                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        CARRY TRADES AND CURRENCY CRASHES

                                     Markus K. Brunnermeier
                                          Stefan Nagel
                                       Lasse H. Pedersen

                                       Working Paper 14473
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14473


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2008




Special thanks goes to Craig Burnside, Gabriele Galati, Jean Imbs, Jakub Jurek, Hanno Lustig, Igor
Makarov, Michael Melvin, Martin Oehmke, Nikolai Roussanov, Adrien Verdelhan and the editors
Daron Acemoglu, Ken Rogoff and Mike Woodford. We are also grateful to comments from seminar
participants at New York University, BGI, International Monetary Fund and conference participants
at the German Economists Abroad conference, the American Economics Association Meetings 2008,
NBER Behavioral Finance Meetings and P. Woolley Center at the London School of Economics. Brunnermeier
acknowledges financial support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. Lasse Pedersen is affiliated
with AQR Capital Management, a global asset management firm that may apply some of the principles
discussed in this research in some of its investment products. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Markus K. Brunnermeier, Stefan Nagel, and Lasse H. Pedersen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Carry Trades and Currency Crashes
Markus K. Brunnermeier, Stefan Nagel, and Lasse H. Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 14473
November 2008
JEL No. E44,F3,F31,G12

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper documents that carry traders are subject to crash risk: i.e. exchange rate movements between
high-interest-rate and low-interest-rate currencies are negatively skewed. We argue that this negative
skewness is due to sudden unwinding of carry trades, which tend to occur in periods in which risk
appetite and funding liquidity decrease. Funding liquidity measures predict exchange rate movements,
and controlling for liquidity helps explain the uncovered interest-rate puzzle. Carry-trade losses reduce
future crash risk, but increase the price of crash risk. We also document excess co-movement among
currencies with similar interest rate. Our findings are consistent with a model in which carry traders
are subject to funding liquidity constraints.


Markus K. Brunnermeier                              Lasse H. Pedersen
Princeton University                                Copenhagen Business School
Department of Economics                             Solbjerg Plads 3, A5
Bendheim Center for Finance                         DK-2000 Frederiksberg
Princeton, NJ 08540                                 DENMARK
and NBER                                            and NYU
markus@princeton.edu                                and also NBER
                                                    lpederse@stern.nyu.edu
Stefan Nagel
Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
stenagel@umich.edu
1       Introduction
This paper studies crash risk of currencies for funding-constrained speculators in an
attempt to shed new light on the major currency puzzles. Our starting point is the
currency carry trade, which consists of selling low interest-rate currencies – “funding
currencies” – and investing in high interest-rate currencies – “investment currencies.”
While the uncovered interest rate parity (UIP) hypothesizes that the carry gains due to
the interest-rate differential is offset by a commensurate depreciation of the investment
currency, empirically the reverse holds, namely the investment currency appreciates a
little on average albeit with a low predictive R2 (see e.g. Fama (1984)). This violation
of the UIP – often referred to as the “forward premium puzzle” – is precisely what
makes the carry trade profitable on average. Another puzzling feature of currencies
is that dramatic exchange rate movements occasionally happen without fundamental
news announcements, e.g. the large depreciation of the US Dollar against the Japanese
Yen on October 7th and 8th of 1998, depicted in Figure 1.1 This reflects the broader
phenomenon that many abrupt asset price movements cannot be attributed to a fun-
damental news events, as documented by Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1989) and
Fair (2002).

          150                                                                        150


          140                                                                        140


          130                                                                        130


          120                                                                        120


          110                                                                        110


          100                                                                        100
                    1996          1997         1998           1999          2000


                Figure 1: US Dollar/Japanese Yen exchange rate from 1998 to 2000.


    We conjecture that sudden exchange-rate moves unrelated to news can be due to
the unwinding of carry trades when speculators near funding constraints. This idea
is consistent with our findings that: (i) investment currencies are subject to crash
risk, that is, positive interest-rate differentials are associated with negative conditional
skewness of exchange rate movements; (ii) the carry, that is, interest-rate differential,
is associated with positive speculator net positions in investment currencies; (iii) spec-
ulators’ positions increase crash risk; (iv) carry-trade losses increase the price of crash
risk, but lower speculator positions and the probability of a crash; (v) an increase in
    1
    While the LTCM debacle, which occurred between end-August and early-September 1998, is not
completely unrelated, it is quite distinct from the US Dollar/Japanese Yen crash on October 7th and
8th 1998. Not also that the Fed’s surprise interest rate cut of .5 percent happened only on October
15th.

                                                2
global risk or risk aversion as measured by the VIX equity option implied volatility
index coincides with reductions in speculator carry positions (unwind) and carry-trade
losses; (vi) a higher level of VIX predicts higher returns for investment currencies and
lower returns for funding currencies, and controlling for VIX reduces the predictive
coefficient for interest-rate differentials; (vii) currencies with similar levels of interest
rate co-move with each other, controlling for other effects. (viii) More generally, the
crash risk we document in this paper may discourage speculators from taking on large
enough positions to enforce UIP. Crash risk may thus help explain the empirically well
documented violation of the UIP.
    Our findings share several features of the “liquidity spirals” that arise in the model
of Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2008). They show theoretically that securities that
speculators invest in have a positive average return and a negative skewness. The pos-
itive return is a premium for providing liquidity and the negative skewness arises from
an asymmetric response to fundamental shocks: shocks that lead to speculator losses
are amplified when speculators hit funding constraints and unwind their positions, fur-
ther depressing prices, increasing the funding problems, volatility, and margins, and
so on. Conversely, shocks that lead to speculator gains are not amplified. Further,
Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2008) show that securities where speculators have long
positions will move together, as will securities that they short.
    In the currency setting, we can envision a country suddenly increasing its interest
rate and thereby attracting foreign capital – possibly worsening the current account.2
In a frictionless and risk-neutral economy, this should lead to an immediate appreciation
of the currency – associated with an inflow of capital – and a future depreciation of the
exchange rate such that UIP holds. In the presence of liquidity constraints, however,
capital only arrives slowly such that the exchange rate only appreciates gradually,
occasionally disrupted by sudden depreciations as speculative capital is withdrawn. In
the initial phase after an interest rate shock, a currency crash pushes the exchange
rate away from its (risk-neutral) fundamental value. Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino
(2007) document the effect of slow moving capital in other markets.
    In the longer term, however, as speculators hold on to their carry trade the invest-
ment currency is prevented from depreciating as described by UIP, leading to a build
up of an exchange rate “bubble.” Holding on to carry trades is profitable for each indi-
vidual speculator, since he does not know when others unwind their positions, Abreu
and Brunnermeier (2003). As a consequence, the price correction is delayed and occurs
as a crash when speculators suddenly unwind their carry trades. Plantin and Shin
   2
     If the the interest rate increase is due an increase in total factor productivity the additional inflow
of capital is efficient. However, if the country’s central bank increases the interest rate to slow domestic
demand in order to curb inflationary pressures, additional capital inflow is counterproductive. In this
case the central bank faces a dilemma – known in IMF circles as the “Tos̆ovský Dilemma” named for
Joseph Tos̆ovský, former Central Bank governor of the Czech Republic, whose attempt to dampen
domestic demand with higher interest rates were largely undone by larger capital inflows.



                                                     3
               0.4                                                                                                         1.2

                                                                                                                                   JPY
                       JPY                                                                                                  1
               0.3


                                                                                                                           0.8
               0.2

                                    CHF            EUR                                                                     0.6
               0.1




                                                                                                          Risk reversal
   Skewness




                                                                                                                           0.4                  CHF
                                                                                                                                                               EUR                        NOK
                0
                                                                              NOK
                                                                                                                           0.2

              −0.1                                                            GBP
                                                                                                                            0                                                             GBP
                                                              CAD
                                                                                                                                                                          CAD
              −0.2
                                                                                                                          −0.2


              −0.3                                                                              NZD                       −0.4
                                                                                AUD                                                                                                         AUD
                                                                                                                                                                                                            NZD

              −0.4                                                                                                        −0.6
                −0.8         −0.6   −0.4    −0.2         0     0.2      0.4         0.6   0.8         1                     −0.8         −0.6   −0.4    −0.2         0     0.2      0.4         0.6   0.8         1
                                      3−month interest−rate differential (percent)                                                                3−month interest−rate differential (percent)



              Figure 2: Cross-section of empirical skewness (Panel A) and of risk-reversal (Panel B),
              reflecting implied (risk-neutral) skewness, for different quarterly interest rate differentials
              i∗ − i.



(2007) show in a dynamic global games framework that carry trades can be destabiliz-
ing when strategic complementarities arise, which is the case if (i) speculators’ trades
occur sequentially in random order, and (ii) as in Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2008),
trading requires capital and margins requirements become more stringent when liquid-
ity is tight. Our empirical findings suggest an initial under-reaction due to slow moving
capital subject to liquidity risk, but are also consistent with a long-run overreaction.
    Our empirical study uses time-series data on the exchange rates of eight major
currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. For each of these eight currencies, we calculate
realized skewness from daily data within (overlapping) quarterly time periods. We show
in the cross section and in the time series that high interest-rate differentials predict
negative skewness, that is, carry trade returns have crash risk. Our finding is consistent
with the saying among traders that “exchange rates go up by the stairs and down by
the elevator.” We note that this saying must be understood conditionally: currencies do
not have unconditional skewness – that is, the skewness of a randomly chosen currency
pair is zero – because country A’s positive skewness is country B’s negative skewness.
Hence, our finding is that the trader saying holds for investment currencies, while the
reverse holds for funding currencies. Further, we find that high interest-rate differentials
predict positive speculator positions, consistent with speculators being long the carry
trade on average. Panel A in Figure 2 clearly shows a negative relationship between
average currency skewness and the average interest-rate differential. We see that the
countries line up very closely around the downward sloping line, with an R2 of 81%.
For example, skewness is positive and highest for Japanese Yen (a “funding currency”),
which also has the most negative interest rate differential. At the other end of the
skewness spectrum, one finds the the two major “investment currencies” Australian
and New Zealand dollar, which have the second-highest interest rate differentials.

                                                                                                          4
    Next, we study the risk premium associated with crash risk, that is, the “price”
of crash risk. In particular, we consider the so-called “risk reversal”, which is the
implied volatility of an out-of-the money call option minus the implied volatility an
equally out-of-the-money put. If the exchange rate is symmetrically distributed under
the risk-neutral measure, then the the risk-reversal is zero since the implied volatilities
are the same. This means that the cost of a call can be offset by shorting the put.
On the other hand, if the risk-neutral distribution of the exchange rate is negatively
(positively) skewed, the price of the risk-reversal is negative (positive). Hence, the
risk reversal measures the combined effects of expected skewness and a skewness risk
premium. Said differently, it measures the cost of buying protection on a currency
position to limit the possible gains and losses.
    In the cross-section, the average implied skewness from risk-reversals is also nega-
tively related to the average rate differential (Panel B of Figure 2), suggesting a close
cross-sectional relationship between our physical skewness measure and the risk-neutral
implied skewness. The time-series relationship between actual skewness and price of a
risk reversal contract is more surprising: a higher risk reversal predicts a lower future
skewness, controlling for the interest rate differential. This finding is related to our
finding that carry trade losses lead to lower speculator positions, a higher risk reversal,
and a lower future skewness, though we must acknowledge the possible peso problem
in estimation.3 Hence, after a crash, speculators are willing to pay more for insurance,
the price of insurance increases, and the future crash risk goes down, perhaps because
of the smaller speculator positions. This has parallels to the market for catastrophe
insurance as documented by Froot and O’Connell (1999) and Froot (2001).
    Funding constraints are likely to be particularly important during financial dislo-
cations when global risk or risk aversion increases, leading to possible redemptions of
capital by speculators, losses, increased volatility, and increased margins. To measure
this, we consider the implied volatility of the S&P500, called the VIX. Note that the
VIX, which is traded at the CBOE, is not mechanically linked to exchange rates since it
is derived from equity options. We show that during weeks in which the VIX increases,
the carry trade tends to incur losses. We also find that risk-reversal prices and carry
trade activity (both contemporaneous and predicted future activity) decline during
these times. The decrease in the price of risk-reversals could be due to an increase
in the price of insurance against a crash risk, or it could simply reflect an objective
increase in the probability of a crash. As another proxy for funding liquidity, we also
examine the effect of the TED spread, the difference between the LIBOR interbank
market interest rate and the risk-free T-Bill rate. An increase in the TED spread, has
similar effects to an increase in the VIX although with less statistical power.
    Further, we find that high levels of the TED and the VIX predict higher future
returns to the carry trade, that is, relatively higher returns for high-interest currencies
   3
    It should also be noted that the option-implied skewness derived from risk-reversals is immune to
peso problems, while the realized skewness measure is not.


                                                 5
and low returns to low-interest currencies. Importantly, controlling for this effect re-
duces the predictability of interest rates, i.e. this helps to explain the UIP violation.
Overall, these findings are consistent with a model in which higher implied volatility
or TED spread leads to tighter funding liquidity, forcing a reduction in carry trade
positions, thus making the under-reaction stronger and returns higher going forward.
    Finally, we document that currencies with similar interest rate comove, controlling
for certain fundamentals and country-pair fixed effects. This could be due to common
changes in the size of the carry trade that lead to common movements in investment
currencies, and common opposite movements in funding currencies.
    The structure of the paper is the following. Section 2 provides a brief summary of
related papers. Section 3 describes the data sources and provides summary statistics.
Our main results are presented in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.


2    Related Literature
There is an extensive literature in macroeconomics and finance on the forward premium
puzzle, which focuses implicitly on the mean return of the carry trade. Froot and Thaler
(1990), Lewis (1995) and Engel (1996) are nice survey articles. The forward premium
puzzle is also related to Meese and Rogoff (1983)’s finding that exchange rates follow
a “near random walk” allowing investors to take advantage of the interest differential
without suffering an exchange rate depreciation. It is only a near random walk since
high interest bearing currencies even tend to appreciate (albeit with a low forecast R2 )
and in the long-run exchange rates tend to converge to their purchasing power parity
levels.
    More recently, Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2007) attribute the failure of UIP
to infrequent revisions of investor portfolio decisions. Lustig and Verdelhan (2007)
focus on the cross-sectional variation between the returns of high and low interest rate
currencies and make the case that the return on currencies with high interest rates have
higher loading on consumption growth risk. Burnside (2007) argues, however, that
their model leaves unexplained a highly significant excess zero-beta rate (i.e. intercept
term), and Burnside, Eichenbaum, Kleshchelski, and Rebelo (2006) (2007) find that the
return of the carry trade portfolio is uncorrelated to standard risk factors, attributing
instead the forward premium to market frictions (bid-ask spreads, price pressure, and
time-varying adverse selection in Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2007)). Jylhä,
Lyytinen, and Suominen (2008) argue that inflation risk is higher in high interest rate
currencies and show a positive relationship between carry trade returns and hedge fund
indices.
    Our analysis is among the first to examine empirically the skewness of exchange
rate movements conditional on the interest rate differential, i.e. on the crash risk of
carry trade strategies. Farhi and Gabaix (2008) develop a model in which the forward


                                           6
premium arises because certain countries are more exposed to rare global fundamental
disaster events. Their model is calibrated to also match skewness patterns obtained
from FX option prices. Instead of focusing on exogenous extreme productivity shocks,
we provide evidence consistent with a theory that currency crashes are often the result
of endogenous unwinding of carry trade activity caused by liquidity spirals. Bhansali
(2007) argues that carry trades are essentially short volatility and documents that
option based carry trades yield excess returns. Jurek (2007) finds that the return
to the carry over the period 1999-2007 with downside protection from put options of
various moneyness is positive. Further, he finds that the more protection one buys
on the carry trade, the smaller is the average return and Sharpe ratio. Ranaldo and
Söderlind (2007)’s finding that safe-haven currencies appreciate when stock market
volatility increases, can be related to our third set of findings that unwinding of carry
trades is correlated with the volatility index, VIX.
    Gagnon and Chaboud (2007) focus primarily on the US Dollar to Japanese Yen
exchange rate and link the crashes to balance sheet data of the official sector, the
Japanese banking sector and households. Galati, Heath, and McGuire (2007) point to
additional data sources and net bank flows between countries that are useful for cap-
turing carry trade activity. Klitgaard and Weir (2004) make use of weekly net position
data on futures traded on the CME – as we do – and document a contemporaneous
(but not predictive) relationship between weekly changes in speculators’ net positions
and exchange rate moves. Finally, there are numerous papers that study crash risk
and skewness in the stock market. Chen, Hong, and Stein (2001) seems to be closest
to our study.4


3       Data and Definitions
We collect daily nominal exchange rates to the U.S. dollar (USD) and 3-month in-
terbank interest rates from Datastream from 1986 to 2006 for eight major developed
markets: Australia (AUD), Canada (CAD), Japan (JPY), New Zealand (NZD), Nor-
way (NOK), Switzerland (CHF), Great Britain (GBP), and the Euro area (EUR), as
well as the Eurodollar LIBOR . For the period before the introduction of the Euro on
1/1/1999, we splice the Euro series together with the exchange rate of the German
mark to the U.S. dollar, and we use German 3-month interbank rates in place of Euro
interbank rates. For most tests below we use a quarterly horizon to measure exchange
rate changes, and hence 3 months is the appropriate horizon for interest rates to apply
uncovered interest parity in straightforward fashion.
    We denote the logarithm of the nominal exchange rate (units of foreign currency
    4
    See also Barberis and Huang (2007) and Brunnermeier, Gollier, and Parker (2007) in which belief
distortions create a preference for positive skewness, resulting into higher expected returns for assets
and trading strategies with negatively skewed payoffs.


                                                   7
per dollar) by
                           st = log(nominal exchange rate).
The logarithm of the domestic U.S. interest rate at time t is denoted by it and the
log foreign interest rate by i∗t . We denote the return of a investment in the foreign
currency investment financed by borrowing in the domestic currency by

                                zt+1 ≡ (i∗t − it ) − ∆st+1 ,

where ∆st+1 ≡ st+1 − st , is the depreciation of the foreign currency. It is a measure
of exchange rate return in excess of the prediction by uncovered interest parity since
under UIP, zt should not be forecastable:

                                      Et [zt+1 ] = 0                              (UIP)

Hence, one can think of z as the abnormal return to a carry trade strategy where the
foreign currency is the investment currency and the dollar is the funding currency. In
most of our analysis, and in line with most of the literature on UIP, we look at interest
rate differentials and currency excess returns expressed relative to the USD. Carry
traders, however, do not necessarily take positions relative to the USD. For example, to
exploit the high interest rates in AUD and the low interest rates in JPY in recent years,
carry traders may have taken a long position in AUD, financed by borrowing in JPY
(or the synthetic equivalent of this position with futures or OTC currency forwards).
Our analysis nevertheless sheds light on the profitability of such a strategy. The AUD
in recent years offered higher interest rates than USD, so our regressions predict an
appreciation of the AUD relative to the USD. The JPY in recent years offered lower
interest rates than USD, and hence our regressions predict a depreciation of the JPY
relative to the USD. Taken together, then, our regressions predict a depreciation of
the JPY relative to the AUD. Thus, while we do not directly form the carry trade
strategies that investors might engage in, our regressions are nevertheless informative
about the conditional expected payoffs of these strategies.
    Much of our analysis focuses on the skewness of exchange rate movements. To
that end, we measure the skewness of daily exchange rate changes (−∆s) within each
quarter t, denoted Skewnesst .
    As a proxy for carry trade activity, we use the futures position data from the Com-
modity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC). Our variable Futurest is the net (long
minus short) futures position of non-commercial traders in the foreign currency, ex-
pressed as a fraction of total open interest of non-commercial traders. Non-commercial
traders are those that are classified as using futures not for hedging purposes by the
CFTC. This basically means that they are investors that use futures for speculative
purposes. We have data from 1986 for five countries (CAD, JPY, CHF, GBP, EUR)
and, in our quarterly analysis, we use the last available CFTC positions report in each
quarter. A positive futures position is economically equivalent to a currency trade

                                             8
where the foreign currency is the investment currency and the dollar is the funding
currency, and, indeed, few speculators implement the carry trade by actually borrow-
ing and trading in the spot currency market. We note, however, that the position data
is not perfect because of the imperfect classification of commercial and non-commercial
traders and, more importantly, because much of the liquidity in the currency market
is in the over-the-counter forward market. Nevertheless, our data is the best publicly
available data and it gives a sense of the direction of trade for speculators.
    We use data on foreign exchange options to measure the cost of insuring against
crash risk or, said differently, the risk-neutral skewness. Specifically, we obtain data
from JPMorgan Chase on quotes of 25∆ 1-month risk reversals.5 A risk reversal is the
difference between the implied volatility of an out-the-money FX call option and the
implied volatility of an out-of-the-money FX put option. This is a measure of the cost
of a long position in a call combined with a short position in a put, that is, the cost of
buying insurance against foreign currency appreciation, financed by providing insurance
against foreign currency depreciation.6 If the underlying distribution of exchange rate
movements is symmetric, the price of the call exactly offsets the price of the put and
the value of the risk reversal is zero. Hence, if the price of the risk reversal differs from
zero, investors believe that foreign exchange movements are positively or negatively
skewed (in risk-neutral terms). In other words, with constant risk premia, a more
positive skewness would lead to a higher value of this risk reversal, and a more negative
skewness would lead to a more negative value of the risk reversal. Of course, due to
risk premia the risk-neutral skewness is not necessarily equal to the physical skewness
of exchange rate changes.
    The figures in the appendix depict the time series of exchange rates, interest rate
differentials, skewness and futures positions for the various currencies.


4       Results
4.1     Summary Statistics and Simple Cross-Sectional Evidence
A Currency-by-Currency Perspective. We begin by highlighting some basic fea-
tures of each currency separately in our summary statistics in Table 1.
    5
     Taking the derivative of the option price w.r.t. the spot exchange rate gives the option delta. An
at-the-money call with exercise price at the current forward exchange rate has a call delta of about a
half, that is, the option price reaction is only half of the change in the underlying exchange rate. The
label 25∆ refers to how far out of the money the options are, namely the strike of the call is at a call
delta of 0.25, and the strike of the put is at a call delta of 0.75.
   6
     Both options that form the risk reversal can be priced using the Garman and Kohlhagen (1983)
formula, which is a modified Black-Scholes formula taking into account that both currencies pay a
continuous yield given by their respective interest rates. Inputting the implied volatility and other
parameters into the Garman and Kohlhagen (1983) formula gives the option price in dollar terms, but
the options are quoted in terms of implied volatility.


                                                   9
                             Table 1: Summary Statistics
                       AUD CAD        JPY    NZD NOK CHF GBP EUR
                                   Panel A: Means
 ∆st                  -0.003 -0.002 -0.003 -0.005 -0.002 -0.004 -0.004 -0.004
 zt                    0.009 0.004 -0.004 0.013 0.007 -0.001 0.009 0.003
 i∗t−1 − it−1          0.006 0.002 -0.007 0.009 0.005 -0.004 0.005 -0.001
 Futures positions       -    0.059 -0.097     -       - -0.067 0.052 0.031
 Skewness             -0.322 -0.143 0.318 -0.297 -0.019 0.144 -0.094 0.131
 Risk reversals       -0.426 -0.099 1.059 -0.467 0.350 0.409 0.009 0.329




    Notes: Quarterly data, 1986-2006 (1998-2006 for risk reversals). ∆st is the quarterly
change in the foreign exchange rate (units of foreign currency per U.S. dollar), zt is the
return from investing in a long position in the foreign currency financed by borrowing in
the domestic currency, Futures positions refers to the net long position in foreign currency
futures of non-commercial traders. Risk reversals are the implied volatility difference between
1-month foreign currency call and put options, as described in the text.

    Panel A shows that there is a positive cross-sectional correlation between the aver-
age interest-rate differential i∗t−1 − it−1 and the average excess return zt , which points
to the violations of UIP in the data. For example, the currency with the most negative
average excess return (JPY) of −0.004 also had the most negative average interest rate
differential relative to the U.S. dollar of −0.007. The currency with the highest excess
return (NZD) of 0.013 also had the highest average interest rate differential of 0.009.
    It is also apparent from Table 1 and from Figure 2 in the introduction, that there is a
clear negative cross-sectional correlation between skewness and the average interest-rate
differential. This negative correlation between interest rate differentials and skewness
shows that carry trades are exposed to negative skewness. An investor taking a carry
trade investing in AUD financed by borrowing in USD during our sample period would
have earned both the average interest rate differential of 0.006 plus the excess FX
return on AUD relative to USD of 0.003, but would have been subject to the negative
skewness of −0.322, on average, of the daily return on the carry trade. An investor
engaging in carry trades borrowing in JPY and investing in USD would have earned
the interest rate differential of 0.007 plus the gain from the excess return of the USD
relative to JPY of 0.004, but would have been subject to negative skewness of −0.318.
    The summary statistics also show that speculators are on average carry traders
since there is a clear positive correlation between the average interest rate differential
and the average net futures position of speculators in the respective currency. For
example, speculators have large short positions in JPY, which has the most negative
average interest rate differential.

                                              10
    Finally, the last row of Panel A shows the average value of risk reversals, for the
subset of our sample from 1998 to 2006 for which we have risk reversal data. Recall that
the risk reversals provide a measure of the risk-neutral skewness in currency changes.
The table and Figure 2 Panel B show that countries with low interest rates tend to
have positive risk-neutral skewness, while countries with high interest rates tend to
have negative risk-neutral skewness.
    A Portfolio Perspective. We also consider the cross-sectional relationship be-
tween carry and returns by looking at the performance of long-short portfolios where
we vary the number of currencies included in the portfolio as reported in Table 2.
Specifically, our carry portfolio has long positions in the k currencies with the highest
interest rates in the beginning of each week (quarter) and short positions in the k
currencies with the lowest interest rates, where each currency is weighted equally and
we consider k = 1, 2, 3.

           Table 2: Summary Statistics for Carry Trade Portfolio Returns
                           1 long, 1 short     2 long, 2 short    3 long, 3 short
                           Wkly Qtrly          Wkly Qtrly         Wkly Qtrly
  Average return           0.002 0.022          0.001 0.016        0.001 0.018
  Standard deviation       0.017 0.068          0.013 0.051        0.011 0.045
  Skewness                 -0.717 -0.700       -0.537 -0.748      -0.695 -0.977
  Kurtosis                 2.851 0.674          1.534 0.661        2.597 1.968
  Annualized Sharpe Ratio 0.704 0.654           0.592 0.638        0.747 0.784

    Notes: Quarterly data, 1986-2006, weekly data 1992-2006 for a equally weighted carry
trade portfolio that is long in the k = 1, 2, 3 currencies with the highest interest rates in the
beginning of each week/quarter and short in the k currencies with the lowest interest rates.

    We see that the carry trade portfolios have large Sharpe ratios, negative skewness,
and positive excess kurtosis. This means that the carry trade is profitable on average,
but has crash risk and fat tails.
    We find no evidence that the negative skewness or excess kurtosis get diversified
away as more currencies are added to the carry trade portfolio, at least with the simple
equal-weighted portfolio strategies that we are considering here. The fact that skewness
cannot easily be diversified away suggests that currency crashes are correlated across
different countries, depending on interest rate differentials. This correlation could be
driven by exposure to common (crash-) risk factors, and later we provide evidence that
liquidity risk is one such driving risk factor.
    To get a sense of the magnitudes, we can compare the skewness of the carry trade
portfolio returns to the skewness of the U.S. stock market portfolio. Using the same
sample periods for weekly and quarterly data as in Table 2, the CRSP (Center for


                                               11
Research in Security Prices) value-weighted U.S. stock market index log return has
skewness of -0.41 weekly, and -0.88 quarterly, and annualized Sharpe Ratios of 0.44
weekly, and 0.41 quarterly. Hence, the skewness of the carry trade portfolio returns are
roughly comparable to the magnitude of skewness of the stock market index. Further,
consistent with our FX findings, equity skewness cannot be diversified away. On the
contrary, diversified equity indices are more negatively skewed than individual stocks,
which are positively skewed.
    Hence, the UIP puzzle that the carry trade has a high average return and our finding
of its negative skewness parallels the equity premium puzzle that the equity market
has a high average return and a negative skewness. It also parallels the puzzling high
average returns to shorting index options that come with significant negative skewness
since the stock-market crash in 1987. Hence, the high returns of negatively skewed
assets could be part of a general phenomenon, as argued in Brunnermeier, Gollier, and
Parker (2007).
    Another way to consider the magnitude of carry trade skewness is to ask whether
it is a concern to professional traders in the FX market, and, consequently, can be
a factor driving currency risk premia. We believe it is. This is especially true since
currency trades are often conducted by highly leveraged professional investors (Gagnon
and Chaboud (2007), Galati, Heath, and McGuire (2007)). Hence, while the equity
premium likely depends on individual investors’ propensity by buy unlevered equity,
the correction of UIP through currency carry trades largely depends on professional
traders’ willingness to lever up. When traders lever up, however, they risk forced
liquidation due to a run: investors redeeming capital, or counterparties refusing to
finance the positions. Hence, a currency crash may force traders to eliminate or down-
size (de-lever) their positions such that they fail to enjoy the subsequent rebound in
the carry return. Further, as we show later, the carry trade often has losses precisely
when traders have funding problems.
    Summing up, our simple cross-sectional findings and our evidence from long-short
portfolio returns point to a clear relationship between interest rates and currency crash
risk. One might wonder, however, whether this is driven by fundamental differences
across countries that lead to differences in both their interest-rate and their currency
risk. To control for country-specific effects, our analysis to follow focuses on time series
evidence with country-fixed effects. As we shall see, the interest rate-skewness link is
also strong in the time series and several new interesting results arise. Indeed, the link
between actual and risk neutral skewness is more intricate in the time series, perhaps
because of liquidity crisis that come and go.

4.2    Carry Predicts Currency Crashes
To link the interest rate differential to currency trades and crash risk, we perform some
simple predictive regressions as reported in Table 3. First, we confirm that our data


                                            12
is consistent with the well-known violation of the UIP. We see that this is the case in
the first column of Table 3, which has the results of the regression of the return on
a foreign currency investment financed by borrowing in USD in quarter t + τ , on the
interest rate differential in quarter t

                                zt+τ = a + b (i∗t − it ) + εt

We use a series of univariate pooled panel regressions with country fixed effects, which
means that we work with within-country time-variation of interest rate differentials and
FX excess returns. We later consider a more dynamic vector-autoregressive specifica-
tion. The table reports only the slope coefficient b. The results show the familiar results
that currencies with high interest rate differentials to the USD have predictably high
returns over the next quarters. This violation in UIP is also apparent from Figure 7 in
the appendix, which plots the exchange rates and interest rate differentials.



Table 3: Future excess FX return z, futures positions, and skewness regressed on i∗t − it
                             FX return z Futures Skewness
                     t+1          2.17        8.26       -23.92
                                (0.78)       (5.06)      (3.87)
                     t+2          2.24        8.06       -23.20
                                (0.70)       (5.08)      (3.71)
                     t+3          1.87        5.96       -23.65
                                (0.66)       (4.68)      (3.87)
                     t+4          1.50        6.41       -23.28
                                (0.63)       (4.44)      (4.65)
                     t+5          1.11        5.87       -23.49
                                (0.52)       (3.47)      (5.05)
                     t+6          0.76        4.72       -22.24
                                (0.48)       (2.52)      (5.00)
                     t+7          0.68        4.27       -21.23
                                (0.49)       (1.91)      (4.09)
                     t+8          0.44        2.81       -16.96
                                (0.55)       (2.12)      (4.03)
                     t+9          0.27        0.46       -12.90
                                (0.63)       (2.41)      (3.45)
                     t + 10      -0.04        -0.96      -11.14
                                (0.78)       (3.26)      (3.74)




                                             13
    Notes: Panel regressions with country-fixed effects and quarterly data, 1986-2006. The
regressions with Futurest+τ as the dependent variable we include CAD, JPY, CHF, GBP, and
EUR only (currencies for which we have futures positions data since 1986). Standard errors
in parentheses are robust to within-time period correlation of residuals and are adjusted for
serial correlation with a Newey-West covariance matrix with 10 lags.

    The second column in Table 3 reports similar regressions, but now with speculators’
futures positions as the dependent variable. The positive coefficient for quarter t + 1
indicates that there is carry trade activity in the futures market that tries to exploit the
violations of UIP. When the interest rate differential is high (relative to the time-series
mean for the currency in question), futures traders tend to take more long positions
in that currency, betting on appreciation of the high interest rate currency. In the
same way as the estimated coefficients in column 1 decline towards zero with increas-
ing forecast horizon, the estimated coefficients for futures positions in column 2 also
decline towards zero. Unlike column 1, however, we obtain only marginally significant
coefficient estimates, indicating that there is quite a lot of statistical uncertainty about
the time-variation of futures positions in relation to movements in the interest rate
differential. This somewhat noisy link between interest rates and speculator positions
is also seen in Figure 9 in the appendix.
    The third column looks at conditional skewness. Negative conditional skewness
can be interpreted as a measure of “crash risk” or “downside risk” inherent in carry
trade strategies. We regress our within-quarter estimates of the skewness of daily FX
rate changes in quarter t + τ on the interest rate differential at the end of quarter
t. We see that interest-rate differentials is a statistically highly significant negative
predictor of skewness, and the coefficients decline to zero only slowly as the forecast
horizon is extended. This implies that carry trades are exposed to crash risk: In times
when the interest rate differential is high, and therefore carry trades look particularly
attractive in terms of conditional mean return, the skewness of carry trade returns is
also particularly negative. Thus, in times of high interest rate differentials, carry trade
investors that are long currencies might “go up by the stairs”, but occasionally “come
down by the elevator”. The interest rate-skewness link is also evident in the time-series
plots in Figure 8 in the appendix.




                                             14
                                                 Quarterly
       10

        8

        6

        4

        2

       0
      −0.25   −0.2    −0.15     −0.1     −0.05       0       0.05      0.1      0.15   0.2    0.25


                                                 Weekly
       35

       30

       25

       20

       15

       10

        5

        0
              −0.06     −0.04          −0.02         0          0.02         0.04      0.06


Figure 3: Kernel density estimates of distribution of foreign exchange returns depending
on interest rate differential. Interest rate differential groups quarterly (Panel A): < -
0.005 (dashed red), -0.005 to 0.005 (solid magenta), > 0.005 (dotted blue); weekly
(Panel B): < -0.01 (dashed red), -0.01 to 0.01 (solid magenta), > 0.01 (dotted blue).

    To illustrate the crash risk visually, we next estimate the distribution of excess
currency return zt conditional on the interest rate differential i∗t−1 − it−1 . Figure 3 plots
kernel-smoothed density estimates with observations in the sample split into three
groups based on the interest rate differential. The top panel plots the distribution of
quarterly returns, with observations split into i∗t−1 − it−1 < −0.005, −0.005 ≤ i∗t−1 −
it−1 ≤ 0.005, and i∗t−1 −it−1 > 0.005. The bottom panel plots the distribution of weekly
returns with cutoffs for i∗t−1 −it−1 at −0.01 and 0.01 (the higher number of observations
with weekly data allow us to move the cutoffs a bit further into the tails). Focusing on
the top panel, it is apparent that when the interest rate differential is highly positive,
the distribution of FX excess returns has a higher mean, but also strong negative
skewness, with a long tail on the left. When the interest rate differential is negative,
we see the opposite, although somewhat more moderate, with a long tail to the right.
Interestingly, even though the mean is higher with higher interest rate differentials,
the most negative outcomes are actually most likely to occur in this case. Similarly,

                                                   15
extremely positive realizations are most likely to occur when interest differentials are
strongly negative. The bottom graph with weekly data shows broadly similar patterns.
Hence, while our regressions focus on skewness measures derived from daily FX rate
changes, the negative relationship between interest rate differentials and skewness also
shows up at weekly and quarterly frequencies.
    Figure 4 presents kernel-smoothed density estimates for the carry trade portfolio
returns. For this graph, we focus on the equal-weighted portfolio that takes a long
position every week (quarter) in the three highest interest rate currencies, and a short
position in the three lowest interest rate currencies. The figure clearly shows the fat
left tail of the distributions, in particular at the quarterly frequency.

                                              Quarterly
      10

       8

       6

       4

       2

       0
      −0.2     −0.15    −0.1      −0.05           0           0.05      0.1    0.15   0.2


                                              Weekly
      50

      40

      30

      20

      10

       0
      −0.08     −0.06     −0.04       −0.02               0          0.02     0.04    0.06


Figure 4: Kernel density estimates of distribution of excess returns on a carry trade
portfolio (long 3 high-interest currencies, short 3 low-interest currencies): Panel A
shows quarterly, while Panel B shows weekly excess returns.




                                                16
4.3     Predictors of Currency Crashes Risk and the Price of
        Crash Risk
We have seen that interest-rate differentials predict skewness. We next look for other
predictors of skewness and the price of skewness. In particular, we focus on how the
level of carry trade activity and recent losses of carry trade strategies affect physical
and risk-neutral conditional skewness.

                Table 4: Forecasting crashes and the price of crash risk
                 Skewnesst+1 Skewnesst+1 Skewnesst+1 RiskRevt                 RiskRevt
       ∗
      it − it        -28.51        -22.18        -27.34        -15.51           -30.70
                    (11.59)       (12.59)       (11.52)       (29.20)          (25.91)
      zt                            -3.34         -2.11                           7.87
                                   (0.60)        (0.69)                         (1.39)
      Futurest        -0.26         0.13          0.18          1.16              0.27
                     (0.12)        (0.15)        (0.14)        (0.19)           (0.12)
      Skewnesst       0.12          0.18          0.17          0.10             -0.02
                     (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.05)        (0.09)           (0.10)
      RiskRevt                                    -0.16
                                                 (0.04)
      R2              0.12          0.18          0.21          0.20            0.41


   Notes: Panel regressions with country-fixed effects and quarterly data, 1998-2006, AUD,
CAD, JPY, CHF, GBP, and EUR only. Standard errors in parentheses are robust to within-
time period correlation of residuals and are adjusted for serial correlation with a Newey-West
covariance matrix with 6 lags. The reported R2 is an adjusted R2 net of the fixed effects.

    Table 4 presents regressions of skewness measured within quarter t + 1, or risk
reversals measured at the end of quarter t, on time-t variables. These regressions are
again pooled panel regressions with country fixed-effects. The first column once again
shows that i∗t − it is a strong negative predictor of future skewness. In addition, the
regression shows that skewness is persistent, and that futures positions are negatively
related to future skewness. The second column further shows that the past currency
return zt negatively predicts skewness. This can be interpreted as currency gains
leading to larger speculator positions and larger future crash risk. We also find that the
currency gain variable “drives out” the futures position variable, because the futures
positions at the end of quarter t are strongly positively related to excess returns zt
during that quarter (not reported in the table). Perhaps the past return is a better
measure of speculator positions given the problems with the position data from the
CFTC. Taken together, the results imply that crash risk of currencies is particularly


                                             17
high following high returns. Times when past returns are high also tend to be times
when futures positions are high. This points to the possibility that part of the skewness
of carry trade payoffs may be endogenously created by carry trade activity. Gains on
carry trades lead to further build-up of carry trade activity, which then also increases
the potential impact on FX rates of an unwinding of those carry trades after losses,
and which manifests itself in the data as negative conditional skewness.
     In the third column we add risk reversals to the regression, and we obtain a sur-
prising result. Controlling for interest rate differentials and the other variables in the
regression, the relationship between risk reversals and future skewness is negative. This
means that, everything else equal, a higher price for insurance against downside risk
predicts lower future skewness. The bi-variate correlation between risk reversals and
skewness (untabulated) is positive however, and so controlling for the other variables,
in particular the interest rate differential, gives rise to the somewhat surprising negative
coefficient. This is consistent with the interpretation that after a crash, speculators
are willing to pay more for insurance, the price of insurance increases even though the
future crash risk goes down, perhaps because of the smaller speculator positions. This
parallels the market for catastrophe insurance as documented by Froot and O’Connell
(1999) and Froot (2001).
     The fourth and fifth columns in the table show the regression of risk reversals on
the other variables. As the table shows, risk reversals have a negative relationship to
i∗t − it , just like physical/actual skewness in the first three columns. Although for risk
reversals the relationship is not statistically significant, the point estimate suggests that
risk reversals and physical skewness may have a common component related to to i∗t −it .
A stark difference exists, however, in their relationship to zt . When a currency has had
a high excess return in quarter t, this predicts a smaller (more negative) future physical
skewness, but a larger risk reversal, and thus risk-neutral skewness, at the end of quarter
t. This means that there is a wedge between the physical and risk-neutral skewness,
i.e. a skewness risk premium, that varies negatively with recent excess returns of the
currency. This again points to the possibility that skewness is endogenously created by
carry trade activity: when recent carry trade return are strongly negative, carry trades
get unwound, and there is less crash risk in the future. But, in addition to outright
liquidation of carry trades, part of the unwinding seems to happen by carry traders
buying insurance against downside risk, which drives up the price of insurance against
crash risk, despite the fact that there is less negative conditional physical skewness.

4.4    Are Carry Trades (De-)Stabilizing?
At horizons of more than one period, we focused so far on univariate forecasts with the
interest rate differential as predictor. To shed some light on the dynamic relationships
between interest rate differentials, FX rate changes, futures positions, and skewness
over longer horizons, and to address the question whether carry traders are stabilizing


                                             18
or destabilizing, we estimate a vector autoregression (VAR). We first estimate a third-
order VAR with zt , i∗t − it , Skewnesst , and Futurest using quarterly data from 1986-
2006 for the five currencies for which we have futures positions data. Figure 5 reports
impulse response function estimated from this VAR(3) system for shocks to the interest
rate differential. The shocks underlying the impulse responses are based on a Choleski
decomposition with the ordering i∗t −it , zt , Skewnesst , and Futurest , the most important
assumption being that shocks to the interest rate differential cause contemporaneous
changes in the other three variables but shocks in the other three variables do not
affect the VAR innovation of the interest rate differential. The figure also shows 90%
(bootstrap) confidence intervals following Kilian (1998), which account for the bias and
skewness in the small-sample distribution of the impulse response functions.
                      −3   Interest rate differential                         Cumulated excess return
                  x 10
             3                                                      0.1

            2.5                                                    0.08

             2                                                     0.06

            1.5                                                    0.04

             1                                                     0.02

            0.5                                                      0

             0                                                    −0.02
                  0            5              10        15                0       5              10     15


                              Futures position                                        Skewness
           0.06                                                    0.05


           0.04                                                      0


           0.02                                                   −0.05


             0                                                     −0.1


          −0.02                                                   −0.15
                  0            5              10        15                0       5              10     15


Figure 5: Impulse response functions from VAR(3) for shock to interest rate differential
with 90 percent confidence intervals.

    The bottom left graph shows that the forecasted futures positions correspond closely
to the forecasted interest rate differentials in the top left graph, consistent with higher
interest rate differentials leading to more carry trade activity. The bottom right graph
confirms that conditional skewness gets more negative following a positive shock to
the interest rate differential, followed by slow reversion towards the mean. Overall, the
VAR results confirm the basic facts from the univariate forecasting regressions in Table
3.

                                                             19
    The top left graph shows that after a positive shock to the interest rate differential,
the interest rate differential keeps rising for about four quarters, before it slowly reverts
back to the mean. The top right graph shows that positive shocks to the interest rate
differentials also lead to appreciation of the foreign exchange rate. If the UIP were
to hold, the exchange rate would jump initially due to the interest-rate shock in one
currency and depreciate subsequently. Stated differently, the cumulative excess returns
on carry trades would jump initially and stay constant afterwards. Instead, as the
figure shows, when the foreign interest rate increases relative to the domestic interest
rate, substantial excess returns accumulate to a carry trader over this horizon since
the foreign currency does not depreciate enough in the next 15 quarters to offset the
persistently high interest rate differential.
    VARs can also help analyze the important question of whether carry trades are
profitable because exchange rates initially underreact to interest-rate shocks or, alter-
natively, because exchange rates overreact as too many traders pile and then later fall
back towards fundamentals as carry trades unwind their positions. The latter view
would be consistent with the popular concern that carry trade activity creates “bub-
bles” by preventing investment currencies from depreciating as described by the UIP.
Each individual speculator might find it optimal to hold on to his carry trades since
he does not know when others unwind their positions. That is, each trader faces a
synchronization risk as modeled in Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003). Consequently, a
price correcting crash only occurs with a delay when carry trades suddenly unwind.
In contrast, the “underreaction view” argues that capital flows, and therefore also ex-
change rates, react sluggishly to shocks in interest rate differentials, and that carry
trade activity essentially helps to speed up the adjustment, as conjectured by Gross-
man (1995). One main reason for this sluggish behavior may be that carry traders
demand a risk premium since they are exposed to “crash risk” in the form of negative
skewness of carry trade returns as we have documented. Under this hypothesis, cur-
rency crashes in which carry traders face losses tend to move the exchange rate further
away fundamentals (assuming that the fundamental exchange rate is consistent with
UIP).
    These two hypotheses make different predictions about the behavior of the impulse-
response of the cumulative excess returns of the VAR, as illustrated in the top left
panel. As noted above, UIP predicts that higher interest rate leads to a jump up in
the carry return, and then a flat cumulative return from then onwards as the future
interest-rate differentials are compensated by exchange-rate depreciation. Underreac-
tion implies that the initial jump is small and that the positive returns continue for
a while. Finally, overreaction implies that the returns are positive for a while and
then turn negative, that is, the cumulative return should be hump-shaped. As seen
in Figure 5, our estimated VAR is consistent with an initial underreaction. It is also
possible that there is a long-run overreaction (or bubble). However, we cannot make
a definite statement, because long-run predictions are difficult to test econometrically,

                                             20
e.g. because the conclusion can be quite sensitive to the specification of the VAR. In
particular, to properly capture a hump shape in cumulative excess returns may require
many lags in the VAR. But including many lags would make estimates imprecise and
hence make it impossible to draw any inference about long-run impulse responses with
much statistical confidence.
    Importantly, we can tests the hypothesis in an alternative way, namely by consid-
ering how much the exchange rate moves in response to interest-rate shocks relative to
what UIP predicts. Said differently, UIP predicts not only that the cumulative return
should jump up and then be flat, it can also be used to predict how much the exchange
rate should jump, and we can compare this to the VAR-estimated moves to look for
under- or overreaction. To do this, we need to make additional assumptions, namely
that the exchange rate is stationary.
    We add inflation since it is more natural to complement the UIP with the assump-
tion that the PPP holds in the long run and that the real exchange rate is station-
ary (rather than assuming a stationary nominal exchange rate). In other words, the
interest-rate shock will affect future inflation and this will ultimately affect exchange
rates. Under the assumption that the exchange rate is stationary, the UIP predicted
magnitude of the log-exchange rate change is the sum of all future log-interest rate dif-
ferentials. For example, if there is a surprise increase in interest rates in Japan relative
to those in the U.S.,
                                i∗t − it − Et−1 [i∗t − it ] > 0,
then, under UIP,
                     ∞
                     X ¡      £            ¤      £            ¤¢
              zt =          Et i∗t+τ − it+τ − Et−1 i∗t+τ − it+τ − (Et [s̄] − Et−1 [s̄]) ,
                     τ =0

where s̄ is the long-run level of the nominal exchange rate. Further, we use our as-
sumption of a stationarity of the log real exchange rate, defined as st − p∗t + pt where
p∗t and pt are the foreign and domestic price levels, respectively. This yields a total
UIP-predicted initial exchange rate move of
       ∞
       X ¡      £            ¤      £            ¤    £ ∗               ¤      £ ∗                ¤¢
zt =          Et i∗t+τ − it+τ − Et−1 i∗t+τ − it+τ − Et πt+τ +1 − πt+τ +1 − Et−1 πt+τ +1 − πt+τ +1    ,
       τ =0

        ∗
where πt+τ  − πt+τ is the inflation-rate differential.
    After incorporating the inflation differential we re-estimate the dynamics with a
more parsimonious VAR to keep the number of parameters manageable. Specifically
we leave out Futures and Skewness, since these variables have little predictive power for
the other variables in the VAR, so their exclusion has little effect on the estimated im-
pulse response of cumulative returns. Figure 6 presents the impulse response functions
estimated from this second VAR(3) that includes inflation. The ordering of shocks is

                                                    21
now i∗t − it , πt∗ − πt , and then zt . The dashed horizontal line in the lower left panel
is the cumulated excess return predicted by the UIP, and its initial jump reflects the
present value of the future real interest rate differentials as predicted by the VAR. It is
apparent from Figure 6 that the cumulative excess returns – and hence the exchange
rate – initially under-reacts. If there was more carry trade activity immediately fol-
lowing the shock to the interest rate differential, then this would tend to push up the
exchange rate towards the reaction implied by UIP. While our findings do not rule
out long-term over-reactions – due to limits on our statistical power and issues with
the specification of the VAR – our combined results suggest that, at least for a time
period after a shock to interest rates, carry trade activity pushes FX rates towards
fundamentals rather than away from it.
                      −3   Interest rate differential                        −3   Inflation differential
                  x 10                                                   x 10
             3                                                      2

            2.5                                                    1.5

                                                                    1
             2
                                                                   0.5
            1.5
                                                                    0
             1
                                                                  −0.5
            0.5                                                    −1

             0                                                    −1.5
                  0            5              10        15               0         5               10      15


                           Cumulated excess return
           0.08

           0.06

           0.04 Implied by UIP

           0.02

             0

          −0.02
                  0            5              10        15


Figure 6: Impulse response functions from VAR(3) for shock to interest rate differential
with 90 percent confidence intervals


4.5    Liquidity Risk and Unwinding of Carry Trades
Our analysis so far raised the possibility that unwinding of carry trades could explain
some of the skewness of the returns to carry trades, and that the negative skewness of
carry trade payoffs combined with the threat of forced unwinding could be a deterrent
to engaging in large highly-levered carry trade activity that would help eliminate UIP
violations. To better understand these interrelationships, we try to identify states of

                                                             22
the world in which speculators are likely to be forced to unwind positions due to losses,
capital redemptions, increased margin, or reduced risk tolerance.
    Identifying such states of the world empirically is not an easy task. Ideally, we
would want a measure for speculators’ willingness and ability to put capital at risk,
but that could depend on many (largely unobservable) factors, including tightness
of margin constraints, value-at-risk limits, recent returns of carry trade strategies,
liquidity spillovers from other markets, the amount of risk capital devoted to carry
trade strategies, and others. We use two measures: (i) the CBOE VIX option implied
volatility index as an observable proxy that should be correlated with at least several
of these factors and (ii) the TED spread, the difference between the 3 months LIBOR
Eurodollar rate and the 3 months T-Bill rate. The LIBOR rate reflects uncollateralized
lending in the interbank market, which is subject to default risk, while the T-Bill rate
is risk-less since it is guaranteed by the U.S. government. When banks face liquidity
problems the TED spread typically increases, and the T-Bill yield often falls due to a
“flight-to-liquidity” or “flight-to-quality”.
    Prior research has shown that the VIX index is a useful measure of the “global
risk appetite”, not only in equity, and equity-options markets, but also in corporate
credit markets (Collin-Dufresne, Goldstein, and Martin (2001)), and in other, seemingly
unrelated markets. For example, Pan and Singleton (2007) find that the VIX is strongly
related to the variation in risk premiums in sovereign credit default swaps. Moreover,
many of the financial crises of recent years, for example the Russian/LTCM crisis of
1998, or the financial market turmoil in Summer 2007, were accompanied by strong
increases in the VIX.
    Table 5 presents pooled panel regressions with country fixed-effects. Note that so
far, we could ignore the direction of the carry trade, since the interest rate differential,
futures positions, and payoffs from exchange rate movements switch signs when the
direction of the trade is reversed. This is not the case with the VIX or TED spread
and hence we interact these two variables with the sign of the interest rate differential,
sign (i∗t − it ).


Table 5: Sensitivity of weekly carry trade positions, price of skewness insurance, and
carry trade returns to changes in VIX
                           ∆Futurest ∆Futurest+1 ∆RiskRevt ∆RiskRevt+1                 zt    zt+1
               ∗
 ∆VIXt ×sign(it−1 − it−1 )     -1.47        -1.29          -5.33         -2.74       -0.43 -0.03
                              (0.77)       (0.57)         (2.64)        (3.39)      (0.11) (0.11)
 Futurest−1                    -0.09        -0.10
                              (0.01)       (0.01)
 RiskRevt−1                                                -0.16         -0.11
                                                          (0.02)        (0.02)
 R2                            0.04          0.06          0.08          0.04         0.00  -0.00


                                            23
    Notes: Panel regressions with country-fixed effects and weekly data, 1992-2006 (1998-
2006 for risk reversals), AUD, CAD, JPY, CHF, GBP, and EUR only (only currencies for
which we have futures positions data since 1992). VIX is the CBOE volatility index. zt is
the return from investing in a long position in the foreign currency financed by borrowing
in the domestic currency. Standard errors in parentheses are robust to within-time period
correlation of residuals and are adjusted for serial correlation with a Newey-West covariance
matrix with 12 lags for futures, 6 for risk reversals, and 4 for returns. The reported R2 is an
adjusted R2 net of the fixed effects.

    The first two columns show that ∆Futurest and ∆Futurest+1 are both significantly
negatively related to signed ∆VIXt , meaning that carry trades are unwound in times
when the VIX increases. At the same time, as shown in columns 3 and 4, risk reversals
are also negatively related to signed ∆VIXt . The price of insurance of carry trades
against crash risk therefore increases in times of rising VIX. Finally, column 5 shows
that carry trades losses money on average in times of rising VIX.
    Taken together, unwinding of carry trades in response to decreases in global risk
appetite can jointly explain the results in Table 5: When traders risk tolerance de-
clines, carry trades are unwound which leads to a reduction in the futures positions
in investment currencies, an increase in the price of insurance against crash risk, and
bad payoffs of carry trades. The dependence of carry trade payoffs on changes in the
VIX, which, according to prior research is driven by a large extent by variations in
“risk appetite”, also suggests that part of the movement in investment and funding
currencies are driven by changing risk tolerance of traders, and that crashes may occur
endogenously as part of the trading process with leveraged and imperfectly capitalized
traders.
    We replicate the same exercise with our second measure of funding liquidity risk, the
TED spread. It is reassuring that the coefficient on the signed TED spread coincides
with the sign of the coefficient on the signed VIX in Table 5. However, the coefficients
are not statistically significantly. We do find a significant negative relationship for
predicting the change of next week’s risk reversal, ∆RiskRevt+1 , and, marginally so,
for next weeks excess return, zt+1 . Thus, while an increase in equity option-based VIX
in Table 5 is associated with a contemporaneous statistically significant reaction of risk-
reversals and carry trade excess returns, a change in the TED spread is only related to
risk-reversals and carry trade returns with a week delay.




                                              24
Table 6: Sensitivity of weekly carry trade positions, price of skewness insurance, and
carry trade returns to changes in the LIBOR-TBill (TED) spread
                            ∆Futurest ∆Futurest+1 ∆RiskRevt ∆RiskRevt+1                 zt   zt+1
 ∆TEDt ×sign(i∗t−1 − it−1 )    -0.48         -1.92          -0.71         -25.05      -0.27 -0.57
                              (2.27)        (1.85)        (10.02)        (13.89)     (0.35) (0.31)
 Futurest−1                    -0.09         -0.10
                              (0.01)        (0.01)
 RiskRevt−1                                                 -0.16          -0.11
                                                           (0.02)         (0.02)
 R2                            0.04          0.06            0.08          0.04       0.00   0.00


    Notes: Panel regressions with country-fixed effects and weekly data, 1992-2006 (1998-2006
for risk reversals), AUD, CAD, JPY, CHF, GBP, and EUR only (only currencies for which
we have futures positions data since 1992). TED is the 3-month USD LIBOR minus the 3-
month T-Bill yield. zt is the return from investing in a long position in the foreign currency
financed by borrowing in the domestic currency. Standard errors in parentheses are robust
to within-time period correlation of residuals and are adjusted for serial correlation with a
Newey-West covariance matrix with 12 lags for futures, 6 for risk reversals, and 4 for returns.
The reported R2 is an adjusted R2 net of the fixed effects.

    Another way of viewing these findings is that the VIX and TED are common risk
factors for exchange rates signed by their interest rate differentials. This helps explain
why a diversified carry portfolio continues to have crash risk (negative skewness) and
fat tails (excess kurtosis) as we showed in Table 2. Indeed, many of the legs to the carry
trade can lose money at the same time since the carry trades are exposed to a systematic
crash risk that is related to “flight-to-liquidity” or a “flight-to-quality”. Therefore, we
would also expect that the return of the diversified carry trade has negative loadings
on ∆VIXt and ∆TEDt . Table 7 presents those loadings for the three-long, three-
short carry trade portfolio described earlier, and, indeed, the relationships are similar
to those in the panel regressions. ∆VIXt has a strong contemporaneous correlation,
but not much effect in the following week, while ∆TEDt has a stronger predictive
relationship to the return in the following week, and a smaller contemporaneous effect.




                                              25
Table 7: Sensitivity of weekly carry trade portfolio excess returns to changes in the
VIX and the LIBOR-TBill (TED) spread
                          Returnt Returnt+1 Returnt Returnt+1
                ∆VIXt       -0.94      -0.07
                           (0.25)     (0.23)
                ∆TEDt                             -1.21       -1.57
                                                 (0.84)      (0.56)
                  2
                R           0.05       -0.00      0.01        0.02

    Notes: Regressions with weekly data for the 3 long, 3 short carry trade portfolio, 1992-
2006. TED is the 3-month USD LIBOR minus the 3-month T-Bill yield. Standard errors in
parentheses are adjusted for serial correlation with a Newey-West covariance matrix with 4
lags. The reported R2 is an adjusted R2 .


4.6    Liquidity Risk Helps Explain Deviations from UIP
Given the strong contemporaneous impact of VIX on excess returns of carry trades, it
is natural to ask whether the signed VIX and possibly the signed TED spread might
help to forecast future excess returns on carry trades various quarters in the future.
To the extent that contemporaneous reaction of carry trade returns reflect a change
in risk premiums, one would expect that they should help forecast carry trade returns
(assuming sufficient statistical power). To answer this question, we replicate our earlier
forecasting regressions shown in Table 3, but also include the signed VIX (or signed
TED spread) as predictor. Table 8 shows two interesting facts: First, the coefficients
of the interest rate differential in the forecasting regressions with VIX are about half of
that in Table 3 and less statistically significant. Second, the signed VIX is a statistically
significant predictor for several quarters in the future, albeit not for the immediate next
quarter. Put together with the results of Table 5 (column 5), this suggests that an
increase in VIX contemporaneously reduces returns on carry trades, but leads to higher
returns some quarters out. The forecasting regressions with the TED spread show a
similar pattern, although the TED spread is only significant for lags of six or seven
quarters out.




                                             26
Table 8: Future excess FX return z regressed on i∗t − it and its interaction with VIX
or TED
                          Forecast with VIX                    Forecast with TED
 Excess return at i∗t − it VIXt ×sign(i∗t−1 − it−1 )   i∗t − it TEDt ×sign(i∗t−1 − it−1 )
 t+1                1.35             0.29                2.58             -0.62
                   (1.36)           (0.26)             (1.01)            (0.45)
 t+2                1.37             0.35                2.27             -0.04
                   (1.17)           (0.18)             (0.91)            (0.50)
 t+3                0.75             0.53                1.40             0.72
                   (1.20)           (0.23)             (0.90)            (0.58)
 t+4                0.63             0.53                0.96             0.84
                   (1.22)           (0.23)             (0.90)            (0.59)
 t+5                0.93             0.31                1.04             0.11
                   (0.82)           (0.16)             (0.58)            (0.29)
 t+6                0.63             0.29                0.18             0.88
                   (0.65)           (0.11)             (0.48)            (0.30)
 t+7                0.23             0.34                0.23             0.70
                   (0.90)           (0.16)             (0.57)            (0.28)
 t+8                0.05             0.31                0.46             -0.03
                   (0.83)           (0.17)             (0.64)            (0.40)
 t+9                0.28             0.09                0.41             -0.21
                   (0.79)           (0.18)             (0.68)            (0.34)
 t + 10             0.30             0.02               -0.25             0.33
                   (0.87)           (0.17)             (0.77)            (0.40)


    Notes: Panel regressions with country-fixed effects and quarterly data, 1990-2006 for the
regressions with VIX, 1986-2006 for the regressions with TED. Standard errors in parentheses
are robust to within-time period correlation of residuals and are adjusted for serial correlation
with a Newey-West covariance matrix with 10 lags.


4.7     Predictable co-movement of FX rates
If part of the movements in investment and funding currencies are driven by changing
risk tolerance of traders, then this should also affect the co-movement of FX rates.
For example, if carry traders unwind in response to declining risk tolerance, and their
unwinding has price impact, then this should cause funding currencies to co-move
positively with funding currencies, and investment currencies with investment curren-
cies. Thus, everything else equal, currencies with similar interest rates should co-move
closely, while currencies with very different interest rates should have little, or even
negative co-movement.


                                               27
   To test this, we calculate the pairwise correlation of daily FX rate changes within
non-overlapping 13-week periods, and we regress these correlations on |i∗1 − i∗2 |, the
absolute interest rate differential between the countries in each pair at the start of the
13-week period. The results are shown in Table 9.

 Table 9: Correlation of FX rate changes and magnitude            of interest rate differentials
                                           (1)    (2)                (3)      (4)
              ∗     ∗
            |i1 − i2 |                   -10.89 -6.62              -16.39 -13.41
                                         (3.81) (3.62)             (4.05) (6.41)
                ∗ ∗
            ρ(i1 , i2 )                   0.63   0.28               0.70     0.32
                                         (0.16) (0.08)             (0.17) (0.08)
            Average ρ(∆s1 , ∆s2 )         2.54   2.56
                                         (0.08) (0.08)
            Time Fixed Effects                                      Yes      Yes
            Country-Pair Fixed Effects                                       Yes
                                          0.18   0.36               0.05     0.03

    Note: Panel regressions, 1992-2006. The dependent variable is the pairwise correlation
of daily FX rate changes, estimated within non-overlapping 13-week periods. |i1 − i2 | is the
absolute pairwise interest rate differential at the start of the 13-week period. ρ(i1 , i2 ) is the
correlation of 5-day interest rate changes, estimated with overlapping windows, within each
13-week period. Average ρ(∆s1 , ∆s2 ) is the cross-sectional average of all pairwise correlations
of daily FX rate changes within each non-overlapping 13-week periods. The reported R2 is
an adjusted R2 net of the fixed effects.

    Of course, some countries might have similar interest rates and highly correlated
FX rates for reasons other than the effects of carry trades. We control for these
other reasons in several ways. First, we include ρ(i∗1 , i∗2 ) as a control variable, the
correlation of 5-day interest rate changes, estimated with overlapping windows, within
each 13-week period. This variable proxies for correlated monetary policy. Second, we
also run a specification where we include country-pair fixed effects. This should take
care of other unobserved time-constant reasons for a country-pair to have high or low
correlation of FX rates. For example, CAD and AUD FX rates have a high correlation,
due to the common exposure of their economies to mining, but this common exposure
is largely absorbed by the fixed effect. Finally, to make sure that the results are not
driven by the exposure of all exchange rates to a common factor, and time-variation
in the volatility of this common factor which could lead to common variation in all
pairwise correlations, we include either time dummies or the cross-sectional average of
all pairwise correlations of daily FX rate changes within each non-overlapping 13-week
periods, denoted by “Average ρ(∆s1 , ∆s2 )”.


                                                28
    The estimates in Table 9 show that there is a strong negative relationship between
|i∗1 −i∗2 |
         and the FX rate correlation. A reduction of 1% in the interest rate differential is
associated with an increase of the FX rate correlation of more than 0.1. The results are
fairly similar for all specifications shown in the table. In particular, the specification
with country-fixed effects shows that this relationship holds even if we only consider
within-country-pair variation. In other words, when the interest rate differential for
a given country pair is lower than it is on average for this country pair, then the
correlation of the FX rate is higher than it is on average for this country pair. This
feature of the data is also consistent with the view we suggested above, i.e. that
the build-up and unwinding of carry trades associated with changes in traders’ risk
tolerance has an effect on FX rates.


5        Conclusion
This paper provides evidence of a strong link between currency carry and currency
crash risk: investing in high interest-rate currencies while borrowing in low interest rate
currencies delivers negatively skewed returns. We document that speculators invest
in high-carry currencies and argue that currency crashes are linked to the sudden
unwinding of these carry trades. Consistent with models in which the erosion of capital
increases insurance premia, we find that the price of protecting against a crash in the
aftermath of one increases despite the fact that a subsequent crash is less likely. Further,
we document that currency crashes are positively correlated with increases in implied
stock market volatility VIX and the TED spread, indicators of funding illiquidity among
other things. This could be the outcome of a setting in which higher volatility leads
to lower available speculator capital due to higher margins and capital requirements,
inducing traders to cut back on their carry trade activities. Moreover, we find that a
higher VIX predicts higher carry returns going forward and that, controlling for this
effect reduces the FX return predictability of interest rates, i.e. it help resolve the
UIP violation. Finally, our finding that currencies with similar interest rate co-move
with each other, controlling for other effects, further suggests that carry trades affects
exchange rate movements.
    Overall, our results are consistent the view that macroeconomic fundamentals deter-
mine which currencies have high and low interest rates and the long-run currency levels,
while illiquidity and capital immobility lead to short-run currency under-reaction to
changes in fundamentals and occasional currency crashes due to liquidity crises. Hence,
our findings call for new macroeconomic models in which risk premia are affected by
market liquidity and funding liquidity issues, not just shocks to productivity, output,
or the utility function.




                                            29
A     Time series for different currencies
                          Australia                                        Canada
          0.03                                   0.8     0.02                                    0.6


          0.02                                   0.6
                                                         0.01                                    0.4

          0.01                                   0.4

                                                           0                                     0.2
            0                                    0.2


         −0.01                                   0      −0.01                                    0
                 0   20   40         60   80   100              0   20   40          60   80   100


                               Japan                                     New Zealand
          0.01                                   5.5     0.05                                    1



            0                                    5

                                                           0                                     0.5

         −0.01                                   4.5



         −0.02                                   4      −0.05                                    0
                 0   20   40         60   80   100              0   20   40          60   80   100

                           Norway                                        Switzerland
          0.04                                   3       0.02                                    1



          0.02                                   2.5

                                                           0                                     0.5

            0                                    2



         −0.02                                   1.5    −0.02                                    0
                 0   20   40         60   80   100              0   20   40          60   80   100


                                UK                                            Euro
          0.02                                   −0.2    0.02                                    0.5



          0.01                                   −0.4

                                                           0                                     0

            0                                    −0.6



         −0.01                                   −0.8   −0.02                                    −0.5
                 0   20   40         60   80   100              0   20   40          60   80   100


Figure 7: Log interest rate differentials (solid blue, left axis) and log FX rate (dashed
green, right axis)
                                            30
                               Australia                                          Canada
          0.04                                       4       0.015                                     2

                                                                0.01                                   1
          0.02                                       2
                                                             0.005                                     0

                                                                  0                                    −1
            0                                        0
                                                            −0.005                                     −2

         −0.02                                        −2     −0.01                                      −3
                 0        20   40         60   80   100                0   20   40          60   80   100


                                    Japan                                       New Zealand
          0.02                                       2          0.05                                   2




            0                                        0            0                                    0




         −0.02                                        −2     −0.05                                      −2
                 0        20   40         60   80   100                0   20   40          60   80   100

                                Norway                                          Switzerland
          0.03                                       2          0.02                                   2


          0.02                                       1          0.01                                   1


          0.01                                       0            0                                    0


            0                                        −1      −0.01                                     −1


         −0.01                                        −2     −0.02                                      −2
                 0        20   40         60   80   100                0   20   40          60   80   100


                     −3              UK                                              Euro
                 x 10
           20                                        2          0.02                                   2

           15                                        1

           10                                        0
                                                                  0                                    0
            5                                        −1

            0                                        −2

           −5                                         −3     −0.02                                      −2
                 0        20   40         60   80   100                0   20   40          60   80   100


Figure 8: Lagged log interest rate differentials (solid blue, left axis) and quarterly
skewness of daily log FX rate changes (dashed green, right axis)


                                                           31
                           Canada                                                 Japan
          0.02                                    1        0.01                                     0.6
                                                          0.005                                     0.4
          0.01                                    0.5         0                                     0.2
                                                         −0.005                                     0
            0                                     0       −0.01                                     −0.2
                                                         −0.015                                     −0.4
         −0.01                                    −0.5    −0.02                                     −0.6
                 0   20   40          60   80   100                 0   20   40         60   80   100

                          Switzerland                                              UK
          0.02                                    0.6        0.02                                   1
         0.015                                    0.4
          0.01                                    0.2
         0.005                                    0
             0                                    −0.2         0                                    0
        −0.005                                    −0.4
         −0.01                                    −0.6
        −0.015                                    −0.8
         −0.02                                    −1      −0.02                                     −1
                 0   20   40          60   80   100                 0   20   40         60   80   100

                               Euro
          0.02                                    0.6
         0.015                                    0.4
          0.01                                    0.2
         0.005                                    0
             0                                    −0.2
        −0.005                                    −0.4
         −0.01                                    −0.6
                 0   20   40          60   80   100


Figure 9: Log interest rate differentials (solid blue, left axis) and futures positions of
non-commerical traders (dashed green, right axis)




                                                        32
References
Abreu, D., and M. K. Brunnermeier (2003): “Bubbles and Crashes,” Economet-
 rica, 71(1), 173–204.

Bacchetta, P., and E. van Wincoop (2007): “Infrequent Portfolio Decisions: A
 Solution to the Forward Discount Puzzle,” working paper.

Barberis, N. C., and M. Huang (2007): “Stocks as Lotteries: The Implications of
 Probability Weighting for Security Prices,” working paper.

Bhansali, V. (2007): “Volatility and the Carry Trade,” Journal of Fixed Income,
 17(3), 72–84.

Brunnermeier, M., C. Gollier, and J. Parker (2007): “Optimal Beliefs, Asset
 Prices and the Preference for Skewed Returns,” American Economic Review (Paper
 and Proceedings), 97(2), 159–165.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and L. H. Pedersen (2008): “Market Liquidity and Fund-
 ing Liquidity,” Review of Financial Studies (forthcoming).

Burnside, C. (2007): “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency Risk Premia and Con-
 sumption Growth Risk: A Comment,” NBER Working Paper No. 13129.

Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, I. Kleshchelski, and S. Rebelo (2006): “The
 Returns to Currency Speculation,” Working Paper.

Burnside, C., M. S. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2007): “Understanding the
 Forward Premium Puzzle: A Microstructure Approach,” NBER Working Paper No.
 13278.

Chen, J., H. Hong, and J. C. Stein (2001): “Forecasting Crashes: Trading Vol-
 ume, Past Returns and Conditional Skewness in Stock Prices,” Journal of Financial
 Economics, 61, 345–381.

Collin-Dufresne, P., R. S. Goldstein, and J. S. Martin (2001): “The Deter-
 minants of Credit Spread Changes,” The Journal of Finance, 56(6), 2177–2207.

Cutler, D. M., J. M. Poterba, and L. H. Summers (1989): “What Moves Stock
 Prices?,” NBER Working Paper No. 2538.

Engel, C. (1996): “The Forward Discount Anomaly and the Risk Permium: A Survey
 of Recent Evidence,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 3, 123–192.

Fair, R. C. (2002): “Events that Shook the Market,” Journal of Business, 75, 713–
  732.

                                       33
Fama, E. F. (1984): “Forward and Spot Exchange Rates,” Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 14, 319–338.

Farhi, E., and X. Gabaix (2008): “Rare Disasters and Exchange Rates,” working
  paper.

Froot, K. A. (2001): “The Market for Catastrophe Risk: A Clincial Examination,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 60(2-3), 529–571.

Froot, K. A., and P. O’Connell (1999): “The Pricing of US Catastrophe Rein-
  surance,” in The Financing of Catastrophe Risk, ed. by K. A. Froot, pp. 195–232.
  University of Chicago Press.

Froot, K. A., and R. H. Thaler (1990): “Anomalies: Foreign Exchange,” Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 4(3), 179–192.

Gagnon, J. E., and A. P. Chaboud (2007): “What Can the Data Tell Us about
 Carry Trades in Japanese Yen?,” International Finance Discussion Papers, Board
 of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, (899).

Galati, G., A. Heath, and P. McGuire (2007): “Evidence of Carry Trade Activ-
 ity,” in BIS Quarterley Review. North Holland, Amsterdam.

Garman, M. B., and S. W. Kohlhagen (1983): “Foreign Currency Option Values,”
 Journal of International Money and Finance, 2(3), 231–237.

Grossman, S. J. (1995): “Dynamic Asset Allocation and the Informational Efficiency
 of Markets,” Journal of Finance, 50(3), 773–787.

Jurek, J. (2007): “Crash-neutral Currency Carry Trades,” working paper.

Jylhä, P., J.-P. Lyytinen, and M. Suominen (2008): “Arbitrage Capital and
  Currency Carry Trade Returns,” working paper.

Kilian, L. (1998): “Small-Sample Confidence Intervals for Impulse Response Func-
  tions,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(2), 218–230.

Klitgaard, T., and L. Weir (2004): “Exchange Rate Changes and Net Positions
 of Speculators in the Futures Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic
 Policy Review.

Lewis, K. (1995): “Puzzles in international financial markets,” in Handbook of Inter-
  national Economics vol. 3, ed. by G. M. Grossman, and K. Rogoff. North Holland,
  Amsterdam, Chap. 37.



                                         34
Lustig, H., and A. Verdelhan (2007): “The Cross-Section of Foreign Currency
  Risk Premia and US Consumption Growth Risk,” American Economic Review,
  97(1), 89–117.

Meese, R. A., and K. Rogoff (1983): “Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the
 Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?,” Journal of International Economics, 14,
 3–24.

Mitchell, M., L. H. Pedersen, and T. Pulvino (2007): “Slow Moving Capital,”
 American Economic Review (Papers & Proceedings), 97(2), 215–220.

Pan, J., and K. Singleton (2007): “Default and Recovery Implicit in the Term
  Structure of Sovereign CDS Spreads,” working paper.

Plantin, G., and H. S. Shin (2007): “Carry Trades and Speculative Dynamics,”
  working paper.

Ranaldo, A., and P. Söderlind (2007): “Safe Haven Currencies,” University of
 St. Gallen Economics Discussion Paper No. 2007-22.




                                      35
