NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY THE EUROPEAN SECURITIES MARKET IS NOT FULLY INTEGRATED
Alberto Giovannini
Working Paper 14476
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14476

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2008

I thank David Wright, Sean Berrigan, Daniela Russo and Mario Nava for their help and support over
the years. All errors and opinions are my own responsibility. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Alberto Giovannini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Why the European Securities Market is Not Fully Integrated
Alberto Giovannini
NBER Working Paper No. 14476
November 2008
JEL No. F3,F36,F59,G15,G2
ABSTRACT
I describe the challenge of fully integrating securities markets in Europe by integrating the clearing
and settlement functionalities. The initial condition is characterized by a multitude of standards, conventions,
regulation and laws, which are inconsistent with a barrier-free post-trading environment. In addition,
the current providers of post-trading services are mostly for-profit monopolies. The EU reform strategy
is discussed in detail, and its performance so far is assessed. I argue that the special features of the
post-trading industry may help understand the disappointing progress so far.

Alberto Giovannini
Unifortune Asset Management
Via Donizetti 53
20122 Milano, Italy
alberto.giovannini@alum.mit.edu

WHY THE EUROPEAN SECURITIES MARKET
IS NOT FULLY INTEGRATED

Alberto Giovannini
Unifortune Asset Management
(This draft, October 2008)

1. Introduction

Economists have often used the concept of integration to measure international efficiency.
Integration is estimated with similar methods both in goods markets and in financial markets. The
method typically adopted is that of sizing deviations from the law of one price: researchers identify
identical assets and determine whether they are traded at the same price in different countries. In
finance, this method is especially useful, since in financial markets certain assets can in some cases
be replicated through appropriate combinations of other assets.1 The study of deviations from the
law of one price is a useful device to identify where distortions are, and is routinely carried out, also
by official institutions. In the Euro Area, the European Central Bank publishes reports on the
integration of financial markets that apply these methods.2

However, the measure of deviations from the law of one price has limitations. First, it is often the
case that identical assets cannot be found, and therefore the law of one price cannot apply. In these
cases researchers resort to equilibrium pricing models, so that the hypothesis of integration gets to
be merged with the hypothesis that the pricing model is correct. In addition, when the analysis
becomes very detailed (in general-equilibrium analysis a good is defined not only by its nature but
1

The classic case is interest-rate parity: a Eurodeposit loan in a given currency can be replicated through a combination
of spot and forward foreign exchange transactions and a Eurodeposit loan in another currency.
2
See European Central Bank (2007).

1

also by time and place) the test of the law of one price loses power. Therefore it is not appropriate
to rely only on the law of one price to determine the degree of integration and efficiency of financial
markets.

An alternative method to discuss integration, which is the starting point of this paper, is to ask
whether similar or identical assets are traded in different markets or in the same market, and what
defines a financial marketplace. Consider the case of the European Union (EU) or, more narrowly,
of the Euro Area, and consider securities for simplicity. Can we say that in the EU or the Euro Area
securities markets are integrated? Macroeconomist would tend to believe that it should be the case,
based upon two observations: first, throughout the EU there is freedom to trade securities among the
different member states; and, second, in the narrower Euro Area there is no foreign exchange risk,
so the comparison of different asset prices is straightforward and the last barrier to securities trade is
gone. Yet, as I show in this paper, the actual picture of European securities markets is very
different. This discrepancy is due to the fact that the basic implicit tenet which allows to associate
freedom of trade with perfect integration is full competition and absence of distortions: both
conditions are not verified in practice.

This paper explains what a single, fully integrated securities market is, and why we do not have it
yet in Europe. I argue that any market, including a securities market, is defined by the
arrangements put in place to ensure delivery of goods and of payments to the counterparties in each
trade (post-trading arrangements). An analysis of these arrangements is the most reliable way to
obtain an accurate assessment of the extent to which there is integration in a geographic area like
the EU or the Euro Area. In the paper I analyze post-trading arrangements in the EU and discuss
their reform, whose objective is to obtain a single EU securities market.

In section 2 I describe the two pillars of post-trading, clearing and settlement, and the actors that
perform these functions. In section 3 I explain where the current status quo in European securities
markets comes from. Section 4 takes up the question of financial reform: is there a case for
intervention in securities markets to induce integration? In section 5 I describe the reform strategy
that is underway in the EU, and its accomplishments so far, which are rather disappointing. In
section 6 I analyze the political economy of this financial reform, to provide an explanation of the
slow pace of reform. Section 7 contains a few concluding remarks.

2

2. What Are Clearing and Settlement

It is now commonplace the use of the word “plumbing” when referring to clearing and settlement.
Indeed, clearing and settlement are plumbing in more than one way. First, they are the little-visible
infrastructures that make certain the receipt of securities by the buyer and the receipt of the cash (or
other means of payment) by the seller. Below, I will present a more detailed description of what is
needed to ensure these simple things to take place. These infrastructures, like plumbing, permit the
working of financial markets. Clearing and settlement are plumbing also in the sense that the little
glamorous community of professionals involved in these activities is, to say the least, not very
visible, either in the financial press or in the public discourse. The little visibility is in part
explained by the very dry, technical nature of the work they carry out. Yet, it is not justified by the
importance of the infrastructure. The volume of economic transactions handled by clearing and
settlements providers is mind-boggling: in 2006, DTCC settled more than $ 1.5 quadrillion (1
quadrillion equal 1,000 trillion, i.e. 1 million billions) of securities transactions,3 while Euroclear’s
turnover in the same year was “a mere” € 450 trillion.4 A failure of the clearing and settlement
system can have major economic impact. Some of the most important financial crises in recent
decades have been accompanied or caused by clearing and settlement problems: the Herstatt crisis
and the 1987 US stock market collapse are the best-known examples. For these reasons, whenever
financial turmoil is in the horizon, authorities, who are well aware of the importance of clearing and
settlement, immediately take initiatives to ensure that clearing and settlement can continue
sufficiently smoothly: this was especially evident in the eve of the year 2000, as well as when
financial markets were disrupted in the wake of the September 11, 2001 attacks on New York City.
To effect a securities transaction the following steps need to be taken (Figure 1 reports a more
detailed but identical functional analysis):
•

Verification of the transaction or settlement details: an essential pre-step of clearing.

•

Clearing: the establishment of the credits and debits, of securities and amounts due, which
can be done in a bilateral (counterparty clearing), or multilateral (central counterparty
clearing) way. Different clearing arrangements can produce different settlement flows. For
example, a counterparty clearing arrangement may compute the net payments due as a result
of the sum of the transactions between two counterparties over a pre-specified period. In a
central counterparty clearing system, the central counterparty becomes the other side of all

3
4

http://www.dtcc.com/about/business/index.php, May 2008.
Norman (2007).

3

bilateral transaction, thus netting all flows in its books. Notice that in central counterparty
clearing the central counterparty needs to assess and control the risk it takes from all
counterparties (to maintain the integrity of the netting process in its books).
•

Settlement: it is the delivery of the securities and the payment of funds between the buyer
and seller. This involves securities depositories (Central Securities Depositories—CSDs—or
International Central Securities Depositories—ICSDs), which, among other functions, hold
the securities and carry out the notary function ensuring that all securities paid equal
securities received, so that the integrity of the outstanding stock is preserved. The payment
of funds is typically effected via a banking/payments system.

A number of observations are useful at this point.
1) Clearing and settlement need to work well together: since errors in clearing produce errors
in settlement. Yet, they are separable functions. More importantly, the volume, and
therefore the risk, of actual settlement operations are determined by clearing: a clearing
process that produces extensive netting of bilateral transactions results in a minimum of
settlement instructions.
2) It is evident that the functions I described above are the core of a market. Indeed, I argue
that these functions actually define a marketplace, since they define the confines and the
mechanics of transactions: a market is defined by the arrangements to get the goods and the
money delivered—i.e. the post-trading arrangements—not by trading arrangements. This
point is confirmed by the fact that, if economic actors are free to do so, they often come up
with different trading venues, which fulfil different functions (for example by selecting
different points in the liquidity/transparency frontier). This is not the case of clearing and
settlement: multiple clearers may exist, but only because they are bundled to other services
(typically, trading: see the US experience with derivatives exchanges, for example).
3) The most important fact about the production of clearing and settlement services is that their
only inputs are information, as well as the use of computing and communication services.
Unlike many other processes in finance, there is no human input in the actual process of
post-trading: no decisions to be taken, no judgment of risk and expected returns, no analysis.
All of these valuable inputs stay out of clearing and settlement per se, but are of course
essential in the design of clearing and settlement systems. Thus I conclude that these
processes are as close to zero-marginal-cost production functions as you can get in finance.
On the other hand, there are huge technical difficulties and considerable risks to be assessed
in the design (and setup) of a clearing and settlement system.
4

4) There are several important functions that are contiguous to clearing and settlement. Here I
list just some examples:
•

Custody, the actual holding of securities, is the closest function to settlement:
indeed, settlement is carried out by custodians.

•

Securities lending, is a way to oil the settlement process: a custodian, or an entity
in charge of settlement, knows who is long a given security and who is short; it
can then match the longs and shorts through securities loans, thus minimizing the
disruptions to the settlement process that arise from fails. In addition, securities
lending for purposes other than the smooth working of the settlement process
requires access to a settlement system; intermediaries in the securities lending
market can use information on the settlement process to improve their brokerage
services.

•

All the typical global custodian (or prime brokerage) services, including
securities valuation, securities lending (for the purpose of establishing short
positions), and cash lending.

•

Other services (often carried out by global custodians) associated with corporate
actions (dividend payments, AGM voting and securities registration, share capital
increases, etc.).

•

Last, but not least, trading: for example, a stock exchange that offers post-trading
services can provide so called straight-through processing, which facilitates and
simplifies stock trading for its customers.

It is apparent that the contiguity of various financial services to the core clearing and settlement
functions gives rise to economies of scope. These in turn create incentives for a relatively wide
spectrum of actors to compete for the clearing and settlement market. This last point is examined in
more detail, with reference to the experience in Europe, in the next section.

3. Evolution of the Post-Trading Market in Europe

The entities providing trading and post-trading services had been traditionally structured as mutual
companies—i.e. customer-controlled firms—or government-owned entities. Di Noia (2000),
following Hansman (1996), claims that the mutual nature of financial infrastructure companies
5

came from the monopolistic nature of the business. If a firm is a monopolist, to be user-owned
minimizes distortions. Similarly, a monopoly owned by the state will charge prices in accordance
to the objectives of the state. Often, the monopoly status of the firms was sanctioned by law, both
in the case of trading (concentration rules) and post-trading (see The Giovannini Group, 2001).
Financial infrastructure firms in each country were also managed with a keen eye to the efficiency
of the country’s financial marketplace: in a number of European countries there have been
committees, often called “financial marketplace” whose aim was to coordinate regulators, users and
providers of infrastructure services in the interest of the market as a whole. It is not surprising that
such committees could easily transform into defenders against foreign competition when trading in
financial assets became liberalized among European countries. This point is discussed in greater
detail below.
National financial markets in Europe were largely isolated and national infrastructures were
designed to cater exclusively to domestic users. This led to the birth of entities whose sole function
was to provide services to international investors. Capital controls in the US and Europe led to the
development of the so-called Eurobond market, where bonds denominated in currencies other than
that of the issuer, namely the US dollar, were sold mainly to international investors (i.e. investors
with international securities accounts). In 1968 Morgan Guaranty setup Euroclear in Brussels.
Euroclear started to settle transactions in Eurobonds without physical delivery of the bonds: the
bonds were kept in the same physical place, and transactions simply led to book entries reassigning
the bonds to the new owners. This was the first international central securities depository, or ICSD.
Shortly afterwards, Cedel was founded in Luxembourg by 71 banks from 11 countries, with the
same mission as Euroclear.5
The coexistence of national infrastructures with a growing international infrastructure has
characterized European financial markets in the following years. However, this coexistence
progressively became competition as a result of two major phenomena: the liberalization of
international financial transactions—a by-product of the creation of the Single European Market—
and the introduction of the Euro, which eliminated an important barrier across the different
European financial markets—namely exchange risk.
The events in Europe were a kind of enhanced version of global developments in financial markets.
Since the beginning of the 1990s international portfolio investment has boomed : see for example
the data for OECD reported in figure 2. As a result, infrastructure providers have felt keener
competitive pressures from abroad, and have started to react to them. A very noticeable
manifestation of this reaction has been a wave of demutualizations or privatizations of the
5

See Norman (2007) for the best description of the history of post-trading in Europe.

6

exchanges, often in tandem with privatizations of the post-trading platforms. Table 1 reports a list
of exchanges which abandoned the mutual governance structure, with the respective dates. There
are a few reasons for this: the first, mentioned by Aggarwal (2002), is the increased competition
among stock exchanges, requiring faster and more efficient decision making (it is claimed that a
mutual company has a more cumbersome decision process than a common stock company). In
particular, the decision process leading to alliances may be facilitated in a common stock setting as
opposed to a mutual setting. In addition, the presence of potential conflicts of interest between the
stock exchanges and their users (intermediaries) may call for a more diverse ownership structure,
and more autonomous management.6 Finally, a common stock structure may make it easier to raise
capital, because it allows reaching out to a much wider universe of potential investors.
Stock exchanges claim that demutualization has led to higher profits (hence greater efficiency).
Verifying this claim is beyond the scope of this paper. However, I note that in connection with the
wave of demutualization there has been an a dramatic increase in trading volumes, which in good
part is due to factors other than the marketing efforts of the exchanges. Table 2 reports turnover
data for a list of European exchanges. The 60% increase in trading revenues between 2000 and
2007 is remarkable, considering that the 7-year period starts—in the year 2000—at the peak of the
equities bubble, a time when equity transactions were commensurably high.
In Europe, the twin revolutions, liberalization and monetary union, had the simple effect to increase
the demand for cross-country transactions within the Euro area. More importantly, together with an
increase in actual demand for cross-border transactions, there was a universal feeling that cross
border business would skyrocket. Therefore, liberalization and monetary union made the existing
infrastructure for financial markets obsolete, as I will explain more in detail below.

4. Financial Market Reform: The Case of Europe’s Clearing and Settlement

Figure 3 reports the graphic analysis of a cross-border transaction. The figure illustrates that the
same functions can be, and are, carried out by different actors, a point already mentioned above. In
particular, international settlement can be carried out through an ICSD or through an agent bank, or
via the services of a global custodian or, finally, through a link between the domestic and foreign

6

Yet, as is the case of Italy, the privatization of the stock exchange, the central securities depository and the central
counterparty resulted in intermediaries holding shares of the privatized companies, some sort of hybrid or artificial
mutual structure, thus actually creating a setting vulnerable to the potential conflicts mentioned above.

7

CSD. As a result, all of these institutions are currently competing for the same cross-border
business in Europe.
What is the attraction of the cross-border business? Not only, as I argued above, cross-border
business is expected to be the growth segment in the EU market. But also, the unit revenues from
servicing cross-border securities transactions are orders of magnitude higher than those for the
equivalent domestic transactions. This result is documented in various studies. The studies mostly
resort to unit revenues because prices for post-trading services have the following two features: (a)
they are not publicly available information and (b) they are widely different, across users (typically
users with more market power get discounts).7 The Giovannini Report (2001) illustrates data
studied by CEPS, which compares unit revenues of ICSDs with unit revenues of domestic CSDs,
after adjusting for netting. This method is based on the hypothesis that ICSDs business is mainly
cross border (the income statements used for the comparison are from 2000). Table 3 reports the
results of this experiment. They are striking: the unit revenue from cross-border transactions is
more than 10 times the same from domestic transactions. This result, published in 2001, was never
seriously disputed by any researcher or service provider in the post-trading industry.
Another authoritative study, by NERA (2004), compares post-trading costs actually using pricing
schedules supplied by service providers. The conclusions of that study are broadly in agreement
with those reported above:
“For an exchange-traded equity transaction settled on a net basis, the cost in the US is around €0.10,
in the UK, Italy and Germany the cost is in the range of € 0.35 to € 0.85.” (NERA, 2004, p. 87)
And:
“…a standard cross border trade settled through an ICSD can cost € 35 or more” (NERA, 2004, p.
87)

At the root of these price differences there is the added complexity of cross-border transactions: a
cross-border transaction can involve as many as 11 intermediaries and 14 instructions between
parties (Giovannini Group, 2001). This complexity is due to the simple fact that EU markets are
separate entities, from a legal and regulatory standpoint. As a result, these markets have developed
different conventions and technical standards. The complexity therefore arises from the need to
bridge separate markets.
At first blush this complexity—and the various risks it gives rise to—cannot explain a price
differential of the order of 10 to 1. To my knowledge, nobody has ever attempted the steep task of
quantifying the effects of market fragmentation on the actual costs of post-trading services. The
7

The disparity of prices across users is puzzling given the standardized nature of these services, which are mostly
carried out by computers.

8

general belief, supported by the few valuations of the business providing international clearing
services that have surfaced (Norman, 2007, for example, cites some), is that the profitability of
cross-border services is, at the price levels mentioned above, very high. It is however to be
expected that it will decrease as a result of increasing volumes of transactions and an increasingly
crowded marketplace. Indeed, since the studies mentioned above, a number of developments
indicate that the ratio of cross-border to domestic costs has decreased: the latest estimate that has
been informally cited is, to my knowledge, 4:1, a number that is still frighteningly high.

Hence, the sense in which the European financial market has got obsolete infrastructure is that it
may be described as a juxtaposition of national monopolies that have been historically isolated from
one another: a far cry from an efficient, integrated market. Should this be sufficient ground for a
public initiative? Consider the fundamental factors driving the evolution of markets. Financial
markets make heavy use of communication and information technologies.8 As a result, the primary
driver of progress is progress in communication and information technologies, one that has been
very fast in recent decades. In the presence of competition, it is to be expected that the dramatic
changes brought about by technical progress in information and communication would be
transforming the way financial markets perform their basic functions. The regulatory framework
designed to support these functions would need to change to reflect the new way such functions are
performed.

Should regulators and lawmakers take the lead in this transformation process, or should they just
accommodate the effects of the strong forces of change mentioned above?

In general, as well as in this case, the role of government authorities is justified on economic
grounds by the presence of market failures, which are phenomena that prevent the normal market
mechanism to reach an efficient allocation of resources. An additional condition for government
intervention to be justified is that it is effective, that is, it actually identifies and eliminates the
market failures. It is useful to concentrate on the market failures that are to be expected in posttrading:
•

Coordination failures: the service providers along the post-trading value-chain need to
coordinate their actions. The equilibrium may not be the optimal one when providers do not

8

The basic functions of financial markets are the facilitation of assets trades, the allocation of resources over time and
space, the trading of risk, the provision of information on the value of investment assets and the solution or principalagent problems. These functions require as inputs people and information.

9

internalize the effects of other participants reactions to their own decisions (Nash
equilibrium).
•

Technology, and in particular near-zero marginal costs in information processing, may give
rise to a single supplier: if it is a for-profit business it will, in absence of regulation, practice
monopoly pricing.

•

In addition, market or monopoly power will induce for-profit suppliers to practice price
discrimination as well as service bundling: a number of services offered in competitive
markets will be bundled to the service offered in a monopoly regime, to protect the former
from competition.

This reasoning applies in a domestic financial market. In an international setting market failures are
trivially represented by barriers that prevent, or make more difficult, the provision of post-trading
services cross-border.
The Giovannini Group (2001) provided an analysis of barriers to the provision of cross-border posttrading services. These barriers justify the presence of the complex systems of cross-border
securities settlement described above, which give rise to those very large cost differences. The
barriers are listed in Table 4.
An analysis of the list of barriers reveals that they are the result not of conscious protectionist
attitudes, but just of a history of separated national financial markets. For example, the use of
communication standards that differ from country to country (barrier 1), the presence of different
rules governing corporate actions (making it cumbersome and costly to access a market from
abroad, barrier 3), the differences in operating hours and settlement deadlines (barrier 7, making,
together with barrier 4, difficult to connect different settlement systems) and the differences in
standard settlement periods (barrier 6) were not the result of protectionism, just historical accident.
The list above contains barriers caused by technical standards and conventions, which can be
regarded as private-market rules. There are also barriers caused by laws and regulations. For
example, barriers 13, 14 and 15 pertain to different legal treatment of interest in securities and they
are also the result of history, not protectionism. The same is true for the barriers associated with
different systems of taxation. In addition, certain provisions like those granting monopoly power
to domestic post-trading infrastructures (see for example barriers 2 on restrictions on the location of
clearing and settlement and barrier 10 on primary dealer restrictions) are probably not inspired by
protectionism, but by the desire to allow the maximum exploitation of the benefits of economy of
scale, by avoiding fragmentation of post-trading services.

10

Therefore, the analysis of barriers seems to suggest that things that are efficient in domestic markets
become the source of fragmentation in international setting. This, however, is not the only problem:
the technology used to deliver post-trading services is characterized by near-zero marginal costs,
therefore there are potential distortions when this technology is managed for profit by entities that
are large enough to be able to affect market prices.
In summary, the combination of barriers to efficient cross-border post-trading with an industry
structure characterized by national monopolies, in turn justified by the technology to deliver posttrading services, appear to be the necessary conditions for government initiative. The existence of
necessary conditions raises the question of the most effective initiatives that government can take.
In practice, governments are constrained by the institutional setting of their decision making. In
particular, in the European Union there is a complex interaction between the EU Commission and
national governments, which has shaped and crucially affected the reform initiatives.

5. The European Commission’s Reform Strategy and Its Performance So Far

The most straightforward strategy for reform of the post-trading infrastructure in the EU would
have been to coordinate consolidation of the different providers: the different segments of the posttrading functions could have been horizontally integrated across the different EU member countries,
to achieve the scale that is the necessary condition for lower costs. However, while this strategy
ensures—by its very nature—the achievement of an efficient outcome, it leaves aside the presence
of the barriers to cross-border business mentioned in the previous section. If consolidation occurs
in the absence of barriers removal, the cost of cross-border business will remain higher than the cost
of domestic business. In addition, a top-down strategy is vulnerable to the problems of government
involvement in business decisions, with potential costly errors.

An alternative strategy is truly opening markets, that is, to eliminate all barriers to cross-border
trading, and let the structure of the industry to evolve on its own. In this case a situation like the
one studied by Krugman (1994) would be created: when trade is opened among national
monopolies, the one with the lowest average cost (and presumably lowest prices) progressively
takes over the whole integrated market, because it is able to charge the lowest price throughout, and
by gaining ever larger market shares, it maintains and improves its pricing advantage over
competitors. In Krugman’s simple description it is assumed that national monopolists have
11

identical technologies. If that was the case, letting the markets produce the Krugman outcome
would not be a particularly useful exercise, although in practice the single EU-wide supplier would
not emerge as the entity that progressively erodes to zero the market power of the smaller
competitors, but rather would be formed through mergers, a faster and quicker way to gain the scale
that allows the lowest costs. What would justify a hands-off approach that limits itself to the
elimination of all barriers to trade is the presence of different know-how and skills. A competitive
game would presumably be a more efficient device to make the better technologies and know-how
emerge, although the cost advantages of the larger players at the time of market opening would still
distort the outcome.

The EU Commission decided to follow the logic presented above. It embraced the view that the
elimination of the barriers is the starting point of reform and that authorities should stay out of the
process of consolidation that should be expected as a result of the elimination of barriers. In a
Communication issued in 2004 (EU Commission, 2004), the Commission stated that the priorities
were:
a) Liberalisation and integration of existing securities clearing and settlement systems;
b) Application of competition policy;
c) Adoption of a common regulatory and supervisory framework including questions of
definitions;
d) Adoption of appropriate governance arrangements.

To achieve them, it decided to embark on the following:
•

to draw up a Directive on clearing and settlement which addressed questions of (i) rights of
access and choice, (ii) a common regulatory framework, and (iii) governance;

•

to set up the a consultative and monitoring Group, called CESAME (Clearing & Settlement
Advisory and Monitoring Experts) with the mandate to organize the removal of the so-called
private sector barriers and advise the Commission on public sector barriers;

•

to establish a group to advise on reforms in the taxation area;

•

to establish a group to advise on reforms in the legal area.

The Commission added rights of access, a regulatory framework and governance among the areas
where it would legislate because it recognized that granting access to non-domestic providers is the
pre-condition for market liberalization, that regulatory issues would be raised with respect of the
risks that intermediaries in charge of post-trading would be allowed to take (in the interest of the
12

safety of the system as a whole) and that, given that the industry has at least a tendency to converge
towards a (natural) monopoly, it would be important that the governance of the providers at least to
some extent limit the incentives that a monopolist manager has to maximize its own profits, thus
increasing costs and charges for its customers.9 Taxation and legal issues are part of the list of
barriers, but since they require action that requires heavier involvement of national government, the
choice of separate working groups allows conducting the work with this different style.

The members of CESAME were, together with representatives from the Commission DirectorateGeneral for the Single Market (DG Markt), which chaired the group, and representatives from the
Directorate General for Competition (DG Comp), top officials from the European Central Bank and
the Bank of England, and the chairman of CESR, the Committee of European Securities Regulators.
The industry representatives were from a number of banks involved in post-trading services, the
national CSDs and ICSDs, stock exchanges and associations representing industry groups involved
in clearing and settlement. There were, however, no representatives of those most directly affected
by the high costs of post-trading services, like final investors and asset managers. In addition, the
representatives for the various providers and industry groups were, with few exceptions, people
working full time in Brussels on relations with the Community institutions.

The function of CESAME was to act as an information clearinghouse: it had to inform the financial
community as a whole of the initiatives undertaken to remove the barriers related to technical
standards and market conventions, for which governments had no direct role to play. It also had to
receive inputs from financial markets on making the process of removing barriers related to
technical standards and conventions speedier and more effective. It had to provide information to
government authorities and the Commission in the first place on aspects related to its own activities
in the liberalization of the post-trading market and, of course, it had to inform the market on how
such initiatives were progressing. The idea was that this mechanism, supported by a skilled and
competent secretariat from DG Markt, would ensure a more democratic process, that is, a process
where authorities would be less vulnerable to capture from private interests. In addition, this
mechanism was meant to provide coordination among the many different actors involved in post
trading: knowing that a certain set of reforms would take place, the different actors would make
investment decisions under the maintained hypothesis that in a given interval of time the EU market
would be much more integrated—thus bringing about an efficient aggregate outcome and avoiding
losses due to misdirected investment decisions.
9

See EU Commission Communication (2004) for a discussion of this.

13

In summary, the process for reform designed by the EU Commission apparently addressed all the
market failures that have emerged in the analysis: from simple coordination failures in standard
setting and in investment planning to the barriers to cross-border integration and the implications
for having monopolistic suppliers of post-trading services.

CESAME had its first meeting in July 2004. It had some of its work already cut out for itself: The
Giovannini Group (2003) had laid out a plan for reform which included a list of responsible entities
to coordinate action for each barrier and a timetable and sequencing order. These devices were
meant to ensure consistency among the different initiatives and to provide incentives for speedy
action. CESAME essentially adopted the process design described in The Giovannini Group
(2003). The timetable is reproduced in Figure 4. It shows that the maximum time required for the
elimination of barriers was estimated to be 3 years. The figure also highlights that separation of
responsibilities (which entities were to be considered to take the responsibility for the initiatives
designed to remove each barrier) was such that most work had to be done by authorities, as it
pertained to regulations and laws, which can only be changed or cancelled by entities that have the
power to do so: parliaments and governments.

Four years after the first meeting of CESAME, which officially kicked off the reform process, the
original mandate of the group is over.10 Has the process delivered what had been promised?
Evaluating progress in the removal of cross-country post-trading barriers is not straightforward,
because the reforms in technical standards, conventions, rules, regulations and laws are non-linear.
In the case of technical standards and conventions, after new templates have been identified and
proposed, their adoption is up to the free decisions of market participants. The process is nonlinear
because it is characterized by coordination equilibria (the behaviour of each actor depends on the
behaviour of the other actors). Similarly, there are nonlinearities in the case of new rules,
regulations and laws, even though, once new rules, regulation and laws are issued, they are
immediately adopted, by definition. With these caveats in mind, an analysis of the state of affairs
does not lead those who laid out the reform strategy to congratulate themselves.

10

Members of the Group prepared a Report (CESAME Report, 2008) containing detailed descriptions of all initiatives
and progress. After the expiry of the mandate of CESAME, the Commission has decided to re-form the group, to carry
on the unfinished work.

14

Table 5 summarizes the progress.11 Of the 15 barriers originally identified, only 2 have been
dismantled. The reforms of standards and conventions (required to remove the private sector
barriers) have proceeded in order, but in some cases extremely slowly, so that after 4 years not even
the preparation phase is completed. The changes in regulations and laws required to remove publicsector barriers are even less advanced: in most cases there has been study, in some cases proposals,
but little or no action from the Commission and national governments.

This very significant discrepancy between outcome and expectations could in part be due to wrong
expectations: has the time to completion of the reforms been estimated to be too optimistic? While
the work carried out between 2004 and 2008 has unearthed a number of details and issues that were
not foreseen before the start, the expected time to completion of the reforms was drawn by a
number of professionals both from the financial industry and the EU Commission: it was aggressive
but not unrealistic. Hence, the disappointing outcome of the reform process has to be found
elsewhere.

The most significant deviation from the initial plan is the decision by Commissioner McCreevy not
to draft a directive. The 2004 Communication envisaged the production of a directive, whose
objective was to gather together the reforms of regulations needed to remove most of the publicsector barriers. McCreevy’s decision was taken at the end of an extremely drawn out discussion
and preparation phase, which included a very vocal debate between two camps in favour and
against the directive, some statements from the European Parliament on the desirability of
legislation, and a very thorough cost-benefit analysis of legislation (“Impact Assessment”).

While the Commission 2004 Communication made it very clear what the contents of a directive
would be, debaters in favour and against argued their views only about certain details. Among the
most vocal entities in favour of a directive were banks involved in the asset servicing business
(which includes post-trading services), coordinated by BNP Paribas around a group that called itself
the “Fair and Clear” group.12 Their argument was that a directive was necessary essentially to
clarify that the business of securities lending by CSDs had to be subject to the same restrictions as
those imposed on banks. Their concern was that CSDs would use their control of the final
settlement function (recall that settlement is complete only when the central securities depositories
accounts have been updated) to subsidize more lucrative asset servicing business, like securities

11
12

The table draws from CESAME Report (2008).
See Fair & Clear (2004).

15

lending. Hence, banks in the asset servicing business wanted a directive to contain the competitive
threat from CSDs, and in particular Euroclear.

By contrast, the camp against the directive was populated by a variety of entities: first and foremost
Euroclear, but also Europarliamentarians worried that a directive would become hostage to special
interests (see, notably, the positions of Theresa Villiers, who was Rapporteur on post-trading in
2004) and some very influential representatives from the London financial community (like, for
example, Sir David Walker and Sir Nigel Wicks, also Deputy Chairman of Euroclear). In general,
those who argued against a directive pointed to two things: a directive would take too much time to
be produced (the consensus view is that the time to produce a directive is 4 years) and, a directive
would be distorted by special interests (in other words, the EU political process is seriously faulty).

The decision not to issue a directive was, in my opinion, the key mistake at the root of the lack of
progress in the removal of barriers related to rules, regulations and laws. It was a mistake for the
simple reason that rules, regulations and laws not consistent with an integrated post-trading market
can only be changed by new rules, regulations and laws: since this reform has to be coordinated
across Europe, a directive appears to be the natural tool to achieve the task. Commissioner
McCreevy apparently did not recognize this point. He justified his decision with his general
aversion to lawmaking: he said that laws have to come in only when the private sector fails to get
things done according to the desired plan.13 Instead of a directive, McCreevy took the initiative to
coordinate the signing (in November 2006) of a code of conduct by the stock exchanges, the
clearinghouses and the CSDs. The code contained commitments towards price transparency, access
and interoperability and service unbundling. This was a welcome initiative--as many national
monopolies have in the past actively used complex and opaque pricing systems, bundling strategies
and restrictive practices to maximize their profits--but in no ways it could represent a substitute for
what a directive was meant to do. Indeed the Code does not remove regulatory barriers, like for
example the requirement of a license for remote access.
Similarly, the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive, which sets the principle of freedom of
choice of post-trading venues, does not remove legal barriers to consolidations or prevent the
protection of national champions.14

The hypothesis presented in this paper is that the slowdown of financial market integration
described above is not the result of individuals’ initiatives, even though those are the proximate
13
14

See McCreevy (2006).
See Turing (2008).

16

causes. The reason why the reform did not occur is that all national governments and the EU
Commission were not of the opinion that such a reform would be a serious priority. And that this
opinion was informed by market participants in pursuit of their interests. In the next section I try to
uncover the political economy of financial market reform.

6. Why Has Integration Not Been Delivered? The Political Economy of Financial Reform

The history of the European Union is characterized by some bold reforms in economic institutions
which have had a major impact on societies and living standards. Among these, monetary union
stands out as a huge, successful reform which has been carried out relatively quickly. From the
perspective of political economy, monetary union appears very interesting. Elsewhere (Giovannini,
1992) I have argued that monetary union was a reform for which gainers and losers were not clearly
identified groups. This stands in contrast with other international liberalizations, like trade reforms,
where gainers all consumers and exporters and losers are those working in import-competing
industries. The financial industry stood to gain from new opportunities but to lose from the closing
down of foreign exchange market “while forex traders were obviously and vocally against, their
bosses and in general the broker-dealer community was supportive of the project, as it saw its
benefits in terms of potential new business.” [Graham Bishop, private conversation with the author,
July 25, 2008].

In the presence of a vacuum of political forces for or against, a reform like monetary union is
subject to two kinds of forces: on one side, elites that see the economic benefits of the reform can
push it through the political process with relative ease—because they do not have to fight with the
political influence of the sectors negatively affected by the reform, as in the case of trade
liberalization; on the other side, the national currency lends itself to becoming a symbol for other
objectives. For example, those who stand to lose from liberalization in general may seek to stop the
process by derailing monetary union. Because the national currency is a highly visible symbol, and
because the complexities of a monetary union are not immediately clear to everybody, strategies of
this kind may actually work.15 On balance, it appears that in most countries the reform has gone
through relatively smoothly and that those exploiting it for other purposes have been few.

15

See, for example, the debate that surrounded the Swedish referendum on the single currency.

17

A reform of post-trading that facilitates the creation of a single, integrated clearing and settlement
platform has potentially a very large positive economic impact on the countries involved.16 The
positive impact of an integrated capital market is not easy to estimate through the standard static
analysis: Hotelling triangles are hard to estimate (since supply and demand elasticities in the case of
securities trading can be very large indeed); in addition, the interesting and relevant economic
effects are not those measured through partial equilibrium analyses of the securities markets, but
stem from the effects that a single, integrated securities market has on capital formation and risk
taking in the EU economies as a whole. This is a very difficult problem to address. The EU
Commission has valiantly taken up this task in its impact assessment, and has produced estimates
on the incremental impact of the reform on EU-wide GDP, with a permanent increase ranging
between 0.2% and 0.6%. An analysis of these estimates is beyond the scope of this paper. Suffices
here to point out that, as several authors have noted, there is abundant historical evidence on the
nexus between an efficient financial system and economic performance: see, for example, Rajan
and Zingales (2003). Thus, the desirability of the reform is, among the informed public, easy to
accept. The difference between this reform and monetary union is that the integration of financial
markets infrastructure is below the radar screen of parliamentarians, because it is an arcane topic,
just like plumbing. Indeed, even within the EU Commission recognition of the importance of the
post trading infrastructure has arrived late: the so-called Financial Services Action Plan, a
comprehensive strategy aimed at creating an integrated and efficient EU financial system, in its
initial versions, did not contain any mention of the urgency of reforming post-trading, which turns
out to be the precondition for any meaningful integration of markets, the Economic and Financial
Committee of the EU launched a research program on the importance of financial markets
infrastructure after hearing a presentation of The Giovannini Group (2001).17

Hence, like monetary union the reform of post trading is one that informed people think brings large
benefits, although these benefits are not easy to explain and not understood by the larger public. In
addition, the individuals who will stand to lose from the reform are hard to identify: there maybe a
number of people who are made redundant by the creation of an integrated and efficient posttrading platform in the EU, but these people normally do not have political representation. Hence,
the standard political-economic analysis does not apply. In what follows I try to highlight a number
of effects that I have been observing which may help explain the outcome so far.
16

See the Impact Assessment prepared by the staff of DG Markt: EU Commission (2005).
In that presentation I argued that the state of financial markets in Europe was like that of a country after a war:
everybody is happy to be free, governments declare the start of peace, but nothing works and the situation is as
miserable as during the war. Similarly, allowing free trade of securities in the EU was not any reason for complacency,
since European financial markets were hopelessly fragmented.
17

18

In Table 6 I summarize the economic incentives of the two classes of interest groups for the status
quo and reform. As mentioned above, the users’ community which is aware of the costs of posttrading is the community of intermediaries, securities trading houses (broker-dealers) and
investment managers. This group does not suffer directly from the costs of post-trading as it is able
to pass this cost along to their customers. Since the cost is a system-wide cost, it does not produce a
disadvantage to any one institution. Financial intermediaries have some interest in lower trading
costs, especially as they would give rise to more business opportunities, though these opportunities
are not immediately apparent. Therefore, the opportunity cost of no reform is not very high for the
users’ community.

Consider now suppliers. Under the status quo suppliers have low volumes in cross-border business,
but very high unit revenues. In an integrated market, volumes are presumably much higher, and
there is the potential of becoming the sole supplier in every zero-marginal-cost segment of the
business. Of course there is also the risk of losing the competitive game in the bigger market.
Hence suppliers would either resist integration or try to influence the reform process in a way that
advantages their own chances of becoming the winner-take-all.

Resistance to integration has been evident in recent years. One manifestation of it has been the
development of so-called “financial-marketplace” committees in various EU countries. Until
recently these committees have worked with the explicit aim of maintaining and fostering the
business of the national financial market, typically around the national stock exchange. The
strategies followed by the financial-marketplace committees, which often included government
authorities playing the role of observers or coordinators, were to make the domestic market
somehow different from foreign markets, making it somehow special. In other words, the strategy
was to erect various regulatory, convention and other barriers to foreign competition.

This strategy is fraught with what I call the fallacy of localism. Local financial markets are, more
than international financial markets, populated by medium and small intermediaries, which can use
their size to their own advantage: they are physically closer to customers and through specialization
they can reach excellence in certain areas of the financial business. By their nature, small
intermediaries cannot sustain large fixed costs. Consider now two alternative structures for the EU
financial market. The firsts structure, like the present, is characterized by a sum of largely isolated,
though accessible, national markets. The markets are isolated because they are characterized by
19

standards, conventions and regulations that are specific to each one. An alternative structure is one
where standards, conventions and regulations pertaining to all markets are the same, so that the EU
can be considered a truly single marketplace. Under both market structures investors and issuers
would want to take full advantage from the possibility of accessing all markets. However, under the
first structure, few intermediaries would have the resources needed to allow their clients to access
all EU national markets. Indeed, for each market, intermediaries would have to deploy the
resources that are needed to perform all procedures specific to that market. With 25 EU member
states, this cost becomes prohibitive to any medium-small intermediary. By contrast, under the
alternative market structure, there would be no additional cost to access other markets, because
there would not be any procedures that are specific to that market. This example illustrates the
fallacy of localism. Those policymakers that create national financial marketplaces with the aim of
protecting domestic (small and medium-size) intermediaries, are not taking into account that all
people want and/or need access to all markets. In fact, the financial marketplace policies end up
crowding out small and medium financial intermediaries in favour to large, multinational
intermediaries which are able to exploit their size to finance the fixed costs needed to give all their
clients access to all domestic markets. In conclusions, strategies that are designed to protect
domestic financial intermediaries end up giving them a competitive disadvantage, as long as there
remains freedom to trade financial assets and freedom to establish financial businesses in different
EU countries.

Another factor affecting the reform process is the technical nature of the subject combined with the
role of clearing and settlement at the core of the financial markets. The fundamental dilemma of
policymakers is that they have to set rules on issues that they do not know first hand, or on which
they have partial information. The functions of liquidity transformation and risk trading (which is
accomplished through leverage) performed by financial markets make them inherently fragile,
prone to multiple equilibria and excess volatility. Thus, financial market reform is an area of
policymaking where the dilemma presents itself in very stark form. On one side, the subject matter
is highly technical and complex, with many implications, some difficult to predict; on the other side
wrong decisions may raise especially serious risks: an inappropriate reform may create additional
instabilities with potentially very large economic costs. The result is that policymakers involved in
financial market reform are especially vulnerable to regulatory capture: they are particularly
sensitive to ideas and suggestions of practitioners in the field, who are also interested parties.

20

Finally, and related to the point made above, one observation about consultative reforms. As
described above, CESAME was designed to provide information to industry actors, policymakers
and the users’ community at large, and through the dissemination of information, to act as a
coordinating device. The virtual absence of the users’ community was evident in CESAME. In
addition, regular industry representatives were in most cases individuals, within companies or
associations, in charge of institutional relations (managing relations with policymakers and
regulators, often based full-time in Brussels), and therefore not directly involved in the
technicalities of post-trading. In these conditions, the risk that industry interests are overrepresented is higher.

In summary, the political economy of the reform of EU financial market infrastructure has the
following characteristics:
•

like monetary reform, it is an arcane subject with little genuine political appeal;

•

like other forms of international liberalizations, the gainers are disperse and largely unaware
of what is going on, let alone the potential gains of the reform;

•

the industry of financial markets infrastructure is not all against reform, but many actors feel
threatened by it (many protected markets would disappear);

•

the intensely technical nature of the reform hinders the power of initiative of authorities;

•

the consultations process allows de-facto over-representation of post-trading industry
interests.

These conditions would lead to predictions that broadly match the actual outcome so far: reform
has been very slow; all fundamental aspects of reform, that is the legal and regulatory framework
that would allow true consolidation and integration of post-trading service providers, are still to
start in a significant way. In other words, since the interest groups with relatively more effective
influence on policymaking are ambivalent about the gains from liberalization (some certain market
advantages would be lost), since policymakers are not under pressure to move forward, and may
well be concerned about undesired and unforeseen effects of reform, progress has been very slow.
In the concluding section I will try to identify some lessons on the appropriate design of
mechanisms to manage a reform process in financial markets.

21

7. Concluding Remarks

After the introduction of the single currency, the construction of a truly integrated and liquid
securities market appears the natural development in the EU, and a worthwhile objective for its
impact on financial intermediation and the efficiency of EU economies. The creation of a single
EU securities market is proving a task much harder than those who conceived it initially envisaged.
This paper has discussed the lack of progress in the reform of financial market infrastructure in the
EU.

To explain why the pace of reform has, so far, been much slower than expected, I have highlighted
a number of issues. First, the EU financial market status quo is very complex. There are a
multitude of different standards, conventions, rules, regulations and laws, which coexisted easily in
a condition of very limited cross border financial activity, but have become a huge hindrance as
cross border transactions are allowed and are needed. With this kind of initial conditions, a reform
plan requires a complex, concerted action which involves public and private actors alike, from all
countries involved in the reform. In this process, legacy players (the current providers of posttrading services) are by necessity crucial actors. Under the status quo legacy players enjoy stable
market shares (mainly due to regulatory frameworks that enforce their monopoly rights in the
countries where they are based) and high profitability to cross-border business. Because of this, it
would not to be expected that legacy suppliers would welcome bold reforms which would in a
sweep dramatically increase competition among providers in all countries.

The EU Commission and national governments have all recognized the importance of reform, but
have made very little progress in the long list of initiatives that they originally laid out for
themselves. I argue that lack of leadership by government authorities is the main cause of the
insignificant progress so far. The main cause of governments’ lack of leadership is difficult to
identify. My hypothesis is that it is the result of the combination of two sets of factors:
1) the distribution of economic payoffs: each of the existing providers faces the threat of
decreased protection and increased competition, while those who certainly stand to gain,
final investors, are unaware of the reform, let alone of its benefits;
2) government authorities’ reform task is highly complex and delicate: the perception of risks
is heightened and their tendency to rely on the advice of legacy providers is increased; this
condition needs to be contrasted to monetary union, where the vast majority of the

22

knowledge on the technicalities and the economic impact of the reform resided with central
banks, which are public authorities and are not driven by profit motives.
Under these conditions, it is unlikely that government authorities would push hard for reform:
indeed, developments so far are consistent with this hypothesis; the key actions that were expected
of EU lawmakers have yet to occur.

Looking back at the history of the attempt of reforming European financial markets infrastructure it
is natural to ask whether, with the benefit of hindsight, the design of the reform mechanism could
be improved in any ways. As mentioned above, 4 years ago, in 2004, the Commission stated its
intentions to draw up a Directive on clearing and settlement which addressed questions of rights of
access and choice, a common regulatory framework and governance. If the process to issue the
directive had started then, now it would be at a very advanced stage, if not completed. In the
complex interaction between the work of government authorities and that of the private sector,
described in this paper, it cannot go unnoticed that the private sector’s motivations to push ahead
crucially depend on authorities revealed preferences: if the authorities actions do not match the
strategy that they themselves have laid out, private market participants may not believe in the
reform’s momentum.

Alternatively, more top down initiatives aimed at consolidating the fundamental functions of
clearing and settlement—like facilitating the creation of a EU-wide clearing platform and a single
CSD—could still be feasible though much more difficult to put in place, as the interests of those
private suppliers that want to drive this consolidation may be at odds with these projects. The
experience of the Target 2 – Securities project of the European Central Bank (which provides a
securities’ settlement functionality with central bank money) is a good illustration of this difficulty,
even though the project is moving ahead, it has been subject to heavy criticism by the industry,
which has waged a campaign to discredit it. However, even if top-down strategies were to become
more feasible, the requirement of an appropriate legal and regulatory framework, which
presupposes new rules and laws to be issued by national authorities, does not go away.

I would like to conclude with a note of optimism: even though progress has been disappointingly
slow, the direction of reform has been broadly correct and, in particular, the project to create an
integrated and efficient securities market in Europe is understood and shared by an ever larger
number of people. These are important and encouraging achievements, which do not preclude, at
any moment, an acceleration of the pace of reform.
23

Table 1:
Exchange Demutualizations
Demutualized Exchanges
Stockholm Stock Exchange
Helsinki Stock Exchange
Copenhagen Stock Exchange
Amsterdam Stock Exchange
Borsa Italiana
Australian Stock Exchange
Iceland Stock Exchange
Simex
Athens Stock Exchange
Stock Exchange of Singapore
Hong Kong Stock Exchange
Toronto Stock Exchange
London Stock Exchange
Deutsche Borse
Euronext
The Nasdaq Stock Market
Chicago Mercantile Exchange

Year
1993
1995
1996
1997
1997
1998
1999
1999
1999
2000
2000
2000
2000
2000
2000
2000
2000

Source: Aggarwal (2002)

Table 2:
Turnover at European Exchanges
Exchange
Athens Exchange
Borsa Italiana
Budapest Stock Exchange
Cyprus Stock Exchange
Deutsche Börse
Euronext
Irish Stock Exchange
Ljubljana Stock Exchange
London Stock Exchange
Luxembourg Stock Exchange
Malta Stock Exchange
OMX Nordic Exchange Copenhagen
OMX Nordic Exchange Stockholm
Oslo Børs
Spanish Exchanges (BME) Madrid
SWX Swiss Exchange
Warsaw Stock Exchange
Wiener Börse
Total

2000 Total
Turnover
€ 117.166
€ 1.013.633
€ 13.091
€ 10.919
€ 2.296.156
€ 2.533.295
€ 15.734
€ 707
€ 4.943.465
€ 1.822
€ 200
€ 101.216
€ 526.244
€ 75.159
€ 660.785
€ 692.258
€ 21.054
€ 10.497
€ 13.033.399

Exchange
Athens Exchange
Borsa Italiana
Budapest Stock Exchange
Cyprus Stock Exchange
Deutsche Börse
Euronext
Irish Stock Exchange
Ljubljana Stock Exchange
London Stock Exchange
Luxembourg Stock Exchange
Malta Stock Exchange
OMX Nordic Exchange
Oslo Børs
Prague Stock Exchange
Spanish Exchanges (BME)
SWX Swiss Exchange
Warsaw Stock Exchange
Wiener Börse
Total

2007 Total
Turnover
€ 122.364
€ 1.680.200
€ 34.610
€ 4.193
€ 3.144.150
€ 4.086.811
€ 99.550
€ 3.439
€ 7.544.970
€ 176
€ 65
€ 1.321.807
€ 399.054
€ 36.581
€ 2.160.321
€ 126.748
€ 63.876
€ 94.489
€ 20.923.404

Source: Federation of European Stock Exchanges (FESE): http://www.fese.be/en/?inc=art&id=4.

24

Figure 1:
Flows and Costs in a Domestic Transaction

Source: The Giovannini Group (2001)

25

Figure 2:
Trends in International Trade and Investment Components
OECD, 1990=100, Current Prices

Source: Bertrand (2006)

26

Figure 3a:
A Non-Domestic Transaction

Figure 3b:
Instruction Flows in a Cross-Border Transaction

Source: The Giovannini Group (2001)

27

Table 3:
Operating Income per Transactions in Selected CSDs
(Figures in Euro)

Source: The Giovannini Group (2001)

28

Table 4:
The 15 Barriers Identified by the Giovannini Group

Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Barrier
Differences in IT standards and interfaces
National restrictions on the location of clearing and settlement
Differences in rules and processes relating to corporate actions
Absence of intra-day finality between systems
Impediments to remote access
National differences in settlement periods
National differences in operating hours/settlement deadlines
Differences in issuance practice
National restrictions on location of securities
National restrictions on activity of primary dealers and market makers
Domestic withholding tax regulations serving to disadvantage foreign
intermediaries
Transactions taxes collected through a functionality integrated into a
domestic settlement system
Absence of a EU-wide framework for the treatment of interests in
securities
National differences in the legal treatment of bilateral netting for
financial transactions
Uneven application of national conflict of law rules

29

Figure 4:
Timetable for the Elimination of Barriers

Different operating hours/settlement deadlines

within 2 years

Diversity of IT platforms/interfaces

Markets

Absence of intra-day settlement finality
Differences in standard settlement periods
Different rules governing corporate actions
Differences in securities issuance
Conflicts of laws

within 2 years and 3 months

Legal treatment of netting
Absence of EU-wide framework of laws
Restrictions on tax collection

Authorities

Restrictions on withholding agents
Restrictions on location of clearing and settlement

within
3

Restrictions on location of securities

years

Impediments to remote access
Primary dealer restrictions

Preparatory phase

30

Removal phase

Table 5:
Progress in the Elimination of Barriers

Number

Barrier

What Happened

Dismantled?
If No, When?

1

Differences in IT standards and interfaces

New SWIFT Protocol

2

National restrictions on the location of clearing and settlement

MiFID Code of Conduct

No

3

Differences in rules and processes relating to corporate actions

New standards being finalized

No

4

Absence of intra-day finality between systems

Standards finalized

5

Impediments to remote access

Some progress in MiFID. Code of Conduct.

No.

6

National differences in settlement periods

No progress

No.

7

National differences in operating hours/settlement deadlines

New Standards

8

Differences in issuance practice

Coordination in issuance and distribution by
numbering agencies

Yes.

9

National restrictions on location of securities

Being studied by ad-hoc Legal group

No.

10

National restrictions on activity of primary dealers and market makers

Under consideration by Commission

No.

Ad hoc fiscal group has identified problems and
proposed solutions
Ad hoc fiscal group has identified problems and
proposed solutions

No. 2011.

No. 2008.

No. 2008.

11

Domestic withholding tax regulations serving to disadvantage foreign intermediaries

12

Transactions taxes collected through a functionality integrated into a domestic settlement system

13

Absence of a EU-wide framework for the treatment of interests in securities

Being studied by ad-hoc Legal group

No.

14

National differences in the legal treatment of bilateral netting for financial transactions

Collateral directive solves the problem.

Yes.

15

Uneven application of national conflict of law rules

Being studied by ad-hoc Legal group

No.

31

No.
No.

Table 6:
Schematic of Economic Incentives to Reform

Status Quo

Reform

Useers: Intermediaries, Investment
Managers

Pay high costs, though costs are
passed through

Lower costs. Gains from new
business opportunities are there but
not so visible.

Suppliers: for profit market
infrastructures

High profit margins, relatively low
volumes, protected market share

High volumes, low margins, potential
prize of becoming the sole supplier,
or sanction of being taken over.

32

REFERENCES

Aggarwal, Reena (2002): “Demutualization and Corporate Governance of Stock Exchanges”
Journal of Applied and Corporate Finance 15 (1), Spring, pp. 105-113.

Bertrand, Ayse (2006): “Possible Use of CPIs for Globalisation Indicators and Investment
Protection Analysis” mimeo, International Conference on CPIs, Bank of Spain, 1-2 March.

CESAME Report (2008): “The Work of the Clearing and Settlement Advisory and Monitoring
Experts”, mimeo, Brussels.

Di Noia, Carmine (2000): “Customer-Controlled Firms: The Case of Stock Exchanges,” CONSOB,
mimeo.

EU Commission (2004): Clearing and Settlement in the European Union – The Way Forward,
Communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament, COM(2994)
312 final, 28.4.2004.

EU Commission (2005): “Draft Working Document on Post-Trading”, mimeo,
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/financial-markets/docs/clearing/draft/draft_en.pdf.

European Central Bank (2007): Financial Integration in Europe, March. Frankfurt: European
Central Bank.

Fair & Clear (2004): “Contribution to the Communication on Clearing and Settlement in the
European Union – The Way Forward,” mimeo, September 20.

Giovannini, Alberto (1992): "EMU: What Happened? Exploring the Political Dimension of
Optimum Currency Areas," December 1992 (in 1993 CEPR volume).

Hansmann, Henry (1996): The Ownership of Enterprise, London: The Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press.

Krugman, Paul (1994): Rethinking International Trade, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
33

McCreevy, Charlie (2006): “Clearing and Settlement: The Way Forward,” Speech to the Economic
and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament, July 11.

NERA Economic Consulting (2004): The Direct Costs of Clearing and Settlement: An EU-US
Comparison, London, April.

Norman, Peter (2007): Plumbers and Visionaries—Securities Settlement and Europe’s Financial
Market, London: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Rajan, Ragnuram and Luigi Zingales (2003): Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists, New York,
Crown Business.

The Giovannini Group (2001): Cross-Border Clearing and Settlement Arrangements in the
European Union, Brussels, European Commission, November.

The Giovannini Group (2003): Second Report on EU Clearing and Settlement Arrangements,
Brussels, European Commission, April.

Turing, Dermot (2008): “After Giovannini – A New Agenda for Clearing and Settlement”, Clifford
Chance, May (mimeo).

34

