                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   OUTSOURCING WHEN INVESTMENTS ARE SPECIFIC AND COMPLEMENTARY

                                          Alla Lileeva
                                    Johannes Van Biesebroeck

                                       Working Paper 14477
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14477


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2008




We would like to thank Ig Horstmann for countless useful discussions and seminar participants at
Case Western, Urbana-Champaign, the Catholic University of Louvain, the University of Toronto,
Aachen University, EARIE 2008, and SITE 2007, especially Bob Gibbons, for comments. Financial
support from Statistics Canada, CFI, OIT, and SSHRC is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Alla Lileeva and Johannes Van Biesebroeck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Outsourcing when Investments are Specific and Complementary
Alla Lileeva and Johannes Van Biesebroeck
NBER Working Paper No. 14477
November 2008
JEL No. D23,L14

                                              ABSTRACT

Using the universe of large Canadian manufacturing firms in 1988 and 1996, we investigate to what
extent outsourcing decision can be explained by a simple property rights model. The unique availability
of disaggregate information on outputs as well as inputs permits the construction of a very detailed
measure of vertical integration. We also construct five different measures of technological intensity
to proxy for investments that are likely to be specific to a buyer-seller relationship. A theoretical model
that allows for varying degrees of investment specificity and for complementarities---an externality
between buyer and supplier investments---guides the analysis. Our main findings are that (i) greater
specificity makes outsourcing less likely; (ii) complementarities between the investments of the buyer
and the seller are also associated with less outsourcing; (iii) property rights predictions on the link
between investment intensities and optimal ownership are only supported for transactions with low
complementarities. High specificity and a low risk of appropriation strengthen the predictions in the
model and in the data.


Alla Lileeva
York University
1144 Vari Hall
4700 Keele Street
Toronto, Ontario M3J 1P3 Canada
lileeva@econ.yorku.ca

Johannes Van Biesebroeck
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
johannes.vanbiesebroeck@utoronto.ca
1       Introduction

Our principal objective is to investigate how the nature of investments by producers and suppliers
influences the optimal way to organize a transaction. Investments are characterized by the degree of
specificity, the ease with which they can be appropriated by another firm, and the likely existence of
complementarities. The more specific question we ask is whether the observed relationship between
technological intensities and outsourcing patterns in Canadian manufacturing is consistent with
predictions of the property rights theory of the firm.
     Technology is likely to be an important factor in firms’ outsourcing decisions. The spread of
information and communication technology has certainly contributed to increased fragmentation
of production across firms, potentially located in different countries (Abramovsky and Griffith
2006). More generally, it is sometimes argued that technology enhances outsourcing benefits, such
as allowing greater specialization. Firms should therefore be expected to become smaller or more
decentralized (Brynjolfsson, et al. 1994; Quinn 2000). At the same time, new technologies could
raise the value of assets within an existing relationship more than outside it, for example because
of greater customization. Firms fearing expropriation of investments would be expected to reduce
outsourcing (Williamson 1985).
     Only a few studies provide systematic evidence on how technological intensity influences out-
sourcing. Mol (2005) shows that in the Dutch manufacturing sector the relationship between R&D
intensity and outsourcing recently switched from negative to positive.1 While concerns over op-
portunism and expropriation still exist, he conjectures that a higher scale of production, increased
specialization between industries, and more sophisticated relational contracting now make it more
advantageous to outsource some R&D intensive activities. A second example, discussed in greater
detail in the next section, Acemoglu, Aghion, Griffith, and Zilibotti (2005) (henceforth AAGZ) test
implicitly between the predictions of transaction cost economics (TCE) and the property rights
theory (PRT). TCE predicts that, all else equal, higher asset specificity makes integration more
likely, irrespective of which firm is making the specific investments. In contrast, the PRT distin-
guishes theoretically between forward and backward integration, although this distinction tends
to be unobservable. If only one type of integration is empirically relevant, increased buyer and
supplier investments should have opposite effects on the probability of outsourcing, which is borne
out in their data.
     As discussed in Whinston (2003), there are many ways to operationalize the PRT, leading to
different predictions. Our empirical work is guided by an explicit theoretical model that features
buyer and supplier investments which are both specific to the relationship and potentially exhibit
complementarities. One feature that our model shares with existing PRT approaches, which are
reviewed in the next section, is that allocating control rights has benefits and disadvantages. It will
strengthen the investment incentives of the controlling firm, at the expense of weaker incentives for
the acquired firm. In the remainder of the introduction, we discuss our theoretical contribution,

    1
     Mol (2005) contains references to several other studies predicting the effect of technology on outsourcing going
in either direction.


                                                         1
highlight important features of our empirical approach, and preview some of the main results.
     A novel feature of our theoretical model is to incorporate complementarities between the invest-
ments made by the two firms that are transacting. These are examples of “cooperative” investments
in Che and Hausch (1999), who have shown that when committing not to renegotiate is impossible,
contracts are without value in this situation, making the PRT framework particularly appropri-
ate. Nöldeke and Schmidt (1998) also allow for complementary, but sequential investments. They
show that unconditional ownership structures can never achieve first best, but more sophisticated
contracts such as ownership options can, even without ruling out renegotiation.
      Complementarities, externalities between actions, are often used to explain why several activ-
ities in a firm’s internal organization tend to be adopted together (Milgrom and Roberts 1990)2 ,
but it has much wider applicability. In general, two (continuous) activities are complementary if
adoption of one activity increases the marginal productivity of a second activity.3 A number of
papers, reviewed in the next section, have studied how complementarities between different actions
of one firm influences the optimal level of outsourcing. Roberts (2004) (p. 218) has suggested that
complementarities between investments of different firms could serve as a theory of the firm, but
we have not seen previous work that models this explicitly.4
     In the PRT, firms make noncooperative investments first and bargain over the division of the
surplus afterwards. Adopting the Nash bargaining approach, investment incentives are influenced
by each firm’s payoff off the equilibrium path. Complementarities have two opposing effects on the
owner of an integrated firm. On the one hand, underinvestment by the acquired firm is more costly
as it directly lowers the marginal return of the owner’s own investment under joint production.
On the other hand, the only off-equilibrium payoff affected (reduced) by complementarities is that
of the owner, strengthening the acquired firm’s relative position and counteracting the original
underinvestment in the PRT. The effect on the incentives of the acquired firm depends on the net
impact on the owner’s investment. In an outsourcing relationship only the first effect matters,
but it will be larger than for the owner of an integrated firm. All this suggests that the impact
of complementarities on the likelihood of vertical integration is not monotonic and will depend in
nonlinear ways on the parameters of the model. We will show formally the net impact in a few
special cases and illustrate more general tendencies graphically.
     Note that our terminology is intended to capture something different from “complementarities”
in Hart and Moore (1990), which refers to the extent an investment remains productive if it is
separated from the human capital of the investor. They use complementarity to describe a property
of a mobile asset and an asset that is inseparable from the investing firm. In our model, the only
assets are those created by the investments and we use complementarity to describe a property
of the investments made by different firms. A situation where marginal investment returns on

   2
     Athey and Stern (2003) discuss estimation issues.
   3
     The cross-partial derivative of the objective function (profit, productivity) with respect to both activities is
positive (negative if the objective is the cost function).
   4
     Lindbeck and Snower (2003) contains some similar ideas, but they tend to focus on economies of scale and scope
within a single production factor.



                                                         2
disagreement payoffs under nonintegration are reduced to zero, what Hart and Moore (1990) call
investments that are “perfectly complementary,” we will call investments that are “impossible to
appropriate.” Our model still yields the prediction that such a feature will increases the likelihood
of investments being co-owned.
     In the empirical implementation, we investigate the make-or-buy decision of Canadian man-
ufacturing firms and focus on technologies that are likely to be important in production. Many
technologies come embodied in assets which are to varying degrees specific to the trading relation
they are employed in. Investments can also be specific to a particular producer-supplier relationship
if they serve to customize an input. With imperfect contractibility, such asset specificity gives rise
to a potential hold-up problem.
     The empirical approach is related to the work of AAGZ on the U.K. manufacturing sector,
but our data has three notable benefits. First, as we observe inputs and outputs at the plant level
at very disaggregate level (6-digit commodities), we do not need to rely on input-output tables to
construct our outsourcing measure. Rather, for each plant we check directly whether any of the
inputs it lists are listed as output by any plant owned by the same firm.5
     Second, linking our sample to the national survey on technology adoption, we construct several
measures of technological intensity at the industry level. In addition to R&D intensity and the
capital-labor ratio, as in AAGZ, we construct measures of advanced technology use, frequency
of innovative activities, and importance of human capital. These latter measures might have a
more direct link to investments in specific assets or to efforts to customize inputs that feature
in the theory. In addition, we use the product detail to classify each input as a homogenous or
differentiated good, following Rauch (1999). This provides an indicator of how likely it is that the
PRT framework—which has asset specificity at its core—is relevant.
     Third, we construct proxies for the important parameters in the model. In the PRT framework,
three properties of the investments influence the theoretical predictions: the extent of specificity,
complementarities, and appropriability. Mapping the theoretical constructs into observable mea-
sures is a delicate undertaking, but we benefit from unusually rich data. Production complemen-
tarities are measured by the overlap in inputs between the producer’s core output and the input
under study. Specificity is expected to be higher for differentiated products, for goods where the
producer is responsible for a large fraction of total Canadian demand, and specificity will vary by
the ratio of buyers to suppliers for the good. The different investment intensities have a natural
ranking in terms of appropriability.
     One would not expect the PRT approach to be able to explain the outsourcing-integration
trade-off for all transactions in the economy. We will provide evidence that the organization of
transactions and investments that are most in line with the PRT assumptions is also more likely to
follow the PRT predictions. For example, the same degree of asymmetry in investment intensities

   5
     Because input-output tables are an aggregation of such plant-commodity level information, our measures are more
detailed. If one plant does not use all of the inputs that the set of plants in its industry uses, we avoid introducing
spurious observations in our analysis.



                                                          3
is less likely to lead to integration if it easier to appropriate a subsidiary’s investment—in line with
the theoretical prediction that ease of appropriability increases underinvestment under integration
and favors outsourcing. Also, if expected returns outside the relationship improve, for example if
there are many alternative clients, integration becomes less attractive for suppliers.
     Our results indicate, first, that our proxies for specificity are important determinants of the
vertical integration or outsourcing decision of manufacturing firms. Second, we find that produc-
tion complementarities tend to increase the likelihood of integration, consistent with our theory.
Third, turning to the more nuanced predictions of the PRT, the effects of buyer and supplier tech-
nological intensity on the outsourcing probability depend crucially on the relative magnitudes of
each firm’s investment intensity. Greater asymmetry between these intensities, which could mean
higher investment by buyers or suppliers, should lead to integration; at least, in the absence of
complementarities. We do find strong empirical support for this prediction, but only for the range
of transactions where complementarities between buyer and supplier investments are low. Invest-
ment asymmetries lead to integration: at the margin, buyer investments lead to integration if they
dominate, but to outsourcing if supplier investments are more important (and vice versa for sup-
plier investments). These predictions are reinforced if investments are more specific or harder to
appropriate.
     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses empirical approaches
to test the PRT and the existing evidence. Section 3 introduces a bilateral trading model with
complementarities and derives a number of theoretical predictions. The empirical specification is
provided in Section 4 and the data is described in Section 5. Section 6 discusses the results with
robustness checks and lessons from the analysis are summarized at the end.


2       Empirical tests of the property rights model

An important feature of both the PRT and TCE is the existence of specific investments which have
a greater value within the relationship than outside it.6 Researchers have tested the TCE model
by verifying whether observable measures of asset specificity—plausibly related to appropriable
quasi-rents—are associated with an increased probability of vertical integration.7 By and large this
has proven to be the case, see surveys by Joskow (1988) and Shelanski and Klein (1995). However,
as Whinston (2003) illustrates for a number of prominent studies that such evidence in support of
TCE does not automatically carry over to the PRT.
        One of the unique features of the PRT is the indivisibility of control.8 While Klein, Crawford,

    6
     Gibbons (2005) argues convincingly that in some of Williamson’s (TCE) work ‘adaptability’ features as an
alternative core distinction between the integrated ownership form and outsourcing.
   7
     The TCE approach, see for example Williamson (1979), posits that when quasi-rents are present, production will
be inefficient as parties engage in costly activities to appropriate them. Without formally modeling the resolution of
the hold-up problem, TCE predicts that we are less likely to observe outsourcing when the risk of hold-up is high.
   8
     The PRT’s focus on ex ante investment versus TCE’s focus on ex post adaptation seems mostly a matter of
modeling convenience, as noted by Whinston (2003) (footnote 6). Klein et al. (1978) (p. 301) acknowledges explicitly
that distortions of ex ante investments, which give rise to the quasi-rents in the first place, are likely.


                                                          4
and Alchian (1978) posit that the defining difference between a long-term contract and vertical
integration is in the possibility of (greater) postcontractual opportunistic reneging in the former
organizational form, the PRT assumes that each division of an integrated firm maximizes its own
profit, choosing investments noncooperatively. The proponents of the TCE concede that “vertical
integration does not completely avoid contracting problems (footnote 4),” but they maintain that
“the crucial assumption underlying the analysis of this paper is that, as assets become more specific
and more appropriable quasi rents are created (...), the costs of contracting will generally increase
more than the costs of vertical integration. Hence, ceteris paribus, we are more likely to observe
vertical integration.” (Klein et al. (1978) p. 298).
     In contrast, the optimal organizational form in the PRT depends crucially on the relative
marginal effect of each firm’s investment rather than on the absolute size of the appropriable quasi-
rent. In an integrated firm, investment incentives of the owner are enhanced but those of the
subsidiary are weakened. While a literal interpretation of the PRT model leads to implausible
predictions, as illustrated by Holmstrom (1999), the model is useful to highlight the importance of
exit rights as an incentive mechanism. The marketability of a firm’s investments is an important
disciplining device for its contracting party.
     A few empirical studies have found support for the PRT by looking in detail at one specific
industry. Woodruff (2002) studies the ownership structure between retailers and producers in the
made-to-order Mexican footwear industry. He finds opposing effects of specificity on integration,
depending on which party is making the specific investments. Greater product variety or higher
quality materials, two attributes that arguably increase the hold-up risk mostly for the producer,
are positively associated with integration. However, increased fashion turnover, which puts the onus
on the retailer to learn consumers’ taste, is associated with less integration. Under the maintained
assumption that the (much smaller) retailers will never want to integrate backward into production,
all three patterns are consistent with the PRT, while the TCE would predict more integration also
in the latter case.
     Baker and Hubbard (2003) study the diffusion of on-board computers in the U.S. trucking
industry and find that it lead to a greater use of internal divisions, as opposed to for-hire car-
riers. Their interpretation is that the ability to monitor the agent (driver) more effectively lead
to diminished scope for underinvestment (in driving effort) and reduced the benefit of relying on
owner-operators.
     A number of papers in international trade have also adopted the PRT framework. Work in this
field is facilitated by the distinction in official statistics between transactions occurring within and
between firms. Antràs (2003) compares across industries the share of U.S. exports that consists
of intrafirm trade and finds that this fraction is increasing in the capital-labor ratio. Assuming
that capital is relationship-specific, he justifies this pattern as the optimal outsourcing decision in
a PRT model. Another application in international trade is Feenstra and Hanson (2005) which
reconciles the observed allocation of ownership and control in China’s export processing sector
with the predictions of an augmented PRT model. They find that in most cases foreign firms retain



                                                   5
ownership and control of the plant, while the local partner controls input-purchasing.9
     AAGZ (Acemoglu, et al. 2005) employ a novel approach to overcome data limitations on the
ownership structure in the economy at large. For the universe of manufacturing firms in the U.K.,
they verify whether a producer (firm) owns a plant in any of the industries that the national input-
output table indicates to be supplier-industries. Their main finding is that increased R&D intensity
in the producer or supplier industry has opposite effects on the likelihood that a firm owns plants
in both industries. The signs on the effects are consistent with the relevant trade-off in the data
being between backward vertical integration (producer owns supplier) and outsourcing. In this case,
integration strengthens producer incentives, while outsourcing encourages supplier investment.
     As mentioned earlier, one important addition we introduce in the PRT model are complemen-
tarities. The marginal contribution of one firm’s investment can be increasing in the investment
level of the second firm. Papers in the complementarity literature model this with interactions of
investments in the objective function, which we will follow.10
     A few papers have discussed the possible impact of complementarities on the theory of the
firm. Milgrom and Roberts (1990) argue that technology will make equipment more flexible and
less specific, reducing the incentive for vertical integration. They also mention that their theory
predicts less outsourcing if demand was more uncertain, requiring increased coordination between
tasks, but only if coordination could be provided more cheaply within the firm. They discard this
possibility as inconsistent with anecdotal evidence. Novak and Stern (2003) develop a model where
outsourcing of one automotive component can create externalities for other sourcing decisions. The
source of the externality in their model is the interdependency in coordination efforts or the need
for disclosure of proprietary trade secrets. Outsourcing of one component is predicted to increase
the likelihood that other components will be outsourced as well. They find support for this in a
confidential data set for the automotive industry.
      Nöldeke and Schmidt (1998) allow for complementarities between investments of different firms.
When these are made sequentially, they show how sophisticated ownership contracts, such as options
to own as used in joint ventures, can achieve first best. Roberts (2004) suggests that complemen-
tarities can make coordination more important and be a motivation for integration. This prediction
is in line with our findings, at least for some parameter values. Before turning to the evidence, we
first illustrate how the existence of complementarities modifies the standard PRT model.


3        Model

Whinston (2003) illustrates that any outcome is possible in a model with general (cross-) investment
effects—allowing for both firms’ investments to affect both firms’ outside options in the integrated

     9
    More empirical work on this subject is ongoing in the trade literature, see for example Nunn and Trefler (2007).
    10
    Influential methodological papers in this literature are Milgrom and Roberts (1990) (theory) and Athey and
Stern (2003) (empirical methodology); Arora and Gambardella (1990) and Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi (1997)
are important applications.



                                                         6
and outsourced organizational form. In order to obtain unambiguous predictions, AAGZ restrict
the impact of investments on the outside options in several respects. We follow their approach in
attempting to investigate the predictive power of the PRT exploiting variation across industries.
     Consider a bilateral trade setting between a buyer (B) who purchases an input from a supplier
(S). Both firms can make unobservable, noncontractible investments that raise the value produced
within the relationship, for example by investing in relationship-specific assets or customizing an
input. The joint surplus created in the relationship takes the following form:

                               F (xB , xS ) = αB xB + αS xS + ρxB xS .                            (1)

The x variables denote the investments of the two firms. Each has a direct effect on the surplus,
αB and αS , and an additional indirect effect, ρ. The interaction term is what distinguishes our
approach from earlier models. It represents complementarities: the marginal value of each firm’s
investment is increased if the other firm invests more (∂ 2 F/∂xB ∂xS > 0). Complementarities are
independent of the organizational form. However, they are only realized if both investments are
combined in production, i.e. under joint production or when one firm controls the outcomes of both
investments (integration).
    We assume that a generic input can be produced at zero cost or without any relationship-
specific assets. The costs of the specific investments for both parties are quadratic,

                                    1                                1
                          CB (xB ) = x2B         and       CS (xS ) = x2S .                       (2)
                                    2                                2

     The timeline of decisions is as follows. First, the parties decide on an organizational form: the
producer buys the supplier, i.e. backward integration by the buyer (BI); unintegrated production
or outsourcing (O); or forward integration and the supplier controls the firm (SI). Possible transfers
between the firms before any investments are made guarantee that each firm receives at least its
reservation payoff and that the adopted organizational form maximizes joint profits. Second, under
each of the three organizational forms, investments are made noncooperatively by both parties.
Third, the surplus is divided between the two firms using Nash bargaining, with each firm receiving
equal weight.
     If ex post the relationship breaks down and no joint production takes place, which does not
happen on the equilibrium path, each party receives its outside option. This depends on the
ownership form that has been put in place before investments are made. If the buyer owns the
firm, the outside options are as follows:

                                    BI
                                   πB  (xB , xS ) = F (xB , λxS ),                                (3)
                                   πSBI (xB , xS ) = 0.

The supplier loses the customized input or its asset, as it is owned and controlled by the buyer, and
receives nothing. It could make generic inputs for another firm and sell them at cost, but no profit



                                                  7
will be made. Ownership gives the buyer the benefit of the customized input, but we assume it
does not yield the full value as in harmonious joint production. For example, some tacit knowledge
of how to use the input is not passed on or some final customization touches would only be put
in place by the supplier at the last minute. As a result, only a fraction λ ∈ [0, 1] of the supplier’s
investment will be productive. An important departure from the models in Whinston (2003) or
AAGZ is that with complementarities the loss of a fraction of the supplier investment also reduces
the marginal return of the buyer’s own investment. The outside options in supplier integration
relation are symmetric.11
   If the parties had formed an outsourcing arrangement, giving each control over its own invest-
ment in the case of a break-up, the outside options would be

                                          O
                                         πB (xB , xS ) = F (θxB , 0),                                            (4)
                                         πSO (xB , xS ) = F (0, θxS ).

As each firm retains control over its own investment, no complementarities will be realized if the
relationship breaks up. Moreover, given that the buyer has to find another partner to supply it
with generic inputs that do not match as well with its own investments and the supplier has to
find another producer that requires somewhat different customization, we assume that the value
of their investments will be reduced to a fraction θ ∈ [0, 1] of their value within the original
relationship, again modeled symmetrically for the two firms. It is likely that the loss when the
specific investments are not combined in production will be larger than the loss when at least one
party controls both investments, i.e. θ ≤ λ, but we do not impose it.12
    As a benchmark, the first best investments in the presence of complementarities maximize the
aggregate welfare function:

                                                          1        1
                           W    = αB xB + αS xS + ρxB xS − (xB )2 − (xS )2 .                                     (5)
                                                          2        2

  11
     As we have no reason to assume otherwise, we model the same fractional loss in buyer investments (λ) to the
supplier.
  12
     The model imposes a number of restrictions on the model of Whinston (2003), which we share with AAGZ, to
obtain unambiguous predictions on the effect of technology intensities on organizational form. If we limit attention
to situations where the supplier-buyer link is very strong (φ = 1 in AAGZ), the following restrictions are important:
   1. Under integration, the return on investment in the outside option of acquired firm is low. We followed AAGZ
      in specifying that ∂πSBI /∂xB = ∂πSBI /∂xS = 0, but weaker assumptions are certainly possible. For example,
      Hart (1995) (chapter 2) only specifies that ∂πSBI /∂xS < ∂πSO /∂xS < ∂F/∂xS and obtains similar predictions.
   2. Still under integration, the return on self-investment in the outside option of the acquiring firm is high,
                                                                                        BI
      but that on cross-investments by the acquired firm is low. We assumed that ∂πB       /∂xB = ∂F/∂xB and
         BI                                                           O           BI
      ∂πB /∂xS < ∂F/∂xS , but weaker assumptions, for example ∂πB /∂xB < ∂πB /∂xB < ∂F/∂xB as in Hart
      (1995), would not change the predictions.
                                                                             O
   3. In an outsourcing relationship, cross-investments are of no value (∂πB   /∂xS = ∂πSO /∂xB = 0) if production is
                                                                                                    O
      not joint and the return on self-investments is lower outside the relationship than inside (∂πB /∂xB < ∂F/xB
              O
      and ∂πS /∂xS < ∂F/xS ).




                                                         8
Solving the system of first order conditions for both decisions gives
                                   αB + ραS                        αS + ραB
                           x∗B =                  and      x∗S =            .                        (6)
                                    1 − ρ2                          1 − ρ2

Given that the marginal investment costs are normalized to xB and xS , we need to assume that
ρ < 1 for the objective function to be concave. Both investments are increasing in each of the three
parameters in the joint surplus production function. For ρ = 0 this boils down to the model in
AAGZ. Even if one investment has no direct effect on the surplus production, say αS = 0, it will
still not be set at zero as it has an indirect effect by raising the productivity of xB if ρ > 0. It will
be the case, though, that xB > xS .
    Second best investments under the different organizational forms will be decided by each party
noncooperatively. Anticipating Nash bargaining (with equal weight for both parties) to split the
surplus, firm k ∈ {B, S} maximizes:

                                 1
             max πkz (xB , xS ) + [F (xB , xS ) − πB
                                                   z
                                                     (xB , xS ) − πSz (xB , xS )] − Ck (xk ),        (7)
              xk                 2

where the appropriate outside options for each organizational form z ∈ {BI, O, SI} have to be
substituted. As both firms take their decisions simultaneously, a Nash equilibrium of the noncoop-
erative investment-game is obtained by the intersection of the two firms’ best response functions.
      Because the entire problem is set up symmetrically for the buyer and supplier, we only have to
solve for the determinants of the trade-off between buyer integration and outsourcing. The trade-off
between supplier integration and outsourcing will be symmetric. Straightforward algebra on the
first order conditions to the above problem in each case gives the following optimal investments:

                                    1−λ2                            1−λ
                                 αB +   4 ραS                        2 (αS + ραB )
                         xBI
                          B =       1−λ2 2
                                                    and xBI
                                                         S =                    2   ,                (8)
                                1− 4 ρ                                1 − 1−λ4 ρ
                                                                                  2

                            1+θ          1                         1+θ         1
                              2 (αB + 2 ραS )                       2 (αS + 2 ραB )
                       xO
                        B =                         and xO
                                                         S =                        .                (9)
                                 1 − 41 ρ2                              1 − 14 ρ2

Without complementarities, these results are consistent with those in AAGZ, and we can unam-
biguously say that comparing BI to O, underinvestment is reduced for the buyer, but exacerbated
for the supplier.
     With complementarities, this pattern will not necessarily hold anymore. A first thing to note is
that the optimal investments under BI are decreasing in λ, the fraction of the supplier’s investment
that can be appropriated by the buyer in case of a break-up. At the extreme, if λ = 1, the supplier
will not invest anything, because the outside option of the buyer equals the entire joint surplus.
As a result, even though the buyer has all the power in the relationship, only the direct effect of
his investment will be realized and he will only invest αB , which potentially falls far short of x∗B .
Even in the best situation for BI, if λ = 0, both firms invest less than the first best. Because
of the complementarities, the underinvestment of the supplier spills over to the buyer, who sees
his marginal return on investment falls. It does remain true that underinvestment will be more


                                                      9
pronounced for the supplier than for the buyer.
     In the outsourcing arrangement, both firms’ investments are increasing in θ. Even in the most
advantageous situation, where investments are equally valuable outside the relationship (θ = 1),
firms will again invest less than in the first best situation. The appropriable quasi-rent is now the
value of complementarities and noncooperative decision-making leads each party to only consider
half of this value when deciding on its own investment. This lowers the denominator in (9) and
results in a lower multiplier effect of the complementarities. If investments are entirely specific
(θ = 0), investments are only half as large as the firms now discount both the direct and indirect
effects of their investments.
     Comparing the two organizational forms, we find that with complementarities even the sup-
plier’s investment is larger under BI than under O in the situation most favorable to integration,
λ = θ = 0. This ceases to hold if either λ or θ grows too large. Under the same assumptions,
the buyer’s investment will be larger under integration than under outsourcing,13 but this does
not hold generally anymore with complementarities. If it is too easy for the buyer to take control
over the supplier’s assets (λ is high), reduced investment by the supplier will lower the marginal
return to the owner’s investment through the complementarities. As a result, it is now possible
that the buyer invests more under outsourcing. This is more likely to happen if investments are
less specific (θ is high). At the extreme, if λ = θ = 1, investments of both parties will be larger
under outsourcing than integration and integration will never be desirable. In general, there exists
a lower threshold λ for λ below which xBI       O
                                          B > xB and an even more stringent lower threshold such
that xBI       O
       S > xS . Both thresholds are declining in θ.

   In terms of optimal ownership structure, the main prediction from AAGZ continues to hold if
complementarities are sufficiently small.

Proposition 1 There exist r, r, and ρ such that if ρ < ρ the unique subgame perfect equilibrium
ownership structure, z ∗ , is given as follows:

                                    z ∗ = BI    for   αB /αS > r,
                                    z∗ = O      for   αB /αS ∈ (r, r), and
                                    z ∗ = SI    for   αB /αS < r.

Moreover, ∂r/∂θ > 0 and ∂r/∂θ < 0; and ∂r/∂λ > 0 and ∂r/∂λ < 0.

Taking the limit for ρ going to zero, the proof boils down to the proof of Proposition 1 in Acemoglu
et al. (2005).14 Differentiating r and r establishes the comparative static results.
    The prediction from Proposition 1 is intuitive. When the direct marginal effect of investment
by the supplier (αS ) is low, the optimal ownership structure will be integration with the buyer

  13
     With λ = θ = 0, it can only be the case that xBI       O
                                                    B < xB if αB /αS < ρ/2, but in such a situation SI will be
preferred over BI, and the adjustment margin between BI and O is irrelevant.
  14
     For some parameter values r > r and outsourcing will never be optimal. Given that we do observe a lot of
outsourcing in the data, we follow AAGZ by limiting attention to the parameter space where this situation does not
occur. Note that we have defined λ as one minus the corresponding parameter in AAGZ.


                                                       10
                Figure 1: Optimal ownership structure with low complementarities


                          1
                       θ, λ                                   θ<λ
                                                                       θ=λ
                                                 O
                                                                         θ>λ




                          0
                                    SI                         BI
                              -2                   0                     2
                                                                 log(αB/αS)


in control to give him optimal incentives. When αS rises relative to αB , the optimal ownership
structure shifts at some point to outsourcing as the rising importance of the supplier’s investment
makes her underinvestment under BI increasingly costly for joint surplus production. Eventually, if
αS becomes sufficiently large it will even be optimal to put the supplier in control of the integrated
firm. Fixing θ = λ, the parameter space in Figure 1 is partitioned into three areas with the optimal
ownership structure indicated. The above discussion amounts to moving from right to left on the
graph.
      If investments are less specific and remain productive when used in isolation (high θ), the
range of αB /αS where outsourcing is ideal expands. Eventually, ownership is always optimal,
irrespective of investment intensities. However, if θ is sufficiently low, outsourcing disappears. If
it is easier for the owner of the integrated firm to appropriate the subsidiary’s investments (high
λ), outsourcing also becomes more attractive because investment by the acquired firm declines
further—the underinvestment problem under integration becomes worse. If θ increases relative to
λ, the dividing lines between the areas in Figure 1 rotate and shift downward and vice versa if θ
decreases.
     Introducing complementarities (ρ) complicates the analysis substantially because each firm’s
marginal return on investment now depends on the other firm’s decision. While we cannot establish
the impact on the likelihood of vertical integration in general, we can sign the effect in some
cases. We discuss two predictions. First, Proposition 2 establishes that the equilibrium ownership
structure from Proposition 1 does not hold anymore for sufficiently large complementarities. In
such a case there exists a range of parameter values for λ and θ where outsourcing dominates
integration even if one of the firm’s investment has no direct impact on the joint surplus.

Proposition 2 There exist ρ and λ(θ) such that if ρ > ρ and λ > λ the optimal ownership structure
will be outsourcing even if αS = 0 or αB = 0. Moreover, ∂λ/∂θ < 0.



                                                 11
The proof is in the Appendix, but the intuition is as follows. With positive complementarities, the
first best investment of the supplier is positive even if αS = 0, but she will underinvest under BI,
especially if her investment is easy to appropriate. In turn, this lowers the marginal product of
buyer investments and with sufficiently high complementarities this negative effect will outweigh
the positive incentive effect that the integrated BI structure confers on the buyer. If appropriation
of investments (λ) is sufficiently easy and complementarities (ρ) sufficiently high, both firms will
invest less under BI than under O.
     Next, we show how the equilibrium ownership structure (as defined in Proposition 1) is changed
at the margin when complementarities are increased from a low level. Because complementarities
make the optimal investments of both firms under BI a decreased function of λ, the effects again
depend crucially on the level of λ. A lower λ worsens the outside option of the buyer and raises
supplier investment. In turn, this raises the marginal benefit of buyer investment through com-
plementarities, increasing the optimal xB . Only if the λ parameter is sufficiently low can we be
certain that the buyer invests more under (backward) integration than under outsourcing. This
threshold becomes more stringent if θ rises. In other words, only if investments are sufficiently
specific and sufficiently hard to appropriate can we unambiguously determine the effect on the
optimal organizational structure.

Proposition 3 There exist λ and ρ such that if ρ < ρ and λ < λ the range of investment asym-
metries for which outsourcing is optimal shrinks as complementarities increase. The λ threshold
satisfies ∂λ/∂θ ≤ 0 and ∂λ/∂ρ > 0.

The proof is in the Appendix, but the intuition is straightforward. If the loss that the owner
(under integration) incurs in the outside option relative to joint production is sufficiently large (λ
sufficiently low), the existence of complementarities will make vertical integration more desirable.
Complementarities increase the difference between the owner’s payoff inside and outside the re-
lationship, while they do not affect the outside option of the subsidiary. In relative terms, they
worsen the outside option and with it the bargaining position of the owner, and thus lessen the
underinvestment problem of the subsidiary.
     Consider the optimal investments when they are highly specific and impossible to confiscate
(λ = θ = 0) and complementarities are extremely low. Equations (8) and (9) predict that both
xBI     O        BI     O
  B > xB and xS > xS . Introducing a small amount of complementarities will raise the joint
production in proportion to xB xS , which will be larger under BI than O. Complementarities raise
the marginal product of both parties’ investments more under BI, because of higher counterpart
investment, making BI more advantageous. At the same time, differentiating the investments in
(8) and (9) by ρ reveals that supplier investments under BI are the most responsive of all to
complementarities. Hence, when ρ grows larger, BI becomes even more preferable, indicated in
Proposition 3 by ∂λ/∂ρ > 0.
     However, this mechanism only works if λ is sufficiently low. For higher λ’s, both firms’ invest-
ments under BI decline relative to O and buyer investments immediately become less responsive
to complementarities under BI than under O. Eventually, for sufficiently large complementarities,

                                                 12
            Figure 2: Optimal ownership structure as a function of complementarities

                         1
                         ρ
                 comple-
                mentarity
                                                         O                                   Proposition 2
                                                                                             (at high comple-
                                                                                             mentarities)



                                     SI                                       BI
                                                                                             Proposition 3
                                                                                             (at low comple-
                                                                                             mentarities)
                                                         O
                         0
                             -2                                                         2
                                                                                log(αB/αS)


               Note: The figure is drawn for λ=0 and θ=0.5 (solid lines) or θ=0.7 (dashed
               lines); it will look similar as long as λ is sufficiently small and θ sufficiently large.



even supplier investments become less responsive to complementarities under BI than under O,
making outsourcing more attractive, with the limit result illustrated in Proposition 2.
     If the value of the investments outside the relationship (θ) rises, the threshold for λ below
which complementarities favor integration declines, i.e. becomes more stringent. In this case, un-
derinvestment is less of a problem under outsourcing and investments become more responsive to
complementarities.
     The optimal ownership structure as a function of the λ and θ parameters, as depicted in Figure
1, depends in complicated ways on the exact level of complementarities. As ρ increases from zero,
the thresholds between integration and outsourcing first rotate down and both thresholds shift
upward to eliminate outsourcing almost everywhere for intermediate values of ρ. For even higher
levels of complementarities, outsourcing reappears in the middle of the parameter space, rising in
popularity with ρ and eventually limiting the areas of integration to high λ and θ values, irrespective
of investment intensities.
      Figure 2 illustrates the optimal ownership structure as a function of the relative investment
intensities and the size of complementarities for two specific λ/θ combinations. At low values
of complementarities, the inward slope of the boundaries between integration and outsourcing
illustrate that marginal increases in ρ favor integration, as shown in Proposition 3. The reversal in
the slope of the boundaries for high levels of ρ illustrates the result of Proposition 2: at high levels
of complementarities, a further marginal increase in complementarities increases the area where
outsourcing is optimal.




                                                            13
4         Empirical Model

The above model yields a number of predictions for the relationship between outsourcing and
investment intensities. Proposition 1 describes the optimal organizational form as a function of the
relative technological intensities of the supplier and buyer in the absence of complementarities. The
thresholds that determine the integration-outsourcing trade-off depend on the specificity (θ) and
appropriability (λ) of investments. The existence of complementarities (ρ) modifies the relationship
further. Proposition 2 illustrates that strong complementarities can invalidate the benchmark
predictions and make outsourcing optimal irrespective of investment intensities. Proposition 3
shows that small amounts of complementarities will lead to more integration if the appropriability
of investments is sufficiently low.
     Before describing the estimating equations, we first discuss a preliminary regression we run
to evaluate the proxies for specificity and complementarity and the controls. Most importantly,
the PRT predictions are only interesting if investments are at least somewhat specific. If θ equals
one, Proposition 1 predicts the firms will choose outsourcing irrespective of investment intensities.
Complementarities are also immaterial in this case as the threshold for λ in Proposition 3 can never
be satisfied. Ceteris paribus, specificity will lead to integration, as it moves a firm down in Figure 1
and rotates the thresholds for the integrated regions up. Even in Figure 2, with complementarities,
the areas where integration is optimal are larger if the specificity is higher (solid versus dashed
lines).
     As the average level of complementarities in manufacturing is likely to be low, we expect
positive complementarities to make integration more attractive on average, as in Proposition 3.
Several proxies for specificity and an observable measure for complementarities are introduced in
the data section. Both variables are predicted to have negative coefficients in a probit regression
of the form:

     OU T Sf j      = α1 Specif icityf j + α2 Complementij + α3 Cost-sharef j + Controlsf j + f j .             (10)

The dependent variable is an indicator that takes a value of one if input j is outsourced by firm f .
     Because firms use multiple inputs, the PRT predictions only apply if the input under consid-
eration is sufficiently important. We include the cost-share in equation (10) and conjecture that
outsourcing will be dominant at low levels. AAGZ incorporate the cost-share explicitly in their
model and show that the range of investment asymmetry between buyers and sellers for which
outsourcing is still optimal shrinks as the cost-share increases.15
     The controls included in this and all following equations include the size and age of firm f ,
as well as industry averages for output i and input j. These variables control for the predictions
in Stigler (1951) that outsourcing will increase as industries mature and grow in size. Additional
variables are included to control for technological explanations for a firm’s outsourcing decision:

    15
         These unconditional predictions regarding specificity and the cost-share would be the same in a TCE approach.



                                                            14
productivity, composition of the workforce, and complexity of the product.
     Next, we discuss how we investigate the more nuanced predictions related to marginal in-
vestment incentives. To apply the model to the data, we make it stochastic simply by adding a
random error z to aggregate welfare. The firms will prefer buyer integration over outsourcing if
∆W (α, ρ, λ, θ) ≡ W BI (α, ρ, λ, θ) − W O (α, ρ, λ, θ) ≥ BI − O . Assuming the errors are normally
distributed, comparative statics for the ∆W entity can be investigated using a Probit model for
the outsourcing indicator, bearing in mind that the theory suggests the effects are not monotone
for most variables.
      The exercise is further complicated because the integrated firm can be controlled by the buyer
or by the supplier and there is no way to distinguish both forms of integration in the data. We only
observe whether an input is produced internally or outsourced. Proposition 1 predicts that the
likelihood of buyer integration is increasing in the ratio of the buyer’s to the supplier’s marginal
investment impact on the joint surplus (αB /αS ), while the likelihood of supplier integration is
decreasing in the same ratio. This reflects the indivisibility of control, a crucial feature of the
property rights theory: integration strengthens incentives for the firm that takes control, but
weakens incentives for the subsidiary.
     For each form of integration, the technological intensity of suppliers and buyers has opposite
effects on the outsourcing decision, but this might not be apparent in a data set that combines
a range of industries where either forms of integration can be relevant. Holding the supplier’s
technology constant, higher investment intensity for the buyer makes integration more likely for
firms deciding between outsourcing and buyer integration, but favors outsourcing for firms con-
templating supplier integration. AAGZ provide evidence for U.K. manufacturing firms that higher
technological intensity of the buyer leads to integration, while supplier investment intensity leads
to outsourcing, consistent with the relevant margin in their data being buyer integration versus
outsourcing.
    To account for the possibility of both forms of integration, one has to allow for the impact of
each firm’s marginal investment intensity (X) to depend on the other firm’s intensity. The simplest
such specification is
                                                                         2
                    OU T Sf j    = βB XiB + βS XjS + δ XiB − XjS              + Controlsf j + εf j .               (11)

Restricting δ = 0 in equation (11), gives the estimating equation in AAGZ. Proposition 1 predicts
that δ < 0, i.e. outsourcing is less likely for two industries that differ a lot in investment intensity.
     In this specification, the marginal impact of buyer investment on outsourcing will be propor-
tional to βB + 2δ(XiB − XjS ). If both industries have similar intensities, the PRT predicts that an
outsourcing arrangement is likely. Starting from such a situation, raising the technological inten-
sity of the producer should make (buyer) integration more likely. Hence, we expect βB < 0, as
in AAGZ.16 Similar reasoning for the supplier leads to the prediction that βS < 0, which differs

 16
      Note that AAGZ use 1 − OU T Sf j as dependent variable, inverting all signs compared to our specification.



                                                          15
from AAGZ as they assume that the only relevant margin in the data is between BI and O. If the
relevant trade-off is between SI and O, which will be the case if XjS is sufficiently higher than XiB ,
the second term in the marginal effect of buyer investment will be positive and come to dominate
βB , leading to the desired (reverse) effect that buyer investments lead to outsourcing.
     An equivalent modeling approach would be to include the interaction of the two technological
intensities, γ(XiB × XjS ), in equation (11) instead of the squared term.17 In this specification, the
marginal impact of buyer investment on outsourcing will be proportional to βB + γXjS . At low
levels of technological intensity of the supplier—αS close to zero in the theory and XjS close to
zero in the data—the relevant margin will be between O and BI. As before, theory predicts that
buyer investments will lead to integration and the effect of XiB on outsourcing is dominated by βB ,
which is expected to be negative. On the other hand, at very high levels of XjS , the other margin
(between O and SI) will be the relevant one and the effect should be reversed. Raising XiB now
makes outsourcing more likely, which will be reflected in a positive coefficient on the interaction
term (γ > 0), which now dominates the marginal effect.
     The theoretical predictions are less clearcut if investments of buyers and suppliers are comple-
mentary, i.e. if the joint surplus is increased when both investments are raised together. Proposition
3 indicates that the probability of outsourcing would be reduced, at least for moderate comple-
mentarities and for sufficiently low appropriability of investments. With complementarities, one
would expect high levels of investments by both firms, as can be seen directly from equations (6).
As a result, the presence of complementarities has the opposite effect on the coefficient of the
interaction term (or the square term) than the standard PRT effect discussed above, making its
sign ambiguous. The mechanism is that complementarities lower the relative outside option and
hence the bargaining position of the controlling firm. Underinvestment of the subsidiary, which is
extremely costly in the case of complementarities, is diminished. As a result, investments by the
two firms will be more similar than in the absence of complementarities, while at the same time
the probability of outsourcing is reduced.
     Because we have an observable measure of technological complementarities, we can estimate
the augmented equation
                                                                                      2
   OU T Sf j = βB XiB + βS XjS + (δ 0 + δ 1 Complementf j ) × XiB − XjS                    + Controlsf j + εf j . (12)

Without complementarities, the predictions of Proposition 1 apply and we expect δ 0 < 0. Com-
plementarities introduce an opposing effect, according to the predictions of Proposition 3, and we
expect δ 1 > 0.
     We estimate the three equations (10), (11), and (12) using five alternative measures of tech-
nological intensity which are introduced in the next section. At the same time, other observable
variables will influence the marginal effects of the intensities. Our model highlights the importance

  17
    The only difference would be that it omits the quadratic intensities, while their coefficients in equation (11) are
restricted to be the negative of the interaction term coefficient. The flexible specification we introduce below nests
both approaches.


                                                          16
of the degree of specificity and appropriability; theoretical results in AAGZ demonstrate that the
predictions are enhanced if the input constitutes a larger share of the buyer’s total costs. Moreover,
results might be different for multiplant firms. In order to allow flexibly for all these effects, we
estimate the following general specification:

                               2 X
                               X 2−k
           OU T Sf j       =           βfklj (XiB )k (XjS )l + Controlsf j + εf j                         (13)
                               k=0 l=0
            with   βfklj   =   β0kl + βcs
                                       kl                  kl
                                          Cost-sharef j + βmp                  kl
                                                              M ulti-plantf + βco Complementf j
                                   kl             kl
                               +βsp1 Rauchj + βsp2 log(P roducers/Suppliers)ij .

This equation contains five uninteracted technology intensity terms—two linear, two quadratic,
and one interaction term—with a further 25 terms interacting the five technology terms with five
variables (the last two capture specificity and will be discussed in the next section). Using the
estimates of equation (13), we can evaluate the marginal effects of buyer and supplier investments
at various points—high or low complementarity, high or low specificity, etc.—to verify to what
extent the results accord with the PRT predictions.


5        Data and Measurements

Outsourcing
The dependent variable in our analysis, the outsourcing dummy, is constructed using firm-level
data on commodity inputs and outputs. The Canadian Annual Survey of Manufacturers (ASM)
collects detailed commodity information on input use and outputs using the six-digit level of Stan-
dard Classifications of Goods (SCG).18 It is a plant-level data set, but contains firm identifiers to
link plants under common ownership. The commodity-level input and output information is only
collected for larger plants—approximately half of all plants, accounting for 85% of shipments for
the years in question—which receive an extended survey questionnaire. We use the 1988 and 1996
data. Over this time period, we observe 2,659 unique input commodities.
     The recorded input purchases combine within-firm transactions and transactions with inde-
pendent suppliers, without any means for distinguishing between the two. We define outsourcing
as a binary variable. If input j is purchased by any plant owned by firm f and none of its Canadian
plants list it as an output, we consider this input outsourced. If we observe positive output of
commodity j at any of the firm’s plants, we assume that the firm satisfies at least some of its input

    18
     The ASM is the Canadian equivalent of the Longitudinal Research Database maintained by the U.S. Census. It
is the yearly census of all manufacturing establishments in Canada, subject to a size threshold.




                                                          17
demand for j internally and we set the outsourcing dummy equal to zero.19
                     (
                         0 if input j is produced by at least one of the plants owned by firm f
       OU T Sf j =
                         1 if input j is not produced by any of the plants owned by firm f

     Each ‘firm-input commodity’ combination f j (buyer-supplier) constitutes a separate observa-
tion in our analysis. The total number of observations is the product of the average number of
inputs listed and the total number of firms. The cost-share for each observation is calculated as
the share of input j in total input purchases of firm f across all its Canadian plants.
      This definition is similar to the one used by AAGZ, except that they construct a vertical
integration dummy—the inverse of our outsourcing dummy—using the U.K. input-output table at
the industry level. For each industry in which a firm has an active plant, the input-output table
lists the set of input industries where the firm might consider vertically integrating. If the firm
owns a plant in one of these input industries, the integration dummy is coded as one and zero
otherwise. Because the set of potential input industries is large, all industries with positive values
in the input-output table, outsourcing is extremely common: the average of OU T Sjf is 0.99 for
them against 0.92 for us. Hortaçsu and Syverson (2006) construct a similar integration dummy
using the U.S. input-output table, but only call integration vertical if the buyer industry purchases
at least 5% of the supplier industry output or if the supplier industry account for at least 5% of its
inputs.20


Technological intensity
The main determinant of the probability of outsourcing in the model is the relative importance
of buyer and supplier investments, which are specific to the relationship. AAGZ note that the
investment must “require tacit knowledge or human capital”, so that “decision rights over these
investments cannot be transferred between the two parties”. Their preferred measure is R&D
intensity, expenditures divided by value added, constructed at the industry level. Physical capital
intensity, the capital stock divided by value added, which is less skewed both within and between
industries, is used as a robustness check.
    We use two comparable measures of technological intensity, R&D and capital intensity, and
add three additional measures: skill intensity, innovativeness, and technology use. While these
measures do not necessarily represent specific investments in their own right, they are likely to
be associated with and accompanied by other (unobservable) investments which are specific. For
example, many technologies require tacit knowledge to be operational, making them specific to
one application. Moreover, we observe a number of direct proxies for specificity (described below),

  19
      An alternative assumption would be to consider input j as outsourced if the firm’s input requirements of j exceeds
its recorded output (across all its plants). In virtually all cases, both approaches give the same result.
   20
      Using commodity flow surveys they also show that the fraction of the output of upstream plants in integrated
firms that is shipped to internal downstream plants is surprisingly small. Even though they cannot observe the reverse
fraction—the percentage of the downstream plant’s input requirement that is satisfied internally—their results suggest
that it is likely to be far less than 100%.


                                                          18
which allow us to focus on transactions that are more likely to involve specific investments.
     Skill intensity is constructed as the fraction of employees in an industry that attained some
post-secondary education, weighted by hours worked. Capital intensity is defined as the logarithm
of the capital stock per hour worked.21
      The measures of industry R&D, innovativeness, and technology adoption are constructed from
information collected through the 1993 Survey of the Innovation and Advanced Technology Sur-
vey, conducted by Statistics Canada for a representative sample of larger plants. No quantitative
information on investments is available, but it contains rich information on the frequency that
manufacturing plants engage in a variety of innovative activities.22 R&D intensity is measured by
the average frequency that plants report to engage in R&D on an ongoing basis. The innovation
intensity measures the frequency that product or process innovations are introduced during the
survey period. Technology use is measured as the average number of advanced technologies, from
a list of 22, that the plant uses.
     All technology variables are constructed at the industry level and mapped to the observations
according to commodity-industry concordance tables from Statistics Canada. For each supplier-
buyer pair, we know the commodity code of the input j that defines the transaction and of the
major line of business, core output i, of the buyer. The former determines which industry-level
investment intensity applies to the supplier and the latter determines the buyer industry intensity.
One advantage over firm-level measures is that they average over firms with different integration
strategies, providing an average characterization of the technological intensity of each industry.
As a robustness check, we also conducted the analysis limited to outsourcing information in 1996,
while the technological intensities are for 1993. This avoids the (reverse) influence of the vertical
organization on observed investment intensities.
     Table 1 contains the correlation between the different measures of technological intensity,
showing large differences. It suggests that the different measures could have a rather different
impact on outsourcing behavior. The highest correlation is 0.56, between the number of technologies
in use and the likelihood of innovative activities. The capital intensity measure has particularly
low correlations with the frequency of R&D or innovation. The skill intensity, proxying for human
capital, on the other hand, has relatively high (but by no means perfect) correlations with each of
the four other measures.

                                      ⇒ [Table 1 approximately here] ⇐



Investment characteristics: specificity, complementarity, appropriability
The theory assumes that the value created in the producer-supplier relationship is increased when
specific investments are made. We observe a number of variables that proxy for the level of speci-

  21
    The education and hours worked information is available at the L-level of Input-Output industries (167 industries).
Capital stock data are only available at a slightly less disaggregate level (R-level or 123 industries).
 22
    Detailed information on the survey is in Baldwin and Hanel (2003).


                                                          19
ficity and hence indicate whether the theory should apply. These measures can be thought of as
determinants of θ in the model. In the limit, for θ → 1, investments are entirely unspecific and
outsourcing will always be optimal.
     We observe at the commodity level whether an input is a differentiated product, according
to the indicator in Rauch (1999), which is likely to increase the probability that a successful
supply relationship entails specific investments.23 The indicator (Rauchj ) takes on a value of zero
if a product is traded on a listed exchange or if prices are quoted in trade publications, and one
otherwise. A second proxy for specificity is the fraction of total Canadian output of input j that the
demand of producer f constitutes (f ractionf j ). If this is large, outsourcing can be a risky strategy
as finding alternative sources of supply (or demand) can be hard difficult in the short run. The loss
in surplus when a relationship breaks down and a firm has to turn to its outside option will also be
related to the relative number of buyers and suppliers in the industry. In particular, the relative
number of buyers to suppliers will relate to the relative value of their outside options. We can
calculate these numbers at the industry (P roducersIN  i
                                                          D and SuppliersIN D ) or at the commodity
                                                                            j
level (P roducersCOM
                  i     and Suppliers  COM ).
                                       j

      An important dimension of the producer-supplier relationship is the degree of complementarity
between their investments. We conjecture that for manufacturing firms there is a greater chance that
the investment of one firm has positive spillovers on the other firm’s investment if their production
technology is similar. A variable Complementij is defined to capture the overlap in the set of
input commodities needed to produce the core output i of firm f and the input j. If the overlap is
large, investments to customize inputs or to improve the production process are more likely to be
leveraged across the producers of both output i and input j. If buyers and suppliers share inputs,
it is also more likely that their processes or equipment have to be compatible, requiring matching
investments on both ends to reap full benefits.
     The variable is constructed as follows. The most detailed Input-Output table gives for each
of 243 industries the input requirements in terms of 476 input commodities. For each input com-
modity j and core output i we know the producing industry, and hence the set of required input
commodities. Let N i be the set of all inputs needed to produce output i, and N j,i be the sub-
set of inputs that are also used in the production of input j. The technological complementarity
(Complementij ) is defined as N j,i /N i and ranges from zero to one.
     In Table B.1 in the Appendix, we provide evidence that input use and technology choices are
related, which allows the Complementij variable to capture technological similarities. For each
firm, the input that accounts for the highest share of its intermediate input purchases is identified
in the list of 476 commodities. Using the innovation survey information, we calculate for each of the
22 technologies that firms can adopt the correlation between the vector of individual firm adoption
decisions and the average adoption rates for firms with the same principal input and adoption rates
for all other firms. As the results illustrate, the correlation is always positive for “same input”

  23
    Our SCG commodity classification is equivalent to the 6-digit HS classification, which maps straightforwardly
into the SITC classification of Rauch (1999).



                                                       20
firms, often quite large, and highly significant in almost all cases. When firms use similar inputs,
they also tend to adopt similar technologies, increasing the likelihood that technology investments
generate spillovers.
      While we do not have a separate variable to measure the ease with which investments can
be appropriated in the case of a breakdown of the relationship, the five technological intensity
measures surely differ in this respect. At one extreme, the physical capital investments of the
subsidiary should be relatively easy to appropriate, i.e. the reduction in surplus should be modest
if the owner takes control. At the other extreme, the human capital in the skill intensity measure
is likely to be accompanied with investments in tacit knowledge that are nearly impossible to
appropriate. The three innovation intensities are expected to be intermediate, with investments
associated with technology use easier to appropriate than investments associated with R&D or
other innovative activities.


Summary statistics
As mentioned earlier, a number of controls for idiosyncratic firm differences are included in the
regressions. These include characteristics of the buyer’s production process: the share of non-
production workers in the workforce, the total number of inputs used to produce the firm’s core
output i (a measure of complexity), and labor productivity (value added per worker). Other buyer
controls include the age (time since start-up for the oldest plant) and size (log employment over all
plants).24 We also include the average of the last two variables for the buyer and supplier industries.
     Summary statistics for all variables are in Table B.2 in the Appendix. There are 6,199 firms
in 1988 and 7,111 firms in 1996; we treat the data as a cross-section. On average these firms use
4.69 commodity inputs. Limiting the sample to observations with nonmissing data for all controls
gives us 50,179 firm-input observations. The proportion of inputs that are outsourced is quite high,
the simple average of OU T Sf j is 0.919. The weighted average, using input value weights, is lower,
suggesting that firms are more likely to internalize inputs that constitute larger shares of costs.
The mean value of Complementij is 0.554 which means that on average, across all industry-pairs,
55 percent of inputs used in production of the core output are also used in the production of the
input. The average Rauchj index is 0.418—42 percent of inputs are classified as differentiated
inputs. It is worth noting that the average technology intensities are similar for producer and
supplier industries: the theory would not lead us to expect more buyer or supplier integration.
      As discussed before, we estimated equation (10) to look at the unconditional impact of speci-
ficity, complementarities, and cost-share. Results are reported in Table B.3 in the Appendix. We
find, as expected, that the proxies for all three variables have a negative impact on the probability
a transaction is outsourced.

  24
    We use these controls in deviations from industry medians in order to remove industry-specific effects that could
be correlated with the industry-level explanatory variables of interest.




                                                         21
6        Results

6.1      Benchmark results for the PRT model with complementarities

The top panel of Table 2 contains the Probit coefficient estimates on the two variables of interest
in equation (11), the importance of buyer (βB ) and supplier (βS ) investment intensities, excluding
at first the squared difference term. The dependent variable throughout is the outsourcing dummy;
marginal effects are complicated by the inclusion of a nonlinear variable in the next two panels and
will be discussed below. Each of the five columns uses a different measure of technological intensity.
The same controls as in Table 2 are included, but not reported.25 As before, the cost-share and
technological complementarity are strongly and negatively related to the probability of outsourcing.

                                     ⇒ [Table 2 approximately here] ⇐

     With the exception of the R&D column, the results are in line with the findings in AAGZ. The
investment intensities of both firms have opposite effects on the probability of outsourcing: negative
for buyers and positive for suppliers. This pattern is consistent with the trade-off between backward
integration and outsourcing, as noted in AAGZ. Where buyer investments are more important,
firms have an incentive to give him control and bring the production of intermediates in-house.
This strengthens the buyer’s incentives and reduces his underinvestment. Greater importance of
supplier investments makes buyer integration, which gives low investment incentives to suppliers,
less desirable.26
    The pattern holds with only a single exception for each of the five technology measures in
columns (1)–(5) and most estimates are significant at the 1% level. The estimates tend to be
higher for supplier investments. This could be because when investments are not very specific the
buyer investment is relatively unaffected by the choice of ownership (BI or O). Supplier investment,
on the other hand, would still be affected, especially if they are easy to appropriate.
     The coefficients are smallest and least significant if the investment intensity is measured by
the capital-labor ratio. Of the five measures, it is arguably the least likely to be associated with
asset specificity and the risk of hold-up. Much of the capital stock is likely to be easily redeployable
in other uses or equipment can be sufficiently flexible to be useful in many relationships. It is
intuitive that the results are strongest for skills and innovation, as they are most likely to require
tacit, non-transferable knowledge.
     The results provide support for the PRT model if the relevant margin in the data is between
buyer integration and outsourcing and complementarities are low. As discussed earlier, if both
types of integration are relevant, the expected signs would be ambiguous, as the marginal effect of
either firm’s investment on outsourcing depends on the other firm’s investment. We can allow for
supplier integration and still have unambiguous predictions by including the squared difference in

    25
    Estimates of the control variables are robust across specifications and full results are available upon request.
    26
    As in AAGZ, we find that the effects of both technology variables are strengthened if the input has a higher
cost-share.


                                                        22
investment intensities in equation (11). The difference is predicted to be negatively related to the
probability of outsourcing; large asymmetries should lead to integration.
     Results for the augmented equation, in the middle panel of Table 2, consistently reveal the
opposite effect. The coefficient on the squared difference term is estimated positively in each
column. Moreover, all coefficients are estimated precisely, with t-statistics ranging from 2.51 to
3.86 (with clustered standard errors). Trading relationships between firms in industries of vastly
different technological intensity are more likely to be organized as outsourcing relationships than
occurring within integrated firms. In contrast, the PRT suggests that it would be optimal in such
a situation to integrate the firm and give the owner optimal investment incentives.
     Including the interaction between the investments of the buyer and supplier in equation (11)
instead of the squared difference leads to the same finding. The coefficient on the interaction term is
always estimated negatively, opposite of the PRT prediction without complementarities. It suggests
a negative effect of each firm’s investment on the probability of outsourcing when the other firm’s
investment is large. In contrast, the PRT predicts outsourcing to be more desirable if both firms
make large investments.
      Complementarities are often modeled with a positive coefficient on the investment interactions
in the objective function, as we did in the joint surplus function (1), leading to more similar in-
vestments for both firms. Proposition 3 predicts small complementarities to lead to integration,
consistent with the negative estimates on the interaction term. The results suggest that the ben-
eficial effect of complementarities on the investment incentives of the subsidiary can dominate the
negative incentive effect that the PRT focuses on. Even if the buyer and supplier industry have
to make similarly-sized investments, and the squared-difference term is low, integration can be
attractive in our model because spillovers between buyers and suppliers make a break-up of an
outsourcing relationship, where each firm retains control over its own investments, particularly
costly. Such similarly-sized investments are especially likely when complementarities are high and
the production processes of the final good and the input are similar.
     Estimation results for equation (12), in the bottom panel of Table 2, confirm this prediction.
The positive sign on the difference term in the middle panel is driven by transactions with high
complementarities. The sign on the uninteracted difference term turns negative when we include
the interaction between the difference and the proxy for complementarities. A large difference in
investment intensity is now predicted to lower the probability of outsourcing, but only if com-
plementarities are sufficiently low, consistent with the PRT predictions (Proposition 1). For the
capital, skill, and R&D measures the effect turns negative if technological complementarities are
between 1.27 and 1.43 standard deviations below the average. For technology use and innovation
intensity, complementarities of 0.85 standard deviation below the mean are sufficiently low to pre-
dict a negative coefficient on the difference term. For transactions with higher complementarities,
the effect of investment asymmetries turns positive.
    An alternative explanation for the opposite findings in the middle panel of Table 2 is that our
proxies for specific investments are imperfect and that many transactions in the sample do not



                                                  23
require specific investments. In that case, comparative advantage considerations suggest that high-
tech industries are particularly keen to outsource low-tech intermediates and vice versa—consistent
with the positive coefficients on the investment difference term. The PRT model is only expected
to be relevant for investments that are truly relationship-specific.
     The importance of specificity is explored further below, but first we report on three robustness
checks that confirm the main findings from Table 2. In each case, we estimate equation (12)
removing some potentially troublesome observations. First, we control for the reverse causation
from ownership to investment. Limiting the sample to 1996 observations, we only use technology
measures that pre-date the ownership structure by at least three years. An alternative way to avoid
the potential endogeneity of investment intensities in the outsourcing regression is by excluding all
firms that own plants sampled in the innovation survey, our source of information for the innovation,
R&D, and technology use intensities.27
     Second, the sample is limited to multiplant firms. For firms with only a single plant we
observe only outsourcing relationships, by construction. Because the choice not to operate more
than one plant can be driven by the investment intensities, we use this sample only as a robustness
check and not for the benchmark results. Third, we exclude firms with some foreign ownership
as they are more likely to source some inputs from internal plants abroad, notably in the U.S.,
which we cannot observe. The results, reported in Table 3, are relatively unaffected, although
fewer coefficients are statistically significant in the smaller samples. In particular, each of the 15
estimates of the uninteracted difference term yields a negative coefficient.

                                     ⇒ [Table 3 approximately here] ⇐

    The results thus far indicate that investment asymmetries are associated with integration if
complementarities are low, as predicted by Proposition 1, but with outsourcing for high levels of
complementarity, in line with Proposition 2. Throughout, the direct effect of complementarities is
to decrease the probability of outsourcing, in line with the prediction of Proposition 3.


6.2    Further evidence: complementarities, specificity, and appropriability

One pattern in the Table 2(c) results does not seem to sync with the theoretical predictions. The
coefficient on the uninteracted supplier investment is consistently estimated positively, while a
negative effect was predicted. Assessing the marginal impact of investments is complicated by the
inclusion of the difference term. Taking the derivative of the right-hand side of equation (12), it
is clear that the negative coefficient on the difference term reduces the marginal impact of both
investments.
     To account more generally for the investment intensities and characteristics, we estimate the
flexible specification of equation (13). Five linear, quadratic, and interaction terms of the tech-

  27
    These last results drop about a third of the observations. All coefficients are estimated less precisely, but the
sign and magnitude of the effects are similar.


                                                         24
nological intensities are included, with the coefficient on each term varying with five observable
proxies. The full set of coefficient estimates is reported in Table B.4 in the Appendix. To discuss
the results, we evaluate the marginal effects of buyer and supplier investment intensity on the
likelihood of outsourcing at different points in the data.
     First, in Figure 3, we plot the marginal effect on outsourcing of both firms’ investment against
the relative investment intensity. On the vertical axis is the derivative of the cumulative normal
density function that takes the righthand side of equation (13) as argument, evaluated at low com-
plementarities (one standard deviation below the mean) and average values for all other variables.
The multiplant dummy is evaluated at the sample mean in the graphs on the left, but set to one
in the graphs on the right.

                                 ⇒ [Figure 3 approximately here] ⇐

     On the horizontal axis is the log difference in buyer minus supplier investment intensity, which
played a crucial role in Proposition 1. It is expressed in numbers of standard deviations, relative
to the respective sample means. A value of one indicates that the buyer intensity is one standard
deviation higher relative to the average buyer intensity than the supplier intensity is relative to its
own average. This can mean, for example, that the buyer invests one standard deviation more than
the mean, while the supplier has average intensity. The same x-value also represents transactions
with a buyer with average investments and suppliers with investments one standard deviation below
the average, etc. We use frequency weights from the sample to construct a weighted average for
transactions with the same x-value.
     Results for the full sample, on the left in Figure 3, illustrate that the PRT predictions are
strongly supported for skill intensity and also hold for innovation, but less strongly for high relative
supplier intensities—low x-values. The marginal impact of buyer investments (dashed lines) is to
reduce the probability of outsourcing where these investments dominate, at high x-values, but to
make outsourcing more likely at low x-values. Results for supplier investments (solid lines) are
opposite on both sides of the spectrum. This corresponds to the predictions of Proposition 1. At
high x-values, the relevant margin is between buyer integration and outsourcing. A further increase
in the importance of buyer investment makes integration more attractive as it gives him optimal
incentives. At the opposite side of the x-spectrum, when supplier investments dominate, a similar
increase in buyer intensity now makes outsourcing slightly more likely than supplier integration.
     For R&D and technology use, the PRT predictions are still supported at high relative buyer
intensity, but at high relative supplier intensity marginal effects of either firm’s investments have no
impact on outsourcing. The argument in AAGZ, that forward integration is rare in manufacturing,
could limited the explanatory power in the sample at the SI − O margin. For capital intensity, the
results are still in line with the predictions for buyer investment: it weakly decreases outsourcing
on the right and increases outsourcing on the left. The impact of supplier investments, however,
follows the same downward-sloping pattern, which is opposite of the PRT predictions.
    The results are even more supportive if the sample is limited to multiplant firms, graphs on

                                                  25
the right in Figure 3. The effects at low x-values, high relative supplier intensity, are now notably
different from zero for innovation and R&D as well and even for technology use is the marginal
effect of buyer investment slightly positive. As can be seen from the vertical scales, the magnitudes
of the marginal effects tend to be estimated two to four times higher for multiplant firms.
     In the following three figures, we focus on the effects of three crucial parameters in the model.
First, we vary the level of complementarities (ρ) which are proxied by the Complement variable,
measuring the overlap in inputs between the two industries. Then, we vary the specificity of the
transaction (θ) using two of the variables shown to predict outsourcing in Table B.3: Rauch and
the ratio of P roducersi to Suppliersj . Finally, we compare the size of the marginal effects for
the five technology intensities as they have a natural ordering in terms of appropriability (λ). We
evaluate the marginal effects for multiplant firms and at high cost shares, as the results tend to be
more pronounced on this subsample. The other variables in equation (13), with the exception of
the one being varied, are evaluated at the mean.
     Figure 4 illustrates the effect of complementarities in the case of skill intensity. Results for the
other investment measures are qualitatively similar, but the differences tend to be less pronounced.
The solid lines repeat the patterns at low complementarity already shown in Figure 3. The effects
for buyers are shown in black and for suppliers in grey. The long-dashed lines represent marginal
investment effects at average levels of complementarity and the short-dashed lines are for high
complementarities (one standard deviation above the mean).
     With complementarities the marginal effects of investments switch signs everywhere. The
effect of buyer investment on outsourcing is now positive at high x-values, where we expect the
relevant margin to be between buyer integration and outsourcing. Proposition 2 provides a possible
explanation, at least if the ease of appropriation of the investments is sufficiently high. Greater
importance of buyer investment can lead to outsourcing because it increases the cost of supplier
underinvestment through foregone complementarities. It is not clear, however, why complemen-
tarities would lead to a lower probability of integration if supplier investment is important, as the
results indicate. At low x-values, where the relevant trade-off is SI − O, we find the mirror image.
At least for supplier investments, with medium or high complementarities the positive effect on
the outsourcing probability for low x-values is more pronounced than the negative effect for high
x-values, which is intuitive.

                                 ⇒ [Figure 4 approximately here] ⇐

     It should be noted that with complementarities the relative investment intensity on the hor-
izontal axis becomes a worse proxy for the αB /αS ratio in the theory, as the investments of both
firms become a function of both parameters. No large asymmetries in investments will be observed
if complementarities grow large, consistent with the marginal effects becoming unimportant at the
extremities.
     In Figure 5, the variables that proxy for specificity are varied. We plot the marginal effects
for the innovation intensity, where the results are almost as clean as for the skill intensity measure.

                                                   26
Results are similar but less pronounced for R&D and technology use. The short-dashed lines are for
transactions that involve homogenous products (Rauchj = 0), which are likely to be less specific.
The long-dashed lines are for transactions of differentiated products with far more suppliers than
buyers; the solid lines are for differentiated products with relatively more buyers. As before,
marginal effects of the buyers are in black and in grey for suppliers.

                                ⇒ [Figure 5 approximately here] ⇐

     The short-dashed lines are almost uniformly closer to the zero line, indicating that the out-
sourcing patterns for homogenous goods are less sensitive to investments. The PRT predictions for
differentiated products in the case of a high or low relative number of buyers are trickier, but the
results are by and large supportive again. At low x-values, where the tradeoff is between SI and O,
we expect more pronounced effects for the long-dashed lines. If there are relatively more suppliers,
the outside option of the buyer (who underinvests under SI) is strengthened. On the left in Figure
5, the long-dashed black line is further away from zero than the solid black lines, in line with the
prediction: buyer investments are particularly likely to lead to outsourcing if there are few of them.
From the supplier’s perspective, competing with many other suppliers strengthens the attraction
of integration (SI) even more, because she now has a low outside option under outsourcing.
    These effects should apply in reverse on the right, where buyer integration is the relevant
margin, but it only shows up at extremely high x-values for the buyers and not at all for the
suppliers. Only at the extreme right is the negative effect of buyer investment on the likelihood of
outsourcing boosted by the presence of many buyers (solid black line).
      The final parameter in the model is the ease with which the owner of the integrated firm can
appropriate the subsidiary’s investment off the equilibrium path (λ). Proposition 2 indicates that a
high λ makes it more likely that complementarities will overturn the usual PRT predictions. At the
extreme, for λ equal to one, integration becomes highly unattractive as subsidiaries stop investing
altogether. The different investment measures are likely to differ in this respect. A priori, we expect
the order of increasing ease of appropriation to be as follows: skill, innovation, R&D, technology
use, and capital. Investments that require human capital are likely to be the most difficult to
appropriate—be highly “complementarity” in the Hart and Moore (1990) terminology. Innovation
is likely to entail more tacit knowledge than R&D and the use of advanced technologies is similarly
expected to incorporate more tacit knowledge than general capital equipment.

                                ⇒ [Figure 6 approximately here] ⇐

    In Figure 6, the marginal effects of the five investment measures are plotted on two graphs,
with the scale of the bottom graph for skill and innovation intensity an order of magnitude larger
than at the top. The effects are evaluated for multiplant firms, a high cost share, differentiated
products, and low complementarities—where we would expect the strongest support for the PRT
predictions.


                                                  27
     While the shapes of the predicted marginal effects for the different measures are similar, the
magnitudes are not. They follow the inverse ordering of the expected ease of appropriation. In
addition, where supplier investments dominate and the trade-off is between SI and O, at low
x-values, only the marginal effects of buyer investments follow the PRT predictions for the top
three measures. The pronounced effects for buyer investments, which reduce the probability of
integration, suggest that integration is particularly damaging for the subsidiary’s incentives in
these cases, as would be expected if λ is high.


7    Conclusions

Our findings are fourfold. First, we have shown that augmenting the property rights model with
complementarities is able to generate a rich set of theoretical predictions. It can destroy the usual
PRT tendency for integration if investment intensities are sufficiently asymmetric. Low amounts
of complementarities will, all else equal, lead to more integration.
    Second, plausible proxies for specificity have predictive power for the ownership structure in
Canadian manufacturing. Transactions are more likely to take place in an integrated firm if the
inputs are differentiated, the production process is more complex, the producer’s input demand
represents a large fraction of total Canadian output, and the outside options of the two firms are
bad or very asymmetric.
     Third, the link between investment intensities and the optimal ownership structure is crucially
influenced by the existence of complementarities. When they are low, the usual PRT predictions are
strongly supported: asymmetries in investments lead to integration. The marginal effect of buyer
investments is to make integration more likely when buyer investments dominate and outsourcing
more likely when supplier investments are relatively more important. Effects for supplier invest-
ments are exactly the opposite, in line with the theory. These results are obtained with entirely
flexible functional forms that allow for the effects to go any way.
     Fourth, the effects of complementarities, specificity, and appropriability on the marginal impact
of investments are generally in line with the theoretical predictions. The existence of complemen-
tarities, proxied by the overlap in the input set of buyers and suppliers, destroys the above patterns,
but leads ceteris paribus to less outsourcing. High specificity and low appropriability enhance the
PRT predictions, both making integration optimal for less pronounced investment asymmetries.
     A final caveat is in order. The interpretation we have given to the results relies on the ap-
propriateness of our proxies for specific investments, complementarities, etc. They allow us to test
the predictions across a range of industries and speak to the general applicability of the theory.
It is reassuring that several of the empirical measures, imperfect as they may be, have effects in
line with the theoretical constructs they are supposed to capture. At the same time, by cutting
across many industries and focusing only on a single theory, we cannot take into account other
explanations for the observed patterns. We hope that our results will be confirmed or refined in
future work, but the current findings are remarkably supportive of the PRT predictions.


                                                  28
References
 Abramovsky, L. and R. Griffith (2006, April-May). Outsourcing and offshoring of business ser-
   vices: How important is ICT? Journal of the European Economic Association 4 (2–3), 594–
   601.
 Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, R. Griffith, and F. Zilibotti (2005, August). Vertical integration and
    technology: Theory and evidence. Working Paper.
 Antràs, P. (2003, November). Firms, contracts, and trade structure. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics 118 (4), 1375–1418.
 Arora, A. and A. Gambardella (1990, June). Complementarity and external linkages: The strate-
    gies of the large firms in biotechnology. Journal of Industrial Economics 37 (4), 361–79.
 Athey, S. and S. Stern (2003, June). An empirical framework for testing theories about comple-
    mentarity in organizational design. Working Paper.
 Baker, G. P. and T. N. Hubbard (2003, June). Make or buy in trucking: Asset ownership, job
    design, and information. American Economic Review 93 (3), 551–572.
 Baldwin, J. R. and P. Hanel (2003). Innovation and Knowledge Creation in Open Economy.
    Cambridge University Press.
 Brynjolfsson, E., T. Malone, V. Gurbaxani, and A. Kambil (1994). Does information technology
    lead to smaller firms? Management Science 40 (12), 1645–1662.
 Che, Y.-K. and D. B. Hausch (1999, March). Cooperative investments and the value of contract-
    ing. American Economic Review 89 (1), 125–147.
 Feenstra, R. C. and G. H. Hanson (2005, May). Ownership and control in outsourcing to china:
    Estimating the property-rights theory of the firm. Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (2),
    729–761.
 Gibbons, R. (2005). Four formal(izable) theories of the firm? Journal of Economic Behavior &
    Organization 58, 200–245.
 Hart, O. (1995). Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. New York: Oxford University Press.
 Hart, O. and J. Moore (1990, December). Property rights and the nature of the firm. Journal of
    Political Analysis 98 (6), 1119–1158.
 Holmstrom, B. (1999). The firm as a subeconomy. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organiza-
    tion 15 (1), 74–102.
 Hortaçsu, A. and C. Syverson (2006, December). Vertical integration and production: Some
    plant level evidence. Working Paper, University of Chicago.
 Ichniowski, C., K. Shaw, and G. Prennushi (1997, June). The effects of human resource man-
    agement practices on productivity: A study of steel finishing lines. American Economic Re-
    view 87 (3), 291–313.



                                              29
Joskow, P. L. (1988). Asset specificity and the structure of vertical relationships: Empirical
   evidence. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organizations 4, 95–117.
Klein, B., R. G. Crawford, and A. A. Alchian (1978, October). Vertical integration, appropriable
   rents, and the competitive contracting process. Journal of Law and Economics 21 (2), 297–
   326.
Lindbeck, A. and D. J. Snower (2003, June). The firm as a pool of factor complementarities. IUI,
   The Research Institute of Industrial Economics, Working Paper No. 598.
Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts (1990, June). The economics of modern manufacturing: Technology,
   strategy, and organization. American Economic Review 80 (3), 511–528.
Mol, M. J. (2005, April). Does being r&d intensive still discourage outsourcing? evidence from
  Dutch manufacturing. Research Policy 34 (4), 571–582.
Nöldeke, G. and K. M. Schmidt (1998, Winter). Sequential investments and options to own.
    RAND Journal of Economics, 29 (4), 633–653.
Novak, S. and S. Stern (2003, November). Complementarity among vertical integration decisions:
   Evidence from automobile product development. Working Paper.
Nunn, N. and D. Trefler (2007, February). The boundaries of the multinational firm: An empirical
  analysis. Working Paper.
Quinn, J. B. (2000, Summer). Outsourcing innovation: the new engine of growth. Sloan Manag-
   ment Review 41 (4), 13–28.
Rauch, J. E. (1999, February). Networks versus markets in international trade. Journal of Inter-
  national Economics 48 (1), 7–35.
Roberts, J. (2004). The Modern Firm: Organizational Design for Performance and Growth. New
  York: Oxfor University Press.
Shelanski, H. A. and P. G. Klein (1995). Empirical research in transaction cost economics: A
   review and assessment. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organizations 11, 335–361.
Stigler, G. J. (1951, June). The division of labor is limited by the extent of the market. Journal
    of Political Economy, 185–193.
Van Biesebroeck, J. (2007, December). Complementarities in automobile production. Journal of
   Applied Econometrics 22 (7), 1315–1345.
Whinston, M. D. (2003, April). On the transaction cost determinants of vertical integration.
  Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 19 (1), 1–23.
Williamson, O. E. (1979, October). Transaction-cost economics: The governance of contractual
   relations. Journal of Law and Economics 22 (2), 233–261.
Williamson, O. E. (1985). The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: Free Press.
Woodruff, C. (2002). Non-contractible investments and vertical integration in the mexican
  footwear industry. International Journal of Industrial Organization 20, 1197–1224.


                                              30
Appendix A
Proof of Proposition 2

We only discuss the trade-off between backward vertical integration and outsourcing. As the
problem is entirely symmetric for buyers and suppliers, the trade-off between forward vertical
integration and outsourcing is entirely similar.
     The optimal investments, in equations (8) and (9), can be substituted in the aggregate wel-
fare function to obtain the joint value that the two firms attain in either mode of organization.
We assume – as in Whinston (2003) or AAGZ – that the choice of organizational form prior to
the investment decisions, is accompanied by transfers, such that firms will always decide on the
organization that maximizes joint surplus.
     In each organizational form, aggregate welfare is given by the joint surplus generated within
the relationship, i.e. on the equilibrium path, given by equation (1), minus the costs of both firms,
equations (2):
                                                               1         1
                   W z (α, λ, θ) = αB xzB + αS xzS + ρxzB xzS − (xzB )2 − (xzS )2 ,                             (14)
                                                               2         2
with xzB and xzS (z ∈ {BI, O}) given by equations (8) and (9).
    The threshold between the BI and O organizational forms is characterized by ∆W = W BI −
WO  = 0. We look at the comparative statics in ∆W to see how this threshold changes with the
importance of the buyer’s investment in the special case where αS = 0 (the most advantageous for
the BI organizational form):

               ∂∆W                                      ∂xBI             BI ∂xS
                                                                                 BI
                         = xBI          BI   BI
                            B + (αB + ρxS − xB )
                                                           B
                                                             + (ρxBI
                                                                  B − xS )          +
                ∂αB                                      ∂αB                   ∂αB
                                                           O                    O
                                                     O ∂xB                O ∂xS
                              − xO
                                 B − (α B + ρx O
                                               S − x B )     −  (ρx O
                                                                    B − x S )
                                                         ∂αB                  ∂αB

    To evaluate this expression we substitute the optimal investment policies, which in the case of
αS = 0 simplify to:

                                 xBI
                                  B = αB /D
                                            BI
                                                        and xBI
                                                             S =
                                                                          1−λ
                                                                           2 ρxB
                                                                                BI

                               xO
                                B =
                                           1+θ
                                            2 αB /D
                                                    O
                                                        and xO
                                                             S =
                                                                        1   O
                                                                        2 ρxB ,
                     2
with DBI = 1 − 1−λ  2     O      1 2
                 4 ρ and D = 1 − 4 ρ . The partial derivatives of the investments with respect
to αB boil down to

                               ∂xBI                           ∂xBI
                                 B
                                    = 1/DBI and                 S
                                                                   = 1−λ
                                                                       2 ρ/D
                                                                             BI
                               ∂αB                            ∂αB
                              ∂xO          O                  ∂xO           O
                                B
                                   = 1+θ
                                      2 /D   and                S
                                                                   = 1+θ
                                                                      4 ρ/D .
                              ∂αB                             ∂αB
Substituting all of this in the above expression gives
              ∂∆W              αB      h
                                                1−λ 2 2
                                                         i        αB      h
                                                                               (1+θ)(3−θ)       3(1+θ)2 2
                                                                                                            i
                         =                 1+    2   ρ        −                    4        +      16 ρ
               ∂αB           (DBI )2                              (DO )2


                                                        31
If we take the limit for this expression for ρ → 1, i.e. maximum complementarities, we find that
                                                                 
            ∂∆W                  h
                                    5−2λ+λ2     (1+θ)(15−θ)
                                                            i      if λ > 0.45
                          = αB ((3+λ2 )/2)2 −        9        <0
             ∂αB ρ→1                                               or if λ = θ > 0.21,

in which case BI will never be optimal. There is thus a threshold for λ above which outsourcing
will be preferred over integration irrespective of αB . This threshold is least binding (0.45) for θ = 0
and falls to 0.21 for the highest realistic value for θ (= λ). 

Proof of Proposition 3

Ideally we would simply differentiate the r and r thresholds in Proposition 1, but these are implicitly
defined highly complex functions that vary non-monotonely with ρ. Instead, we start from the
welfare function, as defined in equation (14), and consider directly how complementarities affect
the difference between W BI and W O :
            ∂∆W                           ∂xBI                         BI
                                                                  BI ∂xB
                     = (αS + ρxBI   BI
                               B − xS )
                                             S
                                                 + (αB + ρxBI
                                                           S  − x B )     + xBI
                                                                             B xS
                                                                                 BI
             ∂ρ                             ∂ρ                        ∂ρ
                                               O                        O
                                        O ∂xS                      O ∂xB
                         − (αS + ρxO
                                   B − xS )       − (αB + ρxOS − xB )      − xO    O
                                                                                B xS
                                             ∂ρ                       ∂ρ

     To evaluate this expression we need the partial derivatives of the investments with respect to
the complementarities parameter:
                   h                             i                 h                                  i
              1−λ2                  1−λ2 2                    1−λ          1−λ2           1−λ2 2
    ∂xBBI       4   α S + 2ρα  B +    4    ρ α S         BI
                                                       ∂xS      2   α B  +   2   ρα S  +    4  ρ α B )
          =                  1−λ2 2 2
                                                   and      =                    1−λ2 2 2
      ∂ρ               (1 − 4 ρ )                       ∂ρ                (1 − 4 ρ )
                        h                        i                 h                         i
                    1+θ                  1 2                   1+θ                   1 2
         ∂xBO        4   α S + ρα B  +   4 ρ α S         O
                                                       ∂xS       4   αB  + ρα  S +   4 ρ α B
                =                1  2  2
                                                   and      =                1   2 2
          ∂ρ                (1 − 4 ρ )                  ∂ρ              (1 − 4 ρ )

   Note that if λ = θ = 1 both derivatives are smaller under integration than under outsourcing.
                                                ∂xBI   ∂xO
However, if λ = θ = 0 it is always the case that ∂ρB > ∂ρB and if αB is sufficiently large relative
                                                                           ∂xBI       ∂xO
to αS (more likely if the organizational form is BI) we also find that       S
                                                                            ∂ρ    >     S
                                                                                       ∂ρ   .
      Substituting all these expressions in the partial derivative of ∆W , it is impossible to determine
its sign in general. However, the expressions simplify considerably at low levels of complementari-
                               ∂∆W
ties, hence we will focus on              , calculating the derivative at the limit for ρ going to zero.
                                ∂ρ ρ→0
In this case both the optimal investments and the partial derivatives simplify considerably to

                                     xBI          BI
                                      B = αB and xS =
                                                               1−λ
                                                                2 αS
                                  xO
                                   B =
                                         1+θ
                                          2 αB   and xO
                                                      S =
                                                              1+θ
                                                               2 αS

and
                              ∂xBI       2              ∂xBI
                                B
                                   = 1−λ
                                       4   αS and         S
                                                             =   1−λ
                                                                  2 αB
                               ∂ρ                        ∂ρ
                              ∂xO                       ∂xO
                                B
                                   = 1+θ4 αS and
                                                          S
                                                             =   1+θ
                                                                  4 αB .
                               ∂ρ                        ∂ρ

                                                  32
If λ = θ = 0, the only difference is that underinvestment is greater for the buyer under O than
under BI, and the supplier’s investment is more responsive to an increase in complementarities in
BI relative to O.
    After some algebra, the derivative of interest boils down to
              ∂∆W               1
                            =   4 αB αS   [(1 − λ)(3 + λ) − 2(1 + θ)] > 0      if λ < λ(θ)          (15)
               ∂ρ    ρ→0
                                                                                           √
Over the relevant range (λ ∈ [0, 1] and θ ∈ [0, λ]), this is decreasing in λ and θ. For λ < 5−2 ≈ 0.24
it is always positive, even
                          √ if θ = λ (the maximum value of θ). If θ = 0, the expression remains
positive as long as λ < 2 − 1. Clearly, the highest λ that still makes (15) positive is decreasing
in θ. At the extremes, the expression is guaranteed to be positive if λ = 0 and certainly negative
if λ = 1, irrespective of θ.
     Moreover, if we do not take the limit for ρ → 0, but only ρ2 → 0 the expressions simplify not
as much, but enough to establish that the λ threshold for the expression in (15) to be positive is
raised. The comparative static now becomes
         ∂∆W                ∂∆W
                        =
          ∂ρ    ρ2 →0        ∂ρ    ρ→0
                                    h (1 − λ)(3 + λ) (1 + θ)(4 + 2θ) i
                                2
                             + αB ρ                  −
                                            4                32
                                   h1 − λ 1 + λ       1−λ      1−λ 2      (1 + θ)(4 + 2θ) i
                                2
                             + αS ρ              (1 +      +(        ) )−
                                        2     2        2          2             32
                            ∂∆W
                        =              + f (λ, θ) with f (λ(θ), θ) > 0
                             ∂ρ ρ→0
In general, this relaxes the constraint on λ for the marginal effect of ρ to still be positive. The
extent to which the constraint is relaxed depends on the parameters in the surplus production
function (αB , αS , and ρ), but as long as they are positive the constraint on λ becomes less binding.
Evaluated at its stringiest level, i.e. at θ = λ, the terms in the square brackets would be positive
at 0.41, the earlier threshold. At θ = 0, the first term in square brackets only becomes negative for
λ > 0.87 and the second term is positive even for λ = 1. 


Appendix B
The estimates of equation (10) are reported in Table B.3. A first set of controls, age and size,
capture market size effects, as discussed in Stigler (1951). The estimated signs are not always
straightforward, even though the results are robust across columns. When industries mature and
grow in size, firms are expected to be more prone to outsource. The estimates indicate that
industries with older firms tend to outsource less, but that within those industries firms that are
older than the industry average outsource more. Somewhat counterintuitively, the average age in
the supplier industry is also associated with reduced outsourcing, but the effect is often insignificant.
The average firm size in buyer industries has no significant effect, but the largest firms do more
in-house. Firm size in the supplier industry, on the other hand, is positively and strongly associated
with increased outsourcing. Obviously, these are merely correlations and reverse causality will play
a role.
    The next set of indicators captures technological explanations for outsourcing. The firm’s


                                                    33
productivity has an insignificant effect. On the one hand, highly productivity plants have an
incentive to take on more production tasks to leverage this advantage more widely or protect
their know-how by outsourcing less. On the other hand, firms that outsource a lot might improve
their productivity as they specialize. The same two-handed reasoning applies to the share of non-
production (skilled) workers, which has a negative, but insignificant effect on outsourcing. As these
workers are expected to be involved in production of knowledge-based assets, protection of know-
how will be more important. The number of inputs that enter a firm’s core output (‘complexity’) is,
as expected, a negative predictor of outsourcing, although the effect is never significant. It mirrors
a finding in Van Biesebroeck (2007) where automobile assembly plants that produce a larger variety
of final outputs, requiring more inputs, bring more of the assembly tasks in-house.
     Our measure of technological complementarity between input j and core output i is strongly
and negatively related to the likelihood of outsourcing. Inputs that share intermediates with the
core output are much more likely to be produced in-house. In addition, the likelihood of outsourcing
an input is decreasing in its cost-share, consistent with TCE and PRT considerations. Both of these
effects are highly significant.
      Next, we discuss the effects for the proxies for specificity. Columns (2)–(7) of Table B.3 report
the estimates for various indicators, each suggesting that greater specificity is associated with a
reduced probability of outsourcing. The negative coefficient on the Rauch indicator, in column
(2), confirms our prior that outsourcing is less likely for differentiated inputs, for example because
of customization. The probability of outsourcing is also reduced if the input demand of firm f
represents a higher fraction of total Canadian production of good j, in column (3). A high value
is likely to make it more difficult to find alternative sources of supply or new clients, lowering the
outside options for both firms in an outsourcing situation.
     Next, we look at the number of buyers or suppliers to proxy for the thickness of the market,
which again relates to the outside options. Results in column (4) are for the number of users
and producers of commodity j, the buyers and suppliers in the model. Results in column (5) are
comparable, but rely on firm-counts at the industry level as a robustness check. These measures only
have an unambiguous relation to outsourcing if only one type of integration (backward or forward)
is possible or dominant in the data. The estimates, positive for number of buyers and negative for
suppliers, are consistent with the relevant margin being BI − O and highlight the importance of the
number of suppliers in particular, consistent with results in AAGZ. If there are more buyers, the
outside option of the supplier is strengthened if she controls her investment, making outsourcing a
more attractive option. With more suppliers, the expected effects and estimated signs are reversed.
The effects are particularly large if the number of firms is measured at the commodity level. We
can combine the opposite effects of the suppliers and buyers by including the (log) ratio, results in
columns (6) and (7). This produces a highly significant coefficient estimate if we use the commodity
detail, with the sign again consistent with the BI − O trade-off.
     As the signs on the numbers of firms should go in the opposite direction if the relevant trade-off
was SI − O, the results are only consistent with the PRT predictions if buyer integration is more
likely. It is possible to obtain results consistent with both types of integration if we introduce a
third term: the interaction of the numbers of suppliers and buyers. If the number of suppliers is
small, the effect of the number of buyers on the likelihood of outsourcing will be dominated by the
uninteracted buyer variable, while the sign on the interaction term will dominate if the number of
suppliers is large. At the same time, if the number of suppliers is small, the relevant trade-off is more
likely to be BI −O as buyer underinvestment under SI will not be remedied by outsourcing. Putting
these two tendencies together, PRT considerations predict a positive coefficient on the uninteracted


                                                   34
number of buyers or suppliers and a negative coefficient on the supplier-buyer interaction, which is
exactly what we find in column (9), at the industry level, while at the commodity level, in column
(8), two of the coefficients have the expected sign.28




  28
    Alternatively, we included a squared difference term, (log(# of buyers) − log(# of suppliers))2 , as in equation
(11). Consistent with the PRT predictions, we find a positive and significant coefficient in this case.


                                                        35
                  Figure 3: Marginal effect of investments on outsourcing at low complementarity
                                  (all firms)                      (only multi-plant firms)
                                      Skill                                               Skill
     .5




                                                               2
                                                               0
     0
     -.5




                                                               -2
                                   Innovation                                          Innovation




                                                               .2
     .05




                                                               0
     -.05 0




                                                               -.2
                                     R&D                                                 R&D
     .02




                                                               .05
                                                               0
     0




                                                               -.05
     -.02




                              Technology use                                      Technology use
     .02




                                                               .02
                                                               -.02 0
     0
     -.02




                                    Capital                                             Capital
     0 .005 .01




                                                               .1
                                                               .05
                                                               0




                  -3    -2    -1       0        1    2     3            -3   -2   -1       0        1   2   3
                                           X-axis: Buyer minus Supplier intensity
                                   Buyer investments           Supplier investments



Notes: The lines are the predicted marginal effects of the respective investments on the outsourcing probability,
obtained by differentiating the cdf of the normal distribution that takes the right-hand side of equation (13) as
argument. All variables are evaluated at their sample average, except for Complement which is set to one
standard deviation below its mean. The multiplant dummy is evaluated at the sample mean in the graphs on the
left, but set to one in the graphs on the right.
On the horizontal axis is the relative buyer to supplier investment intensity, expressed in numbers of standard
                                                                               B
deviations. For example, a value of two indicates that buyer investments (X ) are two standard deviations
                                       S                                                           B
higher than supplier investments (X ), both relative to their own mean. This could mean that X is at one
                      S                    B                 S
(S.D.) above and X at one below, or X two above and X at the mean, or a number of other combinations.
                 Figure 4: Marginal effect of skill intensity on outsourcing
                          for various levels of complementarities
   2
   1
   0
   -1
   -2




         -3            -2          -1         0          1                      2             3
                            X-axis: Buyer minus Supplier intensity
                 Buyer: low complementarity                 Supplier: low complementarity
                 Buyer: medium complement.                  Supplier: medium complement.
                 Buyer: high complementarity                Supplier: high complementarity




Notes: The lines are constructed as in Figure 3, but only the marginal effects of the skill intensity
measure are shown. All variables are evaluated at the sample mean, except for the multiplant
dummy which is set to one and the Complement variable. For the solid lines complementarities
are evaluated at one standard deviation below the mean (low); for the long-dashed lines it is set at
the mean (medium); and for the short-dashed lines at one standard deviation above the mean
(high).
                    Figure 5: Marginal effect of innovation intensity on outsourcing
                                    for various levels of specificy
    1
    .5
    0
    -.5




          -3            -2              -1           0              1                   2            3
                                    X-axis: Buyer minus Supplier intensity

                   Buyer: low specificity                       Supplier: low specificity
                   B: differentiated & few buyers               S: differentiated & many suppliers
                   B: differentiated & many buyers              S: differentiated & few suppliers




Notes: The lines are constructed as in Figure 3, but only the marginal effects of the innovation measures
are shown. All variables are evaluated at the sample mean, except for the multiplant dummy which is set
to one and the two variables proxying for specificity in equation (13). For the short-dashed lines (low
specificity) the Rauch variable is set to zero and for the "differentiated" lines Rauch is set to one. "Few
producers" or "many suppliers" (long-dashed lines) indicate that the log (Producers/Suppliers) variable is
evaluated at one standard deviation below the mean and at one above the mean for the "many producers"
or "few suppliers" (solid) lines.
           Figure 6: Marginal effect of investment intensities on outsourcing
                    (for low complementarities and high specificity)
    .04
    0
    -.04




           -3         -2           -1            0               1             2           3
                                X-axis: Buyer minus Supplier intensity

                            Buyer: capital                 Supplier: capital
                            Buyer: technology              Supplier: technology
                            Buyer: R&D                     Supplier: R&D
    .4
    0
    -.4




           -3         -2           -1            0               1             2           3
                                X-axis: Buyer minus Supplier intensity

                            Buyer: innovation              Supplier: innovation
                            Buyer: skill                   Supplier: skill



Notes: The lines are constructed as in Figure 3, but now marginal effects for different investments
are shown on the same scale, which is an order of magnitude larger in the bottom graphs. All
variables are evaluated at the sample mean, except for the multi-plant and the Rauch dummies
which are set to one, and the Complement variable which is evaluated at one standard deviation
below the mean.
Table 1. Correlations between different investment intensities
                             Skill      Innovation            R&D       Technology use           Capital
Skill                           1
Innovation                   0.30                 1
R&D                          0.44              0.44               1
Technology use               0.38              0.56            0.35                    1
Capital                      0.32              0.20            0.06                 0.35              1
Note: Partial correlation statistics between the investment intensity measures for buyer industries
Table 2(a): Simple property rights model
                                         Dependent variable is firm-commodity outsourcing indicator
X=                                       Skill       Innovation R&D            Tech. use    Capital
                                         (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)
Buyer Investment Intensity (X B )        -1.362*** -0.456**         0.140      -0.061**     -0.044*
                                         (0.368)     (0.223)        (0.222)    (0.026)      (0.024)
Supplier Investment Intensity (X S )     2.324***    1.274***       0.848***   0.126***     0.030*
                                         (0.321)     (0.194)        (0.155)    (0.028)      (0.016)
Observations                             49845       50064          50064      50064        50179
log likelihood                           -13249      -12268         -12413     -12481       -13561

Table 2(b): Property rights model with investment interactions
                                         Dependent variable is firm-commodity outsourcing indicator
X=                                       Skill       Innovation R&D            Tech. use    Capital
                                         (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)
Buyer Investment Intensity (X B )        -1.367*** -0.522**         0.106      -0.073**     -0.019
                                         (0.419)     (0.241)        (0.229)    (0.031)      (0.031)
Supplier Investment Intensity (X S )     2.062***    1.207***       0.736***   0.113***     0.033*
                                         (0.329)     (0.201)        (0.174)    (0.026)      (0.017)
(X B -X S ) 2                            8.901***    0.878**        1.081***   0.028***     0.027***
                                         (2.303)     (0.350)        (0.417)    (0.009)      (0.007)
Observations                             49845       50064          50064      50064        50179
log likelihood                           -13131      -12239         -12370     -12429       -13376

Table 2(c): Property rights model with investment and complementarity interactions
                                         Dependent variable is firm-commodity outsourcing indicator
X=                                       Skill       Innovation R&D            Tech. use    Capital
                                         (1)         (2)            (3)        (4)          (5)
Complement                               -1.617*** -1.654*** -1.712*** -1.645*** -1.524***
                                         (0.194)     (0.198)        (0.199)    (0.204)      (0.191)
                             B
Buyer Investment Intensity (X )          -0.969**    -0.545**       0.074      -0.077**     -0.003
                                         (0.397)     (0.231)        (0.219)    (0.030)      (0.029)
Supplier Investment Intensity (X S )     1.569***    1.197***       0.745***   0.120***     0.021
                                         (0.285)     (0.190)        (0.172)    (0.027)      (0.018)
(X B -X S ) 2                            -12.591*** -2.170**        -0.770     -0.046*      -0.018
                                         (3.734)     (0.917)        (0.802)    (0.028)      (0.014)
(X B -X S ) 2 x Complement               47.310*** 5.929***         3.265*     0.126**      0.079***
                                         (8.305)     (2.005)        (1.739)    (0.053)      (0.028)
Observations                             49845       50064          50064      50064        50179
log likelihood                           -12976      -12184         -12350     -12379       -13320
Notes: Coefficient estimates from Probit estimations pooling two years (1988 and 1996), standard errors
(clustered at the most detailed industry level) in brackets. Results in each column use different measures of
investment intensity (indicated at the top). Controls included are firm size, age, productivity, share of
nonproduction workers, complexity, cost-share, complement (only reported in panel (c)), and a 1996
dummy. *** Significant at the 1% level, ** 5%, * 10%.
Table 3(a): Robustness check for the full model: only 1996 observations
                                       Dependent variable is firm-commodity outsourcing indicator
X=                                     Skill          Innovation     R&D             Tech. use          Capital
                                       (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)                (5)
Complement                             -1.889***      -1.728***      -1.808***       -1.735***          -1.780***
                                       (0.217)        (0.207)        (0.204)         (0.217)            (0.192)
                               B
Buyer Investment Intensity (X )        -1.047**       -0.526*        0.117           -0.044             0.017
                                       (0.478)        (0.300)        (0.250)         (0.034)            (0.031)
Supplier Investment Intensity (X S )   1.824***       1.254***       0.783***        0.129***           0.029
                                       (0.394)        (0.232)        (0.221)         (0.032)            (0.018)
(X B -X S ) 2                          -18.248***     -1.761         -0.228          -0.031             -0.015
                                       (5.435)        (1.196)        (0.983)         (0.037)            (0.017)
(X B -X S ) 2 x Complement             52.824***      5.881**        2.762           0.097              0.082***
                                       (10.731)       (2.874)        (2.100)         (0.066)            (0.030)
Observations                           23339          23449          23449           23449              23506

Table 3(b): Robustness check for the full model: only multi-plant firms
                                       (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)
Complement                             -1.514***       -1.403***       -1.371***        -1.399***       -1.440***
                                       (0.159)         (0.155)         (0.153)          (0.169)         (0.161)
                             B
Buyer Investment Intensity (X )        -0.858***       -0.333*         0.095            -0.055**        -0.004
                                       (0.334)         (0.202)         (0.209)          (0.026)         (0.027)
Supplier Investment Intensity (X S )   1.837***        1.181***        0.886***         0.089***        0.029
                                       (0.317)         (0.175)         (0.162)          (0.021)         (0.018)
(X B -X S ) 2                          -15.142***      -1.773**        -0.449           -0.052***       -0.023*
                                       (3.859)         (0.733)         (0.688)          (0.019)         (0.012)
(X B -X S ) 2 x Complement             42.137***       4.718***        2.459*           0.148***        0.071***
                                       (8.439)         (1.513)         (1.512)          (0.037)         (0.022)
Observations                           24756           24808           24808            24808           24836

Table 3(c): Robustness check for the full model: excluding foreign-owned firms
                                        (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)            (5)
Complement                              -2.021***        -1.898***        -1.996***       -1.876***      -1.952***
                                        (0.251)          (0.258)          (0.260)         (0.267)        (0.244)
                                B
Buyer Investment Intensity (X )         -1.272***        -0.575*          0.102           -0.079**       0.033
                                        (0.441)          (0.350)          (0.245)         (0.036)        (0.033)
Supplier Investment Intensity (X S ) 1.793***            1.284***         0.752***        0.146***       0.006
                                        (0.326)          (0.273)          (0.210)         (0.033)        (0.021)
(X B -X S ) 2                           -20.924***       -3.512***        -1.633*         -0.049         -0.0342*
                                        (6.050)          (1.155)          (0.988)         (0.034)        (0.019)
(X B -X S ) 2 x Complement              61.815***        8.540***         5.183**         0.128**        0.128***
                                        (13.352)         (2.827)          (2.126)         (0.061)        (0.039)
Observations                            32926            33118            33118           33118          33193
Notes: Coefficient estimates from Probit estimations pooling two years (except in panel (a)), standard errors (clustered
at the most detailed industry level) in brackets. Results in each column use different measures of investment intensity
(indicated at the top). Controls included are firm size, age, productivity, share of nonproduction workers, complexity,
cost-share, complement, and a 1996 dummy. *** Significant at the 1% level, ** 5%, * 10%.
Table B.1 Assessing the proxy for complementarities
                                                                 correlation of adoption with average of
                                                                  "same input" firms      "other" firms
Design and Engineering
 Computer aided design and/or engineering                                 0.288***               -0.318***
 CAD output used to control manufacturing machines                        0.102***               -0.217***
 Digital representation of CAD output for procurement                     0.111***               -0.239***
Fabrication and Assembly
 Flexible manufacturing systems                                           0.142***               -0.236***
 (Computer) Numerically controlled machine                                0.287***               -0.329***
 Material working laser                                                   0.073**                -0.195***
 Pick and place robots                                                    0.158***               -0.251***
 Other robots                                                             0.061*                 -0.207***
Automated Material Handling
 Automated storage and retrieval systems                                  0.012                  -0.183***
 Automated guided vehicle systems                                         0.005                  -0.164***
Inspection and Communication
 Automated inspection/testing of incoming material                        0.112***               -0.230***
 Automated inspection/testing of final product                            0.180***               -0.258***
 Local area network for technical data                                    0.208***               -0.261***
 Local area network for factory use                                       0.079**                -0.203***
 Computer network linking plant to suppliers/customers                    0.080**                -0.218***
 Programmable controller                                                  0.241***               -0.315***
 Computers used for control on factory floor                              0.172***               -0.260***
Manufacturing Information Systems
 Material requirement planning                                            0.228***               -0.292***
 Manufacturing resource planning                                          0.115***               -0.237***
Integration and Control
 Computer integrated manufacturing                                        0.085**                -0.215***
 Supervisory control and data acquisition                                 0.086**                -0.214***
 Artificial intelligence and/or expert systems                            0.074**                -0.200***

Note: correlation between the vector of firm-level adoption decisions and the average adoption frequency by other
firms that share the same core input ("same input" firms) and the average adoption frequency of allother firms.
Table B.2 Summary statistics
                                   N   MEAN      STD
OUTS                           50179    0.919   0.272
Cost-share                     50179    0.125   0.226
Complement                     50179    0.573   0.241
Specificity proxies
log Buyers IND                 50179    4.736   1.346
log Suppliers IND              50179    4.147   1.293
log (Buy- Supp) IND            50179    0.590   1.737
log Buyers COM                 50179    3.684   1.383
log Suppliers COM              43352    2.207   1.459
log (Buy- Supp) COM            43352    1.658   1.466
Fraction fj                    50179    0.073   0.189
Rauch j                        44769    0.440   0.496
Investment intensities (industry level)
X B K/L                      50179      3.602   1.562
    S
X       K/L                    50179    3.834   1.796
( X B -X S ) 2 K/L             50179    4.686   7.968
X B skill                      50090    0.452   0.118
    S
X       skill                  49933    0.493   0.118
( X B -X S ) 2 skill           49845    0.014   0.021
X B R&D                        50072    0.361   0.225
    S
X       R&D                    50171    0.409   0.206
         B
(X         -X ) 2 R&D
            S
                               50064    0.066   0.112
X B tech                       50072    1.734   1.239
    S
X       tech                   50171    2.129   1.168
         B      S   2
(X         -X )         tech   50064    2.428   4.067
X B innov                      50072    0.272   0.200
    S
X       innov                  50171    0.374   0.214
( X B -X S ) 2 innov           50064    0.066   0.112
Firm level controls
Size                           50179    2.072   1.687
Age                            50179    0.271   0.471
Productivity                   50179    0.544   0.608
Non-production workers         50179    0.018   0.157
Industry level controls
Complexity                     50179    3.995   0.410
     B
Size                           50179    4.406   1.300
Size S                         50179    4.639   1.185
Age B                          50179   16.477   3.308
     S
Age                            50179   17.085   3.679
Table B.3: Importance of specificity
                                             Dependent variable is firm-commodity outsourcing indicator
                           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)          (5)     (6)        (7)         (8)     (9)
Size                       -0.128*** -0.127*** -0.122*** -0.139*** -0.126*** -0.126*** -0.128*** -0.139*** -0.129***
                           (0.013)   (0.016)   (0.013)   (0.015)      (0.013) (0.014)    (0.013)     (0.015) (0.013)
       B
Size                       -0.038     -0.019      -0.032      -0.034      -0.037      -0.014      -0.023      -0.031      -0.035
                           (0.035)    (0.042)     (0.034)     (0.037)     (0.041)     (0.033)     (0.040)     (0.037)     (0.043)
       S
Size                       0.237***   0.261***    0.238***    -0.020      0.217***    0.086*      0.228***    -0.035      0.206***
                           (0.061)    (0.073)     (0.061)     (0.047)     (0.056)     (0.050)     (0.061)     (0.047)     (0.057)
Age                        0.059**    0.045       0.058**     0.013***    0.058*      0.013       0.059**     0.013       0.057**
                           (0.030)    (0.037)     (0.030)     (0.036)     (0.030)     (0.035)     (0.030)     (0.036)     (0.029)
      B
Age                        -0.032** -0.045*** -0.032** -0.054*** -0.031** -0.051*** -0.031** -0.056*** -0.028**
                           (0.014)  (0.015)   (0.014)  (0.013)   (0.014)  (0.012)   (0.014)  (0.013)   (0.014)
      S
Age                    -0.033*        -0.053***   -0.034*     -0.012      -0.039**    -0.036**    -0.037**    -0.007      -0.033*
                       (0.018)        (0.019)     (0.018)     (0.015)     (0.019)     (0.016)     (0.019)     (0.015)     (0.019)
Productivity           0.001          -0.012      0.004       -0.036      0.002       -0.022      0.002       -0.037      -0.008
                       (0.033)        (0.036)     (0.032)     (0.034)     (0.033)     (0.033)     (0.033)     (0.034)     (0.032)
Non-production workers -0.101         -0.135      -0.106      -0.232      -0.089      -0.207      -0.096      -0.231      -0.089
                       (0.145)        (0.171)     (0.145)     (0.145)     (0.143)     (0.144)     (0.143)     (0.144)     (0.142)
Complexity             -0.124         -0.145      -0.118      -0.107      -0.109      -0.060      -0.132      -0.115      -0.087
                       (0.090)        (0.100)     (0.090)     (0.095)     (0.099)     (0.095)     (0.093)     (0.094)     (0.101)
Cost share             -1.119***      -1.164***   -1.087***   -0.892***   -1.126***   -0.935***   -1.128***   -0.862***   -1.124***
                       (0.096)        (0.113)     (0.098)     (0.095)     (0.094)     (0.096)     (0.094)     (0.094)     (0.093)
Complement             -1.643***      -1.742***   -1.633***   -1.742***   -1.627***   -1.654***   -1.631***   -1.749***   -1.571***
                       (0.174)        (0.209)     (0.176)     (0.168)     (0.177)     (0.160)     (0.178)     (0.168)     (0.182)
Rauch                                 -0.086
                                      (0.095)
Fraction of demand                                -0.228***
                                                  (0.072)
           COM
log Buyers                                                    0.282***                                        0.349***
                                                              (0.025)                                         (0.034)
             COM
log Suppliers                                                 -0.462***                                       -0.371***
                                                              (0.024)                                         (0.052)
           IND
log Buyers                                                                0.004                                           0.276***
                                                                          (0.045)                                         (0.101)
             IND
log Suppliers                                                             -0.042                                          0.248***
                                                                          (0.040)                                         (0.084)
(log Buy - log Supp)COM                                                               0.368***
                                                                                      (0.020)
                     IND
(log Buy - log Supp)                                                                              0.025
                                                                                                  (0.458)
(log Buy x log Supp)COM                                                                                       -0.024*
                                                                                                              (0.012)
(log Buy x log Supp)IND                                                                                                   -0.061***
                                                                                                                          (0.019)
Observations               50179      44769       50179       43352       50179       43352       50179       43352       50,179
log likelihood             -12209     -9802       -12195      -10057      -12200      -10284      -12204      -10041      -12,114
Notes: Coefficient estimates from Probit estimations pooling two years (1988 and 1996), standard errors (clustered at the most
detailed industry level) in brackets. ***Significant at the 1% level, **5%, *10%.
Table B.4: Full set of results for flexible property rights model (coefficient estimates)
                                        Dependent variable is firm-commodity outsourcing indicator
X=                                      Skill            Innovation      R&D                Tech. use             Capital
                                        (1)              (2)             (3)                (4)                   (5)
Size                                    -0.047***        -0.055***       -0.055***          -0.051***             -0.051***
                                        (0.016)          (0.017)         (0.017)            (0.019)               (0.017)
Age                                     0.102***         0.127***        0.130***           0.115***              0.113***
                                        (0.034)          (0.035)         (0.033)            (0.034)               (0.034)
Non-production workers                  -0.115           -0.106          -0.063             -0.029                -0.100
                                        (0.143)          (0.140)         (0.139)            (0.144)               (0.147)
Productivity                            -0.005           -0.001          -0.005             -0.001                -0.004
                                        (0.030)          (0.030)         (0.030)            (0.029)               (0.028)
Cost share                              -1.314           -1.336***       -0.855**           -0.856***             -1.695***
                                        (1.309)          (0.322)         (0.362)            (0.269)               (0.520)
Complexity                              0.162            -0.056          -0.118             -0.046                0.008
                                        (0.116)          (0.119)         (0.115)            (0.111)               (0.122)
Complement                              -5.032***        -2.796***       -3.172***          -2.70***              -2.492***
                                        (1.536)          (0.592)         (0.749)            (0.735)               (0.585)
    B
X                                       -0.603           -2.417          -3.969**           -0.367                0.197
                                        (5.455)          (1.561)         (1.741)            (0.271)               (0.195)
    S
X                                       -7.060           -1.833          -1.883             -0.445                -0.966***
                                        (5.460)          (1.815)         (1.464)            (0.307)               (0.239)
    B        S
X xX                                    13.787           1.815           2.191              0.180***              -0.023
                                        (10.418)         (2.055)         (1.614)            (0.066)               (0.034)
  B 2
(X )                                    -6.063           1.896           2.626              -0.039                -0.006
                                        (6.751)          (1.821)         (1.798)            (0.045)               (0.028)
  S 2
(X )                                    -0.095           1.467           1.564              0.018                 0.123***
                                        (7.352)          (2.273)         (1.626)            (0.061)               (0.032)
     B
(X ) x Complement                       1.948            2.781           3.159              0.365                 -0.447
                                        (8.292)          (2.798)         (2.651)            (0.406)               (0.317)
  S
(X ) x Complement                       10.905           4.001           4.179*             0.623                 0.891***
                                        (8.401)          (2.819)         (2.275)            (0.448)               (0.352)
  B   S
(X x X ) x Complement                   -88.228***       -13.075***      -6.987**           -0.398***             -0.127***
                                        (19.846)         (3.572)         (3.293)            (0.096)               (0.043)
  B 2
(X ) x Complement                       41.974***        3.467           1.194              0.172**               0.102**
                                        (13.400)         (3.032)         (2.741)            (0.077)               (0.049)
  S 2
(X ) x Complement                       35.104***        1.574           -1.518             0.027                 -0.024
                                        (13.137)         (3.495)         (2.720)            (0.100)               (0.046)
     B
(X ) x Cost share                       -5.160           0.574           1.230              -0.379*               0.465**
                                        (5.073)          (1.569)         (2.435)            (0.214)               (0.231)
  S
(X ) x Cost share                       6.717            1.760           -2.006             -0.097                -0.103
                                        (6.290)          (2.271)         (1.872)            (0.239)               (0.175)
  B   S
(X x X ) x Cost share                   -42.894***       -5.454**        -9.279***          -0.046                -0.058**
                                        (11.565)         (2.541)         (3.414)            (0.053)               (0.026)
  B 2
(X ) x Cost share                       23.607***        1.592           2.966              0.099**               -0.042
                                        (6.957)          (2.367)         (3.361)            (0.051)               (0.028)
  S 2
(X ) x Cost share                       17.257*          0.663           6.694***           0.077*                0.057**
                                        (9.790)          (2.104)         (2.395)            (0.046)               (0.023)
Rauch dummy                             1.053            0.133           -0.122             -0.110                -0.256
                                        (0.839)          (0.266)         (0.322)            (0.268)               (0.388)
  B
(X ) x Rauch                            -8.836***        -0.480          1.849**            0.127                 0.118
                                        (2.818)          (0.959)         (0.776)            (0.151)               (0.107)
  S
(X ) x Rauch                            5.644            1.129           -0.836             0.181                 0.148
                                        (3.636)          (1.472)         (1.284)            (0.201)               (0.162)
(X B x X S ) x Rauch                    4.984            1.131           -0.811             0.018                 0.006
                                        (7.038)          (1.618)         (1.223)            (0.036)               (0.019)
(X B ) 2 x Rauch                        6.338            -0.042          -1.236             -0.037                -0.011
                                        (4.765)          (1.094)         (0.886)            (0.028)               (0.014)
(X S ) 2 x Rauch                        -8.475           -2.146          1.505              -0.037                -0.021
                                        (5.679)          (1.896)         (1.419)            (0.047)               (0.022)
Multiplant dummy                        -0.934**         -0.484***       -0.710***          -0.282*               -0.423*
                                        (0.487)          (0.154)         (0.223)            (0.156)               (0.255)
(X B ) x Multiplant                     2.078            1.260           2.263**            0.190                 -0.007
                                        (2.613)          (0.843)         (0.941)            (0.124)               (0.120)
(X S ) x Multiplant                     0.278            -0.819          -0.622             -0.328**              0.031
                                        (2.872)          (0.816)         (0.779)            (0.130)               (0.101)
(X B x X S ) x Multiplant               17.495***        4.296**         1.851              0.009                 0.098***
                                        (6.866)          (1.783)         (1.264)            (0.043)               (0.024)
     B   2
(X ) x Multiplant                       -10.737***       -3.527*         -3.504***          -0.044                -0.050***
                                        (4.083)          (1.860)         (1.253)            (0.034)               (0.019)
     S   2
(X ) x Multiplant                       -8.884*          -0.507          0.096              0.067**               -0.045**
                                        (5.365)          (0.972)         (0.929)            (0.031)               (0.019)
log (# prod. / # suppl.)                0.181**          0.070***        0.072*             0.066**               0.035
(rel. #)                                (0.104)          (0.028)         (0.039)            (0.032)               (0.031)
(X B ) x (rel. #)                       -0.276           -0.121          -0.113             -0.028                0.018
                                        (0.354)          (0.108)         (0.152)            (0.022)               (0.013)
(X S ) x (rel. #)                       0.026            0.412***        0.344**            0.069***              0.026**
                                        (0.457)          (0.141)         (0.141)            (0.024)               (0.012)
(X B x X S ) x (rel. #)                 0.137            -0.023          -0.246             -0.003                0.000
                                        (0.535)          (0.169)         (0.195)            (0.004)               (0.002)
(X B ) 2 x (rel. #)                     0.043            0.044           0.224              0.005                 -0.002
                                        (0.424)          (0.130)         (0.150)            (0.004)               (0.001)
(X S ) 2 x (rel. #)                     -0.050           -0.456***       -0.313*            -0.010*               -0.003**
                                        (0.556)          (0.152)         (0.178)            (0.006)               (0.002)
Constant                                3.351**          3.191***        3.958***           3.402***              3.508***
                                        (1.790)          (0.600)         (0.595)            (0.710)               (0.530)
Observations                            40659            38451           38451              38451                 40939
log likelihood                          -9285.2          -8596.2         -8639.0            -8626.7               -9374.5
Notes: Coefficient estimates from Probit estimations pooling two years (1988 and 1996), standard errors (clustered at the most
detailed industry level) in brackets. Results in each column use different measures of investment intensity (indicated at the top).
***Significant at the 1% level, **5%, *10%.
