NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE BIG CITIES BAD PLACES TO LIVE? ESTIMATING QUALITY OF LIFE ACROSS
METROPOLITAN AREAS
David Albouy
Working Paper 14472
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14472

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2008
I would like to thank Soren Anderson, Patricia Beeson, Jeff Biddle, Dan Black, Glenn Blomquist,
JS Butler, David Card, Paul Courant, Lucas Davis, Morris Davis, Gilles Duranton, Randall Eberts,
Rob Gillezeau, Joseph Gyourko, Jim Hines, John Hoehn, Juanna Joensen, Matthew Kahn, Ryan Kellogg,
Pat Kline, Jed Kolko, François Ortalo-Magné, Enrico Moretti, John Quigley, Jordan Rappaport, Stuart
Rosenthal, Albert Saiz, David Savageau, Noah Smith, Gary Solon, Lowell Taylor, Casey Warman,
Hendrik Wolff and the participants of seminars at Carnegie Mellon University, Columbia University,
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Michigan State University, University of Kentucky, University
of Michigan, the Stockholm School of Economics, University of Washington, University of Western
Ontario, and Yale University and at the AREUEA Annual Meetings, Econometric Society North American
Summer Meetings, NBER Public Economics Meetings, North American Regional Science Council
Annual Meetings, and Society of Labor Economics Annual Meetings for their help, discussions, and
advice. Olivier Deschenes and Wolfram Schlenker generously provided detailed weather data. Kevin
A. Crosby, Walter Graf, and Bert Lue provided excellent research assistance. The National Science
Foundation (SES-0922340) and the Center for Local, State, and Urban Policy (CLOSUP) provided
generous financial assistance. Any mistakes are my own. Please e-mail any questions or comments
to albouy@umich.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by David Albouy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Are Big Cities Bad Places to Live? Estimating Quality of Life across Metropolitan Areas
David Albouy
NBER Working Paper No. 14472
November 2008, Revised February 2011
JEL No. H4,J3,Q51,Q54,R1
ABSTRACT
The standard revealed-preference estimate of a city's quality of life is proportional to that city's cost-of-living
relative to its wage-level. Adjusting estimates to account for federal taxes, non-housing costs, and
non-labor income produces more plausible quality-of-life estimates than in the previous literature.
Unlike previous estimates, adjusted quality-of-life measures successfully predict how housing costs
rise with wage levels, are positively correlated with popular "livability" rankings and stated preferences,
and do not decrease with city size. Mild seasons, sunshine, hills, and coastal proximity account for
most inter-metropolitan quality-of-life differences. Amendments to quality-of-life measures for labor-market
disequilibrium and household heterogeneity provide additional insights.
David Albouy
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
351C Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
albouy@umich.edu

1

Introduction

The urban wage premium that cities offer is seen by economists as evidence not only of high urban
productivity, but also as compensation for urban disamenities, such as crime, congestion, and
pollution (Hoch 1972). This view feeds the stereotype that urban life is an unfortunate by-product
of civilization, and leads Nordhaus and Tobin (1972) to discount economic growth measures for
increasing urbanization when they attempt to measure changes in economic welfare over time.
This view is also used to endorse policies to depopulate cities and subsidize rural areas for greater
"population balance," as in the National Science Foundation report by Elgin et al. (1974). Yet,
interest in urban quality of life persists, as seen recently in the theme of the 2010 World Expo in
Shanghai, "Better City, Better Life," which according to the organizers represents "the common
wish of humankind for a better living in future urban environments."
Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982) point out that high nominal wage levels may compensate for
higher rents, as well as for disamenities. Overall, the value of a city’s amenities, captured in its
overall quality of life (QOL), is reflecte in how high its cost-of-living is relative to its wage level,
i.e. the inverse of its real wage. Workers will live in a place where real wages are low if their lower
consumption of market goods is offset by a higher consumption of non-market amenities. Using
hedonic methods, these QOL measures are used to determine households’ willingness-to-pay for
amenities such as climate, safety, and clean air.1
Despite its solid foundations on revealed-preference theory, the QOL indices found in the economic literature (e.g. Blomquist, Berger, and Hoehn 1988; Gyourko and Tracy 1989) often seem
counterintuitive or "misplaced"(Rappaport 2008). Ranking the QOL of states in 1990, Gabriel,
Mattey, and Wascher (2003) put Wyoming, South Dakota, and Arkansas first second, and third,
while putting seemingly more desirable Colorado, Hawaii and California in 34th, 35th, and 42nd.
Ranking 185 metropolitan areas in the United States, Berger, Blomquist and Waldner (1987) rank
Pueblo, CO, Macon, GA, and Reno, NV in the top three, while San Francisco, CA, is 105th; Seattle, WA, 144th; and New York, NY, 165th. These city rankings are correlated negatively with city
1

Gyourko, Kahn, and Tracy (1999) and Lambiri, Biagi, and Royeula (2007) are excellent guides to this literature.

1

size (Burnell and Galster 1992) and with QOL rankings found in popular guides, such as the Places
Rated Almanac (Savageau 1999), where many large cities score favorably in overall "livability."2
I argue here that the Rosen-Roback model produces more sensible QOL and amenity-value
estimates once three adjustments are made. First, cost-of-living measures should incorporate cost
differences beyond housing costs. Second, proper accounting must account for how urban wage
levels affect a typical household’s buying power. Third, wage differences should net out federal
taxes. Across metropolitan areas – equated here with "cities" – the adjusted model successfully
predicts that a one-percent increase in wages is associated with a 1.5 percent increase in housing
costs, holding amenities constant, unlike previous studies, which predict a 3 to 4 percent increase.3
Estimates from the adjusted model, based on 2000 data, imply that real incomes in large cities
are lower, and QOL higher, than previously thought. The two nicest cities in the United States are
Honolulu and Santa Barbara, while San Francisco, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles and New York
are all above the national average; the top f ve states are Hawaii, California, Vermont, Colorado,
and Oregon. These adjusted QOL rankings are positively correlated with rankings in Places Rated
and rankings based on stated preferences. Adjusted amenity-value estimates indicate that households have a substantial willingness-to-pay to live in areas with coasts, slopes, sunshine, warm
winters, and mild summers: a parsimonious model using only these f ve variables explains over 70
percent of the variation in QOL across cities. Valuations of artificia amenities are more tenuous,
revealing a substantial willingness-to-pay to live in areas with arts and culture, bars and restaurants, and cleaner air. They fail to show positive valuations for safety from crime, an amenity that
is geographically concentrated within metropolitan areas. Unadjusted hedonic estimates often produce counterintuitive valuations, findin mild summers, coastal proximity, and arts and culture to
2
These differences persist when measured at the county level in Blomquist, Berger and Hoehn (1988) where suburban Marin County is ranked 142nd (out of 253 counties), even lower than the City and County of San Francisco,
ranked 105th. Burnell and Galster (1992) note that, in Places Rated, QOL peaks at a city size of 4 million. Oppositely,
Clark, Kahn, and Ofek (1992) fin that QOL reaches a minimum at 4 million with a measures based on nominal, not
real, wages, arguing this is correct in a monocentric city model with free mobility, where – paradoxically – cities are of
fi ed size. Hoehn, Berger, and Blomquist (1987), allow city size to be endogenous in a system of monocentric cities,
and re-establish the need to use real wages.
3
The Appendix demonstrates that a log-linear specificatio of QOL fit the data better than a linear specification
and that a QOL model based on a second-order log-linearization, which incorporates tax progressivity and income and
expenditures change, does little to change the estimates.

2

be undesirable. Overall, larger cities tend to be located in areas with greater natural amenities, but
once these are controlled for, there is no relationship between city size and QOL, implying that on
average big cities are no worse to live in than small ones. It even appears that QOL may be higher
in denser cities.
The last section of the paper considers amendments of the model to handle household heterogeneity in skills and preferences, as well as moving and adaptation costs. This section sheds
light on structural discrete-choice models of household location and migration across metropolitan
areas used to produce amenity valuations (e.g. Timmins 2007, Bishop 2008, Sinha and Cropper
2009). Economic reasoning suggests that larger or growing areas are more desirable to inframarginal residents than is estimated by QOL measures based on wages and costs alone. Dynamic
considerations of local adaptation suggest that population growth, rather than level, is more useful
for amending QOL measures. Thus, faster growing cities and their amenities – sunshine, slopes,
warm weather, and clean air – may be even more desirable than the initial estimates presented. The
marginal value of coastal proximity, an amenity very fi ed in supply, appears to be increasingly
different from the average value. Lastly, as a consequence of Zipf’s and Gibrat’s laws for cities –
which imply that population levels and growth rates are uniformly distributed across city sizes –
neither population-level or growth amendments suggest a preference bias towards either smaller or
larger cities.
Heterogeneous tastes across different household types for cities and amenities have generally been addressed by examining wage differences (e.g. Roback 1988; Beeson 1991; Black,
Kolesnikova, and Taylor 2009; and Lee 2010). When applied to heterogenous households, the
adjusted model successfully predicts that less-educated households are paid higher premia in more
expensive and lower-wage areas. Relative QOL valuations appear problematic as they ignore the
influenc of labor demand factors on wages, which imply that higher concentrations of a household type signal stronger tastes in addition to lower wages. This amendment produces more plausible measures of relative QOL values and reveals that more educated households appear to have

3

stronger tastes for culture, entertainment, and clean air, and care less about crime.4

2

Basic Theory and Calibration

Assume that worker-households, whose types are indexed by g, are fully mobile across cities,
indexed by j. Preferences are modeled by the utility function Ug (y; Qjg ), which is increasing and
quasi-concave over a vector of market goods, y, and quality of life, Qjg , modeled by a scalar specifi
to city and type. Local prices of y are given by the vector pj . Qjg cannot be purchased directly and
e (Zj ). Households supply a single
depends on city amenities, Zj , according to the function Qj = Q
unit of labor in their city of residence and earn a wage, wgj , and also receive non-labor income, Ig ,

which does not depend on the city of residence.5 Out of gross income, mjg = wgj + Ig , households
pay a federal tax, (wgj + Ig ).6
The after-tax net expenditure necessary to obtain utility ug , given local prices, wages, and QOL
is written as Eg (pj ; wgj ; ; ug ; Qjg )

miny fpj y

wgj

Ig + (wgj + Ig ) : Ug (y; Qjg )

ug g Since

households are fully mobile, each type’s utility, ug , must be equalized across the cities it inhabits.
Therefore, in an equilibrium, no household requires additional compensation to live in its city:
Eg (pj ; wgj ; ; ug ; Qjg ) = 0 ,

(1)

where ug is the obtained utility. Totally differentiating (1) around national averages of p; wg and
Qg produces @Eg =@pj dpj + @E=@w dwgj + @Eg =@Q dQjg = 0. Applying Shepard’s Lemma and
rearranging this formula, yg dpj

1

0
g

dwgj = pQg dQjg where

4

0
g

is the marginal tax rate

The methods here meant to complement quasi-experimental estimates of amenity values (e.g. Black 1999, Chay
and Greenstone 2005), and structural migration models with household heterogeneity (e.g. Kennan and Walker 2003),
which all require that that population stocks or fl ws be weighted correctly together with wages and housing costs.
5
Roback (1980) models elastic labor supply, and find it has no first-orde effects on QOL estimates.
6
Deductions for local public goods and housing are left out here, but are included in the application and discussed
in full in Albouy (2009a), which also explains how federal expenditures are not correlated with federal taxes, and
most federal public goods, mainly defense, benefi areas fairly equally. Therefore, differences in disposable income
across areas should be measured after federal taxes. The local public sector does not need explicitly modeling: Local
government goods may be treated as consumption goods, part traded and part non-traded, and differences in local
government efficien y may be reflecte in Q (Gyourko and Tracy 1989).

4

and pQg

@Eg =@Q is the marginal willingness-to-pay for QOL. Log-linearizing this formula,

so that w^gj

^j
dwgj =wg , p^ji = dpji =pi , for each good i, and normalizing Q
g
^ jg = syg p
bj
Q

1

0
g

swg w^gj ,

where syg is a vector of expenditure shares, out of gross income, and swg

(@Eg =@Q) dQjg =mg ,
(2)
wg =mg is the share

b j represents how high the costof gross income received from labor. In percentage terms, syg p

of-living is in city j relative to the national average, while swg w^gj represents how high nominal
income is, with the (1

0
g)

netting out federal taxes. Thus, (2) equates local QOL with how much

cost-of-living exceeds nominal income levels, or how low after-tax real incomes are relative to the
^ j is cardinal and represents the percent of total consumption households are
national average. Q
willing to forego to live in city j instead of an average city.
Household preferences are likely to differ significantl , but a useful measure of aggregate
willingness-pay is obtained by weighting each household type according to their income share,
g.

Basing the parameters and differentials on income-weighted household averages, definin
P
P
0
0
sy =
)sw w^ j
^gj , we may drop the subscript g from
g )swg w
g g syg and (1
g g (1
P
^j
(2) to obtain an aggregate QOL, Q
g g swg . While simple, this single index should largely
capture the average willingness to pay of most households to live in certain cities, at least for the

"marginal" households that are willing to move across cities, which in the long run, include most
Americans.7 In the absence of strong sorting, the index aggregates the preferences of those with
low income shares from labor, such as students and retirees, who care more about high prices,
with those with high income shares from labor, like young workers, who care more about wages.
The approximations also obviate the need to model production side of the economy – discussed in
Appendix A.1 and more fully in Albouy (2009b) – especially when preferences are homogenous.
Indices to accommodate household heterogeneity, moving costs, and labor-market disequilibrium
are considered in Section 5.
7

Sorting of this kind is greatly reduced if retirees decide to locate close to their children, especially if families
share income. Retirees and their working children who locate together act like a family "dynasty" as in Barro (1974).

5

2.1

Choosing the Correct Parameters

Simplifying somewhat, most QOL estimates in the literature are based on a single measure of
wages and a single measure of prices, namely housing costs, here termed p^jhous .8 They have also
ignored federal taxes, treated labor as the only source of income, and put the expenditure share on
housing, shous , at around 25 percent, so that (2) is reduced to
^j
Q
pjhous
unadjusted = 0:25^

w^ j

(3)

The improved measure used here, still relies on single indices of wages and costs, but with the
formula
^j
Q
pjhous
adjusted = 0:33^

0:51w^ j .

(4)

This formula incorporates an effective federal tax rate on labor income of 32 percent (with some
adjustments for tax benefit to owner-occupied housing), the fact that 75 percent of household
income depends on local wages, and that, netting out tax-benefit to owner-occupied housing, the
cost-of-living differences across cities are approximated by a third of housing-cost differences.
This parametrization puts only 1.5 times more weight on low wages relative to housing costs,
unlike previous studies which put 4 times more weight.9

2.2

The Effective Expenditure Share on Housing Costs

Separating goods into housing and non-housing, the cost-of-living differential may be recast as

8

b j = shous p^jhous + soth p^joth ,
sy p

(5)

"Housing cost" refers to rent or an imputed rent based on housing prices for home-owners. I follow the standard
practice of including utilities since contract rents often include them.
9
More specificall the relative weight on wages relative to housing costs is 3.61 in Blomquist et al. (1988), 3.7 in
Beeson and Eberts (1989), 4.82 in Gyourko and Tracy (1991), 3.72 in Gabriel et al. (2003), 4 in Davis and OrthaloMagne (2007), and 2.87 in Chen and Rosenthal (2008). The latter is closest to the study here. Equation (2) is based on
a first-orde approximation of the mobility condition. As shown in Appendix A.3, a second-order approximation has
only a minute impact on QOL estimates. Furthermore, Davis and Ortalo-Magne (2007) provide empirical evidence
that shous is fairly constant across time and metropolitan areas, justifying the use of a single number for sy .

6

where soth and p^oth are the expenditure share and cost differential for non-housing goods. The
Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) reports the share of gross income spent on shelter and utilities, shous , is 0.213, and on other goods, soth , is 0.563 (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2002). The other
22.4 percent is saved or taxed.
While data on regional differences in housing costs are of good quality, data on regional differences in the cost of other goods are limited. Commonly used data on other goods come from the
ACCRA Cost-of-Living Index, which measures price differences across expenditure categories.
Problems with this data, discussed by Koo, Phillips, and Sigalla (2000), are that they cover a
limited number of goods, are collected by volunteers, are meant for urban professionals, may exaggerate housing-cost differences, and most importantly, have limited geographic coverage. For
this last reason, I use ACCRA data to infer how housing costs predict overall cost-of-living differences. A regression using 2004 data in natural logarithms reveals that housing costs predict other
prices well, as seen through the high coefficien of determination:10
ln pjoth =

3:57
(0:043)

+

0:263 ln phous + ej

R2 = 0:66

(0:012)

Substituting in the regression formula, p^joth = b^
pjhous + ej , into equation (5)
b j = (shous + soth b)p^jhous + soth ej .
sy p
{z
}
|

(6)

"sy "

Putting the parameters together, the cost-of-living differential is best predicted by weighing p^j
with sy = 0:362, whereby non-housing goods account for soth b=sy = 41 percent of cost-of-living
differences. Since the R2 = 0:66 implies that two thirds of non-housing costs are predicted by
housing costs, and only 14 percent of all cost-of-living variation is lost by ignoring idiosyncratic
differences in the non-housing goods seen in the error term. Low prices that are not accounted for
10

The index for non-housing costs is reweighed using expenditure shared from the CEX. Results using 1999 ACCRA data are almost identical.

7

by the housing-cost index are then implicit in a higher QOL value.11

2.3

The Share of Income from Labor

Conceptually, sw accounts for the fraction of a household’s income that depends on its location
through local wages. Non-labor income sources – such as from assets or family transfers – are
location independent. Even the value of a migrant’s home equity is effectively location independent, since the price it can be sold for does not depend on where the migrant moves to. Previous
QOL studies have typically determined only the ratio sw =sy by assuming that each household supplies one full-time/full-year worker and divided the ratio by average household rent, producing
values between 2.9 and 4.5, although there are typically 1.3 workers per household. Households
vary in the share of income they earn from labor, but on average sw is about 75 percent (Krueger
1999). This is corroborated by data in the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). In 2001, households received 69.3 percent of income from wages, and 11.7 percent from "business, farm, and
self-employment," some of which is derived from labor. Together, sw = 0:75 and sy = 0:36 imply
that the relative weight of wages relative to housing costs in calculating QOL is sw =sy = 2:08:12

2.4

Federal Taxes and Deductions

Federal taxes reduce the net income households gain from moving to a city offering higher wages.
As fully explained in Albouy (2009a), to calculate the effective tax rate on inter-city wage differ11

Gabriel, Mattey, and Wascher (2003) use the ACCRA data directly. Because the data do not cover enough cities,
the authors cannot create individual city rankings, and instead perform their analysis by state. They claim that cost-ofliving differences within state should be small relative to differences between states, although this may be problematic
in large states such as California, Illinois, Michigan, and New York. According to my calculations, the authors used
an effective shous = 0:22 and soth = 0:38, leading to an effective sy of approximately 0.27, quite similar to the other
literature. Carrillo, Early, and Olsen (2010) construct a price index similar to the one here, but incorporate ACCRA
data in cities where it is available. Shapiro (2006) uses a technique similar to the one here except he uses expenditure
weights provided by ACCRA.
Moretti (2008) runs a regression like (6) across cities over time using local Consumer Price Index data from major
cities,supplied by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. He estimates a larger value of b = 0:35. Moretti’s estimate is
somewhat larger than the one here mainly because his CPI expenditure shares do not include income saved or paid in
taxes. Once these expenditures are taken into account, the adjusted b is 0:25.
12
According to Aizcorbe, Kennickell, and Moore (2003), the average household net worth in 2001, adjusted down
for the stock-market bubble, was $341,300, f ve times the average family income of $68,000. At an annual real interest
rate of 5 percent, this is worth $17,065, or 25.1 percent of income.

8

ences, several taxes must be considered. A base federal income tax rate is taken from TAXSIM
(Feenberg and Coutts 1993), which for 2000 calculates a marginal rate of 25.1 percent, and applies
to the average household, weighted by income. When combined with payroll taxes for Medicare
and OASDI – net of marginal benefit from the simulation in Boskin et al. (1987, Table 4) –
the effective federal tax rate rises to 29.6 percent.13 Tax benefit to owner-occupied housing are
also accounted for: this serves to effectively reduce the share sy . In addition, state tax rates are
incorporated to accommodate wage and price differentials within state. Although actual state-tax
differentials are calculated from state tax rates and within-state wage and price differentials, total
tax differences may be approximated by using

0

= 0.323 and lowering sy from 0.36 to 0.33.14

Overall, taxes lowers the wage-to-housing-cost weight from 2.08 to 1.54.
13

According to the Statistics on Income, although only 33 percent of tax returns itemize, they account for 67 percent
of reported Adjusted Gross Income (AGI). Since the income-weighted share is what matters, 67 percent is multiplied
by the effective tax reduction given in TAXSIM, in 2000 of 21.6 percent. Thus, on average these deductions reduce
the effective price of eligible goods by 14.5 percent. Since eligible goods only include housing, this deduction applies
to only 59 percent of home goods. Multiplying gives an effective price reduction of 8.6 percent for home goods.
Divided by a federal tax rate of 29.6 percent, this produces a federal deduction level of 29 percent. A move to a
high-wage city could potentially increase a household’s marginal tax rate. A preliminary adjustment for progressivity
used in the second-order approximations in Appendix A.3, suggests that the impact of progressive taxes is very small.
14
State-tax differentials are computed by multiplying state tax and deduction rates by the wage and price differentials
within state and include sales taxes, since these effectively tax labor. At the state level, the average effective marginal
tax rate on wages is 6.2 percentage points, although, wage differences within state are only 44 percent as large, on
average, as wage differences within the entire country. Quality of life is computed using the augmented formula
^ j = (1
Q

0

) sy p^j

(1

0

) sw w
^j +

0
^j
S [sw (w

w
^S )

pj
S sy (^

p^S )]

(7)

where is the effective federal deduction rate and S0 and S are are marginal tax and deduction rates at the state-level,
net of federal deductions, and w
^ S and p^S are the differentials for state S as a whole relative to the entire country.
State income tax rates from 2000 are taken from TAXSIM, which, per dollar, fall at an average marginal rate of 4.5
percent. State sales tax data in 2000 is taken from the Tax Policy Center, originally supplied by the Federation of
Tax Administrators. The average state sales tax rate is 5.2 percent. Sales tax rates are reduced by 10 percent to
accomodate untaxed goods and services other than food or housing (Feenberg et al. 1997), and by another 8 percent in
states that exempt groceries, equal to its share of expenditures. State deductions for income taxes are calculated in an
equivalent way using TAXSIM data, and also account for how housing expenditures are deducted from the sales tax.
State adjustments raise the effective deduction level from 0.29 to 0.31.

9

3

Wage, Housing-Cost, and Quality-of-Life Estimates

3.1

Data

Wage and housing-cost differentials are estimated with the 5 percent sample of the U.S. Census
data from the 2000 Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS). Cities are define at the
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) level using 1999 OMB definitions using consolidated defi
nitions (e.g. "San Francisco" includes Oakland and San Jose) so that commuting can be ignored,
and grouping non-metropolitan areas within each state. This produces 276 metropolitan areas and
49 non-metropolitan-area groups.
Amenity data, are divided into two categories. Natural amenities are predetermined characteristics from climate and geography, including heating degree days and cooling degree days per year,
sunshine, coastal proximity, and average slope of the land. Artificia amenities are determined by
local inhabitants, such as restaurants and bars per capita, the Arts & Culture Index from Places
Rated, air quality, and safety. More details are provided in Appendix B.

3.2

Wage and Housing-Cost Regressions

Inter-urban wage differentials are calculated from the logarithm of hourly wages for full-time
workers, ages 25 to 55. In keeping with Rosen (1979) and his successors, these differentials
control for skill differences across cities to provide a meaningful analogue to the representative
worker. Log wages are regressed on metro-indicators ( j ) and on extensive controls (Xiwj ) – interacted with gender – education, experience, race, occupation, industry, and veteran, marital, and
immigrant status, in an equation of the form
ln wij = Xiwj
The coefficient

j

w

+

j

+ ewj
i .

(8)

are normalized to have an average of zero and equated with the wage differen-

tials, w^ j , interpreted as the causal effect of city j’s characteristics on a worker’s wages Accord10

j

ingly, city j 0 s average wage, ln w = X wj
composition effect, X wj

w

w

+

j

, is the sum of the location effect,

j

, and the

, predicted by local worker characteristics (see Appendix Figure A4).
j

Across metros, the standard deviation of ln w is 0.149, which is mainly accounted for by the locational effect,

j

, which has a standard deviation of 0.128. The standard deviation of X wj

w

is only

0.048, meaning that observed characteristics explain only a limited fraction of wage differences
across metropolitan areas . This may be surprising given the evidence on residential sorting (e.g.
Epple and Sieg, 1999), although this is focused on sorting within metropolitan areas: sorting across
metropolitan areas appears more limited, perhaps because of the complementarity of different labor types within local labor markets. Differences in
j

w

by city, which leads to heterogeneity in

by type, are not dealt with until section 5.4, although Appendix Figure A1 shows that location

effects are remarkably similar across education groups, meaning the labor skills are somewhat,
albeit not completely uniformly priced: these differences are investigated in section 5.4.
The estimates of

j

may be biased by selection according to unobserved skills: if this causes

wages in larger cities to be overestimated, than their QOL will be underestimated, since workers are
receiving less actual compensation to live in them. To control for sorting, I re-estimate the location
effects dropping all observations from workers who live in metropolitan areas that do not contain
their state of birth. The location effects without migrants are almost identical – regressing them on
the original effects yields a coefficien statistically indistinguishable from one (1.033, s.e. 0.026),
and a root mean squared error of only 0.015 – suggesting that selection effects are unimportant.15
Both housing values and gross rents, including utilities, are used to calculate housing-cost dif15

Place of birth is not available at the sub-state level. This classificatio of movers follows that of Beaudry, Doms,
and Lewis (2010). In the literature, Glaeser and Maré (2001), Moretti (2004), and Baum-Snow and Pavan (2010) argue
that the urban-rural wage gap is largely unaffected by selection bias, while Combes, Duranton and Gobillon (2008)
argue that it is. The wage differentials could also be too small as some of the worker characteristics controlled for,
such as occupation or industry, could depend on where the worker locates, although removing these controls has only
a minute effect on the location effects.
Adjustment for unionization rates, which in 2000 range from 34.4 percent MN in Duluth to 0.6 percent in Hickory,
NC, was also considered with data from Hirsch and Macpherson (2003). Lewis (1986) concludes that unions raise
wages by approximately 15 percent. If higher wages are not absorbed by a higher cost-of-living – perhaps through
restricted entry into union jobs – then this could cause after-tax real incomes to be up to 2.5 percent higher in Duluth
relative to Hickory for reasons independent of local amenities, causing QOL to be underestimated in highly unionized
areas. QOL estimates amended for unionization, are only slightly different than the ones reported. Since it is unclear
whether unions actually raise wages (Dinardo and Lee 2004) without raising costs-of-living, the estimates are not
adjusted for unionization.

11

ferentials. To be consistent with previous studies, imputed rents are converted from housing values
using a discount rate of 7.85 percent (Peiser and Smith 1985), to which utility costs are added:
this makes imputed rents comparable to the gross rents available for rental units. To avoid measurement error from imperfect recall or rent control, the sample includes only units acquired in
the last ten years. Housing-cost differentials are calculated in a manner similar to wage differentials, using a regression of gross rents on fl xible controls (Xipj ) - interacted with tenure - for size,
rooms, acreage, commercial use, kitchen and plumbing facilities, type and age of building, and the
number of residents per room.
ln pji = Xipj
The coefficient

j

p

+

j

+ epj
i .

(9)

are used as the housing-cost differentials, and are interpreted to measure how

much costlier a standard unit of housing in city j is relative to the national average. Unobserved
differences in housing quality may bias estimates of

j

, so that places with nicer houses are mis-

perceived to have a higher QOL. Yet the standard deviation of log housing cost is 0.277 log points,
while for observable differences it is only 0.073 (see Appendix Figure A4).16

3.3

Calculating and Visualizing Quality-of-Life Estimates

Figure 1 graphs the wage and cost differentials for different cities, with w^ on the horizontal axis
and p^ on the vertical axis. The solid line corresponds to the mobility condition (2),
j

p^ =

0

1
sy

sw w^ j +

1 ^j
Q;
sy

(10)

^ j = 0. Along this line, costs rise with wage levels so that
for cities with an average QOL, i.e. Q
after-tax real incomes remain constant, as workers are paying to locate by well-paying jobs. When
costs in a city are above this line, the city is inferred to have a higher QOL in proportion to the
16

Since an indicator variable is used to control for rental units, this discount rate only affects the relative valuation of
housing to utilities, and not to rental units. Malpezzi, Chun, and Green (1998) argue that housing-price indices derived
from the Census perform as well or better than most other indices. I combine housing costs and rents to avoid issues
of differing home-ownership rates across metro areas. Appendix B.2 presents evidence that rent and housing-cost
differenctials are generally similar in 2000, except in the costliest cities.

12

distance from the line.
Table 1 lists wage, housing-cost, and QOL differentials for several metropolitan areas, the
nine Census divisions, and for metropolitan areas of different population sizes. Appendix Table
A1 presents estimates for all metro and non-metro areas; Appendix Table A2 presents estimates
for the states. Pacifi locations score the highest, and other cities in the West do well: Honolulu
(#1), San Francisco (#4) and San Diego (#8) are in the top 10; Los Angeles, Seattle, Denver, and
Portland are all in the top 40. On the East Coast, Miami (#39), Boston (#45), and New York (#51)
are the best large cities. Cities in the Midwest and in the South generally fare less well, although
New Orleans and Chicago are above average.
QOL estimates using an (unadjusted) parametrization typical of the previous literature may be
visualized using the dashed line in Figure 1, which has slope of 4. Unlike the solid line, the dashed
line passes under most of the smaller cities in the sample, giving them a higher inferred QOL
than in the adjusted case, and above most of the larger cities, giving them a lower inferred QOL.
The adjusted QOL, using the favored parametrization, are graphed against the unadjusted QOL
estimates in Figure 2, which displays just how different they are: when weighted by population,
the correlation between the estimates is almost zero.
The largest discrepancies are in large cities, where both wages and costs are high, and smaller
cities, where the opposite is true. While the adjusted estimates indicate a small positive relationship
between population size and QOL, the unadjusted estimates indicate a starkly negative relationship.
The unadjusted parametrization overstates the nominal income gain and understates the cost-ofliving loss from moving to larger cities, causing their QOL to be underestimated.17
Regressing QOL on wage levels and housing costs predicted by worker and housing composi17
Most previous studies used the projection of the unadjusted QOL estimates onto the space of individual amenities
used in their regression analysis, a procedure which may have mitigated some of the problems with the unadjusted
parametrization. Beeson and Eberts (1989) were the firs authors to use the aggregate QOL measure seen here,
although their study was limited to the 35 largest cities, largely obscuring the implied negative relationship between
QOL and city size. My analysis with 1980 Census data – the same data used by Blomquist, Berger, and Hoehn (1988),
Beeson and Eberts (1989), and Gyourko and Tracy (1991) – suggests that adjusted and unadjusted QOL estimates are
more positively correlated in 1980 than in 2000, although the differences in 1980 are still substantial. Adjusted QOL
estimates from 1980 still reveal a positive, albeit statistically insignificant relationship between QOL and city size.

13

tion yields
^j =
Q

0:36 X wj

w

(0:09)
The predicted coefficien on X wj

0:43 X wp

p

+ ej

R2 = 0:36

(0:09)
w

is 0:51"Q;m , where "Q;m is the elasticity of QOL with re-

spect to income. Hence, "Q;m appears to be positive, but not larger than one, although this may
be confounded if skills and QOL are substitutes. The predicted coefficien on X pj

j

is

"y;m ,

where "y;m is the income elasticity of housing. This value is somewhat below the typical range
for "y;m , between 0.7 and 1.0 (Harmon 1988), but this could reflec that housing and amenities are
complements.18

3.4

A Test of the Parametrized Mobility-Condition Slope

The dotted line in Figure 1, estimated by regressing housing costs on wage level, motivates a test
of the parameter choices, as the difference between this line and the calibrated mobility condition
implies a statistical relationship between observed wages and unobserved QOL. Write the linear
^ j = Zj
projection of QOL on wages and an incomplete vector of amenities as Q

Q

+ bQ w^ j +

j

,

where by construction E [ j jZj ; w^ j ] = 0. Then, according to (10), the expectation of p^j conditional
on Zj and w^ j is
E p^j jZj ; w^ j = Zj

Q+

0

1
sy

sw +

bQ
sy

w^ j

Zj

Q

+ bw w^ j

(11)

The coefficien bw is the slope of the mobility condition under the correct parametrization, (1
0

)sw =sy , plus a term which depends on the residualized correlation of QOL with wage levels, bQ .

If bQ = 0 without any amenity controls, then the mobility condition is given by the regression line.
Moreover, any parametrization implies a value of bQ = sy bw
18

(1

0

) sw : Estimated values of bw

If unobserved skills are positively related with observed skills, this regression suggests that unobserved skills may
be positively related with QOL, causing QOL differences to be underestimated in cities with greater skills, such as in
some larger cities. As QOL and observable housing characterstics are negatively related, QOL may be overestimated
in cities with nicer housing, such as in some smaller cities.

14

and implied values of bQ are reported in table 2.19
If QOL could be observed, then a direct regression of (10) would provide an unbiased estimate
of (1

0

) sw =sy , as bQ would be reduced to zero. Since QOL is unobserved, the best approach is

to control for observed amenities to minimize bQ , and to test whether the estimated bw is different
from the parametrized slope. The test results shown in columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 reveal that
estimates of bw are close to the adjusted parametrization, and far from the unadjusted one, which
can only be correct if unobserved amenities are correlated very negatively with wage levels.20

3.5

Relationship with Other QOL Measures

Another check on the validity of the revealed-preference QOL estimates is to consider how they
correlate with city rankings based on other methods. As explained in Becker et al. (1987), the
Places Rated Almanac ranks cities along nine dimensions: climate, crime, health care, transportation, education, arts and culture, recreation, housing costs, and job outlook. These nine rankings
are averaged geometrically to determine an overall "livability" ranking. The rankings are sensitive
to many subjective decisions, but do have a certain plausibility that account for their popularity. As
seen in Panel A of Table 3, the correlation between the Places Rated and adjusted QOL rankings
is positive, while it is negative with the unadjusted QOL ranking. An issue with the "livability"
index is that it incorporates cost-of-living and job-market components that do not belong in the
revealed-preference QOL ranking. The economic QOL measure assumes that all cities are equally
good once costs-of-living and labor markets are accounted for, while Places Rated looks for cities
that offer the most valuable amenities at the lowest cost, similar to the "Best Value" recommendations seen in Consumer Reports. When recalculated to remove these components, the Places
Rated ranking is correlated more positively with the adjusted ranking and more negatively with the
19

The restriction bQ = 0 is implicitly assumed but not theoretically justifie by Glaeser, Kolko, and Saiz (2002)
It is worth noting that the parameters were intially chosen in order to predict the effect of federal taxes in Albouy
(2009a), and not to estimate QOL. Also, most of the amenity measures in the regression were chosen prior to the
development of this test. Thus, this test does not suffer from conventional pre-test bias.
20

15

unadjusted ranking.21
I also construct a ranking based on stated preferences from the Pew Research Center by Taylor
et al. (2009). Respondents were named 10 cities in random order and asked "As I read through
the following places, just tell me your firs reaction: would you want to live in this city or its
surrounding metropolitan area or NOT want to live there?" The percent of "yes" and "no" responses
are used to construct stated-preference rankings of 28 cities, which, as seen in Panel B of Table 3,
are positively correlated with both QOL rankings, especially the adjusted one.22
The QOL estimates here also differ substantially from other revealed-preference estimates in
the economic literature. As seen in Panel C, at the state level, the QOL estimates in Gabriel, Mattey
and Wascher (2003) are correlated weakly to the adjusted estimates, but strongly to the unadjusted
ones. As seen in Panel D, at the metro level, the QOL estimates in Chen and Rosenthal (2008) are
correlated positively with the adjusted estimates and even more so with the unadjusted estimates,
especially when non-metro areas are included. The similarity with the adjusted estimates arises as
Chen and Rosenthal use a wage/housing cost weight of 2.86 – the smallest in the previous literature
– although they still rank large cities like New York and Chicago well below average.23
21

An additional support for the adjusted QOL estimates is provided by Carlino and Saiz (2008), who fin that the
adjusted QOL estimates are positively correlated with the number of tourist visits in a city.
22
This ranking has shortcomings as they are from 2008 and respondents were not told to ignore labor-market opportunities or cost-of-living, and all of the listed cities are fairly large. Nonetheless, the answers are likely to reflec
cities that respondents consider to have an attractive QOL.
23
Gabriel, Mattey, and Wascher (2003) use an effective wage/housing-cost weight of 3:72, taking into account their
use of ACCRA data for non-housing costs. Shapiro (2006) takes into account non-housing costs, but never provides
QOL measures.

16

4

Quality of Life and Individual Amenities

4.1

Two-Step Estimates

Based on hedonic theory, the QOL values may be used to estimate how much value households
put on particular amenities from a second-step regression
^j =
Q

X

Q j
k Zk

+ "Qj ,

(12)

k

where

k

=

~
(@E=@Q) @ Q=@Z
k =m measures the fraction of gross income a household is

willing to pay for one more unit of amenity k. Multiplying this coefficien by average gross household income ($68,000 in 2000) produces the dollar value. The residual "Qj results from measurement error, unobserved amenities, mis-specification and unobserved differences in housing quality
and worker skills. The separate contribution of wage and housing-cost effects are presented from
regressions
w^ j =

X

Zkj

w
k

+ "wj ; p^j =

k

where the model implies that

Q
k

= sy

X

Zkj

p
k

+ "pj ,

(13)

k

p
k

0

(1

)sw

w
k:

Beginning with Rosen (1979), previous studies have typically estimated amenity values using
individual-level wage and housing-cost equations like (8) and (9), with a vector of amenity variables in place of MSA dummy variables, essentially substituting in (13). This one-step method
produces estimates of

p
k

and

w
k

similar to the two-step method outlined above when the same

amenities and weights are used in both equations (Ameniya 1978). The QOL estimates reported
^ j = P ^ Q Z j , which depends on the amenities chosen and
are typically from the prediction Q
k
k k
ignores the residual, "Qj . Issues around clustering can cause standard errors from the one-step

method to be too small (Gyourko, Kahn, and Tracy 1999), while the two-step method provides conservative standard errors (Wooldridge 2003) and a coefficien of multiple correlation (R-squared),
describing how much QOL is explained by measured amenities.24
24

Clustering at the city level in the one-step method produces standard errors for amenity values similar to those in

17

Whatever the specifi method, inferring specifi amenity values with cross sectional data faces
many conventional potential pitfalls. There is a high degree of collinearity between the amenity
variables, making it difficul to obtain precise estimates for a reasonably large set of variables. Unmeasured amenities, such as a city’s downtown charm, may contribute to omitted variable biases.
Furthermore, artificia amenities may be highly endogenous, subjecting their estimated values to
additional skepticism. Yet, oftentimes there is no other recourse, due to the unavailability of natural experiments and confounding factors in the dynamics of urban price and wage changes over
time.

4.2

Dependence of Quality of Life on Amenities

Table 4 presents amenity-value estimates, with each measure signed so that each is an amenity,
which a priori should yield a positive valuation. Column 1, which includes only natural amenities,
estimates that households pay 0.89 percent of income to live in areas with 1000 fewer heating
degree days, which translates to 3.9 percent of income for all excessive cold in a typical area; for
cooling degree days the estimate is 3.13, which translates to 4.0 percent of income to eliminate
a typical area’s excessive heat. Households pay 2.9 percent of income to live in areas where 10
percent more of the day is sunny (1.29 standard deviations), 1.7 percent of income to live in areas
with a standard deviation higher inverse distance to the coast, and 2.7 percent of income to live
in areas where the average slope is 10 percent higher. It is questionable whether these measures
reflec true valuations of these amenities, but they seem plausible and it is remarkable that these
f ve variables explain 70 percent of the variation in the adjusted QOL measure. As seen in columns
2 and 3, the amenity variables are better at explaining housing costs than wages. Estimates with the
unadjusted QOL measures in column 4, more reliant on wages, explain less and lack plausibility,
with households paying to live in hot areas away from the coast, without caring significantl about
cold or sunshine.25
the two-step method. Technically, the cities should be weighted by the predicted income of the inhabitants, although
for transparency and simplicity, I weight them by population here, which produces almost identical results.
25
Additional climate measures, such as annual rainfall, wind speed or humidity are generally not significan in these
regressions. Separating Great Lake coasts from salt-water coasts results in slightly higher, but insignif cantly different,

18

Columns 5 through 6 add artificia amenities. The adjusted estimates show that households
have a high willingness-to-pay to live in areas with many eating and drinking establishments, arts
and culture, and better air quality. However, there is no significan association between estimated
QOL and indices of either property or violent crime. This demonstrates the limitations of the
hedonic approach, especially for amenities that vary significantl within a metropolitan area.26
Nevertheless, the estimates appear better adjusted, as they fin coasts, culture, and sunny, temperate
climates to be goods.27

4.3

Amenities and City Size

Urban amenities and disamenities depend largely on urban population and density, including safety,
cleanliness, and cultural and consumption (Rosen 1979; Glaeser, Kolko and Saiz 2001). Including
a metropolitan population variable in (12) helps to account for the amenities, observed or not, that
are correlated with or endogenously result from city size. Columns 1 and 2 in Panel A of Table 5 report that population is related positively to adjusted QOL, but very negatively to unadjusted QOL,
demonstrating the anti-urban bias in the previous literature. Controlling for amenities in columns
3 through 6 causes the relationship to disappear with adjusted QOL, but not with unadjusted QOL.
The positive relationship between adjusted QOL and population is due to cities being larger where
there is a nicer climate and geography, reflectin the household location choices noted by Rappaport and Sachs (2003) and Rappaport (2007). Using a density measure in place of a density
measure in Panel B, produces rather similar results, albeit slightly in favor of denser cities being
nicer places to live.28
valuations for sea coasts.
26
Rosenthal and Ross (2010) argue that economically vibrant areas are favored targets for crime, further complicating the ability to identify the value of safety from cross-sectional data.
27
Commuting time is not entered as an independent variable as this is an endogenous variable from the individual’s
viewpoint. Workers should be willing to commute longer hours in order to live in a more desirable metropolitan area.
Empirically, the elasticity of commuting time with respect to population size is roughly 0.10. Assuming commuting
takes 10 percent of the working day and monetary costs are 5 percent of income, this implies that commuting increases
the elasticity of QOL with respect to population by 0.015:
28
While this analysis find that there is no empirical relationship between city size and QOL it does not definit vely
prove that there is no causal relationship. The slightly positive relationship between QOL and population is reduced to
zero once natural amenities are controlled for, as the population size endogenously depends on available amenities. It

19

5
5.1

Taste Heterogeneity and Imperfect Mobility
Amending the Basic Model

There are many ways to model heterogenous households, many of them perplexing. But it is
possible to incorporate a continuous form of heterogeneity into the model that is tractable and
useful for understanding a number of phenomena. Suppose that QOL in city j is dependent on a
universal component Qj , and a household-specifi component,
hold i in city j is Qji = Qj ij . Furthermore, assume that
1= : F ( ij ) = 1
with

( = ij )1= ;

j
i

. A higher

j
i

j
i,

so that overall QOL for house-

is Pareto distributed with parameter

implies greater heterogeneity in preferences,

= 0 corresponding to the model with homogenous preferences. For simplicity, assume

j
that the outside utility for households is given by a constant u. For some given constant, Nmax
,

there exists a marginal household k with taste parameter
j
Pr(
N j = Nmax

j
i

j
k)

j
[1
= Nmax

j
k,

so that the population in city j is

j
F ( kj )] = Nmax
( = kj )1= . Hence,

j
log N j = ln Nmax
+

1

[log

log

j
k ].

(14)

Fully differentiating the equilibrium condition (1), treating N as an endogenous variable, and
^j =
noting that (14) implies N

^j = ; leads to an extended version of equation (2):
k
sy p^j

sw (1

0

^j
)w^ j = Q

^ j.
N

(15)

This says that the marginal willingness-to-pay to live in city j, given by the left-hand side, decreases by

percent of income, when the population increases by one percent.

metrize household mobility, with

= 0 and

may para-

= 1 characterizing perfect mobility and im-

is conceivable that, holding natural amenities fi ed, adding population to existing cities could lower QOL by increasing
artificia urban disamenities. For this hypothesis to hold, there should be some unobserved, presumably natural,
amenity that when controlled for would make the QOL-population gradient negative. Nevertheless, if this hypothesis
is true, then controlling for artificia amenities should cause the population-QOL gradient to rise, which it did not
appreciably, as controlling for urban disamenities should have made larger cities more attractive. Furthermore, since
the measured amenities explain much of the existing variation in QOL, it is difficul to imagine that there is such an
important unmeasured amenity that is unaccounted for.

20

mobility, respectively. Rearranging (15) provides an upward-sloping local-labor supply curve
in terms of wages and QOL, as well as a downward-sloping demand curve in terms of local
^ j = [sw (1
prices: N

0

) w^ j

j

^ ]= . The more willingness-to-pay to live in a city varies
sy p^j + Q

across individuals, the less elastic is its labor supply, as inframarginal households need to be paid
an increasing premium to move to it.

5.2

Population Level and Density

^ j , may be measured depends on how N
^ j is interpreted.
How the universal QOL component, Q
j
^ j as the population deviation from the national average, whereby Nmax
is constant
Interpreting N

across cities, is a natural way to account for preference heterogeneity. If a small number of individuals enjoy an amenity, say a coastal location, the few who enjoy it will likely have the highest
marginal willingness-to-pay for it. Such is seen in discrete-choice models – which, as shown in
Appendix A.4, can produce equation (15) – since they are identifie off of the population shares
residing in different locations. This implies that more populous cities offer a higher QOL than is
implied by wages and costs alone: if two cities offer the same wages and costs, the more populated
city is deemed the one most amenable to the typical individual.
When considering tastes for city size, it may be better to characterize cities according to population size alone as the taste components,

j
i,

should be correlated across cities of the same size.

In this case, Zipf’s (1949) law for cities – the empirical findin that a city’s population is inversely
proportional to its rank, confirme for the U.S. by Ioannides and Overman (2003) – implies that the
population is uniformly distributed across city sizes. Thus, adjusting for heterogenous preferences
does not change the conclusion that households are, on the margin, indifferent over city sizes.
Regressions of city size on amenities, seen in column 1 of Table 6, show a positive relationship
between population size and coastal proximity, although that is the only significan natural amenity.
Due to what are surely endogenous processes, there are also positive relationships with arts and
culture, air pollution, and violent crime. The relationship with property crime is negative, as it is
with restaurants and bars per capita, although both estimates are susceptible to division bias, since
21

the measures are per capita. Since the land areas of cities increase with size, it may be preferable to
consider the relationship between population density and amenities, as this effectively treats each
acre of land as a separate choice. As seen in column 2, population density is positively related to
both sunshine and coastal proximity, as well as arts and culture, but not significantl to the other
variables.
The use of population levels or densities to value amenities is problematic if place-specifi
tastes depend on local attachments, which are state dependent on previous population levels. These
levels depend on previous local employment and housing opportunities, as well as amenities. Thus,
Detroit may have a large population not because it offers a high QOL relative to its real-wage level,
but because of its once vibrant economy. Existing residents have attachments to the area, but these
are not of value to potential migrants.

5.3

Population Growth and Labor-Market Disequilibrium

^ j is better measured as the deviation relative to a previous population
In certain applications, N
j
level, say where Nmax
is determined by previous population levels. Viewed dynamically, migration

fl ws are expected to occur to cities where real wages are high relative to universal QOL, i.e. to
cities that are "under-priced" relative to the amenities they offer. This disequilibrium may reflec
factor imbalances that will be corrected for. In principle,

should fall towards zero as the time-

period in question expands: location-specifi tastes are more homogenous over the long run, as
households adapt to local amenities, lose attachments to old locations, and amortize moving costs
over a longer time period. Indeed, most Americans originate from populations in the Old World
that migrated less than two centuries ago. But in the shorter-run, households must be offered a
real-wage premium to move, and a larger premium attracts more migrants. It may also reflec
that recent migrants may not receive as much of a premium as existing residents, at least at first
This insight provides a micro-foundation for the disequilibrium model in Greenwood et al. (1991),
whereby a city’s QOL is measured through a weighted combination of its population growth and

22

minus its real income.29
Figure 3 illustrates how city growth may be used to amend QOL estimates by plotting population changes between 1980 and 2000 against the original adjusted QOL estimates. This adjustment
increases the value of fast-growing cities, like Las Vegas, Phoenix, and Atlanta. Slower-growth
cities like Pittsburgh, Chicago, and New York, should have their QOL estimates lowered as workers there accept a real wage discount to preserve their local attachments. The positive correlation
between growth rates and the adjusted QOL measures suggests that QOL differences may be larger
than the original measure and that households may have an increasing preference for non-market
goods. Gibrat’s law for cities (Gabaix 1999) – the empirical findin that population growth rates
are independent of city size – implies that adjusting for population growth should not bias preferences towards or against city size.
A regression based on population growth in Column 3 of Table 6 find that warm areas are
gaining population, consistent with Glaeser and Tobio (2007), so that aversion to heat may be
overvalued in Table 4. Sunny and sloped areas are also growing, meaning those amenities deserve
higher values. Coastal proximity is negatively related to growth, as coastal areas have largely fille
up: thus, as implied by the "superstar cities" hypothesis of Gyourko, Mayer and Sinai (2006)
– amenities in tight supply see their marginal valuation rise at a faster rate than their average
valuation, as the national population grows. Growth rates are positively related to arts and culture,
and negatively with violent crime, although these effects could be endogenous. Yet, while growth
should increase pollution, populations are migrating towards areas with cleaner air.30
Combining growth rates with wage and housing costs to measure QOL and amenity values
requires determining the weight . This is a behavioral parameter that can be estimated off of the
29
Greenwood et al. (1991) separately estimate actual and equilibrium real wages, and fin that in only 7 out of
51 cases are the two the statistically different at the 90 percent significanc level (Hunt 1993). Their QOL estimates
depend inversely on real wages and emigration, but are not adjusted for federal taxes or non-labor income. They are
higher for Arkansas, Mississippi, and South Dakota than they are for Hawaii and California.
30
Quigley and Raphael (2005), Glaeser, Gyourko, and Saks. (2005), and Gyourko, Mayer, and Sinai (2006) argue
that supply restrictions on housing in areas, such as California, have caused housing costs in these areas to increase
disproportionately without wage or amenity improvement. Yet, in the traditional Rosen-Roback model with homogenous households, supply restrictions in a single city raise housing costs nationwide but do not increase the relative
price in that city, holding wages constant, although they do reduce local population.

23

impact of labor demand shocks on wages and housing costs, assuming that QOL are unaffected by
those shocks. Estimates in this style from Notowidigdo (2010) show wages and housing costs move
closely together, implying small values of , around 0.05 or below, although an extreme value of
= 0:1 is used here for illustration and to account for possible QOL endogeneity.31 Dashed
lines tracing out cities with the same amended QOL are drawn in Figure 3. Column 4 of Table
5 presents amended amenity valuations using a value of

= 0:1, which show a somewhat more

balanced dislike for heat relative to cold, stronger tastes for slopes, culture, and air quality, and
weaker tastes for coastal location. Interestingly, these reduced-form results reflec core finding
in the structural migration models of Bishop (2008) and Sinha and Cropper (2009), who fin very
large valuations for clean air and warm weather, respectively, as their estimation technique puts
weight on growth (i.e. ) that is quite large relative to wages and costs.

5.4

Preference Heterogeneity across Observed Types

Several studies have given considerable attention to how households with different skills value
amenities differently. Differencing (15) for two different household types

(1

0
^1j
1 )sw1 w

(1

The standard case assumes

0
^2j
2 )sw2 w

1

=

2

=

j

^
(Q
1

^ j ) + (sy1
Q
2

sy2 )^
pj + (

^j
1 N1

^j
2 N2 )

(16)

= 0, so that type 1 is paid a premium relative to type 2, i.e.

^ j2 ; ii) is in a costlier city and has a
^ j1 < Q
w^1j > w^2j if it i) enjoys the amenities of the city less, Q
higher housing expenditure share, sy1 p^j > sy2 p^j ; and also if it iii) faces a higher marginal tax rate,
0
1

>

0
2;

or iv) receives a smaller share of income from labor, sw1 > sw2 . Definin s~w

31

(1

0

)sw

Notowidigdo (2010, Tables 2 and 4) find that over 10 years a positive employment shock that leads to 1.8
point increase in population, leads to a 0.52 point increase in wages and a 0.80 increase in housing costs. Using the
calibration here, this is only a 0.01 increase in real income. The effect becomes larger with the size of the shock,
increasing to 0.03 with a positive shock of one standard deviation. The linearized derivative, a good indicator of , is
approximately 0.05. However, if QOL improves differentially in growing areas, which it may, this parameter will be
biased downwards.

24

and assuming
s~w (w^2j

1

=

2

= , we can rearrange (16) into the regression equation

w^1j ) = (~
sw1

where "j = (~
sw

s~w2 )(w^2j

s~w2 )w^ j + (sy2

w^ j )

(~
sw

j

^
sy1 )^
pj + ( Q
1
s~w1 )(w^1j

^j )
Q
2

^1j
(N

^2j ) + "j
N

(17)

w^ j ) is orthogonal to w^ j by construction.32

The left-hand side of (17) expresses the relative willingness-to-pay of type 1 households, as a
fraction of total income, for overall wage levels, w^ j , cost levels, p^j , and amenities. The last term,
^1j
(N

^2j ), expresses how higher relative wages elicits higher relative supplies. A positive
N

may be rationalized even in a static setting, if workers of different types are attached to each
other, and costly to separate. For instance, a family may have workers with different skills; see
also Heckman and Scheinkman (1987).
This model is illustrated here with two worker types: college (type 1) and high-school (type
2). Figure 4 graphs relative differences in their wages, w^1

^1j
w^2 ; and quantities, N

^2j , the
N

latter measured through a Katz and Murphy (1992) index.33 According to statistics from the SCF
and CEX, high-school workers get a greater share of their income from wages, with s~w1

s~w2 =

0:120, and spend a greater share of their income on housing and local goods, with sy2

sy1 =

0:061.34 Thus, they need to be paid relatively more to live in expensive areas, but will accept less
of a premium in areas where overall wage levels are high. Column 1 of Table 7 demonstrates that
this prediction is largely upheld. In principle, a regression of (17) should also be able to identify
32

This follows from w
^j = w
^1j + (1
)w
^2j and s~w = s~w1 + (1
)~
sw2 for the same constant , which is true
for = 0:55.
33
The Katz-Murphy Index determines the number of college (high school) workers by giving workers a weight of
1 (0) with a college degree, 0.38 (0.67) with some college, 0 (1) with a high-school degree, and -0.39 (1.11) with less
than a high-school degree. The weights for workers with some college or less than high school, are determined by
regressing their location effects on the location effects for college and high-school workers. The weights are somewhat
close to Katz and Murphy’s, despite the fact that the variation of wages is across metros, rather than across years.
34
According to the 2000 CEX, the gross expenditure share on shelter and utilities is 0.191 for college graduates and
0.227 for high-school graduates. If we inflat both of these shares by 1.69 to include non-housing goods, the shares
become 0.324 and 0.385. In the SCF, the ratio of family net worth to income for college-headed familes is 1.69 times
that of high-school-headed families, producing, sw1 = 0:706 while sw2 = 0:822. According to figure in Piketty
and Saez (2007), marginal federal taxes are about 2.5 percentage points lower for high-school incomes and 2.5 points
0
0
higher for college incomes. Thus (1
1 )sw1 = 0:460 and (1
2 )sw2 = 0:577: Notowidigdo (2010, Table 3) does
not fin significantl different effects of employment shocks on college and non-college workers, implying similar
values for 1 and 2 , although the model here refers to levels and not changes. Berry and Glaeser (2005) document
that human capital differences across cities doubled between 1970 and 2000.

25

^j
, and relative valuations for amenities, Q
1

^ j : With these additional variables in column 2,
Q
2

the coefficient on w^ j and p^j are both very close to their predicted values.35 The estimate of

is

negative, but small and insignificant This relative valuation for amenities are curious, suggesting
that college-educated households seem to have a weaker aversion to cold and a weaker taste for
coastal proximity, although these estimates could be biased by omitted amenities.36 The coefficien
on property crimes that high-school educated households have a greater aversion to property crime,
perhaps as they are more likely to locate in neighborhoods where it is concentrated.
A limitation with the above analysis is that relative wages depend only on labor-supply factors. To consider demand factors, assume that aggregate labor input in city production may
be aggregated according to a constant elasticity of substitution, , with aggregate labor N j =
P
[ g (Ajg Ngj )( 1)= ] =( 1) , where Ajg denotes the productivity of type g in city j. Then, relative
labor demand is decreasing in the relative wage and increasing with relative productivity, if
^1j
N

^2j =
N

(w^1j

1)(A^j1

w^2j ) + (

> 1:
(18)

A^j2 )

With (16), relative wage and quantity differences are determined in the case where sy1 = sy2 and
s~w1 = s~w2 :
w^1j
^1j
N

1
s~w +
1
^2j =
N
s~w +
w^2j =

h
h

(
s~w (

1)(A^j1

A^j2 )

1)(A^j1

or

positively when

^j )
Q
2

^j
A^j2 ) + (Q
1

Relative productivity differences appear in wage differences only if
dominant as

j

^
(Q
1

i

^j )
Q
2

> 0 and

(19)
i

(20)
6= 1, and become

! 1. Both relative productivity and QOL differences impact labor quantities
> 1, but become less important as

! 1.

The lack of a clear positive or negative relationship in Figure 4 between relative wages and
35
Using 1990 data, Black, Kolesnikova, and Taylor (2009) fin similar results for sy , but do not calibrate the
prediction or control for overall wage levels. The prediction does not hold with 2000 data without controlling for the
overall wage level.
36
Without conditioning on wages and costs, coastal proximity has a positive correlation with relative college-worker
willingness-to-pay as well as supply.

26

supplies across cities suggests that neither supply nor demand factors dominate their relationship.
The figur includes an upward-sloping hypothetical relative indifference curve, using
and s~w = 0:51 in w^1

^1
w^2 = ( =~
sw )(N

= 0:1

^2 ), derived from (16) assuming equal prices, costs,
N

and amenity values: areas to the lower-right of this relative supply curve are predicted to have
higher costs, lower overall wages, or better amenities for college relative to high-school workers.
A downward-sloping hypothetical substitution locus for firm is also drawn, using
w^1

w^2 =

^1
(1= )(N

= 2 using,

^2 ), derived from (18) assuming equal productivities: cities to the
N

upper-right of this relative demand curve may offer productive advantages to college workers.37
Notice that if

= 0, the supply curve is horizontal, meaning that college-educated households

have stronger preferences for Las Vegas and Texarkana, and weaker preferences for Washington,
DC and New York. The sloped line with

= 0:1 reverses these relative preferences, making them

more plausible, and attributes the relative wage differences to high-school workers being relatively
productive in Las Vegas and less so in Washington.38
The amended valuations in column 4 combine the valuations in column 2 with the relative
supply amounts in column 3, attaching a weight of

= 0:1 to them, assuming this weight was in-

correctly estimated in column 2. These results mainly reinforce previous ones, but also strengthen
the evidence that college-educated workers have a greater demand for arts and culture and clean
air, although they could be affecting their supply as well as their demand.
37

The elasticity is calibrated to model productivity feedbacks. If productivity depends on absolute productivity
^j N
^ j ) + (A^j A^j ). then a
differences and the relative supply of workers of one’s own type: A^j1 A^j2 = A (N
1
2
1
2
feedback-corrected elasticity of substitution is
= =[1
1)].
= 2 is consistent with = 1:4 from
A(
Katz and Murphy (1992) and A = 0:075. Berry and Glaeser (2005) present a model where relative productivity
differences affect relative wage levels but implicitly assume = 1. Positive feedbacks in prefernces can increase the
^ j = Q (N
^j N
^ j ) + (Q
^j Q
^ j ), then a feed-back correccted
^j Q
tendency to sort, if Q
=
Q.
2
1
1
1
2
2
38
Another possibility is that > 0 controls for selection bias if worker types with better unobserved skills sort
preferentially into areas where a greater number of them live. For example, New York may have a high measure of
relative wages for college workers because of sorting rather than supply and demand factors, which is reflecte in the
relatively larger supply of these workers.

27

6

Conclusion

Neither population size nor density appear to negatively impact American QOL in modern times:
it appears that urbanization’s amenities largely compensate for its disamenities. Thus, there is
no reason to see urbanization as lowering economic welfare, undermining arguments for policies
to disperse the population to mitigate negative urban externalities. While most policy-makers
are concerned about improving the amenities in their cities, the fact that most QOL differences
are explained by natural amenities suggests that policy-makers should also consider ways to help
households move to places with greater sun, mountains, coastal proximity, or temperate seasons.
For instance, they could consider relaxing restrictions to residential development on lands wellendowed by nature, as higher densities are unlikely to reduce, and may even improve, local QOL.
Methodologically, it is encouraging that revealed-preference estimates of QOL are not at odds
with popular notions of what cities are nice places to live, although hedonic methods suggest
that certain amenities, such as climate and coastal proximity, may deserve greater weight than
popular rankings may put on them. This work may renew confidenc that revealed-preference and
hedonic methods, when properly applied, may produce sensible results even when relying on crosssectional data, although all of the estimates provided here certainly deserve greater scrutiny. Better
accounting for taxes, household incomes, and expenditures may also help to improve research on
QOL and local labor markets in future research.

References
Aizcorbe, Ana M., Arthur B. Kennickell, and Kevin B. Moore (2003) "Recent Changes in U.S.
Family Finances: Evidence from the 1998 and 2001 Survey of Consumer Finances." Federal Reserve Bulletin, 89, pp. 1-32.
Albouy, David (2009a), "The Unequal Geographic Burden of Federal Taxation." Journal of Political Economy 117(4), pp. 635-667.

28

Albouy, David (2009b), "What are Cities Worth? Land Rents, Local Productivity, and the Value of
Amenities." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 14981, Cambridge, MA.
Ameniya, Takeshi (1978), "A Note on a Random Coefficient Model." International Economics
Review, 19, pp. 793-796.
Barro, Robert (1974) "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political Economy, 82, pp.
1095-1117.
Baum-Snow, Nathaniel and Ronni Pavan (2010) "Understanding the City Size Wage Gap" mimeo.
Brown University.
Beaudry, Paul, Mark Doms, and Ethan Lewis (forthcoming) "Should the PC be Considered a Technological Revolution? Evidence from U.S. Metropolitan Areas." Journal of Political Economy.
Becker, Richard A., Lorraine Denby, Robert McGill, and Allan R. Wilks (1987) "Analysis of Data
From the Places Rated Almanac." The American Statistician, 41, pp. 169-186.
Beeson, Patricia E. (1991) "Amenities and Regional Differences in Returns to Worker Characteristics." Journal of Urban Economics, 30, pp. 224-241.
Beeson, Patricia E. and Randall W. Eberts (1989) "Identifying Productivity and Amenity Effects
in Interurban Wage Differentials." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 71, pp. 443-452.
Berger, Mark C, Glenn C. Blomquist, and Werner Waldner (1987) "A Revealed-Preference Ranking of Quality of Life for Metropolitan Areas." Social Science Quarterly, 68, pp. 761-778.
Berry, Christopher and Edward Glaeser (2005) "The Divergence of Human Capital Levels across
Cities." Regional Science 84(3), pp. 407-444.
Bishop, Kelly A. (2008) "Dynamic Model of Location Choice and Hedonic Valuation." Washington University mimeo.

29

Black, Dan, Natalia Kolesnikova, and Lowell Taylor (2009). "Earnings Functions When Wages
and Prices Vary by Location." Journal of Labor Economics, 27, pp. 21-47.
Black, Sandra E. (1999) "Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, pp. 577-599.
Blomquist, Glenn C., Mark C. Berger, and John P. Hoehn (1988) "New Estimates of Quality of
Life in Urban Areas." American Economic Review, 78, pp. 89-107.
Boskin, Michael J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Douglas J. Puffert, and John B. Shoven (1987) "Social
Security: A Financial Appraisal Across and Within Generations." National Tax Journal, 40, pp.
19-34.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2002) "Consumer Expenditures in 2000." Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office
Burnell, James D. and George Galster (1992) "Quality-of-life Measurements and Urban Size: An
Empirical Note." Urban Studies, 29, pp. 727-735.
Carlino, Gerald A. and Albert Saiz (2008) "City Beautiful." Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Working Paper No. 08-22.
Carrillo, Paul E., Dirk W. Early, and Edgar O. Olsen. (2010) "A Panel of Price Indices for Housing,
Other Goods, and All Goods for All Areas in the United States 1982-2008." mimeo, University of
Virginia.
Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone (2005) "Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the
Housing Market." Journal of Political Economy, 113, pp. 376-424
Chen, Yu and Stuart Rosenthal (2008) "Local Amenities and Life-Cycle Migration: Do People
Move for Jobs or Fun?" Journal of Urban Economics, 64, pp. 519–537.
Clark, David, James R. Kahn and Haim Ofek (1988) "City Size, Quality of Life, and the Urbanization Deflato of the GNP: 1910-1984." Southern Economic Journal, 54, pp. 701-714.
30

Combes, Pierre-Philippe, Gilles Duranton and Gobillon Laurent. (2008) "Spatial Wage Disparities:
Sorting Matters!" Journal of Urban Economics 63(2), pp. 723-742.
Davis, Morris and Francois Ortalo-Magne (2007) "Household Expenditures, Wages, and Rents."
mimeo, University of Wisconsin.
Dinardo, John and David S. Lee (2004) "Economic Impacts of New Unionization On Private Sector
Employers: 1984-2001." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, pp. 1383-1441.
Elgin, Duane, Tom Thomas, Tom Logothetti and Sue Cox (1974) "City Size and the Quality of
Life: An Analysis of the Policy Implications of Continued Population Concentration" U.S. Department of Health, Education & Welfare.
Epple, Dennis and Holger Sieg (1999) "Estimating Equilibrium Models of Locational Sorting."
Journal of Political Economy, 107(4), pp. 645-681.
Feenberg, Daniel R. and Elisabeth Coutts (1993), "An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model." Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12, pp. 189-194.
Feenberg, Daniel R., Andrew W. Mitrusi, and James M. Poterba (1997), "Distributional Effects
of Adopting a National Retail Sales Tax." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 5885, Cambridge, MA.
Gabaix, Xavier (1999) "Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114, pp. 739-767.
Gabriel, Stuart A., Joe P. Mattey, William L. Wascher (2003) "Compensating Differentials and
Evolution in the Quality-of-life among U.S. States." Regional Science and Urban Economics, 33,
pp. 619-649.
Gabriel, Stuart A. and Stuart S. Rosenthal (2004) "Quality of the Business Environment versus
Quality of Life: Do Firms and Households Like the Same Cities?" The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 86, pp.548-444.
31

Glaeser, Edward L. Joseph Gyourko and Raven E. Saks (2005) "Why Have Housing Prices Gone
Up?" American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 95, pp. 329-333.
Glaeser, Edward L., Jed Kolko, and Albert Saiz (2001) "Consumer City." Journal of Economic
Geography, 1, pp. 27-50.
Glaeser, Edward L. and David Maré (2001) "Cities and Skills." Journal of Labor Economics, 19,
pp. 316-342.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Kristina Tobio (2007) "The Rise of the Sunbelt." National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper No. 13071, Cambridge, MA.
Greenwood, Michael J., Gary L. Hunt, Dan S. Rickman, and George I. Treyz (1991) "Migration,
Regional Equilibrium, and the Estimation of Compensating Differentials." American Economic
Review, 81, pp. 1382-1390.
Gyourko, Joseph, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai (2006) "Superstar Cities." National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 12355, Cambridge, MA.
Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy (1989) "The Importance of Local Fiscal Conditions in Analyzing Local Labor Markets." Journal of Political Economy, 97, pp. 1208-31.
Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy (1991) "The Structure of Local Public Finance and the Quality
of Life." Journal of Political Economy, 99, pp. 774-806.
Gyourko, Joseph, Matthew Kahn and Joseph Tracy (1999) "Quality of Life and Environmental
Comparisons." in E. Mills and P. Cheshire, eds. Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics,
Vol. 3. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Heckman, James and Jose Scheinkman (1987) "The Importance of Bundling in a GormanLancaster Model of Earnings" The Review of Economic Studies, 54(2), pp. 243-255.

32

Hirsch, Barry T. and David A. Macpherson (2003) "Union Membership and Coverage Database
from the Current Population Survey: Note." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56, pp. 34954.
Hoch, Irving (1972) "Income and City Size." Urban Studies, 9, pp. 299-328.
Hoehn, John P., Mark C. Berger and Glenn C. Blomquist (1987) "A Hedonic Model of Interregional Wages, Rents, and Amenity Values." Journal of Regional Science, pp. 605-620.
Hunt, Gary L. (1993) "Equilibrium and Disequilibrium in Migration Modelling." Regional Studies,
27, pp. 341-349.
Ioannides, Yannis M. and Henry G. Overman (2003). "Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Empirical Examination." Regional Science and Urban Economics, 33(2), pp. 127-137.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy (1992) "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), pp. 35-78.
Kennan, John and James R. Walker (2003) "The Effect of Expected Income on Individual Migration Decisions." NBER Working Paper No. 9585. Cambridge, MA.
Koo, Jahyeoung, Keith R. Phillips, and Fiona D. Sigalla (2000) "Measuring Regional Cost of
Living." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 18, pp. 127-136.
Krueger, Alan B. (1999), "Measuring Labor’s Share." American Economic Review, 89, pp. 45-51.
Lambiri, Dionysia, Bianca Biagi, and Vicente Royuela (2007) "Quality of Life in the Economic
and Urban Economic Literature." Social Indicators Research, 84, pp. 1-25.
Lee, Sanghoon (2010) "Ability Sorting and Consumer City." Journal of Urban Economics 68, pp.
20-33.
Lewis, H. G. (1986) Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

33

Malpezzi, Stephen, Gregory H. Chun, and Richard K. Green (1998) "New Place-to-Place Housing
Price Indexes for U.S. Metropolitan Areas, and Their Determinants." Real Estate Economics, 26,
pp. 235-274.
Moretti, Enrico (2004) "Estimating the Social Return to Education: Evidence from Longitudinal
and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data." Journal of Econometrics, 121, pp. 175-212.
Moretti, Enrico (2008) "Real Wage Inequality." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 14370, Cambridge, MA.
Nordhaus, William D. and James Tobin (1972) "Is Growth Obsolete?" in Economic Research:
Retrospect and Prospect, Vol. 5. Economic Growth. New York: Columbia Univ. Press (for National
Bureau of Economic Research).
Notowidigdo, Matthew (2010) "The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks." mimeo, University of Chicago.
Peiser, Richard B. and Lawrence B. Smith (1985) "Homeownership Returns, Tenure Choice and
Inflation. American Real Estate and Urban Economics Journal, 13, pp. 343-60.
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez (2007) "How Progressive is the U.S. Federal tax system? A
Historical and International Perspective." Journal of Economic Perspectives , 21, pp. 3-24.
Quigley, John Q. and Stephen Raphael (2005) "Regulation and the High Cost of Housing in California." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 95, pp. 324-328.
Rappaport, Jordan (2007) "Moving to Nicer Weather." Regional Science and Urban Economics,
37, pp. 375-398.
Rappaport, Jordan (2008) "Consumption Amenities and City Population Density." Regional Science and Urban Economics, 38, pp. 533-552.
Rappaport, Jordan and Jeffrey D. Sachs (2003) "The United States as a Coastal Nation." Journal
of Economic Growth, 8, pp. 5-46.
34

Roback, Jennifer (1980) "The Value of Local Urban Amenities: Theory and Measurement." Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Rochester.
Roback, Jennifer (1982) "Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life." Journal of Political Economy,
90, pp. 1257-1278.
Roback, Jennifer (1988) "Wages, Rents, and Amenities: Differences among Workers and Regions." Economic Inquiry, 26, pp. 23-41.
Ruggles, Steven; Matthew Sobek; Trent Alexander; Catherine A. Fitch; Ronald Goeken; Patricia
Kelly Hall; Miriam King; and Chad Ronnander. (2004) Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:
Version 3.0. Minneapolis: Minnesota Population Center.
Rosen, Harvey (1985) "Housing Subsidies: Effects on Housing Decisions, Efficien y, and Equity."
in M. Feldstein and A. Auerbach, eds. Handbook of Public Economics, Vol.. 1, Amsterdam: North
Holland, pp. 375-420.
Rosen, Sherwin (1979) "Wages-based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life." in P. Mieszkowski and
M. Straszheim, eds. Current Issues in Urban Economics, Baltimore: John Hopkins Univ. Press.
Rosenthal, Stuart and Amanda Ross (2010) "Violent Crime, Entrepreneurship, and Cities." Journal
of Urban Economics 67, pp. 135-149.
Savageau, David (1999) Places Rated Almanac. Foster City, CA: IDG Books Worldwide.
Shapiro, Jesse M. (2006) "Smart Cities: Quality of Life, Productivity, and the Growth Effects of
Human Capital." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88, pp. 324-335.
Sinha, Paramita and Maureen Cropper (2009) "The Value of Climate Amenities: Evidence from
U.S. Migration Decisions." mimeo, University of Maryland.
Taylor, Paul, Rich Morin, Kim Parker, D’Vera Cohn, Wendy Wang (2009) "For Nearly Half of
America, Grass is Greener Somewhere Else." Pew Research Center.
35

Timmins, Christopher. (2007) "If You Cannot Take the Heat, Get Out of the Cerrado... Recovering
the Equilibrium Amenity Cost of Nonmarginal Climate Change in Brazil." Journal of Regional
Science, 47. pp. 1-25.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. (2003) "Cluster-Sample Methods in Applied Econometrics." American
Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 93, pp. 133-138.
Zipf, G. (1949) Human Behaviour and the Principle of Least Effort. Reading MA: AddisonWesley.

36

Appendix - Not for Publication
A
A.1

Additional Theoretical Details
Aggregation of Types

To aggregate types, let labor be aggregated according to the CES aggregator in section 5.4 and
for simplicity, that there are two goods: a good x traded across cities, and a home good, y, like
housing, that is not traded and has a price pj . Production is assumed to have constant returns to
scale in labor, which can differ by household, together with capital and home-goods, which can be
used as inputs. In equilibrium, because firm are mobile, the unit cost function for x must equal
the price of x, which is one
cX (w1j =Aj1X ; :::; wgj =AjGX ; pj ) = 1
Log-linearizing (A.1) around the national average
X
X
^gj + Y p^j =
gw
g

^j
g Ag

(A.1)

A^jX

g

where g is used to denote the cost-share of P
each labor type. Let the share of national income
accruing to type g worker be g = Ng mg = g0 Ng0 mg0 , defin the following income-weighted
averages
X
X
^j
^j
(A.3a)
sy =
g Qg ;
g syg ; Q =
g

g

and let sx = 1 sy .
A case worth considering is one where type-1 households receive all of their income from
wages, and type-2 households receive all their income from capital and land. This approximates
the situations of prime-age workers, whose incomes are fully tied to local-wage levels, and retirees,
whose incomes are completely independent of local-wage levels. Thus 1 = sw = sx 1 and
b
= 1 sw = sy +sx (1
1 ). In this situation, we expect 1-types to sort into high-wage cities, and
2-types into low-wage cities. Nevertheless, approximating around the average city where sorting
effects are neutralized,
sy1 p^j

0
^1j
1 )w
sy2 p^j

(1

^ j1
=Q
^ j2
=Q

Averaging these two equations according to their shares of total income, sw and 1 sw , produces
equation (2) in the main text. This result is more approximate in cities with prices and wages far
from the average, where sorting is more of an issue. A second-order approximation would require
that labor income be weighed more heavily in high-wage cities.
An advantage of using income-weighted averages is that it produces sensible comparative statics results when considering the effect of differences in QOL and productivity for either householdtype on wages and home-good prices. Ignoring taxes for expositional ease, solving the system
i

reveals the wage differential for a type 1 household:
sw1 w^1j =

1

sR

^b
sy1 Q

^a
sy2 Q

sx Y ^ j sy ^
Q + s x AX
sR 1 sR

(A.4)

where sR = sy + sx Y . The term beginning with 1 explains how type 1 is paid less in cities with
amenities it values relatively more. Both types are paid more in productive cities, A^X , regardless
of which type of labor is made more productive. The home-good and average wage differential,
weighted by wage-income shares, aggregate neatly into
p^j =
w^ j

1 ^ j sx ^j
Q + AX
sR
sR
X
1
^gj =
j swg w
sw g

(A.5)
^ j + sy sx A^j
Q
sR X
N sR
Y

(A.6)

reflectin how local QOL and productivity fully determine cost and wage differences across cities.

A.2

Functional Form and Aggregation over Incomes

Assume that utility takes the following form with separable labor supply and Q representing the
elasticity of substitution between Q and the composite commodity (x; y), where is homothetic:
U (x; y; Q) = !Q

Q 1
Q

+ (x; y)

Q 1
Q

Q
Q 1

Then it is possible to show that
@V =@Q
!
pQ =
=
@V =@m

m
Q

1
Q

where = the marginal utility of consumption. In the case where quality-of-life and consumption
are perfect substitutes, Q ! 1, then pQ = != , which is constant. If instead, preferences are
^ = ! dQ. Indifference curves for the two cases
Cobb-Douglas, Q = 1, then, pQ = !m=Q, and Q

ii

are illustrated below

m

m

Q

Q

Perfect Substitutes

Cobb-Douglas

In the perfect substitutes case, the willingness to pay for quality-of-life remains constant with income. In the Cobb-Douglas case, the willingness to pay rises proportionally with income. It is this
latter case which more consistent with the theoretical presentation and with the semi-logarithmic
functional forms justifie empirically in Section B.3.

A.3

Second-Order Approximation of the Mobility Condition

The first-orde approximation of QOL in equation (2) may be expanded into a second-order approximation, which solves the quadratic equation
1
^ j )2
(Q
sx + sy

sy
^ j +sy 1
p^ + 1 Q
sx + sy

1 c j j
p^ p^ (1
2

0

1
)sw 1 + "(1
2

where is the compensated elasticity of demand for home goods, and "(1
0
the marginal net of tax rate (1
) with respect to income, m, or
c

"(1

0)

=

0
d ln (1
)
=
d ln m
1

00
0

0)

0)

sw w^ j w^ j = 0

(A.7)
is the elasticity of

m

In a progressive tax system the marginal tax rate is increasing, so 00 > 0, implying that this
elasticity should be negative. Equation (A.7) accounts for three phenomena. First, if D < 1,
then the home-good expenditure share, sy , increases with p^j , as the demand for home goods is
inelastic. Second, because of progressivity, households who move to higher-wage areas pay a
0
higher tax rate, reducing the net-of tax rate (1
). Third, households in higher-wage areas
derive a larger fraction of income from labor sources, seen in an increasing sw .
The impact of using the second-order approximation is considered using parameter values of
c
and "(1 0 ) that lead to the largest plausible deviation from the first-orde approximation. A
value of c = 0:5 is close to the lower bound of plausible values from a variety of housing-demand
estimates, including Rosen (1985), Goodman and Kawai (1986), Goodman (1988) Ermisch, Findlay, and Gibb (1996), Goodman (2002), and Ionnides and Zabel (2003). Estimates of "(1 0 ) that I
obtained using data from Piketty and Saez (2007) are small, with a value of "(1 0 ) = 0:1 being
the furthest plausible value away from zero.
iii

^ j levels of 0.1, 0, and -0.1 are plotted in Figure
Using these values, mobility conditions for Q
A1 using the first-orde approximation, shown by the solid lines, and the second-order, shown by
the dashed lines. Overall, the firs and second-order approximations are similar. A closer look of
the second-order approximation suggests that the first-orde QOL estimates may be overestimated
in high-wage-high-cost areas, but only by a very small amount.

A.4

Discrete Choice Modeling

The model presented in (5.1) has very similar implications to the discrete choice model often used
in structural work. For a given individual i of type k, in city j, assume that the expenditure function
is given by
(A.8)
Eg (pj ; wgj ; ; u; Qjg ; ij ) = E~g (pj ; wgj ; ; Qjg ) exp( ij ) exp(u)
where and ij represents a taste parameter of person i for city j. With this specification we can
then represent indirect utility as quasilinear: Vigj
ln E~g (pj ; wgj ; ;Qjg ) + ij . Individuals will
choose the city that maximizes utiility, which assume for simplicity is known. Additionaly, assume
that ij follows a double-exponentiated (Gumbel) distribution with zero mean and variance 2 g2 =6.
Then the probability that someone of type g will occupy city j is
Pgj

=

Pr(Vigj

>

0
max
Vigj )
0
j 6=j

exp[ ln E~g (pj ; wgj ; ; Qjg )= g ]
=P
j
~ j j
j 0 exp[ ln Eg (p ; wg ; ; Qg )= g ]

The denominator on the right-hand side may be treated as a constant, B, since it does vary by city,
and since we are modeling a city which only contains a small portion of the total population. When
the total population is Ng , then the population of that type in city j is
Ngj = Ng Pgj =

1
exp[ ln E~g (pj ; wgj ; ; Qjg )=
B

g]

Taking logs and rearraning
g

ln Njk +

g

ln B =

ln E~g (pj ; wgj ; ; Qjg )

Log-linearizing this formula, treating B as a constant, gives
^j
g Ng

= swg (1

0
^gj
g )w

^j
bj + Q
syg p
g

which is a simple generalization of (15). The assumption of quasilinearity, which avoids the problem of modeling income effects, is fairly innocuous for marginal households, whose second option
^ j as a
offer almost the same utility as their firs choice. This model may be amended to have N
g
dynamic change, relative to a previous level, by incorporating a switching costs for moving from
one city to another, as seen in Kennan and Walker (2003).

iv

B
B.1

Data and Estimation Details
Wage and Housing Cost Data

I use United States Census data from the 2000 Integrated Public-Use Microdata Series (IPUMS),
from Ruggles et al. (2004), to calculate wage and housing price differentials. The average city
has 14,199 wage and 11,119 housing-price observations; the smallest city has 1093 wage and 817
housing-price observations.
The wage differentials are calculated for workers ages 25 to 55, who report working at least
30 hours a week, 26 weeks a year. The MSA assigned to a worker is determined by their place of
residence, rather than their place of work. The wage differential of an MSA is found by regressing
log hourly wages on individual covariates and indicators for a worker’s MSA of residence, using
the coefficient on these MSA indicators. The covariates consist of
12 indicators of educational attainment;
a quartic in potential experience, and potential experience interacted with years of education;
9 indicators of industry at the one-digit level (1950 classification)
9 indicators of employment at the one-digit level (1950 classification)
4 indicators of marital status (married, divorced, widowed, separated);
an indicator for veteran status, and veteran status interacted with age;
5 indicators of minority status (Black, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, and other);
an indicator of immigrant status, years since immigration, and immigrant status interacted
with black, Hispanic, Asian, and other;
2 indicators for English proficien y (none or poor).
All covariates are interacted with gender.
I firs run the regression using census-person weights. From the regressions a predicted wage
is calculated using individual characteristics alone, controlling for MSA, to form a new weight
equal to the predicted wage times the census-person weight. These new income-adjusted weights
are needed since workers need to be weighted by their income share (see Appendix A.1). The new
weights are then used in a second regression, which is used to calculate the city-wage differentials
from the MSA indicator variables. In practice, this weighting procedure has only a small effect on
the estimated wage differentials.
Housing-cost differentials are calculated using the logarithm of rents, whether they are reported
gross rents or imputed rents derived from housing values. Only housing units moved into within
the last 10 years are included in the sample to ensure that the price data are fairly accurate. The
differential housing cost of an MSA is calculated in a manner similar to wages, except using a
regression of the actual or imputed rent on a set of covariates at the unit level. The covariates for
the adjusted differential are
v

9 indicators of building size;
9 indicators for the number of rooms, 5 indicators for the number of bedrooms, number
of rooms interacted with number of bedrooms, and the number of household members per
room;
2 indicators for lot size;
7 indicators for when the building was built;
2 indicators for complete plumbing and kitchen facilities;
an indicator for commercial use;
an indicator for condominium status (owned units only).
I firs run a regression of housing values on housing characteristics and MSA indicator variables
using only owner-occupied units, weighting by census-housing weights. A new value-adjusted
weight is calculated by multiplying the census-housing weights by the predicted value from this
firs regression using housing characteristics alone, controlling for MSA. A second regression is
run using these new weights for all units, rented and owner-occupied, on the housing characteristics
fully interacted with tenure, along with the MSA indicators, which are not interacted. The houseprice differentials are taken from the MSA indicator variables in this second regression. As with
the wage differentials, this adjusted weighting method has only a small impact on the measured
price differentials.
Differences in wages and housing-costs predicted by observable characteristics are illustrated
in Appendix Figure A4.

B.2

Comparing Housing Costs and Rents

In measuring housing costs, it is sensible to use both rental and owner-occupied units, since together these capture the housing costs of residents in a city. Nevertheless, across cities the ratio of
housing prices to rents can vary substantially. Figure A2 graphs the housing-cost differentials used
above, which are based on both actual rents and imputed rents of owner-occupied units, against
actual rents. Across most cities, rent and housing-price differences are fairly similar, and so the
two measures are fairly close. In cities with housing-cost differentials above 0.2, such as Boston,
Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco, these housing-cost differentials are significantl larger
than rent differentials. Since housing prices should reflec the present value of the stream of future
rents, this suggests that relative rents in these cities were expected to rise, although it is not clear
whether rents were expected to rise because of improvements in QOL, improvements in the local
job-market, or for other reasons.
Using only rent differentials would result in lower QOL estimates for these higher-cost cities.
However, there are a number of problems with using only rent differentials. First, rent control
in cities such as San Francisco and New York may artificiall depress rents. Second, homeownership rates decline significantl as price-to-rent ratios rise, which implies that the share of
rental units in the sample is larger in high-price cities. Using both rental and owner-occupied units
avoids the issue of having to deal with changes in the sample composition due to changes in the
vi

home-ownership rate. In order to avoid these problems, and to preserve comparability with QOL
estimates in the existing measure, the traditional measure of housing costs is used in the analysis
here.

B.3

Functional Form

^ j in (2) is measured as
Wage and housing-cost differentials are measured logarithmically, so that Q
the fraction of income a household is willing to pay (or to accept if negative) to live in city j, rather
than an in an average city. Most studies have measured QOL in dollar terms. As explained in Appendix A.2, when aggregating across households with different incomes, the choice of logarithms
applies best when households value amenities proportionally to their income, rather than in stable
dollar amounts regardless of income.
Empirically, the semi-logarithmic functional form in (8) and (9) is supported by work in
Blomquist, Berger, and Hoehn (1988), who use maximum likelihood estimation with a Box-Cox
transformation of the form (w
1) = . They fin that a value of = 0:1 best fit the data for
wages, and = 0:2 for housing costs, both of which are fairly close to = 0, which corresponds
to the logarithm. Similar estimates (not shown) using much larger samples from the 2000 Census,
and with MSA dummy variables on the right-hand side (rather than measured amenities), result in
estimates of close to 0:1 for both wages and housing costs. This is not dependent on the control
variables, as a similar value of is estimated if predicted effects of the controls are firs subtracted
from wages and prices, with the residuals then regressed on the MSA dummies. Thus, city wage
and housing-cost differentials across worker and housing types are best expressed in percentage
terms rather than in dollar amounts.

B.4

Amenity Data

All climate and geographic data are calculated at the public-use microdata area (PUMA) and averaged up to the metropolitan level, weighted by population. Population density is measured at the
census tract level, and also population-averaged.
Heating and cooling degree days (Annual) Degree day data are used to estimate amounts of energy required to maintain comfortable indoor temperature levels. Daily values are computed
from each days mean temperature (max + min/2). Daily heating degree days are equal to
maxf0; 65 meantempg and daily cooling degree days are maxf0; meantemp 65g. Annual degree days are the sum of daily degree days over the year. The data here refer to
averages from 1970 to 2000 (National Climactic Data Center 2008).
Sunshine Average percentage of possible. The total time that sunshine reaches the surface of the
earth is expressed as the percentage of the maximum amount possible from sunrise to sunset
with clear sky conditions. (National Climactic Data Center 2008).
Average slope (percent) The average slope of the land in the metropolitan area. Coded by author
using GSI software.
Coastal proximity Equal to one over the distance in miles to the nearest coastline. Coded by
author using GSI software.
vii

Violent crimes (per capita) These consist of the average of the four z-scores (standard deviations)
for aggravated assaults, robbery, forcible rape, and murder (City and County Data Book
2000).
Property crimes (per capita) These consist of the average of the four z-scores (standard deviations) for aggravated burglary, larceny, motor theft, and arson (City and County Data 2000)
Air quality index (Median) An AQI value is calculated for each pollutant in an area (groundlevel ozone, particle pollution, carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide). The
highest AQI value for the individual pollutants is the AQI value for that day. An AQI over
300 is considered hazardous; under 50, good; values in between correspond to moderate,
unhealthy, and very unhealthy (Environmental Protection Agency, 2008).
Bars and restaurants Number of establishments classifie as eating and drinking places (NAICS
722) in County Business Patterns 2000.
Arts and Culture Index from Places Rated Almanac (Savageau 1999). Based on a ranking of
cities, it ranges from 100 (New York, NY) to 0 (Houma, LA).

References
Aura, Saku and Thomas Davidoff (forthcoming) "Supply Constraints and Housing Prices." Economics Letters.
Ermisch, J.F., J. Findlay, and K. Gibb (1996) "The Price Elasticity of Housing Demand in Britain:
Issues of Sample Selection." Journal of Housing Economics, 5, pp. 64-86.
Goodman, Allen C. (1988) "An Econometric Model of Housing Price, Permanent Income, Tenure
Choice, and Housing Demand." Journal of Urban Economics, 23, pp. 327-353.
Goodman Allen C. (2002) "Estimating Equilibrium Housing Demand for ’Stayers.’" Journal of
Urban Economics, 51, pp. 1-24.
Goodman, Allen C. and Masahiro Kawai (1986) "Functional Form, Sample Selection, and Housing
Demand." Journal of Urban Economics, 20, pp. 155-167.
Ioannides, Yannis M. and Jeffrey E. Zabel (2003) "Neighborhood Effects and Housing Demand."
Journal of Applied Econometrics, 18, pp. 563-584.

viii

TABLE 1: WAGE, HOUSING-COST, AND QUALITY-OF-LIFE DIFFERENTIALS, 2000
Adjusted Differentials
Population
Housing Quality-of
Unadj.
Size
Cost
Life
QOL Rank QOL Rank
Wages
Main city in MSA/CMSA
Honolulu
876,156
-0.01
0.61
0.203
1
9
Santa Barbara
399,347
0.07
0.66
0.175
2
52
Monterey (Salinas)
401,762
0.10
0.59
0.137
3
135
San Francisco
7,039,362
0.26
0.81
0.137
4
258
San Luis Obispo
246,681
0.02
0.45
0.132
5
60
Santa Fe
147,635
-0.06
0.29
0.128
6
21
Cape Cod (Barnstable)
162,582
0.01
0.40
0.122
7
59
San Diego
2,813,833
0.06
0.48
0.121
8
113
Los Angeles
16,373,645
0.13
0.45
0.081
15
229
Seattle
3,554,760
0.08
0.31
0.060
22
211
Denver
2,581,506
0.05
0.24
0.054
26
193
Portland
2,265,223
0.03
0.17
0.047
37
182
Miami
3,876,380
0.00
0.13
0.041
39
164
Boston
5,819,100
0.12
0.29
0.034
45
254
New York
21,199,865
0.21
0.41
0.028
51
274
Phoenix
3,251,876
0.03
0.08
0.012
72
214
Chicago
9,157,540
0.14
0.22
0.005
81
269
Sioux Falls
172,412
-0.15
-0.26
-0.007
100
72
Washington-Baltimore
7,608,070
0.13
0.15
-0.013
122
270
Cleveland
2,945,831
0.01
-0.03
-0.016
128
232
Minneapolis
2,968,806
0.08
0.02
-0.032
174
268
Atlanta
4,112,198
0.08
0.01
-0.032
175
267
St. Louis
2,603,607
0.00
-0.10
-0.033
179
240
Philadelphia
6,188,463
0.12
0.05
-0.041
195
273
Dallas
5,221,801
0.07
-0.04
-0.045
206
266
Detroit
5,456,428
0.13
0.05
-0.047
217
275
Pittsburgh
2,358,695
-0.04
-0.21
-0.047
218
218
Houston
4,669,571
0.07
-0.11
-0.072
268
272
Census Division
Pacific
45,025,637
0.10
0.39
0.079
1
6
Mountain
18,172,295
-0.06
0.00
0.029
2
1
New England
13,922,517
0.07
0.19
0.027
3
7
South Atlantic
51,769,160
-0.04
-0.08
-0.007
4
4
Middle Atlantic
39,671,861
0.10
0.13
-0.008
5
9
West North Central
19,237,739
-0.11
-0.25
-0.028
6
2
East North Central
45,155,037
0.01
-0.07
-0.029
7
8
West South Central
31,444,850
-0.08
-0.24
-0.040
8
5
East South Central
17,022,810
-0.12
-0.32
-0.041
9
3
MSA Population
MSA, Pop > 5 Million
MSA, Pop 1.5-4.9 Million
MSA, Pop 0.5-1.4 Million
MSA, Pop < 0.5 Million
Non-MSA areas
United States

84,064,274
57,157,386
42,435,508
42,324,511
55,440,227

0.16
0.03
-0.03
-0.10
-0.16

0.32
0.04
-0.09
-0.19
-0.32

0.027
-0.001
-0.011
-0.011
-0.023

1
2
3
4
5

5
4
3
2
1

281,421,906
0.13
0.30
0.051
total
standard deviations
Wage and housing price data are taken from the U.S. Census 2000 IPUMS. Wage differentials are based
on the average logarithm of hourly wages for full-time workers ages 25 to 55. Housing-cost differentials
based on the average logarithm of rents and housing prices for units first occupied within the last 10 years.
Adjusted differentials are city-fixed effects from individual level regressions on extended sets of worker
and housing covariates.

TABLE 2: REGRESSION OF HOUSING COSTS ON WAGE LEVELS, AND A TEST
OF THE CALIBRATED SLOPE COEFFECIENT FOR THE MOBILITY

Panel A: Slope Estimates
Wage differential
(robust s.e.)
R-squared

No Controls
(2)

Controls for
Natural
Amenities
(3)

Controls for
Natural and
Artificial
Amenities
(4)

2.14
(0.20)

1.59
(0.08)

1.48
(0.10)

0.74

0.91

0.93

Panel B: p-value of test that the regression slope equals the mobility-condition slope
0.002
0.476
0.596
Adjusted slope = 1.53
0.000
0.000
0.000
Unadjusted slope = 4.00

Panel C: Implied relationship between wages and (residual) quality of life, b Q
0.20
0.02
-0.02
Adjusted
-0.62
-0.80
-0.83
Unadjusted
Robust errors are shown in parentheses. Regressions are weighted by population.
Natural amenities, listed in Table 4 include heating degree days, cooling degree days,
percent of sunshine possible, inverse distance to a coast, and average land slope.
Artificial amenities include bars and restaurants per capita, Places Rated arts and
culture index, median air quality index, and violent and property crime per capita
indices. Each regression is run on 247 observations with non-missing data for all of
these variables.

TABLE 3: RANK CORRELATION OF QUALITY-OF-LIFE
WITH POPULAR, STATED-PREFERENCE, AND PREVIOUS
HEDONIC METHODS
Unadj.
Adj. QOL
QOL
(1)
(2)
Panel A: Places Rated Almanac "Livability" Index
0.20
-0.29
Raw Score
0.22
-0.33
Revised Score
Number of Metro Areas

274

274

Panel B: PEW Stated-Preference Ranking
"Yes" answers
Absence of "No" answers

0.67
0.62

0.58
0.60

28

28

0.03
0.09

0.74
0.76

50

50

Number of Metro Areas
Panel C: Gabriel et al. (2003) State Rankings
Ranking from 1990
Ranking from 1980
Number of States

Panel d: Chen and Rosenthal (2008) 2000 Rankings
Metro Areas Only
0.80
Including Non-Metro Areas
0.78

0.81
0.80

Number of Metro Areas
Number of Non-Metro Areas

241
49

241
49

Places rated ranking used for first city in CMSA. Revised Places
Rated Score eliminates cost-of-living and job-market components.
Chen and Rosenthal estimates aggregated from the PMSA to
CMSA level using averages weighted by population. All ranking
correlations are highly significant, with p-values less than 0.01.

TABLE 4: HEDONIC ESTIMATES OF THE VALUE OF INDIVIDUAL AMENITIES

Adj QOL
(1)

Natural Amenities Only
Hous. Cost
Wages
Unadj. QOL
(2)
(3)
(4)

Natural and Artificial
Amenities
Adj QOL Unadj. QOL
(7)
(8)

Minus 1000s of Heating Degree Days, 65F base
(mean = 4.37, sd = 2.16)

0.0090***
(0.0021)

0.0582***
(0.0152)

0.0199**
(0.0083)

0.0134***
(0.0025)

0.0076
(0.0053)

Minus 1000s of Cooling Degree Days, 65F base
(mean = 1.29, sd = 0.89)

0.0317***
(0.0056)

0.2459***
(0.0361)

0.0959*** -0.0344*** 0.0325***
(0.0189)
(0.0118)
(0.0050)

-0.0066
(0.0126)

Sunshine, percent possible
(mean = 0.0603, sd = 0.078)

0.2468***
(0.0426)

1.2152***
(0.2786)

0.3002**
(0.1490)

0.2626***
(0.0413)

0.0303
(0.0688)

Inverse distance to coast
(mean = 60.3, sd = 7.8)

0.5305***
(0.0535)

4.0174***
(0.4820)

1.5426*** -0.5383*** 0.3123***
(0.3016)
(0.1926)
(0.0585)

-0.2475
(0.1696)

Average Slope of Land, in percent
(mean = 1.69, sd = 1.65)

0.0089***
(0.0015)

0.0022
(0.0090)

Type of Amentiy Variables
Dependent Variables

-0.0053
(0.0051)

0.0036
(0.0924)

-0.0166*** 0.0172***
(0.0047)
(0.0030)

Restaurants and Bars per Thousand
(mean = 1.71, sd = 0.28)
Log of Places Rated Arts & Culture Index/100
(mean = 0.82, sd = 0.24)

0.0086***
(0.0018)

0.0102***
(0.0032)

0.0416***
(0.0100)

0.0805***
(0.0203)

0.0379*** -0.1305***
(0.0093)
(0.0199)

Minus Median Air Quality Index/100
(mean = 0.50, sd = 0.13)

0.0733***
(0.0191)

0.0515
(0.0513)

Safety from Violent Crime Index
(mean = 0.50, sd = 0.13)

-0.0100
(0.0079)

-0.0026
(0.0080)

Safety Property Crime Index
(mean = 0.50, sd = 0.13)

0.0051
(0.0043)

-0.0019
(0.0078)

0.79
247

0.57
247

R-squared
Number of Observations

0.70
321

0.66
321

0.45
321

0.28
321

Robust standard errors shown in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Regressions weighted by population. Variables are
described in the Appendix.

TABLE 5: QUALITY-OF-LIFE, CITY SIZE, AND DENSITY

Type of Amentiy Variables
Dependent Quality of Life Variable
Panel A: Metropolitan Population
Logarithm of Population

Number of Observations
Panel B: Population Density
Logarithm of Density

Number of Observations

No Controls
Adjusted
Unadj.
(1)
(2)

Natual Amenities
Controls
Adjusted
Unadj.
(3)
(4)

Natural and Artificial
Amenities
Adjusted
Unadj.
(6)
(7)

0.012***
(0.004)

-0.032***
(0.005)

0.002
(0.002)

-0.036***
(0.003)

0.003
(0.003)

-0.041***
(0.005)

276

276

274

274

247

247

0.019***
(0.005)

-0.046***
(0.003)

0.005**
(0.002)

-0.054***
(0.004)

0.007*
(0.004)

-0.041***
(0.008)

321

321

321

321

247

247

Robust standard errors shown in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. The density measure is calculated at
the census tract level, and averaged according to population. Regressions weighted by population.

TABLE 6: ALTERNATE QUALITY-OF-LIFE INDICATORS RELATED TO QUANTITIES AND
INDIVIDUAL AMENITIES
GrowthLog
Population
(1)

Log
Density
(2)

Log Pop
Growth
1980-2000
(3)

Amended
QOL
Measure
(4)

Minus 1000s of Heating Degree Days, 65F base
(mean = 4.37, sd = 2.16)

0.0398
(0.0599)

-0.0324
(0.0461)

0.0184
(0.0154)

0.0152***
(0.0029)

Minus 1000s of Cooling Degree Days, 65F base
(mean = 1.29, sd = 0.89)

0.1316
(0.1100)

-0.0726
(0.1451)

-0.0863**
(0.0353)

0.0239***
(0.0050)

Sunshine, percent possible
(mean = 0.0603, sd = 0.078)

0.7976
(0.7338)

1.6780**
(0.7537)

0.7871**
(0.3081)

0.3418***
(0.0597)

9.4781***
(2.8825)

5.0610***
(1.4963)

-0.9095**
(0.3621)

0.2196***
(0.0730)

Average Slope of Land, in percent
(mean = 1.69, sd = 1.65)

-0.0250
(0.0389)

0.0127
(0.0199)

0.0273*
(0.0139)

0.0113***
(0.0025)

Restaurants and Bars per Thousand
(mean = 1.71, sd = 0.28)

-0.8858***
(0.309)

-0.212
(0.176)

-0.056
(0.075)

0.0355***
(0.012)

Log of Places Rated Arts & Culture Index/100
(mean = 0.82, sd = 0.24)

3.7292***
(0.228)

0.8015***
(0.159)

0.1814***
(0.050)

0.0574***
(0.011)

Minus Median Air Quality Index/100
(mean = 0.50, sd = 0.13)

-2.1739***
(0.443)

-0.274
(0.343)

0.2117*
(0.122)

0.0945***
(0.024)

Safety from Violent Crime Index
(mean = 0.50, sd = 0.13)

-0.1939*
(0.114)

0.080
(0.086)

0.0493*
(0.030)

-0.005
(0.010)

Safety Property Crime Index
(mean = 0.50, sd = 0.13)

0.3035**
(0.118)

-0.103
(0.074)

-0.030
(0.029)

0.002
(0.006)

0.84
247

0.31
247

0.58
247

0.74
247

Dependent Variables

Inverse distance to coast
(mean = 60.3, sd = 7.8)

R-squared
Number of Observations

Robust standard errors shown in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Regressions weighted by
population. The results are in column 4 are based on the QOL measure used in column 6 of Table 4, but
adding 0.1 times the log population growth, used in column 3 here.

TABLE 7: RELATIVE WILLINGNESS TO PAY OF COLLEGE VS. HIGH-SCHOOL HEADED
HOUSEHOLDS FOR WAGES, COSTS-OF-LIVING, AND AMENITIES
College-HS
QOL Diff
Wage
Only

College-HS College-HS

(1)

(2)

Relative
Quanity
Supply
(3)

Overall Wage Differential

-0.1084***
(0.0358)

-0.0990**
(0.0450)

-0.4394
(0.4157)

-0.1398**
(0.0540)

Housing-Cost Differential

0.0262
(0.0161)

0.0586**
(0.0238)

0.7922***
(0.1943)

0.1321***
(0.0300)

Dependent Variable

Log Relative Supply of College/HS Workers

-0.0073
(0.0071)

QOL Diff
Wage and
Together
(4)

-0.1000
(imposed)

Minus 1000s of Heating Degree Days, 65F base
(mean = 4.37, sd = 2.16)

-0.0073***
(0.0017)

-0.0296
(0.0216)

-0.0101***
(0.0025)

Minus 1000s of Cooling Degree Days, 65F base
(mean = 1.29, sd = 0.89)

0.0019
(0.0047)

-0.0504
(0.0548)

-0.0028
(0.0069)

Sunshine, percent possible
(mean = 0.0603, sd = 0.078)

0.0150
(0.0398)

-0.4300
(0.2938)

-0.0250
(0.0462)

-0.1333**
(0.0561)

-1.0452**
(0.4557)

-0.2302***
(0.0733)

Average Slope of Land, in percent
(mean = 1.69, sd = 1.65)

0.0000
(0.0018)

-0.0200
(0.0143)

-0.0020
(0.0020)

Restaurants and Bars per Thousand
(mean = 1.71, sd = 0.28)

0.008
(0.010)

0.100
(0.115)

0.0170
(0.0155)

Log of Places Rated Arts & Culture Index/100
(mean = 0.82, sd = 0.24)

-0.007
(0.009)

0.5982***
(0.084)

0.0484***
(0.0114)

Minus Median Air Quality Index/100
(mean = 0.50, sd = 0.13)

0.024
(0.017)

0.5627***
(0.213)

0.0766***
(0.0219)

Safety from Violent Crime Index
(mean = 0.50, sd = 0.13)

0.000
(0.004)

0.001
(0.032)

0.0002
(0.0050)

-0.0098***
(0.003)

-0.009
(0.032)

-0.0106**
(0.0042)

0.50
247

0.67
247

0.65
247

Inverse distance to coast
(mean = 60.3, sd = 7.8)

Safety Property Crime Index
(mean = 0.50, sd = 0.13)
R-squared
Number of Observations

0.10
325

Robust standard errors shown in parentheses. * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Regressions weighted by
population. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is 0.51 times the difference between the highschool premium and college premium for a metro area, measuring the wage sacrifice of college relative to
high-school workers, using average marginal tax rates and labor income shares. The dependent variable in
column 3 is a Katz-Murphy (1992) measure of the supply of college relative to high-school labor. The
dependent variable in column 4 is the dependent variable in column 2 plus 0.1 times the dependent
variable in column 3.

Figure 1: Housing Costs versus Wage Levels across Metro Areas, 2000

0.7

0.8

San Francisco

0.6

Santa Barbara

0.5

Honolulu

0.4

San Diego
San Luis Obispo
Los Angeles
New York

Cape Cod

0.3

HI
Santa Fe

Naples

Seattle Boston

-0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

Denver
Chicago
Reno
Sacramento
Portland
Washington-Baltimore
CO Fort Collins
Hartford
Miami
Sarasota
AK
Medford
Grand Junction
Phoenix
Austin
Detroit
Philadelphia
Las
Vegas
Minneapolis
Wilmington
Atlanta
Albuquerque Springfield
Tucson
Fort
Myers
OR
Nashville NV
Orlando Columbus Dallas
Cincinnati
Norfolk Tampa
VT
Missoula
NewPierce
Orleans
Fort
St. Louis
Punta Gorda
Houston
Fort WaltonMyrtle
Beach Beach
Flagstaff
Bakersfield
Bloomington
AZ
UTYuma
Pittsburgh
Kokomo
MTKilleen
FL
San AntonioSyracuse
Sioux Falls
Jacksonville
Oklahoma City
Ocala
-0.3

-0.2

Log Housing-Cost Differential

Monterey

-0.4

Joplin

-0.5

SD

-0.6

Decatur
Beaumont

El Paso

Great Falls

Gadsden
Steubenville
KY
AL
OK
MS
ND
McAllen

-0.2

-0.1
0.0
Log Wage Differential

0.1

0.2

METRO POP

>5.0 Million

Avg Mobility Cond: slope = 1.53

1.5-5.0 Million

0.5-1.5 Million

Unadjusted Avg Mobility Cond: slope = 4

<0.5 Million

Non-Metro Areas

Regression Line: slope= 2.04 (s.e. .06)

0.2

Figure 2: Quality-of-life Estimates: Adjusted vs. Unadjusted

Honolulu
Santa Barbara

Monterey
San Luis Obispo
San Diego Cape Cod

Adjusted Quality of Life

0.1

San Francisco

Seattle
DenverReno
Portland
Miami
Boston
Sacramento

New York

Fort Collins
VT
Wilmington
Sarasota
FortOR
Walton Beach
MT
Tucson
Punta Gorda
Albuquerque
Fort Myers
Jacksonville
Myrtle Beach
AZ Killeen Great Falls
NorfolkFlagstaff

0.0

Austin
Phoenix
Fort Pierce
UT
AK
Orlando
New
Orleans
Springfield
Nashville Tampa Yuma
Sioux Falls
Ocala
NV
Washington-Baltimore
Oklahoma City
Hartford Las Vegas
Minneapolis
Atlanta Columbus
St. Louis
Cincinnati
San Antonio
El Paso
Philadelphia Dallas
Detroit
Pittsburgh
Bakersfield
KY
Steubenville
Bloomington
MS
AL
Syracuse
Gadsden
Houston
McAllen
Decatur
-0.1

Grand
COJunction
Missoula
Medford

Naples
Los Angeles

Kokomo

Santa Fe
HI

Chicago

FL
SD
Joplin
OK
ND

Beaumont

-0.1

0.0
0.1
Unadjusted Quality of Life

0.2

Diagonal line
Correlation between adjusted and unadjusted estimates = .48 (unweighted), .06 (weighted)

2.60 2.80 3.00

Figure 3: Quality of Life and Population Growth
Las Vegas

2.40

Naples

Population in 2000 Relative to 1980, Log Scale
1.20
1.40
1.60
1.80
2.00

2.20

Punta Gorda

Fort Pierce Fort Myers
Ocala
Yuma
Phoenix
NV Austin
Orlando
Myrtle Beach
AK
UT

McAllen

Atlanta
Bakersfield
Dallas

FL

AZ Reno
Fort Collins
Sarasota

Wilmington
Tucson
Sacramento
Fort Walton Beach
Flagstaff

SantaHI
Fe
San Luis
COObispo

1.00

San
Diego
Barnstable
Killeen
Miami
Tampa
Houston
El Paso
Seattle Grand Junction
San Antonio
Denver
Salinas-Monterey
Portland
Medford
Sioux Falls Norfolk
Albuquerque
Santa Barbara
JacksonvilleMT
Los Angeles
San Francisco
Nashville
Washington-Baltimore
Bloomington
Missoula
OR
Columbus Joplin
Minneapolis
Oklahoma City
VT
Honolulu
New Boston
York
ALKY
OK
Hartford
MS
SD
St. Louis Springfield
Chicago
Cincinnati
Beaumont
Philadelphia
Gadsden
Great Falls
Syracuse
Kokomo
Detroit
New Orleans
ND

0.80

Decatur

Pittsburgh

Steubenville
-0.100

-0.050
0.000
0.050
0.100
0.150
Relative Quality of Life (Q), No Growth Adjustement 2000

0.200

METRO POP

>5.0 Million

Log-Linear Fit: slope = 1.157 (s.e. 0.302)

1.5-5.0 Million

0.5-1.5 Million

Average QOL with Growth Adjustment

<0.5 Million

Non-Metro Areas

QOL = 10% of income with Growth Adj.

Figure 4: Relative Wages and Supply of College vs High-School Labor

0.2

McAllen

Panama City

0.1

El Paso
Killeen
Ocala
Jacksonville
Jackson
Odessa

Huntsville

Corpus Dothan
Christi
Gadsden
Bakersfield
Laredo
Williamsport
Decatur Waco
Lafayette
AL

RI

-0.1

0.0

Binghamton
Santa Fe
Fort
Walton Beach
Birmingham
Dallas
Houston
Houma
San Diego
Miami
New Orleans
Tampa
San Antonio Orlando
New York
Pittsburgh
FL
Atlanta
Austin
Johnstown
Visalia Yuma
Fort Smith
FortBeach
Pierce Los Angeles
Norfolk Washington-Baltimore
Myrtle
Cincinnati
Sarasota
GA
Raleigh
VictoriaKY Punta Gorda
San Francisco
Boston
Hickory
MS
AR TX
Albuquerque
Phoenix
San
Luis Obispo
OK
Philadelphia
Oklahoma City Detroit
TN Danville LA PA Joplin
Fort Myers
Chicago
NC Beaumont
Sacramento
Naples
Columbus
Medford
Syracuse
Merced
SC
Nashville
Bloomington
Wilmington
DecaturGrand
Jonesboro
Reno
Junction
Denver
Hartford
St.
Louis
Tucson
Santa
Barbara
SD
VA
Steubenville
Lakeland
Mansfield
Yakima
Minneapolis
NV
RockyOH
Mount
Lancaster
MO
NDPortland
MT
INTexarkana AZ IL
Grand
Rapids
OR
Seattle
Las VegasDubuque
MN UT
Anchorage
WI
NE Sioux
Wichita
ME
Bryan
Monterey KS
Falls
CO
Pittsfield
St.
Cloud
Cape Cod
Altoona
Columbia
Pueblo
VT Burlington
Fort
Collins
Springfield
Fort WayneSheboygan
WAGrand ForksState CollegeChampaign
Charlottesville
Honolulu Lincoln
Appleton
Muncie
Cheyenne
Elkhart
Rockford
Madison
WYRapid
Lima
Janesville
Great
FallsCity
Eugene
Athens
Missoula
Corvalis
Bloomington
Chico
Flagstaff
Iowa City
HI
AK
Kokomo
Waterloo
St. Joseph
MA
Lafayette
Lawrence
-0.2

Log Differential of College to High-School Wage

Brownsville

Bellingham

-1.0

-0.5
0.0
Log Differential of College to High School Labor Supply

0.5

METRO POP

>5.0 Million

Weighted Fit: slope = 0.014 (s.e. 0.011)

1.5-5.0 Million

0.5-1.5 Million

Hypothetical Indifference Locus (psi = 0.1)

<0.5 Million

Non-Metro Areas

Hypothetical Substitution Locus (sigma = 2.0)

TABLE A1: LIST OF METROPOLITAN AND NON-METROPOLITAN AREAS BY ESTIMATED QUALITY OF LIFE
Adjusted
Unadjusted
Population
Housing Quality of QOL Quality of QOL
Life
Rank
Full Name of Metropolitan Area
Size
Wages
Cost
Life
Rank
Honolulu, HI
876,156
-0.008
0.605
0.203
1
0.159
9
Santa Barbara-Santa Maria-Lompoc, CA
399,347
0.069
0.662
0.175
2
0.097
52
Salinas (Monterey-Carmel), CA
401,762
0.102
0.590
0.137
3
0.045
135
San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, CA
7,039,362
0.257
0.813
0.137
4
-0.054
258
San Luis Obispo-Atascadero-Paso Robles, CA
246,681
0.020
0.452
0.132
5
0.093
60
Santa Fe, NM
147,635
-0.063
0.290
0.128
6
0.135
21
Non-metro, HI
335,381
-0.030
0.332
0.127
.
0.113
.
Barnstable-Yarmouth (Cape Cod), MA
162,582
0.005
0.395
0.122
7
0.094
59
San Diego, CA
2,813,833
0.062
0.479
0.121
8
0.058
113
Grand Junction, CO
116,255
-0.180
0.079
0.114
9
0.199
4
Non-metro, CO
693,605
-0.137
0.137
0.112
.
0.171
.
Missoula, MT
95,802
-0.249
-0.090
0.100
10
0.227
1
Naples, FL
251,377
-0.005
0.286
0.096
11
0.077
82
Medford-Ashland, OR
181,269
-0.138
0.084
0.095
12
0.159
10
Eugene-Springfield, OR
322,959
-0.120
0.091
0.089
13
0.143
15
Corvalis, OR
78,153
-0.113
0.076
0.081
14
0.132
23
Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County, CA
16,373,645
0.131
0.450
0.081
15
-0.018
229
Fort Collins-Loveland, CO
251,494
-0.060
0.150
0.079
16
0.098
51
Bellingham, WA
166,814
-0.066
0.127
0.074
17
0.098
50
Non-metro, VT
439,436
-0.198
-0.086
0.074
.
0.176
.
Wilmington, NC
233,450
-0.134
0.017
0.072
18
0.139
18
Sarasota-Bradenton, FL
589,959
-0.071
0.094
0.066
19
0.095
57
Burlington, VT
169,391
-0.108
0.021
0.066
20
0.113
35
Non-metro, CA
1,121,254
-0.051
0.134
0.064
.
0.085
.
Non-metro, MA
247,672
-0.068
0.108
0.063
.
0.095
.
Fort Walton Beach, FL
170,498
-0.205
-0.125
0.063
21
0.174
6
Non-metro, OR
919,033
-0.141
-0.024
0.062
.
0.135
.
Seattle-Tacoma-Bremerton, WA
3,554,760
0.080
0.308
0.060
22
-0.003
211
Non-metro, MT
596,684
-0.265
-0.239
0.059
.
0.206
.
Asheville, NC
225,965
-0.159
-0.060
0.058
23
0.144
14
Cheyenne, WY
81,607
-0.249
-0.214
0.058
24
0.195
5
Colorado Springs, CO
516,929
-0.087
0.033
0.055
25
0.096
55
Denver-Boulder-Greeley, CO
2,581,506
0.051
0.240
0.054
26
0.009
193
Charlottesville, VA
159,576
-0.114
-0.003
0.054
27
0.113
36
Madison, WI
426,526
-0.039
0.110
0.054
28
0.066
99
Chico-Paradise, CA
203,171
-0.091
0.043
0.054
29
0.102
46
Reno, NV
339,486
0.026
0.210
0.053
30
0.027
172
Portland, ME
243,537
-0.080
0.019
0.052
31
0.085
70
Tucson, AZ
843,746
-0.113
-0.010
0.052
32
0.111
41
Punta Gorda, FL
141,627
-0.168
-0.108
0.050
33
0.141
17
Albuquerque, NM
712,738
-0.083
0.013
0.050
34
0.086
69
Fort Myers-Cape Coral, FL
440,888
-0.106
-0.014
0.049
35
0.103
45
Jacksonville, NC
150,355
-0.279
-0.264
0.048
36
0.213
3
Portland-Salem, OR-WA
2,265,223
0.025
0.174
0.047
37
0.019
182
Non-metro, NH
496,087
-0.101
-0.030
0.043
.
0.094
.
Redding, CA
163,256
-0.095
0.001
0.042
38
0.095
56
Miami-Fort Lauderdale, FL
3,876,380
0.002
0.126
0.041
39
0.029
164
Non-metro, RI
61,968
0.061
0.215
0.040
.
-0.008
.
Myrtle Beach, SC
196,629
-0.170
-0.135
0.039
40
0.136
20
Lawrence, KS
99,962
-0.149
-0.112
0.038
41
0.121
28
State College, PA
135,758
-0.143
-0.092
0.038
42
0.120
29
Non-metro, WA
994,967
-0.084
-0.014
0.038
.
0.081
.
Great Falls, MT
80,357
-0.308
-0.373
0.037
43
0.215
2
Non-metro, AZ
603,632
-0.180
-0.163
0.035
.
0.139
.
Iowa City, IA
111,006
-0.088
-0.032
0.035
44
0.080
78
Boston-Worcester-Lawrence, MA-NH-ME-CT
5,819,100
0.122
0.294
0.034
45
-0.049
254
Killeen-Temple, TX
312,952
-0.232
-0.249
0.034
46
0.170
7
Rapid City, SD
88,565
-0.232
-0.266
0.033
47
0.166
8
Sacramento-Yolo, CA
1,796,857
0.067
0.206
0.033
48
-0.015
222
Bloomington, IN
120,563
-0.128
-0.090
0.032
49
0.105
44
Flagstaff, AZ-UT
122,366
-0.146
-0.128
0.030
50
0.114
34
New York, Northern New Jersey, Long Island, NY-NJ-CT-PA
21,199,864
0.210
0.411
0.028
51
-0.107
274
Non-metro, ME
808,317
-0.202
-0.229
0.027
.
0.144
.
Bryan-College Station, TX
152,415
-0.138
-0.126
0.027
52
0.107
43
Panama City, FL
148,217
-0.155
-0.159
0.027
53
0.115
33
Norfolk-Virginia Beach-Newport News, VA1,569,541
-0.109
-0.081
0.027
54
0.089
65
Salt Lake City-Ogden, UT
1,333,914
-0.023
0.038
0.026
55
0.033
156
Charleston-North Charleston, SC
549,033
-0.095
-0.069
0.025
56
0.078
81
Fayetteville, NC
302,963
-0.190
-0.209
0.024
57
0.138
19

TABLE A1: LIST OF METROPOLITAN AND NON-METROPOLITAN AREAS BY ESTIMATED QUALITY OF LIFE
Adjusted
Unadjusted
Population
Housing Quality of QOL Quality of QOL
Life
Rank
Full Name of Metropolitan Area
Size
Wages
Cost
Life
Rank
Gainesville, FL
217,955
-0.147
-0.156
0.024
58
0.108
42
Columbia, MO
135,454
-0.180
-0.204
0.023
59
0.129
26
Anchorage, AK
260,283
0.074
0.185
0.022
60
-0.028
237
Tallahassee, FL
284,539
-0.111
-0.106
0.022
61
0.084
71
Lincoln, NE
250,291
-0.134
-0.150
0.022
62
0.097
53
Daytona Beach, FL
493,175
-0.158
-0.185
0.020
63
0.111
38
Las Cruces, NM
174,682
-0.207
-0.261
0.020
64
0.141
16
Provo-Orem, UT
368,536
-0.055
-0.030
0.019
65
0.047
130
West Palm Beach-Boca Raton, FL
1,131,184
0.041
0.115
0.018
66
-0.012
219
Austin-San Marcos, TX
1,249,763
0.008
0.067
0.017
67
0.009
194
Athens, GA
153,444
-0.139
-0.153
0.016
68
0.101
47
Pittsfield, MA
84,699
-0.061
-0.033
0.015
69
0.053
121
Providence-Fall River-Warwick, RI-MA
1,188,613
0.017
0.073
0.015
70
0.001
204
Billings, MT
129,352
-0.180
-0.252
0.013
71
0.117
31
Phoenix-Mesa, AZ
3,251,876
0.027
0.075
0.012
72
-0.009
214
Fort Pierce-Port St. Lucie, FL
319,426
-0.086
-0.100
0.012
73
0.061
107
Non-metro, ID
786,043
-0.185
-0.251
0.012
.
0.122
.
Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill, NC
1,187,941
0.016
0.044
0.011
74
-0.005
212
Boise City, ID
432,345
-0.083
-0.109
0.010
75
0.056
114
Non-metro, FL
1,144,881
-0.178
-0.247
0.010
.
0.117
.
Non-metro, DE
156,638
-0.080
-0.088
0.010
.
0.058
.
Non-metro, UT
524,673
-0.133
-0.171
0.009
.
0.090
.
Non-metro, AK
366,649
0.041
0.090
0.009
.
-0.018
.
Spokane, WA
417,939
-0.097
-0.128
0.008
76
0.065
102
Yuba City, CA
139,149
-0.071
-0.074
0.007
77
0.052
122
Non-metro, WY
345,642
-0.174
-0.256
0.007
.
0.110
.
Orlando, FL
1,644,561
-0.040
-0.046
0.006
78
0.029
166
New London-Norwich, CT-RI
293,566
0.050
0.110
0.006
79
-0.023
235
Fayetteville-Springdale-Rogers, AR
311,121
-0.140
-0.206
0.005
80
0.088
67
Chicago-Gary-Kenosha, IL-IN-WI
9,157,540
0.136
0.224
0.005
81
-0.080
269
New Orleans, LA
1,337,726
-0.070
-0.097
0.005
82
0.045
133
Springfield, MO
325,721
-0.188
-0.272
0.004
83
0.120
30
Pensacola, FL
412,153
-0.156
-0.232
0.004
84
0.098
49
Abilene, TX
126,555
-0.236
-0.349
0.004
85
0.149
12
Springfield, MA
591,932
-0.007
0.009
0.003
86
0.010
190
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
2,395,997
-0.057
-0.084
0.003
87
0.036
150
Non-metro, NM
783,991
-0.212
-0.324
0.002
.
0.131
.
Non-metro, SD
493,867
-0.291
-0.457
0.001
.
0.177
.
Melbourne-Titusville-Palm Bay, FL
476,230
-0.109
-0.171
0.000
88
0.066
100
Yuma, AZ
160,026
-0.102
-0.158
0.000
89
0.062
104
Nashville, TN
1,231,311
-0.017
-0.030
-0.001
90
0.009
192
Stockton-Lodi, CA
563,598
0.088
0.126
-0.002
91
-0.057
259
Cedar Rapids, IA
191,701
-0.080
-0.137
-0.003
92
0.045
134
Casper, WY
66,533
-0.226
-0.366
-0.003
93
0.134
22
Pueblo, CO
141,472
-0.168
-0.269
-0.003
94
0.101
48
Clarksville-Hopkinsville, TN-KY
207,033
-0.214
-0.342
-0.004
95
0.129
25
Lafayette, IN
182,821
-0.071
-0.123
-0.006
96
0.040
144
Fresno, CA
922,516
-0.017
-0.039
-0.006
97
0.007
196
Goldsboro, NC
113,329
-0.185
-0.297
-0.006
98
0.111
39
Montgomery, AL
333,055
-0.122
-0.209
-0.006
99
0.070
88
Sioux Falls, SD
172,412
-0.148
-0.258
-0.007
100
0.083
72
Non-metro, CT
148,665
0.083
0.119
-0.007
.
-0.053
.
Lewiston-Auburn, ME
90,830
-0.126
-0.229
-0.007
101
0.069
92
Columbia, SC
536,691
-0.076
-0.145
-0.008
102
0.040
145
Hickory-Morganton-Lenoir, NC
341,851
-0.128
-0.220
-0.008
103
0.073
85
Modesto, CA
446,997
0.055
0.059
-0.008
104
-0.040
251
Yakima, WA
222,581
-0.028
-0.072
-0.008
105
0.010
187
Milwaukee-Racine, WI
1,689,572
0.042
0.032
-0.009
106
-0.035
246
Laredo, TX
193,117
-0.199
-0.332
-0.009
107
0.116
32
Champaign-Urbana, IL
179,669
-0.082
-0.142
-0.009
108
0.047
131
Dover, DE
126,697
-0.088
-0.158
-0.009
109
0.048
129
Jacksonville, FL
1,100,491
-0.050
-0.110
-0.009
110
0.022
179
Lubbock, TX
242,628
-0.164
-0.282
-0.010
111
0.094
58
Ocala, FL
258,916
-0.170
-0.298
-0.010
112
0.096
54
Joplin, MO
157,322
-0.255
-0.417
-0.010
113
0.151
11
Knoxville, TN
687,249
-0.128
-0.231
-0.011
114
0.070
89
Non-metro, NV
250,521
0.008
-0.017
-0.011
.
-0.012
.
Lancaster, PA
470,658
-0.015
-0.053
-0.011
115
0.002
203
Little Rock-North Little Rock, AR
583,845
-0.100
-0.197
-0.011
116
0.050
126

TABLE A1: LIST OF METROPOLITAN AND NON-METROPOLITAN AREAS BY ESTIMATED QUALITY OF LIFE
Adjusted
Unadjusted
Population
Housing Quality of QOL Quality of QOL
Life
Rank
Full Name of Metropolitan Area
Size
Wages
Cost
Life
Rank
Wichita Falls, TX
140,518
-0.228
-0.383
-0.011
117
0.132
24
Amarillo, TX
217,858
-0.144
-0.253
-0.011
118
0.081
77
Green Bay, WI
226,778
-0.018
-0.064
-0.011
119
0.002
202
Savannah, GA
293,000
-0.079
-0.151
-0.012
120
0.041
141
Merced, CA
210,554
-0.011
-0.048
-0.012
121
-0.001
209
Washington-Baltimore, DC-MD-VA-WV
7,608,070
0.126
0.154
-0.013
122
-0.088
270
Charlotte-Gastonia-Rock Hill, NC-SC
1,499,293
0.013
-0.033
-0.013
123
-0.021
233
Tuscaloosa, AL
164,875
-0.100
-0.195
-0.013
124
0.051
125
Non-metro, NC
2,612,257
-0.151
-0.268
-0.013
.
0.084
.
Auburn-Opelika, AL
115,092
-0.133
-0.252
-0.015
125
0.070
87
Greensboro--Winston Salem--High Point, NC
1,251,509
-0.047
-0.126
-0.015
126
0.015
185
Mobile, AL
540,258
-0.130
-0.248
-0.015
127
0.068
93
Cleveland-Akron, OH
2,945,831
0.012
-0.032
-0.016
128
-0.020
232
Visalia-Tulare-Porterville, CA
368,021
-0.033
-0.094
-0.016
129
0.010
189
Lawton, OK
114,996
-0.259
-0.448
-0.016
130
0.147
13
Roanoke, VA
235,932
-0.107
-0.212
-0.017
131
0.054
120
Sheboygan, WI
112,646
-0.062
-0.146
-0.017
132
0.025
176
Bangor, ME
90,864
-0.170
-0.324
-0.018
133
0.089
64
Omaha, NE-IA
716,998
-0.080
-0.195
-0.018
134
0.032
158
Glens Falls, NY
124,345
-0.113
-0.204
-0.019
135
0.062
106
La Crosse, WI-MN
126,838
-0.128
-0.247
-0.019
136
0.066
98
Oklahoma City, OK
1,083,346
-0.134
-0.278
-0.020
137
0.064
103
Non-metro, NE
811,425
-0.262
-0.464
-0.020
.
0.146
.
Appleton-Oshkosh-Neenah, WI
358,365
-0.047
-0.138
-0.021
138
0.013
186
Greenville, NC
133,798
-0.081
-0.195
-0.021
139
0.033
155
Des Moines, IA
456,022
-0.030
-0.123
-0.021
140
0.000
208
Lakeland-Winter Haven, FL
483,924
-0.118
-0.254
-0.022
141
0.054
119
Waterloo-Cedar Falls, IA
128,012
-0.127
-0.271
-0.023
142
0.059
112
Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton, PA
637,958
0.003
-0.064
-0.023
143
-0.019
230
Non-metro, MO
1,800,410
-0.256
-0.456
-0.023
.
0.142
.
Louisville, KY-IN
1,025,598
-0.041
-0.138
-0.023
144
0.007
197
Non-metro, MD
385,446
-0.032
-0.105
-0.023
.
0.005
.
Topeka, KS
169,871
-0.137
-0.286
-0.023
145
0.066
101
Dubuque, IA
89,143
-0.148
-0.307
-0.024
146
0.072
86
San Angelo, TX
104,010
-0.179
-0.348
-0.024
147
0.092
61
Rocky Mount, NC
143,026
-0.110
-0.246
-0.025
148
0.048
128
Canton-Massillon, OH
406,934
-0.078
-0.191
-0.025
149
0.030
162
Tyler, TX
174,706
-0.103
-0.234
-0.025
150
0.044
137
Jonesboro, AR
82,148
-0.241
-0.452
-0.025
151
0.128
27
Las Vegas, NV-AZ
1,563,282
0.068
0.029
-0.025
152
-0.061
262
Eau Claire, WI
148,337
-0.118
-0.256
-0.026
153
0.054
118
Biloxi-Gulfport-Pascagoula, MS
363,988
-0.132
-0.289
-0.026
154
0.060
111
Scranton--Wilkes-Barre--Hazleton, PA
624,776
-0.105
-0.236
-0.026
155
0.046
132
Hartford, CT
1,183,110
0.134
0.133
-0.026
156
-0.100
271
St. Joseph, MO
102,490
-0.165
-0.335
-0.027
157
0.081
76
Non-metro, IA
1,600,191
-0.192
-0.381
-0.027
.
0.097
.
Non-metro, WI
1,723,367
-0.117
-0.260
-0.028
.
0.052
.
Johnson City-Kingsport-Bristol, TN-VA
480,091
-0.180
-0.363
-0.028
158
0.089
63
Hattiesburg, MS
111,674
-0.179
-0.364
-0.028
159
0.088
66
Sherman-Denison, TX
110,595
-0.133
-0.291
-0.028
160
0.061
108
Columbus, OH
1,540,157
0.023
-0.054
-0.028
161
-0.037
247
Non-metro, AR
1,352,381
-0.237
-0.457
-0.029
.
0.123
.
Harrisburg-Lebanon-Carlisle, PA
629,401
-0.010
-0.105
-0.029
162
-0.016
223
Dayton-Springfield, OH
950,558
-0.021
-0.124
-0.030
163
-0.010
216
Benton Harbor, MI
162,453
-0.075
-0.194
-0.030
164
0.027
171
Alexandria, LA
126,337
-0.172
-0.358
-0.030
165
0.083
74
Baton Rouge, LA
602,894
-0.045
-0.169
-0.030
166
0.003
200
Greenville-Spartanburg-Anderson, SC
962,441
-0.071
-0.210
-0.030
167
0.018
183
Williamsport, PA
120,044
-0.126
-0.282
-0.031
168
0.056
116
Lynchburg, VA
214,911
-0.137
-0.300
-0.031
169
0.062
105
Enid, OK
57,813
-0.219
-0.435
-0.031
170
0.111
40
Jackson, MS
440,801
-0.093
-0.246
-0.031
171
0.031
159
Sharon, PA
120,293
-0.149
-0.319
-0.032
172
0.069
90
Tulsa, OK
803,235
-0.096
-0.260
-0.032
173
0.031
161
Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN-WI
2,968,806
0.083
0.020
-0.032
174
-0.078
268
Non-metro, VA
1,550,447
-0.158
-0.334
-0.032
.
0.075
.
Atlanta, GA
4,112,198
0.078
0.014
-0.032
175
-0.074
267
York, PA
381,751
-0.026
-0.138
-0.033
176
-0.009
215
Lexington, KY
479,198
-0.088
-0.241
-0.033
177
0.028
167

TABLE A1: LIST OF METROPOLITAN AND NON-METROPOLITAN AREAS BY ESTIMATED QUALITY OF LIFE
Adjusted
Unadjusted
Population
Housing Quality of QOL Quality of QOL
Life
Rank
Full Name of Metropolitan Area
Size
Wages
Cost
Life
Rank
Non-metro, SC
1,205,050
-0.135
-0.311
-0.033
.
0.057
.
Non-metro, OK
1,352,292
-0.257
-0.496
-0.033
.
0.133
.
Richmond-Petersburg, VA
996,512
0.005
-0.098
-0.033
178
-0.030
239
St. Louis, MO-IL
2,603,607
0.004
-0.104
-0.033
179
-0.030
240
Corpus Christi, TX
380,783
-0.099
-0.255
-0.034
180
0.035
152
Non-metro, KS
1,167,355
-0.241
-0.469
-0.034
.
0.124
.
Chattanooga, TN-GA
465,161
-0.099
-0.258
-0.034
181
0.034
153
Erie, PA
280,843
-0.108
-0.268
-0.035
182
0.041
140
Monroe, LA
147,250
-0.126
-0.307
-0.036
183
0.049
127
Kansas City, MO-KS
1,776,062
-0.002
-0.129
-0.036
184
-0.030
241
Sumter, SC
104,646
-0.180
-0.388
-0.037
185
0.083
73
Non-metro, TN
1,827,139
-0.186
-0.403
-0.037
.
0.086
.
Springfield, IL
201,437
-0.076
-0.222
-0.038
186
0.020
181
Non-metro, MI
1,768,978
-0.102
-0.258
-0.038
.
0.037
.
Cincinnati-Hamilton, OH-KY-IN
1,979,202
0.035
-0.070
-0.038
187
-0.052
256
San Antonio, TX
1,592,383
-0.088
-0.254
-0.039
188
0.024
177
Indianapolis, IN
1,607,486
0.017
-0.096
-0.039
189
-0.041
252
Fargo-Moorhead, ND-MN
174,367
-0.169
-0.382
-0.039
190
0.073
84
Dothan, AL
137,916
-0.183
-0.404
-0.040
191
0.082
75
Non-metro, ND
358,234
-0.261
-0.532
-0.040
.
0.128
.
Non-metro, GA
2,519,789
-0.141
-0.330
-0.040
.
0.059
.
Cumberland, MD-WV
102,008
-0.167
-0.365
-0.040
192
0.076
83
El Paso, TX
679,622
-0.159
-0.369
-0.040
193
0.067
96
Rochester, NY
1,098,201
-0.019
-0.136
-0.040
194
-0.015
220
Philadelphia-Wilmington-Atlantic City, PA-NJ-DE-MD
6,188,463
0.115
0.052
-0.041
195
-0.102
273
Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY
875,583
-0.016
-0.132
-0.041
196
-0.017
227
Florence, AL
142,950
-0.143
-0.348
-0.041
197
0.056
115
Toledo, OH
618,203
-0.025
-0.164
-0.041
198
-0.016
224
Owensboro, KY
91,545
-0.136
-0.338
-0.041
199
0.051
124
Shreveport-Bossier City, LA
392,302
-0.116
-0.308
-0.041
200
0.039
146
Davenport-Moline-Rock Island, IA-IL
359,062
-0.078
-0.245
-0.041
201
0.016
184
Non-metro, WV
1,042,776
-0.206
-0.445
-0.041
.
0.095
.
Elkhart-Goshen, IN
182,791
-0.049
-0.204
-0.042
202
-0.002
210
Muncie, IN
118,769
-0.115
-0.304
-0.043
203
0.039
147
Grand Rapids-Muskegon-Holland, MI
1,088,514
0.004
-0.122
-0.044
204
-0.034
245
Fort Smith, AR-OK
207,290
-0.187
-0.433
-0.044
205
0.079
80
Non-metro, TX
3,159,940
-0.198
-0.442
-0.045
.
0.087
.
Dallas-Fort Worth, TX
5,221,801
0.065
-0.037
-0.045
206
-0.074
266
Altoona, PA
129,144
-0.151
-0.363
-0.045
207
0.060
109
Anniston, AL
112,249
-0.185
-0.424
-0.045
208
0.079
79
Grand Forks, ND-MN
97,478
-0.204
-0.455
-0.046
209
0.091
62
Reading, PA
373,638
-0.003
-0.146
-0.046
210
-0.033
244
Lansing-East Lansing, MI
447,728
0.006
-0.126
-0.046
211
-0.037
248
Evansville-Henderson, IN-KY
296,195
-0.095
-0.286
-0.046
212
0.023
178
Birmingham, AL
921,106
-0.019
-0.179
-0.047
213
-0.026
236
South Bend, IN
265,559
-0.060
-0.235
-0.047
214
0.001
205
Waco, TX
213,517
-0.109
-0.311
-0.047
215
0.031
160
Bismarck, ND
94,719
-0.246
-0.532
-0.047
216
0.113
37
Non-metro, MN
1,456,119
-0.156
-0.367
-0.047
.
0.065
.
Detroit-Ann Arbor-Flint, MI
5,456,428
0.130
0.053
-0.047
217
-0.117
275
Pittsburgh, PA
2,358,695
-0.041
-0.207
-0.047
218
-0.011
218
Mansfield, OH
175,818
-0.100
-0.294
-0.048
219
0.026
174
Wichita, KS
545,220
-0.064
-0.257
-0.048
220
0.000
207
St. Cloud, MN
167,392
-0.099
-0.290
-0.049
221
0.027
170
Florence, SC
125,761
-0.121
-0.341
-0.049
222
0.036
151
Wausau, WI
125,834
-0.074
-0.265
-0.049
223
0.008
195
Non-metro, IN
1,690,582
-0.101
-0.306
-0.050
.
0.025
.
Non-metro, NY
1,503,399
-0.115
-0.304
-0.050
.
0.039
.
Non-metro, IL
1,877,585
-0.148
-0.369
-0.050
.
0.056
.
Janesville-Beloit, WI
152,307
-0.002
-0.164
-0.050
224
-0.039
249
Richland-Kennewick-Pasco, WA
191,822
0.030
-0.117
-0.051
225
-0.059
261
Charleston, WV
251,662
-0.104
-0.331
-0.052
226
0.021
180
Youngstown-Warren, OH
594,746
-0.079
-0.276
-0.052
227
0.010
191
Non-metro, OH
2,139,364
-0.099
-0.306
-0.052
.
0.023
.
Pine Bluff, AR
84,278
-0.159
-0.416
-0.052
228
0.055
117
Houma, LA
194,477
-0.111
-0.338
-0.053
229
0.027
173
Non-metro, PA
1,889,525
-0.134
-0.364
-0.054
.
0.042
.
Buffalo-Niagara Falls, NY
1,170,111
-0.028
-0.190
-0.054
230
-0.019
231
Bakersfield, CA
661,645
0.025
-0.132
-0.054
231
-0.058
260

TABLE A1: LIST OF METROPOLITAN AND NON-METROPOLITAN AREAS BY ESTIMATED QUALITY OF LIFE
Adjusted
Unadjusted
Population
Housing Quality of QOL Quality of QOL
Life
Rank
Full Name of Metropolitan Area
Size
Wages
Cost
Life
Rank
Binghamton, NY
252,320
-0.112
-0.313
-0.054
232
0.034
154
Huntsville, AL
342,376
-0.044
-0.244
-0.055
233
-0.017
225
Columbus, GA-AL
274,624
-0.139
-0.379
-0.056
234
0.045
136
Kalamazoo-Battle Creek, MI
452,851
-0.021
-0.196
-0.056
235
-0.028
238
Non-metro, LA
1,098,766
-0.170
-0.435
-0.056
.
0.061
.
Brownsville-Harlingen-San Benito, TX
335,227
-0.213
-0.502
-0.056
236
0.087
68
Elmira, NY
91,070
-0.130
-0.345
-0.057
237
0.044
138
Non-metro, KY
2,068,667
-0.183
-0.456
-0.057
.
0.069
.
Lafayette, LA
385,647
-0.116
-0.356
-0.057
238
0.027
169
Danville, VA
110,156
-0.153
-0.403
-0.057
239
0.052
123
Augusta-Aiken, GA-SC
477,441
-0.077
-0.294
-0.057
240
0.004
199
Wheeling, WV-OH
153,172
-0.179
-0.448
-0.057
241
0.067
95
Steubenville-Weirton, OH-WV
132,008
-0.180
-0.448
-0.057
242
0.068
94
Longview-Marshall, TX
208,780
-0.135
-0.386
-0.058
243
0.038
148
Memphis, TN-AR-MS
1,135,614
0.008
-0.178
-0.059
244
-0.052
257
Terre Haute, IN
149,192
-0.125
-0.372
-0.060
245
0.032
157
Sioux City, IA-NE
124,130
-0.145
-0.417
-0.060
246
0.041
142
Pocatello, ID
75,565
-0.125
-0.396
-0.062
247
0.025
175
Peoria-Pekin, IL
347,387
-0.021
-0.217
-0.062
248
-0.033
243
Odessa-Midland, TX
237,132
-0.123
-0.382
-0.062
249
0.027
168
Fort Wayne, IN
502,141
-0.049
-0.268
-0.062
250
-0.018
228
Utica-Rome, NY
299,896
-0.115
-0.342
-0.062
251
0.030
163
Jackson, TN
107,377
-0.081
-0.322
-0.063
252
0.000
206
Bloomington-Normal, IL
150,433
0.026
-0.149
-0.063
253
-0.063
265
Rochester, MN
124,277
0.022
-0.164
-0.063
254
-0.063
264
Albany, GA
120,822
-0.082
-0.316
-0.063
255
0.003
201
Lima, OH
155,084
-0.084
-0.322
-0.064
256
0.004
198
Lake Charles, LA
183,577
-0.066
-0.303
-0.064
257
-0.010
217
Johnstown, PA
232,621
-0.186
-0.476
-0.064
258
0.067
97
Jackson, MI
158,422
-0.014
-0.212
-0.065
259
-0.039
250
Non-metro, MS
1,820,996
-0.203
-0.517
-0.065
.
0.074
.
Non-metro, AL
1,338,141
-0.175
-0.477
-0.067
.
0.056
.
Syracuse, NY
732,117
-0.040
-0.251
-0.068
260
-0.023
234
Macon, GA
322,549
-0.060
-0.299
-0.068
261
-0.015
221
Texarkana, TX-Texarkana, AR
129,749
-0.185
-0.498
-0.068
262
0.060
110
Rockford, IL
371,236
-0.003
-0.211
-0.068
263
-0.049
255
Gadsden, AL
103,459
-0.134
-0.421
-0.069
264
0.029
165
Duluth-Superior, MN-WI
243,815
-0.099
-0.356
-0.069
265
0.010
188
Parkersburg-Marietta, WV-OH
151,237
-0.155
-0.457
-0.071
266
0.040
143
Decatur, AL
145,867
-0.064
-0.326
-0.072
267
-0.017
226
Houston-Galveston-Brazoria, TX
4,669,571
0.073
-0.111
-0.072
268
-0.100
272
Huntington-Ashland, WV-KY-OH
315,538
-0.162
-0.477
-0.073
269
0.043
139
Saginaw-Bay City-Midland, MI
403,070
-0.011
-0.239
-0.074
270
-0.048
253
Victoria, TX
84,088
-0.081
-0.356
-0.075
271
-0.008
213
Jamestown, NY
139,750
-0.145
-0.430
-0.077
272
0.038
149
McAllen-Edinburg-Mission, TX
569,463
-0.212
-0.570
-0.079
273
0.069
91
Decatur, IL
114,706
-0.054
-0.349
-0.088
274
-0.033
242
Beaumont-Port Arthur, TX
385,090
-0.036
-0.390
-0.108
275
-0.062
263
Kokomo, IN
101,541
0.068
-0.237
-0.109
276
-0.127
276

State
Hawaii
California
Vermont
Colorado
Oregon
Montana
Washington
New Hampshire
Massachusetts
New Mexico
Maine
Utah
Arizona
Florida
Rhode Island
Alaska
Wyoming
New Jersey
Idaho
Connecticut
New York
South Dakota
North Carolina
Nevada
Virginia
Illinois
Nebraska
Wisconsin
District of Columbia
Maryland
South Carolina
Arkansas
Iowa
Delaware
Missouri
Oklahoma
Tennessee
Louisiana
Kansas
Ohio
Georgia
Indiana
Pennsylvania
Minnesota
North Dakota
Kentucky
Alabama
West Virginia
Texas
Michigan
Mississippi

TABLE A2: LIST OF STATES BY ESTIMATED QUALITY OF LIFE
Adjusted
Unadjusted
Housing Quality of QOL Quality of QOL
Population
Wages
Cost
Life
Rank
Life
Rank
1,211,537
-0.014
0.530
0.182
1
0.146
4
33,871,648
0.126
0.458
0.085
2
-0.012
37
608,827
-0.173
-0.056
0.071
3
0.159
2
4,301,261
-0.016
0.172
0.065
4
0.059
17
3,421,399
-0.045
0.106
0.058
5
0.072
13
902,195
-0.255
-0.237
0.055
6
0.196
1
5,894,121
0.027
0.181
0.046
7
0.019
29
1,235,786
0.033
0.164
0.037
8
0.008
32
6,349,097
0.094
0.251
0.034
9
-0.031
42
1,819,046
-0.149
-0.136
0.033
10
0.115
7
1,274,923
-0.160
-0.171
0.027
11
0.117
6
2,233,169
-0.054
-0.023
0.021
12
0.049
21
5,130,632
-0.027
0.019
0.020
13
0.032
28
15,982,378
-0.060
-0.036
0.020
14
0.052
19
1,048,319
0.020
0.082
0.016
15
0.000
33
626,932
0.055
0.130
0.014
16
-0.022
39
493,782
-0.193
-0.264
0.014
17
0.127
5
8,414,350
0.190
0.336
0.012
18
-0.106
50
1,293,953
-0.147
-0.212
0.007
19
0.094
10
3,405,565
0.165
0.278
0.005
20
-0.096
49
18,976,457
0.120
0.199
0.003
22
-0.070
47
754,844
-0.252
-0.389
0.003
21
0.154
3
8,049,313
-0.084
-0.141
-0.003
23
0.049
20
1,998,257
0.054
0.054
-0.010
25
-0.040
43
7,078,515
-0.034
-0.085
-0.010
24
0.013
30
12,419,293
0.065
0.063
-0.013
26
-0.049
45
1,711,263
-0.175
-0.319
-0.014
27
0.095
9
5,363,675
-0.036
-0.099
-0.014
28
0.011
31
572,059
0.126
0.154
-0.015
-0.088
5,296,486
0.110
0.126
-0.016
29
-0.079
48
4,012,012
-0.100
-0.214
-0.018
30
0.047
22
2,673,400
-0.185
-0.364
-0.023
31
0.094
11
2,926,324
-0.140
-0.293
-0.023
32
0.067
14
783,600
0.043
-0.010
-0.026
33
-0.046
44
5,595,211
-0.107
-0.247
-0.026
34
0.045
23
3,450,654
-0.179
-0.369
-0.028
35
0.087
12
5,689,283
-0.102
-0.249
-0.029
36
0.040
24
4,468,976
-0.105
-0.264
-0.032
37
0.040
26
2,688,418
-0.133
-0.312
-0.034
38
0.055
18
11,353,140
-0.024
-0.143
-0.035
39
-0.011
36
8,186,453
-0.022
-0.145
-0.036
40
-0.015
38
6,080,485
-0.032
-0.168
-0.039
41
-0.010
35
12,281,054
-0.011
-0.135
-0.039
42
-0.023
40
4,919,479
-0.008
-0.134
-0.040
43
-0.025
41
642,200
-0.235
-0.495
-0.040
44
0.112
8
4,041,769
-0.121
-0.326
-0.044
45
0.040
25
4,447,100
-0.114
-0.318
-0.045
47
0.034
27
1,808,344
-0.162
-0.392
-0.045
46
0.064
15
20,851,820
-0.041
-0.203
-0.046
48
-0.010
34
9,938,444
0.051
-0.061
-0.047
49
-0.066
46
2,844,658
-0.168
-0.427
-0.053
50
0.061
16

Gabriel et al. (2003)
1980
1990
rank
rank
21
38
39
42
13
13
45
34
24
22
5
4
33
41
20
43
29
27
7
14
9
9
36
39
34
20
19
10
14
12
41
23
2
1
46
47
4
5
32
32
50
50
1
2
18
17
11
29
30
31
48
48
8
16
40
37
47
25
6
10
35
43
22
31
17
12
38
28
44
37
42
15
23
26
16
27
49
3

45
18
3
15
30
40
21
28
8
19
33
36
44
35
46
6
24
26
11
25
49
7

Figure A1: College vs High-School Wages across Areas
San Francisco

0.2

New York

0.1

Los Angeles
Washington-Baltimore
Chicago
Detroit
Boston
Hartford
Houston Philadelphia
RI
Dallas
Atlanta
San
Diego
Bakersfield

0.0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3

Great Falls
-0.4

Log Differential of College Wage

Monterey
Sacramento
Santa
Barbara
Minneapolis
Anchorage
Seattle
Cincinnati
Miami
Denver
Phoenix
San
Luis
Obispo Las Vegas
Raleigh
Austin
Birmingham
Columbus
Huntsville
Bloomington
Reno
Portland
Naples
Orlando
St. LouisNV
Jackson Pittsburgh
Visalia
Kokomo
Merced
Tampa
Nashville Cape Cod
Decatur
AK
New
Orleans
Santa Fe
McAllen Panama City
Corpus Christi
Yakima
Grand
Rapids
Beaumont
Syracuse
Sarasota
San
Antonio
Honolulu
Victoria Lancaster
Houma
Fort Pierce
Binghamton
El Odessa
Paso
Springfield
Decatur
Waco
Rockford
Williamsport
Gadsden
Albuquerque
Madison
Norfolk
Lafayette
Janesville
Fort
Collins
Ocala
Yuma
Pittsfield
Fort
Wayne
Appleton
Wichita
Dothan
Fort Myers
HI
Sheboygan
Brownsville
AL Hickory
GA TucsonChampaign
Mansfield
City
Elkhart MA
Medford
PA Mount
OH WA
Rocky
Laredo Oklahoma
Lakeland
Iowa City
FL Wilmington
Burlington
Fort Killeen
Walton Beach
SCCharlottesville
IN
Lafayette
Myrtle
Beach
Chico
Johnstown
St.
Cloud
UT
NC
Fort Smith
WI
Punta Danville
Gorda
Lima
Bellingham
KYLA
Bryan
OR
Corvalis
Muncie
Bloomington
Eugene
CO
IL
State
College
Dubuque
Sioux
Falls
VA
Lincoln
Athens
TN
MS
Jacksonville
TX
MN
Grand
Junction Pueblo
Lawrence
Steubenville
Flagstaff
Columbia
AZ
Altoona Waterloo
AR
Texarkana
VT WY
Grand Forks
ME
OK
Joplin
Jonesboro
St. Joseph
Rapid
City
KS
MO
ND
MT Missoula
NE
Cheyenne
SD

-0.3

-0.2

-0.1
0.0
Log Differential of High School Wage

0.1

0.2

METRO POP

>5.0 Million

Weighted Fit: slope = 1.047 (s.e. 0.043)

1.5-5.0 Million

0.5-1.5 Million

Diagonal line

<0.5 Million

Non-Metro Areas

Figure A2: Housing-Cost versus Rent Differentials across Areas
0.8

San Francisco

0.6

Santa Barbara
Honolulu
Monterey

0.4

San Diego
San Luis Obispo
Los Angeles
New York
Cape Cod

0.0

0.2

Denver
Chicago
Reno
Sacramento
Portland
Washington-Baltimore
Fort
CO Collins
Hartford Miami
Sarasota
AK
Medford Phoenix
Grand Junction
Detroit
PhiladelphiaAustin
Las Vegas
Minneapolis
Wilmington
Atlanta
Albuquerque
Springfield
Tucson
Fort Myers
NV
ORNashville
Dallas
Orlando
Columbus
Cincinnati
Norfolk
Tampa
VT
Missoula
NewPunta
Orleans
Pierce
St.Fort
Louis
Gorda
Fort
Walton
Beach Houston
Flagstaff
Bakersfield
Myrtle
Beach
Bloomington
Yuma
AZ
UT
Pittsburgh
Kokomo
MT
Lexington
FL San
Killeen
Syracuse
Antonio
Sioux
Falls
Jacksonville
Oklahoma
City
Ocala

-0.2
-0.4
-0.6

Log Housing-Cost Differential

HI
Seattle
Boston
Santa Fe Naples

Decatur
El Paso
Beaumont
Joplin
Gadsden
Steubenville
KYSD
Johnstown
AL
OK
MS
ND
McAllen
Great Falls

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0.0
Log-Rent Differential

0.2

0.4

METRO POP

>5.0 Million

Diagonal

1.5-5.0 Million

0.5-1.5 Million

Linear Fit: Slope = 1.117 (.053)

<0.5 Million

Non-Metro Areas

Quadratic fit

0.6

Figure A3: Linear vs Quadratic Approximation of Quality of Life

0.7

0.8

San Francisco

0.6

Santa Barbara

0.5

Honolulu

0.4

San Diego
San Luis Obispo Los Angeles
New York

Cape Cod

0.3

HI
Santa Fe

Naples

Seattle Boston

-0.1

0.0

0.1

0.2

Denver
Chicago
Reno
Sacramento
Portland
Washington-Baltimore
CO Fort Collins
Hartford
Miami
AK
Grand JunctionMedford Sarasota
Phoenix
Austin
Detroit
Philadelphia
Las Vegas
Wilmington
Atlanta
Albuquerque Springfield Minneapolis
Tucson
Fort
Myers
OR
Nashville NV
Orlando Columbus Dallas
Cincinnati
Norfolk Tampa
VT
Missoula
NewPierce
Orleans
St. Louis
Punta Gorda Fort
Houston
Fort WaltonMyrtle
BeachBeach
Flagstaff
Bakersfield
Bloomington
AZ
UTYuma
Pittsburgh
Kokomo
MT
FL
Killeen
Syracuse
San
Antonio
Sioux Falls
Jacksonville
Oklahoma City
Ocala
-0.3

-0.2

Log Housing-Cost Differential

Monterey

El Paso

-0.4

Great Falls
Joplin

-0.6

-0.5

SD

Decatur
Beaumont

Gadsden
Steubenville
KY
AL
OK
MS
ND
McAllen

-0.2

-0.1
0.0
Log Wage Differential

0.1

LINEAR

Q = -.1

Q=0

Q = .1

QUADRATIC

Q = -.1

Q=0

Q= .1

0.2

0.2

Figure A4: Compositional Wage and Housing Costs across Areas: 2000

UT

Compositional Log Housing-Cost Differential
-0.1
0.0
0.1

Atlanta

McAllen

Fort Collins
Flagstaff
Washington-Baltimore
Minneapolis
Denver
CO
Nashville
Cape Cod
Missoula
VT Bloomington
Sioux Falls
Cincinnati
Naples
Fort Walton
Beach
Grand
Junction
Norfolk
KY
MT
Wilmington
Columbus
Hartford
Philadelphia
ND
GadsdenJoplin
Santa Fe
SD
AL
Orlando
Seattle
Phoenix Syracuse
St. Louis
Boston
MS
Portland
Austin
Kokomo
NVPierce
Fort
Detroit
Dallas
Myrtle
Beach
Las Vegas
AK
Houston
Great Falls
Punta Gorda
Albuquerque
Pittsburgh
Reno
Sacramento
Ocala
Steubenville
Jacksonville
Fort Myers DecaturChicago
OR
Oklahoma
City
San Antonio
OK
Medford
Sarasota
FLKilleen
HI New Orleans
Beaumont
AZ
San
Luis Obispo
El Paso
Tampa
Tucson
Springfield
Bakersfield
Monterey
New York
San Diego
San Francisco
Miami Santa Barbara
Honolulu
Los Angeles

-0.2

Yuma

-0.2

-0.1
0.0
Compositional Log Wage Differential

0.1

METRO POP

1.5-5 Million

Linear Fit:

<0.5 Million

>5.0 Million

slope = 0.47 ( 0.23)

0.5-1.5 Million

Non-Metro Areas of State

