                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE ROLE OF BOARDS OF DIRECTORS IN CORPORATE GOVERNANCE:
                  A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK AND SURVEY

                                          Renée Adams
                                       Benjamin E. Hermalin
                                       Michael S. Weisbach

                                        Working Paper 14486
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14486


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2008




The authors wish to thank Ji-Woong Chung, Rudiger Fahlenbrach, and Eliezer Fich for helpful comments
on earlier drafts. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Renée Adams, Benjamin E. Hermalin, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Role of Boards of Directors in Corporate Governance: A Conceptual Framework and
Survey
Renée Adams, Benjamin E. Hermalin, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 14486
November 2008
JEL No. G3,L22

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper is a survey of the literature on boards of directors, with an emphasis on research done subsequent
to the Hermalin and Weisbach (2003) survey. The two questions most asked about boards are what
determines their makeup and what determines their actions? These questions are fundamentally intertwined,
which complicates the study of boards due to the joint endogeneity of makeup and actions. A focus
of this survey is on how the literature, theoretical as well as empirically, deals - or on occasions fails
to deal - with this complication. We suggest that many studies of boards can best be interpreted as
joint statements about both the director-selection process and the eect of board composition on board
actions and rm performance.


Renée Adams                                           Michael S. Weisbach
UQ Business School                                    Department of Finance
University of Queensland                              Fisher College of Business
Brisbane, Qld 4072                                    2100 Neil Ave.
Australia                                             Columbus, OH 43210
r.adams@business.uq.edu.au                            and NBER
                                                      weisbach_2@fisher.osu.edu
Benjamin E. Hermalin
Walter Haas School of Business
545 Student Services Building, #1900
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-0001
hermalin@haas.berkeley.edu
1      Introduction
People often question whether corporate boards matter because their day-to-
day impact is difficult to observe. But, when things go wrong, they can become
the center of attention. Certainly this was true of the Enron, Worldcom, and
Parmalat scandals. The directors of Enron and Worldcom, in particular, were
held liable for the fraud that occurred: Enron directors had to pay $168 million
to investor plaintiffs, of which $13 million was out of pocket (not covered by
insurance); and Worldcom directors had to pay $36 million, of which $18 million
was out of pocket.1 As a consequence of these scandals and ongoing concerns
about corporate governance, boards have been at the center of the policy debate
concerning governance reform and the focus of considerable academic research.
Because of this renewed interest in boards, a review of what we have and have
not learned from research on corporate boards is timely.
    Much of the research on boards ultimately touches on the question “what is
the role of the board?” Possible answers range from boards’ being simply legal
necessities, something akin to the wearing of wigs in English courts, to their
playing an active part in the overall management and control of the corpora-
tion. No doubt the truth lies somewhere between these extremes; indeed, there
are probably multiple truths when this question is asked of different firms, in
different countries, or in different periods.
    Given that all corporations have boards, the question of whether boards
play a role cannot be answered econometrically as there is no variation in the
explanatory variable. Instead, studies look at differences across boards and ask
whether these differences explain differences in the way firms function and how
they perform. The board differences that one would most like to capture are
differences in behavior. Unfortunately, outside of detailed field work, it is dif-
ficult to observe differences in behavior and harder still to quantify them in
a way useful for statistical study. Consequently, empirical work in this area
has focused on structural differences across boards that are presumed to corre-
late with differences in behavior. For instance, a common presumption is that
outside (non-management) directors will behave differently than inside (man-
agement) directors. One can then look at the conduct of boards (e.g., decision
to dismiss the ceo when financial performance is poor) with different ratios
of outside to inside directors to see whether conduct varies in a statistically
significant manner across different ratios. When conduct is not directly observ-
able (e.g., advice to the ceo about strategy), one can look at a firm’s financial
performance to see whether board structure matters (e.g., the way accounting
profits vary with the ratio of outside to inside directors).
    One problem confronting such an empirical approach is that there is no
reason to suppose board structure is exogenous; indeed, there are both theoret-
ical arguments and empirical evidence to suggest board structure is endogenous
(see, e.g., Hermalin and Weisbach, 1988, 1998, and 2003). This creates problems
for the estimation of structure-conduct and structure-performance regressions.
    1 Klausner   et al. (2005).



                                        1
In fact, one of our main points in this survey is the importance of endogeneity.
Governance structures arise endogenously because economic actors choose them
in response to the governance issues they face.2
    Beyond the implications endogeneity holds for econometric analysis, it also
has implications for how to view actual governance practice. In particular,
when we observe what appears to be a poor governance structure, we need to
ask why that structure was chosen. Although it is possible that the governance
structure was chosen by mistake, one needs to give at least some weight to the
possibility that it represents the right, albeit poor, solution to the constrained
optimization problem the organization faces. After all, competition in factor,
capital, and product markets should lead, in Darwinian fashion, to the survival
of the fittest. While admittedly “fittest” does not mean “optimal,” anything
that was sub-optimal for known reasons would be unfit insofar as there would
be pressure to address these reasons for sub-optimality. In other words, existing
sub-optimality is unlikely to lend itself to quick or obvious fixes.
    This insight about endogeneity is, however, easy to forget in the face of data.
Figure 1 shows a plot of two data points.3 On the horizontal axis is an attribute
of governance (e.g., board size). On the vertical axis is a measure of financial
performance. One firm has more of the attribute, but weaker performance; while
the other firm has less of the attribute, but better performance. A regression line
through the points underscores the apparent negative relation between attribute
and performance. Without further analysis, one might be tempted to conclude
that a firm would do better if it shrank the size of its board. The problem with
such a conclusion is that it fails to consider why a large board might have been
chosen.
    Figure 2 replicates Figure 1, but it also shows the optimization problems
faced by the two firms in question. Observe that, for a given firm, there is
a non-monotonic relation between the attribute and financial performance. In
particular, the relation is concave and admits an interior maximum. Moreover,
each of the two firms is at its maximum. Consequently, whereas Firm 2 would
prefer ceteris paribus to be on Firm 1’s curve, it isn’t and, thus, would do worse
than it is doing if it were to shrink its board in line with the naı̈ve conclusion
drawn from the regression in Figure 1.
    Figures 1 and 2 illustrate another issue confronting the study of governance,
namely heterogeneity in the solutions firms choose for their governance prob-
lems.4 As illustrated, Firms 1 and 2 face different governance problems and, not
   2 Demsetz   and Lehn (1985) were among the first to make the general point that governance
structures are endogenous. Others who have raised it include Himmelberg et al. (1999), Palia
(2001), and Coles et al. (2007). The point has also been discussed in various surveys of the
literature; consider, e.g., Bhagat and Jefferis (2002) and Becht et al. (2003), among others.
    3 Figure 1 is presented for illustrative purposes and should not be read as a critique of any

existing research. In particular, no analysis is as naı̈ve as Figure 1.
    4 To be sure, a real empirical study would attempt, in part, to control for such heterogenity

by putting in other controls, including if the data permitted, firm fixed effects. It should be
noted, however, that (i) there can still be a problem with the specification if the attribute enters



                                                 2
                Financial
                performance




                                   Firm 1




                                                  Firm 2




                                                               Governance
                                                               Attribute

Figure 1: Relation between a specific firm attribute and firm financial performance.




                Financial
                performance




                                         Firm 1’s optimization problem




                                                        Firm 2’s optimization problem




                                                               Attribute


                 Figure 2: The real decisions faced by the firms.




                                         3
surprisingly, are driven to different solutions. Almost every model of governance
shows that the equilibrium outcome is sensitive to its exogenous parameters;
consequently, heterogeneity in those parameters will lead to heterogeneity in so-
lutions. Moreover, once one takes into account various sources of non-convexity,
such as those arising in optimal incentive schemes, one may find that strategic
considerations lead otherwise identical firms to adopt different governance solu-
tions (see, e.g., Hermalin, 1994).
     Some help with the heterogeneity issue could be forthcoming from more
theoretical analyses. Although a common—and not necessarily inaccurate—
perception of the literature on corporate governance, particularly related to
boards of directors, is that it is largely empirical, such a view overlooks a large
body of general theory that is readily applied to the specific topic of boards. For
instance, monitoring by the board would seem to fit into the general literature
on hierarchies and supervision (e.g., Williamson, 1975, Calvo and Wellisz, 1979,
Kofman and Lawarrée, 1993, and Tirole, 1986, 1992). As a second example,
issues of board collaboration would seem to fit into the general literature on
free-riding and the teams problem (see, e.g., Holmstrom, 1982).
     The teams-problem example serves to illustrate a problem that can arise in
applying “off-the-shelf” theory to boards. It is well known that, as a member’s
share of a team’s output falls, he or she supplies less effort. For boards, however,
the question is not a single director’s effort, but what happens to total effort
(e.g., are larger boards less capable monitors because of the teams problem)?
Yet, here, theory cannot provide a definitive answer—whether total equilibrium
effort increases or not with board size depends critically on assumptions about
functional forms.5 While “anything goes” conclusions can be acceptable in
an abstract theoretical model, they are often less than satisfactory in applied
modeling. The lack of clear definitive predictions in much of the related general
theory is, therefore, a hindrance to modeling governance issues. Conversely, if a
specific model makes a definitive prediction, then one can often be left wondering
if it is an artifact of particular assumptions rather than a reflection of a robust
economic truth.
     A second, related point is that, in a simplified, and thus tractable, model,
theory can be too strong; that is, by application of sophisticated contracts or
mechanisms the parties (e.g., directors and ceo) can achieve a more optimal
outcome than reality indicates is possible. To an extent, that problem can be
finessed; for instance, if one restricts attention to incomplete contracts. But as
into the specification only linearly (as opposed to nonlinearly as suggested by the parabolas
in Figure 2); and (ii) if different firms face different shaped tradeoffs (e.g., if the parabolas
aren’t the same shape for all firms), then the coefficients on the attribute, its square, etc., will
vary across firms, suggesting a random-coefficients approach is warranted. See Hermalin and
Wallace (2001) and Bhagat and Jefferis (2002) for a discussion of some of these methodological
issues.
    5 For instance, if a team’s total benefit is
                                                 PN
                                                   n=1 en , where  e is the effort of agent n, each
                                                                 ` PnN      ´         γ+1
agent gets 1/N of the benefit, and each agent n’s utility is         m=1 em /N − (en      )/(γ + 1),
                                     ` 1 ´1/γ
then total equilibrium effort is N N          , which is increasing in N if γ > 1, decreasing in N
if γ ∈ (0, 1), and constant if γ = 1.




                                                 4
others have noted, the assumption of incomplete contracts can fail to be robust
to minor perturbations of the information structure (Hermalin and Katz, 1991)
or the introduction of a broader class of mechanisms (Maskin and Tirole, 1999).
    A further issue is that corporations are complex, yet, to have any traction,
a model must abstract away from many features of real-life corporations. This
makes it difficult to understand the complex and multifaceted solutions firms
use to solve their governance problems. For instance, the optimal governance
structure might involve a certain type of board, operating in a certain fashion,
having implemented a particular incentive package, and responding in certain
ways to feedback from the relevant product and capital markets. To include
all those features in a model is infeasible, but can we expect the assumption of
ceteris paribus with respect to the non-modeled aspects of the situation to be
reasonable? The constrained answer arrived at by holding all else constant need
not represent the unconstrained answer accurately.
    Yet another point, related both to the previous point and to our emphasis
on issues of endogeneity, is that, motivated by both a desire to simplify and to
conform to institutional details, the modeler is often tempted to take certain
aspects of the governance structure as given. The problem with this is that the
governance structure is largely endogenous; it is, in its entirety, the solution
reached by economic actors to their governance problems. Of course, certain
features, such as the necessity of having a board of directors, can largely be
seen as exogenous (although it should be remembered that the decision to make
a company a corporation rather than, say, a partnership is itself endogenous).
Furthermore, the timing of events, particularly in the short run, can make it
reasonable to treat some aspects of the governance structure as exogenous for
the purposes of investigating certain questions theoretically.
    In this survey, we focus primarily on work that illustrates the sorts of chal-
lenges discussed above, papers that help clarify the nature of board behavior,
or that use novel approaches. We also attempt to put the work under the same
conceptual microscope, namely how should the results be interpreted in light of
governance structures being the second-best solution to the governance problems
faced by the firm. Our focus is also on more recent papers, even if they are not
yet published, because prior surveys by John and Senbet (1998) and Hermalin
and Weisbach (2003) cover many established papers in this field. Although we
aim to be comprehensive, it would be impossible to discuss every paper in light
of the recent explosion in the literature on boards.6 Of necessity, we omit many
interesting papers in this area and we apologize to their authors in advance.
For a more detailed discussion of the event-study evidence surrounding board
appointments, we refer the reader to Yermack (2006). Fields and Keys (2003)
review the monitoring role of the board, as well as the emerging literature on
board diversity (see, also, Carter et al., 2003, Farrell and Hersch, 2005, and
Adams and Ferreira, 2008b, on board diversity). For the sake of brevity, we
do not discuss the literature on boards of financial institutions. Because this
   6 After searching the literature, we estimate that more than 200 working papers on boards

have been written since 2003, when Hermalin and Weisbach published their board survey.




                                             5
is a survey of corporate boards, we also do not discuss the literature on boards
of organizations such as non-profits and central banks. Partly because of the
difficulty in obtaining data, this literature is less developed than the literature
on corporate boards (Bowen, 1994, discusses some of the similarities and differ-
ences between corporate and non-corporate boards).7 Similar data limitations
restrict us to a discussion of boards of publicly-traded corporations.
    Boards have also been a subject of interest in many disciplines beyond eco-
nomics and finance, including accounting, law, management, psychology, and
sociology.8 Each of these literatures provide fascinating insights into the nature
of boards. Although this survey focuses on the economics and finance litera-
tures, it is worth noting that the study of boards is interdisciplinary.
    The next section considers the question of what directors do. The section
following, Section 3, considers issues related to board structure. Section 4 dis-
cusses how boards fulfill their roles. Section 5 examines the literature on what
motivates directors. We end with some concluding remarks.


2     What Do Directors Do?
To understand corporate boards, one should begin with the question of what
do directors do?9

2.1     Descriptive Studies
One way to determine what directors do is to observe directors; that is, do
field work. There is a large descriptive literature on boards (e.g., Mace, 1971,
Whisler, 1984, Lorsch and MacIver, 1989, Demb and Neubauer, 1992, and
Bowen, 1994).
    The principal conclusions of Mace were that “directors serve as a source
of advice and counsel, serve as some sort of discipline, and act in crisis situ-
ations” if a change in ceo becomes necessary (p. 178). The nature of their
“advice and counsel” is unclear. Mace suggests that a board serves largely as
a sounding board for the ceo and top management, occasionally providing ex-
pertise when a firm faces an issue about which one or more board members
are expert. Yet Demb and Neubauer’s survey results find that approximately
two-thirds of directors agreed that “setting the strategic direction of the com-
   7 Also see Hermalin (2004) for a discussion of how research on corporate boards may inform

the study of university and college boards. Freedman (2004) discusses the relation between
universities and colleges’ boards and their presidents.
   8 Some examples of this broader literature include Bebchuk and Fried (2004), Demb and

Neubauer (1992), Grandori, ed (2004), Hambrick et al. (1996), Lorsch and MacIver (1989),
Mace (1971), Pfeffer (1972), Roe (1994), Westphal and Zajac (1995), Westphal (1999), and
Zajac and Westphal (1996).
   9 This question is distinct from the question of what should directors do? This second

question is answered, in part, by the legal obligations imposed by corporate law (both statute
and precedent), having to do with fiduciary obligations (see, e.g., Clark, 1986, especially
chapters 3 and 4).




                                              6
pany” was one of the jobs they did (p. 43, emphasis added).10 Eighty percent
of the directors also agreed that they were “involved in setting strategy for the
company” (p. 43). Seventy-five percent of respondents to another of Demb and
Neubauer’s questionnaires report that they “set strategy, corporate policies,
overall direction, mission, vision” (p. 44). Indeed far more respondents agreed
with that description of their job than agreed with the statements that their job
entailed “oversee[ing], monitor[ing] top management, ceo” (45%); “succession,
hiring/firing ceo and top management” (26%); or serving as a “watchdog for
shareholders, dividends” (23%).
    The disciplinary role of boards is also unclear from descriptive studies. Per-
haps reflecting the period he studied, Mace suggests that discipline stems largely
from the ceo and other top management knowing “that periodically they must
appear before a board made up largely of their peers” (p. 180). Lorsch and
MacIver take an even dimmer view, suggesting that boards are so passive that
they offer little by way of discipline (see, especially, p. 96). Demb and Neubauer’s
statistics seem broadly consistent with this view, as less than half of their re-
spondents agree that their job is to “oversee, monitor top management, ceo”
and less than a quarter agree that their job is to serve as a “watchdog for
shareholders, dividends” (p. 44).
    On the other hand, it has been suggested that the board passivity described
by Mace and Lorsch and MacIver is a phenomenon of the past. For instance,
MacAvoy and Millstein (1999) suggest that boards have recently become less
passive; that is, they have evolved from being “managerial rubber-stamps to
active and independent monitors.” MacAvoy and Millstein provide statistical
evidence in support of that conclusion, finding that CalPERS’ grading of a
firm’s board procedures is positively correlated with accounting-based measures
of performance. Another piece of evidence consistent with the view that boards
have become tougher is that ceo dismissal probabilities have been trending
upward (see Huson et al., 2001, for evidence over the period 1971 to 1994 and
see Kaplan and Minton, 2006, for more recent evidence).

2.2     The Hiring, Firing, and Assessment of Management
One role that is typically ascribed to directors is control of the process by which
top executives are hired, promoted, assessed, and, if necessary, dismissed (see,
e.g., Vancil, 1987, for a descriptive analysis and Naveen, 2006, for statistical
evidence).
    Assessment can be seen as having two components, one is monitoring of
what top management does and the other is determining the intrinsic ability of
top management. The monitoring of managerial actions can, in part, be seen
as part of a board’s obligation to be vigilant against managerial malfeasance.
Yet, being realistic, it is difficult to see a board actually being in a position to
  10 It is important to note that the Demb and Neubauer surveys and questionnaires sample

very few American directors (4.2%). The top four nationalities surveyed by them are British
(29.6%), German (11.3%), French (11.3%), and Canadian (9.9%). Overall 43.7% of their
respondents come from common-law countries.



                                            7
detect managerial malfeasance directly; at best, a board would seem dependent
on the actions of outside auditors, regulators, and, in some instances, the news
media. Indirectly, a board might guard against managerial malfeasance through
its choice of auditor, its oversight over reporting requirements, and its control
over accounting practices.
    The principal focus of the literature on assessment, at least at a theoretical
level, has been on the question of how the board determines managerial abil-
ity and what it does with that information.11 One strategy for studying the
question of ability assessment has been the adaptation of Holmstrom (1999) to
boards. Within that broad approach, authors have focussed on how the assess-
ment of ability relates to the power of the ceo (e.g., Hermalin and Weisbach,
1998); to the selection of projects and strategy (e.g., Dominguez-Martinez et
al., in press); to the process of selecting the ceo (e.g., Hermalin, 2005); among
other issues.

2.2.1    Assessment, Bargaining Power, and CEO Control
The first article to apply Holmstrom’s framework to boards was Hermalin and
Weisbach (1998). In their model, there is an initial period of firm performance
under an incumbent ceo. Based on this performance, the board updates its
beliefs about the ceo’s ability. In light of these updated beliefs, the board may
choose to dismiss the ceo and hire a replacement from the pool of replacement
ceos or it may bargain with the incumbent ceo with regard to changes in
board composition and his future salary. The board, then, chooses whether to
obtain an additional, costly signal about ceo ability (either that of the original
incumbent if retained or the replacement if hired).12 Based on this signal,
if obtained, the board again makes a decision about keeping or replacing the
ceo. If replaced, a (another) ceo is drawn from the pool of replacement ceos.
Finally, second- (and final-) period profits are realized, with the expected value
of the profits being a positive function of the then-in-charge ceo’s ability.
    The board’s inclination to obtain an additional signal is a function of its inde-
pendence from the ceo.13 The board’s independence at that stage will depend
  11 Typically, the ceo is a member of the board. In stating the ceo is at odds with “the

board,” we are, like the literature, using the board as shorthand for the board minus the ceo.
  12 An alternative, but essentially equivalent, modeling strategy for this stage would be to

assume the board always receives the additional signal, but the board has discretion over the
informativeness of the signal, with more informative signals being costlier to the board than
less informative signals. See the discussion in Hermalin (2005) on this matter.
  13 Independence is a complex concept. With respect to monitoring the ceo, one imagines

that directors who have close ties to the ceo (e.g., professionally, socially, or because the ceo
has power over them) would find monitoring him more costly than directors with fewer ties.
In terms of measurable aspects of board structure, outside directors are typically taken to be
more independent than inside directors, given the latter are either the ceo or his subordinates.
Some empirical work tries to further analyze the reported ties between outside directors and
the ceo, dividing outside directors according to their level of independence (e.g., Baysinger
and Butler, 1985; Hermalin and Weisbach, 1988, 1991). This division of outsiders is almost
always dichotomous with the two categories being independent outsiders and “gray” directors,
with the latter referring to directors with reported social or professional ties to the ceo. Some
authors use the term “affiliated” instead of “gray.”


                                               8
on the outcome of the bargaining game between the board and the incumbent
ceo if he is retained.14 Because the acquisition of the additional signal can
only increase the risk of being dismissed and the ceo enjoys a non-contractible
control benefit, the ceo prefers a less independent board; that is, a board less
likely to acquire this additional signal. The board, however, prefers to main-
tain its independence. When the ceo has bargaining power—specifically when
he has demonstrated that he’s a “rare commodity” by performing well—the
board’s independence declines. Intuitively, a ceo who has shown himself to
be above average bargains on two dimensions: he can bargain for more com-
pensation and, because he prefers to remain ceo over being fired, the degree
of the board’s independence. At any moment in time, a board views itself as
optimally independent (i.e., the directors view any change in their composition
that may lead to more or less diligence in monitoring as moving it away from
the incumbent board’s optimum). Hence, a change in independence represents
a second-order loss for the board, whereas as an increase in the ceo’s salary
is a first-order loss. The board, therefore, is more willing to budge on the is-
sue of independence (willingness to monitor) than salary and, hence, there is
more movement on independence. So a ceo who performs well ends up facing
a less independent board. The flip side is that a ceo who performs poorly is
vulnerable to replacement.
    Baker and Gompers (2003), Boone et al. (2007), and Ryan and Wiggins
(2004) each find evidence consistent with the idea that successful ceos are able
to bargain for less independent boards. Boone et al. find that variables that are
reasonably associated with bargaining power either for the board or the ceo
are significant and have the right sign. In particular, measures of ceo bar-
gaining power, tenure, and the ceo’s shareholdings, are negatively correlated
with board independence. The tenure findings, in particular, are precisely what
the Hermalin and Weisbach model would predict. Measures that indicate that
the ceo has relatively less bargaining power, including outside director own-
ership, venture capital reputation, and the reputation of the firm’s investment
banker at the time of its ipo, are all positively correlated with board indepen-
dence. Similarly, Baker and Gompers find that measures that reflect the ceo’s
bargaining power, including an estimate of the ceo’s Shapley value and the
reputation of the firm’s venture capitalists, have the predicted signs (negative
for the former and positive for the latter) with respect to the percentage of non-
inside directors on the board. At odds with the Hermalin and Weisbach model
and unlike Boone et al., Baker and Gompers find a positive—albeit statistically
insignificant—relationship between ceo tenure and percentage of non-inside di-
rectors. Finally, Ryan and Wiggins find that a ceo’s pay becomes less linked
to equity performance as his control over the board increases (proxied by his
tenure and the proportion of insiders). These authors interpret these findings
as consistent with the Hermalin and Weisbach bargaining framework, because
  14 Hermalin and Weisbach assume there is sufficient competition among potential replace-

ment ceos for the position that a replacement ceo has no bargaining power. Their model
would be robust to giving a replacement ceo some bargaining power as long as it was less
than that enjoyed by an incumbent ceo who is retained.


                                            9
it suggests that as ceos become more powerful, they use this power to im-
prove their well-being (e.g., as here, where this power allows them to reduce the
volatility of their compensation).

2.2.2    Assessment and Project Selection
Dominguez-Martinez et al. (in press) is a similar model to Hermalin and Weis-
bach (1998); a key difference is that now it is the ceo who determines what
information the board learns. An interpretation of Dominguez-Martinez et al.’s
model is that there are two possible types of ceo, good and bad. In each of
two productive periods, a ceo draws a project at random from a distribution
of different projects (conditional on ceo ability, each period’s draw is an in-
dependent event). Think of each project being summarized by its npv. The
difference between the two types of ceos is that the distribution of projects
(distribution of npvs to be precise) is better for the good type than the bad
type (e.g., the good type’s distribution dominates the bad type’s in the sense
of first-order stochastic dominance).
    The ceo sees the npv “stamped” on the project he draws, whereas the
board does not. In the second (final) period, the ceo’s incentives are such that
he implements the project he draws if and only if it has a positive npv. In the
first period, however, the ceo’s incentives are possibly misaligned with that of
the shareholders: The ceo values remaining in office in the second period. If
his actions or performance lead the directors to infer he is the bad type and the
board is not committed to retain him, then he will be dismissed as it is better
to draw again from the pool of ceos than to continue to the second period with
a ceo who is known to be bad.
    One potential solution would be for the board to commit to retain the first-
period ceo for the second period. With that commitment, ceos would choose
only positive npv projects in the first period. This, however, is not necessarily
optimal because the directors are throwing away the option to replace the ceo
if they infer he is likely to be bad. That is, as is also noted in Hermalin and
Weisbach, the ability to replace a ceo a board infers is probably bad creates a
valuable real option for the firm.
    Given that good-type ceos are more likely to have positive npv projects
than bad types, an alternative strategy for the board would be to commit to
dismiss the ceo only if he doesn’t undertake a project. This, however, is not
without cost because now a ceo could be willing to undertake a negative npv
project if it is not so bad that the disutility resulting from pursing the project
outweighs his utility from retaining his job.15 Under this governance rule, some
number of negative npv projects will be pursued.
    A third strategy might be for the board to commit to keep the ceo only if
he undertakes a positive npv project. This might seem optimal, insofar as it
avoids negative npv projects and allows some learning, but could nevertheless
  15 Dominguez-Martinez et al. assume a ceo’s first-period utility function is π + λχ, where

π is the returns from the first-period project, λ > 0 is his benefit of keeping his job, and
χ ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether he loses or keeps his job, respectively.



                                            10
               bad type density                            good type density




                                                                          npv
                                           vi         v0


Figure 3: Illustration of the Dominguez-Martinez et al. (in press) model. The
          probability density functions over NPV are shown for the two types.
          From an informational perspective, the CEO should be retained if and
          only if the realized value of a project is above v i . If, however, v 0 denotes
          the project with an NPV = 0, then the board, to limit first-period loses,
          may wish to commit to retain the CEO if and only if realized value is
          above some cutoff strictly between v i and v 0 .




be sub-optimal: How much is learned about the ceo’s ability depends on the
relative likelihood of the two types having projects with a particular npv. It
is possible, therefore, that if a given npv is more likely from a good type than
a bad type, then it could be worth having that project undertaken even if the
npv is negative because seeing the project provides valuable information about
the ceo’s ability. Conversely, if a given npv is more likely from a bad type
than a good type, then it could be worthwhile dismissing the ceo following the
realization of the project even if its npv is positive. Figure 3 illustrates. Purely
from the perspective of optimal inference, the board should retain a ceo if he
has a project with an npv above v i and dismiss him otherwise. If, however
v i < 0 = v 0 , then this cutoff implies first-period costs. Trading off these first-
period costs against the value of information, the board may wish to set a cutoff,
v c , between v i and v 0 ; that is, a ceo keeps his job if and only if he undertakes
a project and that project pays off at least v c .
      Dominguez-Martinez et al. observe that their model offers a possible expla-
nation for why evidence of “poor decision making” does not always lead to ceo
dismissal. Sometimes it is optimal to let a ceo pursue a bad strategy rather
than stick to the status quo (i.e., better to pursue a negative npv project rather
than do nothing) because the information revealed from that course of action
allows the board to update positively about the ceo’s ability. Admittedly, as


                                           11
formulated here, the same model would also explain the dismissal of a ceo after
moderate success if moderate success is more associated with low ability than
high ability.16 Dominguez-Martinez et al.’s model also suggests an explanation
for why new ceos rarely seem to be riding with training wheels when it comes
to managing their companies. Limiting a ceo’s range of action, while perhaps
a way to avoid risky mistakes, also limits how much the board can learn about
his ability. Especially early in his career, when relatively little is known, the
expected value of information can outweigh the expected cost of mistakes.

2.2.3     Assessment and CEO Selection
Hermalin (2005) is concerned with the fact that information is more valuable
when a board is seeking to infer the ability of a relatively unknown ceo than that
of a more established veteran. The reason is that the option to dismiss a poorly
performing ceo is like a put option. Consequently, its value is greater, ceteris
paribus, the greater is the amount of uncertainty. Hermalin builds on this insight
to examine the relationship between a board’s structure and its propensity to
hire a new ceo from the outside (an external hire) versus from the inside (an
internal hire). Presumably an internal hire is a better-known commodity than an
external hire, meaning that an external hire offers the greater option value and
is, therefore, more valuable ceteris paribus. How much more valuable, however,
depends on the degree to which the board will monitor the ceo (its degree of
diligence). Like the Hermalin and Weisbach (1998) model, the board makes a
decision as to how intensively it will monitor the ceo, which is reflected in the
probability it will get an additional signal correlated with his ability.17 Without
the signal, there is no option value. Consequently, the value of uncertainty
about a new ceo is greater the more diligent the board (i.e., the more likely it
is to acquire the signal) and, therefore, a more diligent board is more willing to
trade off other attributes for greater uncertainty than is a less diligent board.
Hermalin argues that this insight offers an explanation for why there has been
a growing trend towards both more external hires and shorter ceo tenures:
Due to increased pressure from institutional shareholders, more government
regulations, greater threats of litigation, and new exchange requirements, boards
have become more independent and diligent.18 Hence, boards are more willing to
monitor, which raises the likelihood they hire externally for the ceo position.19
More monitoring directly raises the likelihood of ceo dismissal and indirectly
raises it if it leads firms to hire ceos about whom less is known.
   16 Dominguez-Martinez et al. do not make this point. This is one of the ways our interpre-

tation of their model could be said to differ from their actual model.
   17 Alternatively, and essentially equivalently, the signal is always observed, but its precision

is an increasing function of the board’s efforts at monitoring. See §VI of Hermalin.
   18 See Huson et al. (2001) and Gillan and Starks (2000) for evidence on trends toward greater

board independence (technically, boards with a greater proportion of outside directors) and
the rise of institutional investors.
   19 See Borokhovich et al. (1996), Huson et al. (2001), and Dahya et al. (2002) for evidence

that the proportion of new ceo hires that are external has been increasing; the last provides
evidence for this trend outside the us.




                                                12
                                                     More
                                                     ceo
                        More ceo risk                effort                 Compensation
                        ⇒ more ceo                                          required for
                        incentive                             More risk     greater effort
                                                              ⇒ more
                                         Greater              incentive
                                         value of
                                                     More                       Greater
     More                Greater         option
                                                     external                   ceo com-
     independent         propensity
                                                     ceo                        pensation
     boards              to monitor
                                                     hires
                                                           More uncer-
                                                           tainty ⇒ more
                        ceo more                           likely fired  Compensation
                        likely to be                                     required for
                        discovered low               Shorter             less job
                        ability                      average             security
                                                     ceo
                                                     tenures




          Figure 4: A graphical summary of the Hermalin (2005) model.




   One response of ceos to this greater monitoring pressure is for them to
work “harder” (which could be interpreted as taking less perquisites). Both
because they are led to work harder and their jobs are less secure, ceos will de-
mand greater pay in compensation. Hence, a consequence of more independent
boards over time could be upward pressure on ceo compensation.20 Figure 4
summarizes Hermalin’s model.21

2.2.4    Other Assessment Models
A number of other papers examine the mechanisms associated with the board’s
assessment of the ceo. Graziano and Luporini (2005) also has a board that
  20 As Hermalin notes, the positive correlation between board independence and ceo pay in

time series need not imply a positive correlation in the cross section at any point in time.
Hermalin sketches an extension of his model that would predict a negative correlation in cross
section, despite a positive correlation over time. See his §V.
  21 It is worth noting that Hermalin is not the only theoretical explanation for the trend

toward more external hires and greater ceo compensation. Murphy and Zábojnı́k (2003,
2004) offer a non-boards-based model that takes as its main premise that there has been a
decline in the value of managers’ firm-specific knowledge relative to the value of their general
knowledge. As they show, this will increase the willingness of firms to hire ceos externally.
Given Murphy and Zábojnı́k’s modeling of the ceo labor market, this greater willingness to
go outside translates into a rise in ceo compensation. Hermalin discusses how his model can
be extended to incorporate the Murphy and Zábojnı́k model, see his §VI.



                                              13
seeks to determine ceo ability. Critical to their analysis is the presence of a
large shareholder on the board, one who is willing to bear the cost of monitoring,
but who also gains private benefits if the company pursues certain strategies
(projects). Because only the large shareholder will monitor, they find there can
be advantages to a dual-board system (e.g., as in much of continental Europe)
because it may be advantageous to divorce the monitoring role from the power to
have a say over the company’s strategy. Hirshleifer and Thakor (1994) assume
that boards always receive signals useful to assessing the ceo’s ability, but
boards differ insofar as some are lax and some are vigilant. Vigilant boards
may choose to fire the ceo on the basis of a bad signal. The situation in
Hirshleifer and Thakor is complicated by the possibility of a takeover bid by
an outside party with independent information about the firm; consequently, it
may behoove a vigilant board not to act on its own information, but wait to see
what information can be learned by the presence (or not) of a takeover bid and
the price bid. This article also exemplifies the fact that board governance is only
one source of managerial discipline and, more specifically, it captures the notion
that internal and external monitoring can serve as substitutes or complements.
Warther (1998) is another article in which the board acquires information about
managerial ability. Here, unlike the other models we’ve discussed, each director
gets a private signal and aggregation of information is costly insofar as a director
who indicates he received a negative signal is at risk of losing his board seat if
he proves to be in the minority.
    A recent strand of the literature has recognized that the board’s monitor-
ing of the ceo can create, in effect, a danger of opportunism or holdup by the
board.22 The ability to dismiss the ceo after he has made firm-specific in-
vestments means the board can appropriate some of the ceo’s returns, thereby
diminishing his original investment incentives. Two papers in this strand are
Almazan and Suarez (2003) and Laux (2008). In both, two critical assump-
tions are (i) initial contracts between board and ceo can be renegotiated and
(ii) at least some kinds of boards (strong in Almazan and Suarez, independent
in Laux) cannot commit to not behaving opportunistically or aggressively in
renegotiation.
    In Almazan and Suarez, after being hired, a ceo can, at personal cost, take
a discrete action that raises, by a discrete amount, the probability that a given
strategy or project will succeed. This action is observable by the board, but not
verifiable, which creates an opportunity for later holdup. After the ceo takes
(sinks) his action, a profitable opportunity for the firm may arise that requires
a new ceo to exploit. If the board is strong enough to fire the incumbent ceo
in favor of a new ceo, then the board can use that possibility to obtain salary
concessions from the incumbent because losing his job means he loses a private
benefit. The threat of being forced to make such concessions can undermine the
ceo’s initial incentive to take the costly action. To be more concrete, consider
the following variation on Almazan and Suarez’s idea:23 Suppose that the new
  22 Opportunism and holdup problems have been studied in a large number of areas of eco-

nomics since Williamson (1975, 1976).
  23 The actual Almazan and Suarez (2003) model is more complex than what we present here.




                                           14
opportunity has the same expected payoff as keeping the incumbent ceo if he
took the action and, thus, a higher expected payoff than keeping him if he
didn’t take the action. Suppose a weak board will never fire the ceo when the
expected value of keeping him equals that of the new opportunity, but can fire
him when the latter is greater. A strong board is always capable of firing the
ceo. Assume it is possible, when the threat to dismiss the ceo is credible,
for the board to capture, in renegotiation, the ceo’s private benefit of control
and push the ceo to some reservation utility (call it 0). Hence, a ceo with a
strong board has no incentive to take the action: If the new opportunity doesn’t
arise, he retains his job no matter what he did, there is no renegotiation of his
compensation, and he enjoys the control benefit. But if the new opportunity
does arise he gets 0 regardless of his action; either he is fired, thus denied
both pay and private benefit, or through renegotiation is forced down to a 0
reservation utility (payoff). Because his ultimate payoff is independent of his
action, he has no incentive to incur the cost of taking it. The story is, however,
different for a ceo who faces a weak board. Now, he is strictly better off if he
has taken the action and the new opportunity arises: The board cannot threaten
to fire him, so he continues to capture rents (wage plus private benefit). If he
didn’t take the action and the new opportunity arose, then he would lose both
wage and private benefit. If the new opportunity arises with low frequency, so it
is efficient for the incumbent ceo to take the action, then having a weak board
will be better than having a strong board.
    In Almazan and Suarez, the distinction between strong and weak boards is
a distinction about their bargaining power. In Laux (2008), the board always
has all the bargaining power at the renegotiation stage (can make a take-it-
or-leave-it offer to the ceo), but boards differ in their degree of independence.
This variation in degree of independence acts, however, like a shift in bargaining
power. Consequently, for reasons similar to those in Almazan and Suarez, a firm
can be better off with a less independent board than a more independent board.

2.2.5    Additional Empirical Analyses of Assessment
There is both anecdotal and statistical evidence that boards dismiss poorly
performing ceos. Based on interviews, Mace (1971) and Vancil (1987) con-
clude that boards fire, albeit often reluctantly, poorly performing ceos. There
are numerous statistical analyses that show poor performance, measured ei-
ther as stock returns or accounting profits, positively predicts a change in the
ceo.24 Simply documenting a relationship between poor performance and an
While those complications lead to a richer and more nuanced analysis, they are not necessary
to get the basic idea across.
  24 A problem facing empirical work is that firms often offer a face-saving rationale for a

change in ceo (e.g., he wishes to spend more time with his family) rather than admit the
ceo was forced out for doing a bad job. See Warner et al. (1988), Weisbach (1988), Parrino
(1997), and Jenter and Kanaan (2008) for further discussions of this issue and strategies for
dealing with it. To the extent non-performance-based ceo turnover is random, it simply adds
noise to turnover regressions, thus reducing the power of such tests, but leaves them unbiased
and consistent.



                                             15
increased probability of a ceo turnover, although suggestive of board monitor-
ing, is nonetheless far from conclusive. After all, a sense of failure or pressure
from shareholders could explain this relationship. To better identify the role
played by the board, Weisbach (1988) interacts board composition and firm
performance in a ceo turnover equation. His results indicate that when boards
are dominated by outside directors, ceo turnover is more sensitive to firm per-
formance than it is in firms with insider-dominated boards.25 This result is
consistent with the predictions of Hermalin and Weisbach (1998) and Laux
(2008) under the presumption that outsider domination is a good proxy for
board independence.
    Yermack (1996) also seeks to relate board structure to ceo turnover. Instead
of an interaction between board composition and performance, Yermack inter-
acts the log of board size with financial performance and finds a positive and
significant coefficient on this interaction term.26 That the coefficient is positive
indicates that firms with smaller boards have a stronger relationship between
poor performance and ceo turnover than do firms with larger boards. This
finding is consistent with the oft-heard view that smaller boards are more vigi-
lant overseers of the ceo than larger boards. In particular, in response to poor
performance, they may not be paralyzed by free-riding or otherwise plagued
with inertia in the way that larger boards are.
    Another of Yermack’s findings (supported by later work by Eisenberg et al.,
1998) is that board size and firm performance, the latter measured by average
Tobin’s Q, are negatively correlated.27 It is not obvious how to reconcile Yer-
mack’s results with the renegotiation-based models discussed previously: These
models suggest that too vigilant (here, small) a board is detrimental to a firm
insofar as it discourages the ceo from taking valuable actions or means such
actions can be implemented only at greater cost. Yermack’s findings could also
be at odds with Hermalin and Weisbach’s (1998) bargaining-based model: If
larger boards are less vigilant—effectively less independent—then the logic of
the Hermalin and Weisbach model suggests a successful ceo will bargain to
increase the size of his board. This would yield a prediction consistent with
Yermack’s interaction effect: Larger boards will be less responsive to a signal
of poor performance than smaller boards. However, because it is the more suc-
cessful ceos who have the larger boards, the Hermalin and Weisbach model
would seem to predict that firms with larger boards would outperform those
  25 Dahya   et al. (2002) find a similar result in the uk: Firms that adopted the recommenda-
tions of the Cadbury Commission show a greater sensitivity of ceo turnover to performance
than non-adopting firms. Related, Goyal and Park (2002) find that the sensitivity of ceo
turnover to performance is less when the ceo also serves as board chair. Adams and Ferreira
(2008b) find that the proportion of women on boards increases the ceo performance-turnover
sensitivity even after controlling for the proportion of outside directors, which suggests that
the proportion of female outside directors—directors outside of the “old-boy network”—is
proxying for board independence.
   26 See Faleye (2003) for a similar study.
   27 Average Tobin’s Q is the ratio of the market value of assets to their book value. A

presumption in the literature is that Q > 1 is partially a reflection of the good job management
is doing. As long as one controls for book value of assets, Tobin’s Q regressions are similar to
market-value regressions.


                                              16
with smaller boards, which is contrary to Yermack’s findings.
    Such issues led Coles et al. (2008) to reestimate Yermack, but with greater
attention to heterogeneity issues. Consistent with the spirit of Figure 2 and the
conceptual framework set forth there, Coles et al. seek to control for the possi-
bility that boards have different sizes because firms face different problems. In
contrast to Yermack’s findings, Coles et al. find that firm performance (average
Tobin’s Q) is increasing in board size for certain types of firms, namely those
that are highly diversified or that are high-debt firms.
    Perry (1999) breaks down the cross-sectional relationship between ceo turn-
over and firm performance by whether the outside directors are paid using incen-
tives. He finds that the relationship between ceo turnover and firm performance
is stronger when boards have incentives. This finding suggests that providing
explicit incentives to directors leads them to be more vigilant (act more in-
dependently). Beyond incentive reasons, another potential explanation is the
following: In firms that make use of incentive pay for directors, the directors
have a professional rather than a personal relationship with the ceo and, thus,
are relatively independent of him.

2.3     Setting of Strategy
In addition to making decisions concerning the hiring and firing of ceos, boards
may also be involved in the setting of strategy or, somewhat equivalently, the
selection of projects. Certainly surveys of directors—see the discussion of Demb
and Neubauer (1992) above—indicate that directors believe themselves to be
involved in setting strategy.

2.3.1   Theory
To an extent, many of the models discussed above could be modified to make
them about boards’ oversight of strategy. Instead of replacing the ceo, the
board compels him to change strategy. In an adaptation of Almazan and Suarez
(2003) or Hermalin and Weisbach (1998), the ceo could be assumed to have
an intrinsic preference for the incumbent strategy versus a replacement (the
incumbent strategy provides, e.g., more opportunity to consume perquisites).
In an adaptation of Laux (2008), similar results would follow if one assumed
the financial returns to the replacement strategy are independent of the ceo’s
initial actions.
    An alternative modeling approach is to investigate the choice of strategy as a
game of information transmission: the ceo (or management more generally) has
different preferences than the board concerning projects (strategies). A number
of observers are coming to the view that information transmission between the
board and the ceo is important for good governance (see, e.g., Holmstrom,
2005). This is particular true when the ceo has payoff-relevant private infor-
mation, insofar as an agency problem arises because the ceo can influence the
board’s decision his way through the strategic release of information.



                                       17
    Adams and Ferreira (2007) build a model based on four broad assumptions:
(i) the ceo dislikes limits on his actions (loss of control); (ii) advice from the
board raises firm value without limiting a ceo’s actions; (iii) the effectiveness
of the board’s control and the value of its advice are better the more informed
the board is; and (iv) the board depends crucially on the ceo for firm-specific
information. In the Adams and Ferreira model, the board can learn the amount,
a ∈ [0, 1], by which a project should be optimally adjusted (e.g., what the
appropriate level of investment in it should be). The board can do this, however,
only if the ceo has informed them about the project. It is assumed the ceo
can withhold that information, but if he chooses to share it, then he must do
so honestly (i.e., using the standard terminology of the contracts literature, the
information is “hard”). The ceo has a bias, b > 0, such that he likes to increase
the size of projects (e.g., invest more than is appropriate).28 Ignoring fixed
terms and additively separable aspects of their respective utilities, the utility of
the board and ceo as a function of the size of the project, s, and the true a are
quadratic losses,

                      UB = −(s − a)2 and UC = −(s − a − b)2 ,

respectively. The board’s knowledge of a is its private information. The board
can, however, send a message m ∈ [0, 1] as to what its value is. Unlike the
ceo’s information, the board’s information is “soft,” in that a false message
(i.e., m 6= a) can be sent. Provided the ceo has the power to choose s and the
board has learned a, the message-transmission subgame is a cheap-talk game
(Crawford and Sobel, 1982). This subgame has multiple equilibria, but one is
maximally—although not fully—revealing of the board’s information.
    Observe that s 6= a (at least almost surely) because of the ceo’s bias and
the imperfection of information transmission in equilibrium. This provides the
board with a motive to assert control; that is, take the choice of s out of the
ceo’s hands. Suppose the board could always take control. Observe it would,
then, be in the ceo’s interest to have always informed it about the project.
Absent that information, the board would set s = µa , where µa = E{a}. The
ceo’s payoff would be a concave function of the random variable µa − a − b,
which has an expected value of −b. With the ceo’s information, the board
would set s = a. The ceo’s payoff would be a concave function of the constant,
−b. Since the former scenario is a mean-preserving spread of the second, it
follows that ceo will prefer the second; that is, revealing his information.
    To generate further tension between the board and the ceo, Adams and
Ferreira assume the ceo suffers a personal loss, ℓ > 0, if control is taken from
him. Further, they assume the board is not necessarily assured of being able
to seize control. Rather, the board chooses the probability, π, that will seize
control. The board incurs a cost that is increasing in π. The marginal cost of
π is, however, falling in the board’s level of independence. The rationale for
this last assumption is that more independent boards find it easier to confront
  28 Alternatively, one could assume he likes to economize on effort, so prefers smaller projects;

in this case, b < 0. The critical assumption is that b 6= 0.


                                               18
the ceo than less independent boards. Under Adams and Ferreira’s maintained
assumptions, it is never optimal for the board to choose π = 1. Critically,
the board chooses π after the ceo has or has not revealed his information.
Moreover, because the value of seizing control is greater when the board can set
s = a rather than just = µa , the board will choose a greater value of π when
it has been informed by the ceo than when it hasn’t. Consequently, the ceo
now has incentive to withhold his information: by withholding it, he raises the
probability he retains control (avoids losing ℓ).
    If the board is sufficiently lacking in independence, then the probability of
its seizing control, even if the ceo reveals his information, is low. In fact, it can
be so low that the ceo is willing to run the increased risk of losing control that
follows his revealing his information in order to gain the board’s advice (i.e., the
informative message m), because the advice will help him reduce his expected
quadratic loss. Adams and Ferreira show that there can exist an interior equi-
librium in which, provided the board’s independence is below a cutoff, the ceo
indeed reveals his information. Conditional on the board’s independence being
at or below the cutoff, the firm’s expected profits are greatest if the board’s
independence equals the cutoff. At this level of independence, the expected
gain from being able to utilize the board’s information outweighs the expected
loss from the size of the project sometimes being distorted (i.e., in those states
when the ceo retains control). The Adams and Ferreira model also implies that
it may be optimal to separate the advisory and monitoring roles of the board;
that is, to have a dual board system as in many countries in Europe.
    Harris and Raviv (in press) is similar in spirit to Adams and Ferreira. Har-
ris and Raviv assume that the ceo and the insider directors, like the outside
directors in Adams and Ferreira, have information relevant to the quadratic
loss. The payoffs, net of fixed terms and additively separable aspects of their
respective utilities, are

            UO = −(s − aO − aI )2 and UI = −(s − aO − aI − b)2 ,

where the subscripts O and I denote outsiders and insiders, respectively, and at
is the information that the t group of directors have about the optimal size of the
project. Observe, now, that the optimal size from the shareholders’ perspective
is s = aO + aI . The value of at is the private information of the t group of
directors. Unlike in Adams and Ferreira, now it could be suboptimal, from the
shareholders’ perspective, to give control over s to the outsiders: although the
insiders will almost surely not choose the optimal s given control, they might
get closer if their information is particularly valuable (i.e., the variance of aI
is relatively big). Harris and Raviv consider two board structures: outsider
control and insider control. When group t has control, it has the choice of
choosing s or delegating the choice to the other group. When group t makes
the choice it receives a message from the other group about that other group’s
information. As in Adams and Ferreira, the equilibria of these cheap-talk games
do not permit full information revelation. When the insiders’ information is
sufficiently valuable relative to the outsiders’ (i.e., Var(aI )/Var(aO ) ≥ κ > 1,


                                         19
κ a constant that depends on parameter values) and information is valuable
relative to the agency problem (specifically, Var(aI )/b2 ≥ ω > 1, ω a constant
that depends on parameter values), then insider control is superior to outsider
control. If those conditions aren’t met, then outsider control is superior.
    Like Adams and Ferreira and Harris and Raviv, Raheja (2005) wishes to
understand board structure in the light of the board’s need to obtain information
about the firm’s projects or strategies. Unlike Adams and Ferreira, where all
board members are equally ignorant, or Harris and Raviv, where both inside
and outside directors respectively have private information, Raheja assumes that
only the inside directors possess private information. In contrast to most of the
literature, Raheja departs from the idea that the non-ceo inside directors and
the ceo have coincident incentives. Insiders control the ceo through the threat
of “ratting” him out to the outsiders, who will then join with the insiders in
firing the ceo, should the ceo misbehave.
    Although a clever model, it is difficult to reconcile Raheja’s model with the
evidence in Mace (1971) or Vancil (1987). Insubordination by a ceo’s man-
agement team seems exceedingly rare. Moreover, what evidence there is about
whistle-blowers (rats) is hardly encouraging for Raheja’s model. Anecdotal ev-
idence, at least, suggests that whistle-blowers tend to suffer, more than be
rewarded, for their actions (see, e.g., Lublin, 2002). Evidence of whistle-blowers
going to outside directors is rare—the most prominent recent whistle-blower,
Enron’s Sherron Watkins, for instance went to the ceo (Ken Lay) with her
concerns.
    Song and Thakor (2006) also consider information transmission relevant to
project selection. Like some other work in this area, they build on the career-
concerns notions of Holmstrom (1999). Unlike previous work, they assume that
both the board and the ceo have career concerns. Unlike Holmstrom, who
assumes all actors are equally ignorant about theirs and others’ abilities, Song
and Thakor assume that both the ceo and board each know their own abilities.
In the Song and Thakor model, ceo ability means how likely the ceo is to
identify a project to undertake; whereas board ability means how accurate the
board is at assessing the value of any project put forth by the ceo. Independent
of his ability, the ceo also obtains a signal of a project’s quality, which he can
pass along truthfully or not to the board. Song and Thakor show that when
the probability of good projects is low, then the board will be biased toward
underinvestment. If the probability of good projects is high, however, then
the board will be biased toward overinvesting. Song and Thakor suggest that
the probability of good projects will be low during economic downturns and
high during economic booms, which means their model offers an explanation
of changes in governance over the business cycle: during downturns, the board
will be tougher and, during upturns, the board will be more lenient.
    The Song and Thakor model is rather complex, with many moving parts.
To provide some intuition for its results, consider an adaptation of Hermalin
and Weisbach (2008) motivated by Song and Thakor. Assume a risk-averse ceo
with career concerns à la Holmstrom (1999). Assume his ability, unknown ex
ante to all, is α ∼ N (0, 1/τ ), where N (µ, σ 2 ) denotes a normal distribution with

                                         20
mean µ and variance σ 2 .29 A project arises that will payoff r+α+ε, where r is a
known constant reflecting the current economic environment and ε ∼ N (0, σε2 ).
A public signal, s, about the ceo’s ability is realized after the project arises, but
before the board must commit to the project. Assume s ∼ N (α, 1/q), where
q is a measure of the board’s quality. Note the unconditional distribution of
s is N (0, 1/H), where 1/H = 1/τ + 1/q. Normalize the firm’s revenues if the
board decides not to pursue the project to be 0. Using the standard formula for
forming posteriors from normal distributions (see, e.g., DeGroot, 1970, p. 167),
the expected value of the project conditional on the signal is
                                               qs
                                         r+       .
                                              q+τ
The board proceeds with the project if that is positive; that is, if
                                           (q + τ )r
                                   s≥−               ≡S.
                                               q
Given the option of blocking a negative npv project, the firm’s expected value
prior to the reception of the signal is
                Z ∞                    r                
                                    qs     H          H 2
           V =       max 0, r +                exp − s ds − w
                  −∞              q+τ      2π         2
                 √
                   H     √              √    
              =      φ S H + 1 − Φ(S H) r − w ,                            (1)
                  τ
where w is the ceo’s compensation, φ(·) is the density function of a standard
normal random variable (i.e., with mean zero and variance one), and Φ(·) is the
corresponding distribution function.
    Differentiating V with respect to q, it is readily shown that the firm’s ex-
pected value, V , is increasing in the quality of the board, q, all else held equal.
Intuitively, the ability to block a bad project creates an option. An option that
is never exercised is worthless; hence, if the signal were complete noise, as would
be the case if board had zero quality (recall the signal’s variance is 1/q), there
would be effectively no option. As the quality of the board and, thus, informa-
tion improves, the more valuable this option becomes and, therefore, the more
valuable the firm becomes.
    It is not, however, costless to increase board quality without bound. First,
it seems reasonable that higher quality directors command a premium or that
providing a board with sufficient incentives to do a high-quality job is expensive.
So the cost of board quality is increasing in quality. Under suitable assumptions
about this cost function (e.g., that marginal cost be rising in q), there will be
an optimal finite value for q. In addition, if the ceo labor market reacts to the
signal so that the ceo’s future salary is an increasing function of the signal,
then the ceo is exposed to more future salary risk the more informative the
signal is (i.e., the greater is q). Intuitively, the posterior estimate of the ceo’s
 29 While   the realization of α is unknown by anyone, all distributions are common knowledge.


                                              21
ability is a weighted average of the prior, which is fixed, and the signal, which
is noisy. The more informative the signal is known to be, the more weight is
assigned the signal. This increases the ceo’s risk more than the lower variance
of the signal itself reduces it (see Hermalin and Weisbach, 2008, for details).
A ceo will require compensation for this greater risk, so his initial salary (w
in expression (1)) will have to be greater. In light of this cost, under suitable
conditions, it will again be the case that a finite q is optimal.
    From expression (1), the marginal net return to q is
                                          
                              1        −rτ           ∂w
                                 2
                                   φ   √     H 3/2 −
                            2τ q         H           ∂q
         √             √
(note S H = −rτ / H). The change in the marginal net return to q with
respect to r, the measure of the current economic environment, has the same
sign as                                     
                                   d     −rτ
                                     φ √       < 0;
                                  dr       H
where the inequality follows because an increase in r is a move further into the
left tail of the density. Therefore, the marginal net return to q is falling in
r, which means that the optimal quality of the board is lower when economic
conditions are good (i.e., r is high) than when they are bad (i.e., r is low).
Intuitively, when times are good, the board will wish to let mediocre ceos go
ahead with projects, but they won’t when times are bad. Consequently, the
value of improving the monitoring of projects is greater when times are bad
than when they are good.
    Baranchuk and Dybvig (in press) is an interesting article in this area because
it is not worried about information transmission between ceo and board, but
among the various board members themselves (which, in practice, includes the
ceo). Each director i has a belief, ai ∈ Rn , as to what the firm should do.
Similar to Adams and Ferreira (2007) and Harris and Raviv (in press), a director
expects to suffer a quadratic loss in the distance between his beliefs as to what
the firm should do and what the firm’s actual course of action, â, is; that is, a
director’s utility is
                                    −kai − âk .
The directors arrive at â according to a solution concept that the authors call
consensus. This solution concept has many desirable properties, including exis-
tence for all such games. A weakness of the concept, however, is that there is no
explicit extensive-form game to which it is a solution (consensus is a cooperative
game-theoretic concept). Another issue is there is no scope for directors to up-
date their beliefs based on what they learn of others’ beliefs. Absent biases on
the part of the directors, it is not clear why the directors would not freely share
their information and arrive at a consensus belief, which in turn would lead to
a unanimous choice as to what the firm should do.
   By the revelation principle, the information-transmission models discussed
here could all be solved by a direct-revelation mechanism if complete contract-


                                        22
ing were possible.30 That is, if the parties could fully commit and monetary
transfers of any level among them were feasible, then the parties could achieve
an informationally constrained optimum via contracting. There would, there-
fore, be no need to worry about board composition or control. Hence, as is
common of many models seeking to explain the institutions we observe, there
is a reliance, at some level, on the assumption that contracting is necessarily
incomplete. In particular, either boards cannot commit fully as to how they will
use the information revealed to them or it is infeasible contractually for them to
pay the ceo (or others) in a manner sufficient to induce efficient revelation. For
instance, in Harris and Raviv (in press), a direct-revelation mechanism would do
better than the equilibrium outcomes considered provided that the parties could
contract directly on the size of the project as a function of their announcements
and they could make transfers. Although this literature tends not to explore
fully why contracts are incomplete, casual empiricism would suggest that there
are, indeed, limits to both commitments and transfers. So, realistically, organi-
zations are necessarily in a second- or third-best situation. Consequently, the
“law of the second best” often applies—to remedy, in part, the second- or third-
best problem, the parties can gain by introducing another, partially offsetting
problem.31 In the literature on boards, the offsetting “problem” is having a less
diligent/less controlling/less independent board. Having a “lax” board is a way
of partially committing to how information will be used, thereby mimicking,
in part, the commitment that a contractual solution, were one feasible, would
provide.

2.3.2       Empirical and Experimental Evidence
Gillette et al. (2003, 2008) perform a series of interesting experiments designed
to get at the issue of information transmission within the boardroom. In Gillette
et al. (2003), they consider a laboratory setting in which informed insiders are
grouped with uninformed outsiders in a simulated boardroom setting. They find
that the inclusion of outsiders improves welfare, by making undesirable equi-
libria less likely. Gillette et al. (2008) compare, again in a laboratory setting,
single-tiered boards, two-tiered boards, insider-controlled boards, and outsider
controlled boards. They find that two-tiered boards tend to be overly conser-
vative in their choices and that outsider-controlled boards tend to lead to the
most efficient payoffs.
    The class of models based on strategic information transfer implicitly relies
on the assumption that outsider directors are less well informed than are inside
directors. Ravina and Sapienza (in press) adopt a clever approach to testing
this assumption. These authors examine the relative profitability of trades in
their companies’ stocks made by outsiders and insiders and find that both types
  30 Note  Song and Thakor is not an information-transmission model.
  31 An  example of the law of the second best is, for instance, encouraging some degree of
cartelization of a polluting industry: By reducing competition, price will be driven above
private marginal cost; hence, society may hope to get price closer to social marginal cost (i.e.,
cost inclusive of the negative externality caused by the pollution).



                                               23
of directors earn abnormal profits, but that insiders earn better returns than
do outsiders. These results suggest that both types of directors have access to
inside information but that outsiders information is strictly worse than insiders’.
Thus the finding supports the underlying assumption of the information-based
models of boards.


3     How are boards of directors structured?
We have discussed some explanations for why there are boards, and why one
might expect endogenously-chosen boards to provide monitoring of manage-
ment, despite the fact that management typically has some say over the board’s
composition. But the theories simply provide a stylized description of the un-
derlying tensions in the role of the board in corporate governance. Actual
governance is much richer than these bare-bones characterizations.
   There are a number of questions that can only be answered by looking at
data on real-world boards of directors. How are boards structured in practice?
Does this structure coincide with the earlier-discussed theories? How has it
changed over time, both in response to changes in the economy and regulatory
environments?

3.1    Some Facts
Observers typically divide directors into two groups: inside directors and outside
directors. Generally, a director who is a full-time employee of the firm in question
is deemed to be an inside director, while a director whose primary employment is
not with the firm is deemed to be an outside director. Outside directors are often
taken to be independent directors, yet the independence of some directors who
meet the definition of an outsider is questionable. Examples of such directors
are lawyers or bankers who do business with the company. Outsiders of dubious
independence are sometimes put in a third category in empirical work (see, e.g.,
Hermalin and Weisbach, 1988): “affiliated” or “gray” directors. In recent years,
public pressure and regulatory requirements have led firms to have majority-
outsider boards.
    The characteristics of boards of large U.S. corporations have been described
in a number of studies. For example, Fich and Shivdasani (2006) consider a
sample of 508 of the largest US corporations between 1989 and 1995. They find
that, on average, outsiders make up 55% of directors, insiders 30%, and affili-
ated directors the remaining 15%. The average board contains twelve directors,
each receiving approximately $36,000 in fees (plus stock options), and has 7.5
meetings a year. A number of the directors served on multiple boards; the out-
side directors in these firms averaged over three directorships. While these data
are for large public firms, Linck et al. (2008) consider a larger sample of 8000
(necessarily) smaller firms, with similar patterns in the data.
    While the existence and basic structure of boards have remained relatively
constant over time, the way in which they are composed has changed. Lehn et al.


                                        24
(in press) consider a sample of 81 firms that have survived as public companies
from 1935 until 2000. Survivorship bias complicates the interpretation of their
findings, nevertheless they reflect some basic trends that have affected boards.
First, board size appears to have a hump pattern over time; it averages 11 in
1935, peaks at 15 in 1960 and declines to 11 in 2000. However, board size has
become more uniform over time as the standard deviation of board size drops
from 5.5 in 1935 to 2.7 in 2000. These companies’ boards have become more
outsider-dominated as well; insider representation drops from 43% in 1935 to
just 13% in 2000. Part of this drop can be explained by the typical life cycle of
firms. As founding families exit and firms become more professionally managed,
agency problems can become worse as those in control are no longer significant
owners. In response, firms will wish to add outside directors to counteract the
increased agency problems.
    Since 2000, there have been significant changes. Sarbanes-Oxley contained a
number of requirements that increased the workload of and the demand for out-
side directors (see Linck et al. (in press) for a description of these requirements).
In addition, the scandals at Enron and Worldcom have led to substantially in-
creased public scrutiny of corporate governance. Consequently, boards have
become larger, more independent, have more committees, meet more often, and
generally have more responsibility and risk (again see Linck et al., in press).
These changes both increased the demand for directors and decreased the will-
ingness of directors to serve for a given price. It is not surprising, therefore,
that director pay and liability insurance premiums have increased substantially.
From the shareholders’ perspective, the net effect of this regulation is not clear;
future research will need to address the extent to which the additional monitor-
ing offsets the incremental costs imposed by Sarbanes-Oxley.

3.2     Factors in Board Composition that Potentially Affect
        a Board’s Actions
We have already discussed much of the literature relating board composition (in
terms of the insider-to-outsider ratio) and board size to board actions regarding
oversight of the ceo, as well as to overall firm performance (see section 2.2).
Yet beyond the insider-to-outside ratio and board size, other board attributes
no doubt play a role. Each board of directors is likely to have its own dynamics,
a function of many factors including the personalities and relationships among
the directors, their backgrounds and skills, and their incentives and connections.
Some of these factors are readily measured while others are not. There has
been considerable research that seeks to estimate the impact of various board
characteristics on board conduct and firm performance.

3.2.1   CEO-Chairman Duality
Many ceos also hold the title of Chairman of the Board; this duality holds in al-
most of 80% of large us firms (see Rechner and Dalton, 1991). This structure is
viewed by many as giving ceos greater control at the expense of other parties,


                                         25
including outside directors. To mitigate the consequent problems, many ob-
servers of corporate governance have called for a prohibition on the ceo serving
as chairman (see, e.g., Jensen, 1993).
    A number of recent papers have examined the use of dual titles in corporate
governance empirically. Brickley et al. (1997) considers the performance effects
of combined titles. These authors find little evidence that combining or sepa-
rating titles affects corporate performance. They conclude that the separation
and combination of titles is part of the natural succession process described by
Vancil (1987). In contrast, Goyal and Park (2002) find that the sensitivity of
ceo turnover to performance is lower when titles are combined, consistent with
the notion that the combination of titles is associated with increased power over
the board. Similarly, Adams et al. (2005) find evidence consistent with the view
that ceos also holding the chairman title appear to hold greater influence over
corporate decision-making.
    Overall, these studies are consistent with the view that combined titles are
associated with ceos having more influence in the firm. However, this relation is
not necessarily causal. Influence inside an organization arises endogenously, and
with influence, generally come fancier titles. The Goyal and Park and Adams
et al. findings potentially reflect ceo power that came about endogenously
through a manner similar to that described in the Hermalin and Weisbach (1998)
model. In other words, a ceo who performs well would be rewarded by his being
given the chairman title as well. Such a process, especially if the increase in
power arises because of a demonstrated high ability, would not necessarily imply
performance changes following shifts in titles, consistent with the Brickley et al.
findings.
    Even if it is true that combining the titles of ceo and chairman means that
an individual has, on average more influence over his firm, it does not follow
that mandating separate titles would improve corporate performance. In fact,
Adams et al.—similar to Brickley et al.—find that measures of CEO power are
not systematically related to firm performance. This is consistent with our over-
arching argument that actual corporate-governance practice needs to be seen as
part of the solution to the constrained optimization program that is corporate-
governance design. Hence, imposing separate titles would either yield a less
optimal solution or lead to a, possibly inefficient, work-around that maintained
the optimal amount of ceo power.32 Moreover, as noted earlier, making the
ceo’s job worse likely means an offsetting increase in pay as compensation. Con-
sequently, as with most policy prescriptions in the area of governance, policy
makers should be wary of calls for prohibiting the ceo serving as chairman.

3.2.2   Staggered Boards
A common, yet controversial, governance arrangement is known as “staggered
boards.” When a firm has a staggered board, instead of holding annual elections
  32 Recall that, in a number of models of boards, ceding some control to management is

optimal (see e.g., Almazan and Suarez, 2003, Laux, 2008, Adams and Ferreira, 2007, and
Harris and Raviv, in press).



                                          26
for each director, directors are elected for multiple years at a time (usually
three), and only a fraction (usually a third) of the directors are elected in a
given year. This practice is typically adopted as a way of shielding a firm from
takeover because a potential acquirer cannot quickly take control of the firm’s
board even it controls 100% of the votes. This arrangement is more common
that one might imagine—in the Faleye (2007) sample, roughly half of the firms
have classified (staggered) boards.
    While the consequence of the separation of the ceo and chairman positions
on firm performance is ambiguous, less ambiguity exists with respect to stag-
gered boards; the empirical evidence indicates this arrangement is not in the
shareholders’ interests (although, as with much of the empirical work, caution is
warranted due to joint-endogeneity issues). Both Jarrell and Poulsen (1987) and
Mahoney and Mahoney (1993) find negative returns when firms announce they
are classifying their boards (although Jarrell and Poulsen’s finding is not sta-
tistically significant). Bebchuk et al. (2002) find that a classified board almost
doubles the odds that a firm remains independent when faced with a hostile
takeover. Because some would-be acquirers are no doubt scared off by the stag-
gered board, the Bebchuk et al. findings likely under estimate the ability of a
classified board to resist takeovers. Bebchuk and Cohen (2005) find that firms
with staggered boards have lower value than other firms, using Tobin’s Q as a
measure of value. Finally, Faleye (2007) finds that a staggered board lowers the
sensitivity of ceo turnover to firm performance.
    An implication of the view that staggered boards entrench managers and
decrease value is that when firms “de-stagger,” return to annual elections for
all directors, value should increase. Guo et al. (2008) consider a sample of firms
that de-stagger and find that the value of these firms does, in fact, increase.
They also find that de-staggering is not typically initiated by managers, but
by activist shareholders. Subsequent to the de-staggering, investor reaction
indicates that these firms are more likely to be takeover targets. All of these
findings reinforce the view that staggering boards is a mechanism that serves to
protect management by making takeovers difficult.
    All in all, it appears that firms with staggered boards do worse than firms
with annual board elections. Of course, some of this effect could be due to en-
dogeneity; firms with already entrenched managers are more likely to be able to
convince shareholders to adopt staggered boards. Or, to take a less sinister view,
those managers who prove themselves are in a position to bargain for greater job
security as part of an optimal (second-best) bargain for their continued service
(and those who fail to prove themselves become vulnerable to de-staggering and
takeover). In this light, stock-market reaction to announcements about whether
the board will be staggered or not could be due to the news such announcements
convey vis-à-vis the bargaining toughness and independence of the board rather
than to simply whether the board is or isn’t staggered.




                                       27
3.3     The Role of Particular Types of Outside Directors
To be considered an outsider, a director’s primary employment must be with a
different organization than the firm on whose board he serves. Outside directors
typically have backgrounds that will enable them to be valuable to a board, or
to represent an important constituency. A small literature considers particular
types of directors and their specific roles in corporate governance.

3.3.1   Bankers
Many firms have bankers on their boards. Bankers may be added to boards
both because they can monitor the firm for the lender for whom they work and
because they can provide financial expertise. Both Booth and Deli (1996) and
Byrd and Mizruchi (2005) consider the extent to which bankers play a monitor-
ing role. These authors find that, when a director is affliated with a bank lending
to the firm, the firm’s overall debt ratio is lower. This finding is consistent with
a view that such an affiliated director can protect the bank’s interest by dis-
couraging the firm from taking out loans from other banks that could increase
the risk to the director’s bank. Güner et al. (in press) find evidence suggesting
that adding commercial bankers to boards increases a firm’s ability to access
debt markets, but that the firms that utilize this increased financial flexibility
the most are those firms with good credit but poor investment opportunities.
Güner et al. argue that having bankers on boards can be a double-edged sword,
in that the bankers can improve a firm’s access to capital markets, but some-
times this improved access works to the benefit of the bank rather than the firm
doing the borrowing.

3.3.2   Venture Capitalists
Many firms are founded with funding from venture capitalists. As a condition
of receiving funding, new enterprises must yield some degree of control to the
venture capitalists. Venture capitalists have a fiduciary responsibility to their
own investors to exit these enterprises relatively quickly, and generally leave
these enterprises’ boards when they sell their ownership stake in them. De-
spite the shortness of vcs’ tenures as directors, a study by Baker and Gompers
(2003) suggests that their presence can affect firms long after they have left the
board. Baker and Gompers find that the initial presence of a venture capital
investor, especially one with a strong reputation, is likely to decrease the ceo’s
bargaining power relative to the board. Empirically, a high-reputation venture
capitalist leads to a more powerful board, even after the venture capitalist exits
his investment. The interpretation of this result is that such a venture capitalist
negotiates substantially more control rights than is typical for outside investors
in other private firms. When these firms go public, this balance of power away
from management tends to persist, leading ceos in vc-backed firms to have less
control over their boards than ceos in non-vc-backed firms.




                                        28
3.3.3   Politically-Connected Directors
Firms that deal regularly with government, such as regulated utilities, or ones
with significant government contracts, place a high value on being able to influ-
ence governmental decisions. Consequently, these firms should have a demand
for directors with political connections. Agrawal and Knoeber (2001) test this
hypothesis, and, not surprisingly, find that firms that are more reliant on gov-
ernmental decisions are more likely to appoint directors with backgrounds in law
and politics. Extending this idea, Goldman et al. (in press) consider the nature
of these connections in greater detail. These authors classify directors by the
party to which they belong. Around the time of the 2000 election, which was
a very close win for the George W. Bush and the Republican party, firms with
Republican-connected boards increased in value while Democratic-connected
firms decreased in value. This finding emphasizes the value politically-connected
directors can provide and, consequently, the importance of these connections to
firms.

3.3.4   CEOs as Directors
One of the most common occupations of outside directors is ceo of another firm.
ceos of other firms clearly have management skills and an understanding of the
issues facing top management. Fahlenbrach et al. (2008) consider the effect
of having ceo directors on boards. These authors find no evidence, however,
that ceos on boards add value, at least relative to other outside directors. This
conclusion is somewhat at odds with Fich (2005), discussed in detail later, which
finds the announcement that ceos of well-performing firms will be added to the
board generates positive abnormal returns.
    Fellow ceos on the board may, however, reduce firm value in at least one
circumstance, namely when a ceo is added to a board as a part of an interlock;
that is, when the ceo of one firm is added to the board of a second while the
second’s ceo simultaneously serves on the board of the first. When directors are
added as interlocks, Fahlenbrach et al. find that firm performance declines. This
decline is attributed to mutual “back-scratching”: The implicit threat of what
the first ceo can do for or against the second in the first’s role as director causes
the second to act more favorably toward the first in the second’s role as director.
Consistent with this idea, Hallock (1997) finds that interlocked directors receive
abnormally high pay. Similar results are found in Kramarz and Thesmar (2006)
and Larcker et al. (2005), who use more sophisticated measures of connections
between ceos and boards, and find evidence of worse firm performance and
higher ceo pay at firms in which the ceo has connections to the board. Fich and
White (2005) explore, more generally, the reasons why ceos sit on each other’s
boards. They find that measures of ceo bargaining power—tenure, evidence
of ability (Tobin’s Q), and sitting on the nominating committee—are positively
correlated with interlocks, while ceo ownership is negatively correlated. These
findings are consistent with a view of interlocks as a means of providing the ceo
job security. Finally, Bizjak et al. (in press) find that board interlocks increase


                                         29
the likelihood of “option backdating,” a controversial practice that serves to
increase top management’s pay by ex post adjusting the date on which options
are dated. This finding supports the view that boards play a role in setting
corporate policies and provides further evidence that interlocked boards benefit
management, possibly at the expense of shareholders.
    Overall, there appears to be substantial evidence that interlocks and other
outside personal relationships between the ceo and his directors can be asso-
ciated with poor performance. As before, however, interpreting these results
is tricky due to the underlying endogeneity problem. It is difficult to know if
the board structure determines the firm’s performance or the board structure is
merely a manifestation of the power a ceo has over his firm and the problems
that stem from that. This distinction is not merely of academic interest; policies
to regulate board composition are often proposed and sometimes enacted. The
extent to which these policies are likely to be effective depends crucially on the
extent to which the board structure causally changes firm performance and is
not merely a symptom of underlying issues inside the firm.
    Another issue with ceos as directors is why should the firm the ceo manages
permit him to devote time and effort to other firms? Conyon and Read (2006)
offer a theoretical explanation. Serving on the boards of other firms helps to
build the ceo’s human capital. Moreover, the firm can subtract the opportunity
cost of his time and effort away from the firm from the compensation it pays
him. The interest of the ceo and his firm’s owners are not, however, perfectly
aligned on this matter insofar as the ceo also gains a personal benefit from
service on the boards of other companies (e.g., additional income and prestige).
Hence, a firm that did not limit the number of directorships its ceo could accept
would find that the ceo accepts more directorships than would be optimal from
the shareholders’ perspective.

3.3.5   Stakeholder Representatives on Boards
Often, especially outside the us, a variety of constituencies (stakeholders) with
an interest in a firm are represented on the firm’s board. A particularly impor-
tant set of such stakeholders is labor. Presumably the reason why labor is eager
to gain such representation is to influence management to take actions favorable
to workers. Faleye et al. (2006) find evidence that supports this notion: Labor-
controlled publicly traded firms tend to invest less in long-term assets, take fewer
risks, and exhibit lower labor and total factor productivity. Similarly, Gorton
and Schmid (2004) consider employee representation on supervisory boards in
Germany. These authors find that when labor has equal representation, firms
trade at a 31% discount to firms with 1/3 employee representation, and have
higher payrolls. Both the Faleye et al. and Gorton and Schmid articles suggest
that, when labor can affect firm policies, either through board representation or
equity ownership, it is able to influence firm policies to benefit workers at the
expense of shareholders.




                                        30
3.4     Summary
While the existence of a board of directors is common to most firms (and other
organizations), their structure varies both across firm and over time. The key
underlying variable that determines board structure is the power of management
relative to the board and outside constituencies. This power manifests itself
in a number of observable ways, including the makeup of the board and the
rules by which the board can be elected. Two characteristics of boards that
are associated in the data with poor performance are staggered boards and
interlocked boards. The existence of a staggered or interlocked board is likely a
consequence of a powerful ceo who exercises control over his board, and both
characteristics are potential ways in which such a powerful ceo can further
increase his control over the board.


4     How Does The Board Work?
The discussion of boards so far has left the working of the board as a black
box. What they do has been discussed, but not how they do it. How do boards
function? What are the mechanics by which they do their jobs? These are
questions to which we now turn.
    An obvious problem in addressing these questions is that what happens
inside a boardroom is necessarily private. While some academic research has
tried to uncover these workings of the board through interviews and case studies
(see Section 2.1 supra), most research has relied on publicly observable data that
arguably shed light on the inner workings of the board.

4.1     The Working of Teams
A board of directors is a team. There is a lengthy theoretical literature in
economics on the workings of teams (see Bolton and Dewatripont, 2005, §8.1
for an introduction). As, however, was noted earlier, application of this theory
to boards does not always lead to clear predictions. For instance, total board
effort can increase or decrease with the size of the board.
    One might hope to resolve such ambiguous theoretical predictions by turn-
ing to the data. If, for example, total board effort is positively correlated with
outcomes, then a potential test of size on total effort would be to examine
the relation between outcomes and board size. Although, as discussed in Sec-
tion 2.2, such tests have been run, their interpretation is complicated by joint-
endogeneity issues. The work that best controls for those issues, Coles et al.
(2008), finds ambiguous results: For “simple” firms, Tobin’s Q decreases in
board size; while, for “complex” firms, it increases in board size.33
    One interpretation of Coles et al.’s results is as follows. Directors provide the
ceo with advice, as suggested by field work (see Section 2.1). Advice is more
   33 A complex firm is one that scores above the median on an index of complexity, a simple

firm is one that scores below. The index is positively related to the number of business
segments a firm has, its size, and its leverage.


                                            31
valuable the more complex the firm.34 This is a factor in favor of increasing
board size when the firm is “complex.”
    Without meaning to suggest this isn’t the correct interpretation, it does
raise questions. Although consistent with field work, one might speculate as to
why the ceo relies on the board rather than, say, management consultants for
advice? And why is it that the total quality or amount of advice increases with
board size (i.e., why is it that the free-riding problem isn’t so severe as to make
these values decrease with size)?
    Alternatively, complex firms could be more difficult to monitor, which could,
in theory, warrant more monitors (a larger board). Specifically, let C(n) be the
cost of having n directors (e.g., the amount of their compensation plus other
associated expenditures). Suppose that, if a problem exists, the independent
probability that a given director detects it to be sp, where s is a measure of the
simplicity of the firm and p is a constant. Without loss of generality, normalize
the probability of a problem existing times the benefit of correcting it to one.
Then a firm chooses its number of directors, n, to maximize

                               1 − (1 − sp)n − C(n) .
                                              
                                                                                (2)

The cross-partial derivative of (2) with respect to s and n is

                      (1 − sp)n−1 p + n(1 − sp)n−1 log(1 − sp)p ,

which has the same sign as

                                      1 + n log(1 − sp) .                                  (3)

If sp > .632 or for n large enough, (3) is negative—the marginal return to
adding directors is decreasing in the simplicity of the firm. Hence, it is optimal
for simpler firms to have fewer directors than should more complex firms.

4.2     Busy Directors
Firms generally want to have outside directors who are distinguished individuals
who also have an ability to add value as directors. Many of these individuals have
demanding full-time jobs, such as ceos, attorneys, or bankers. Even if directors
                                                                               iid
  34 For instance, suppose the quality of advice from director i is q , where q ∼ F . The ceo
                                                                     i         i
adopts the best advice, which, assume, has a monetary payoff proportional to max qi /s, where
s is the simplicity of the firm. The benefit from n directors is
                            1 ∞                        1
                              Z
                                  qnF n−1 (q)f (q)dq ≡ E{max q|n} .
                            s 0                        s
The cross-partial derivative of that expression with respect to s and n is
                                      1    dE{max q|n}
                                  −      ×             < 0,
                                      s2       dn
where the sign follows because the expectation of the extreme value is increasing in the number
of draws. Hence, the marginal benefit of adding directors is declining in the simplicity of the
firm.


                                              32
do not have full-time jobs, some of them are in sufficient demand that they serve
on many boards, sometimes as many as ten simultaneously. A concern often
voiced about this arrangement is that such “extremely busy” directors will not
be able to devote sufficient effort to any one board. The alternative argument
is that the directors who are considered “busy” are in fact chosen to be on so
many boards precisely because of their high ability, which serves to offset the
effect of their lack of time. Not surprisingly, therefore, the effectiveness of such
“busy” directors has become an active area of interest.

4.2.1     Theory
The simple theory behind the problem of busy directors is that, the busier a
director is, the less effort he or she devotes to each of his or her duties. This idea
is readily modeled: Suppose, for simplicity, that the benefit a director derives
from
   PMeffort expenditure is the same for all her activities. Hence, her total benefit
is m=1 b(am ), where am is effort expended on the mth activity, b : R+ → R+ is
the common benefit function, and M is the total number of activities. Critically,
assume spending more effort on activity m increases her marginal cost of effort
on activity j for any pair of activities m     P and j. This would, for instance, be
true if her cost of effort function were c( M    m=1 am ), where c(·) is increasing and
convex (e.g., her utility for leisure exhibits diminishing marginal utility). If b(·)
is concave, then the director optimally allocates her efforts equally across her
activities; specifically, effort on activity m satisfies the first-order condition
                                                    
                                              XM
                               b′ (am ) − c′     aj  = 0 .                         (4)
                                               j=1


We can rewrite (4) as

                              b′ a∗ (M ) − c′ M a∗ (M ) = 0 ,
                                                      
                                                                                           (5)

where a∗ (M ) is the optimal amount of effort she expends on any one activity
given that she is undertaking M activities. Using (5), it follows that a∗ (M +1) <
a∗ (M ); that is, if assigned one more activity (board seat), her effort on any given
activity falls.35
    A problem with this simple model is that the number of board seats held
by a director is not an exogenous variable (i.e., our director is not compelled to
accept M seats). Rather a director has choice. This makes M an endogenous
variable, implying that we need to ask why some directors choose to be busier
  35 Proof:  Suppose not; that is, suppose a∗ (M + 1) ≥ a∗ (M ). Because her marginal costs
are rising in total effort, it follows that
                              c′ M a∗ (M ) < c′ (M + 1)a∗ (M + 1) .
                                 `         ´   `                 ´

Expression (5) then entails
                                 b′ a∗ (M ) < b′ a∗ (M + 1) ;
                                   `       ´    `          ´

but, because she has diminishing marginal benefits, this last expression implies the contradic-
tion a∗ (M ) > a∗ (M + 1).


                                              33
than others? This, in turn, can alter our conclusion that busier directors devote
less effort on a given board than their less-busy colleagues. To see this, assume
there are types of directors, where a director of type θ derives benefit θb(am )
from effort expended on her mth activity. A type-θ director’s utility, as a
function of M , is
                          M θb a∗ (M ) − c M a∗ (M ) .
                                                     
                                                                               (6)
Utilizing the envelope theorem, the cross-partial
                                                      derivative of (6) with respect
to M and θ is readily shown to be b a∗ (M ) > 0; that is, higher-type directors
enjoy a greater marginal benefit from adding an activity than do lower-type
directors. Consequently, higher-type directors will optimally choose to do more
activities than lower-type directors. Moreover, because a higher-type director
enjoys a higher marginal return to effort than does a lower-type director, a
higher-type director expends more effort than a lower-type director holding
constant the number of activities. In other words, busier directors are higher
types who would, thus, expend more effort per activity were they restricted
to the same number of activities as less-busy (lower-type) directors. This is a
countervailing effect vis-à-vis the less-effort-the-more-activities effect identified
in the previous paragraph. Which of the two effects dominates is, a priori,
indeterminate. Theory, therefore, does not offer a definitive prediction about
the effort of busy directors once one recognizes that the number of board seats
held is endogenous.
    To illustrate why this is an important fact to recognize, suppose thatpb(a) =
log(a) and c(x) = x2 /2. Straightforward calculations reveal that a∗ = θ/M .
Expression (6) is readily shown to equal
                                        r !
                                            θ        θ
                              θM log             −      ,                          (7)
                                           M       2M

which is a globally concave function of M for any θ. Suppose there are just
two types, 9 and 15. Table 1 demonstrates that the optimal number of activi-
ties
p (directorships)
           p          is 4 for the 9-type and 6 for the 15-type director. Because
   15/6 > 9/4, it follows that the directors who are busier in equilibrium (the
15-type) expend more effort on each of their directorships than do the less-busy
directors (the 9-type) on each of theirs. In other words, busier does not equate
to less effort in this example.

4.2.2   Empirical Work on Busy Directors
Given that theory is ambiguous in its prediction of the overall effect of busy
directors on firms, people have attempted to discern empirically which of the
two effects dominates. In other words, is the fact that busy directors are likely
to be relatively high quality directors more important than the possibly impact
of their potential lack of time on their effectiveness? Consistent with the quality
arguments, Kaplan and Reishus (1990), Booth and Deli (1996), and Ferris et al.
(2003) find that there is a positive relationship between a firm’s performance

                                         34
Table 1: Utility for different director types according to number of directorships
         taken. Numbers are calculated according to the example connected to
         expression (7) in the text.
                                           Utility for Type
                          Directorships θ = 9        θ = 15
                                3           13.33      33.71
                                4          13.47       37.78
                                5           12.33      39.70
                                6           10.20     39.98
                                7            7.27      38.94



and the additional directorships acquired by its board members: when the firm
cuts its dividend its directors lose directorships (Kaplan and Reishus); when a
firm performs well, its directors are more likely to land seats on other boards
(Ferris et al.). Ferris et al. also find that “busy” directors are equally likely to
serve on committees as other directors and are no more likely to be sued than
other directors, which these authors interpret as supporting the view that busy
directors do not shirk on their responsibilities.
    However, not being sued and agreeing to serve on committees seem like
relatively indirect tests of the hypothesis that being busy hurts performance.
Fich and Shivdasani (2006) provide more direct tests of this hypothesis. Fich
and Shivdasani find that firms with a majority of directors who serve on three
or more boards have lower market-to-book ratios than other firms; moreover,
they have a lower sensitivity of ceo turnover to performance. In addition, stock
prices increase when busy directors depart the board, and when already busy
directors add an additional board seat, the stock price of the firms on whose
boards they serve declines. Overall, these findings suggest having busy directors
on a board can fail to be in the firm’s interests.

4.3    Board Committees
Boards usually do most their work in committees, and data on the committee
structure is generally publicly available. Some authors have used these data to
draw inferences about the functioning of the board.
    Shivdasani and Yermack (1999) use information about the nominating com-
mittee to draw inferences over the ceo’s influence on the board. These authors
find that, when the ceo serves on the nominating committee or when there is
no such committee, fewer independent directors are appointed and the stock
price reaction to independent director appointments is lower than when there
is a nominating committee that does not include the ceo. This effect could be
causal, in that being on the nominating committee could allow ceos to exercise
control over board selection, or it could simply reflect that more powerful ceos
are both able to get appointed to nominating committees and also to influence


                                        35
director selection. In either case, the Shivdasani and Yermack findings are con-
sistent with the view that powerful ceos are able to influence the structure of
their board
    Klein (1998) considers the relation between firm performance and board
committee structures. She finds that, although there is no relation between
overall board composition and firm performance, the number of insiders on the
finance and investment committees is positively associated with better perfor-
mance. The same causality question as discussed above is relevant for interpret-
ing her findings: Do insiders on the finance and investment committees cause
good performance or is this committee structure somehow a consequence of bet-
ter performance? In particular, if firms can improve performance substantially
simply by rearranging their committee structure, why haven’t all firms “opti-
mally” rearranged their committees? On the other hand, it is possible that firms
face external pressure to staff committees with outsiders, which leads them to
suboptimize by having too few insiders on key committees.
    More recently, Adams (2003) and Hayes et al. (2004) have considered board
committee structure in more detail. Adams uses the committee structure of
boards as a way to infer the nature of the tasks to which boards spend their
time. She finds that boards of diversified firms devote more time to monitoring
while boards of growing firms devote more time to strategic issues. Hayes et
al. find a number of results, most of which reflect the number of committees
and their tasks. The committees of larger firms and ones that pay dividends
tend to have more tasks assigned to them, while those in firms with higher ceo
ownership have fewer tasks. These findings suggest that the board is part of
the professionalization of the firm. As the firm becomes larger, more mature,
and transitions from founder management toward professional management, the
board plays a larger role in corporate governance.
    Finally, a number of papers have used data on audit committee membership
to draw inferences about the accounting process inside of firms.36 This literature
looks at the quality of accounting, such as whether firms manipulate earnings
through accruals and whether a firms earnings response coefficient means that
earnings are informative about value. In general, these papers find that the
makeup of the audit committee is correlated with these variables of accounting
quality. Once again, it is difficult to infer causality from these studies. While it
is possible that audit committees play a role in improving accounting practice, it
is also possible that firms determined to improve their accounting change both
their accounting practices and their audit committee membership.


5     What Motivates Directors?
Directors are agents of the shareholders. Because their inherent motives are
unlikely to be aligned with the shareholders’ interests, at least in all situations,
it is worth considering this misalignment, its consequences, and its remedies.
  36 A partial list of this literature includes K. Anderson et al. (2003), R. Anderson et al.

(2004), Deli and Gillan (2000), Klein (2002), and Xie et al. (2003).


                                             36
Given that the preceding discussion touches on these issues here and there and
we seek to avoid unnecessary repetition, this section will prove to be relatively
short.

5.1     Direct Compensation
Like all economic actors, directors may be presumed to prefer greater wealth
to less wealth; hence, they should be responsive to financial incentives. Indeed,
firms routinely use a variety of such incentives including additional fees for at-
tending meetings, stock and option grants, and performance bonuses. For a
sample of 1198 firms in 2002, Bryan and Klein (2004) report that the average
director received $102,976 in total annual compensation; of this, $71,839 was
incentive pay and $31,137 was cash. The latter figure also contains an incen-
tive component insofar as approximately $8129 are attendance-contingent fees.
Roughly 73% of firms in the sample made option grants and 37% stock grants.37
Yermack (2004) finds evidence that when all incentives are accounted for (in-
cluding keeping current board seats and gaining new ones), the average outside
director of a Fortune 500 firm gains 11 cents for each $1000 increase in firm
value. He finds that a one standard deviation change in the market capital-
ization of the median sample firm (a $2.6 billion change) results in a $285,000
change in an outside director’s wealth.

5.1.1    Theory
From a theoretical perspective, the basic ideas of incentive pay are well known
and have been analyzed at depth (see, e.g., Holmstrom, 1979, Shavell, 1979, and
Grossman and Hart, 1983; Bolton and Dewatripont, 2005, offers a textbook
treatment). The three-level hierarchy of shareholders-directors-management
generates some additional issues, such as possible collusion between directors
and management, but many of these have also been addressed in the broader
literature (see, e.g., Tirole, 1986, 1992).
    An interesting board-specific theoretical analysis is Kumar and Sivaramakr-
ishnan (2008). First, unlike almost all the theoretical literature on boards, Ku-
mar and Sivaramakrishnan examine the role of the board in setting the ceo’s in-
centive compensation. Second, the authors explicitly study the role of incentive
pay for directors with respect to the performance of their duties. Among their
findings are that board independence and board incentive pay could be substi-
tutes; independent boards could be less diligent monitors than less-independent
boards; and, as a consequence, having a maximally independent board need not
be best for the shareholders ceteris paribus. The basic intuition is as follows.
A less-independent board, knowing it will not be as strong a negotiator against
the ceo when it comes time to set his compensation, has a stronger incentive
than does a more-independent board to learn payoff-relevant information prior
to those negotiations. The reason being that such information helps to offset
  37 See Brown (2007) for a survey of some of the, largely legal, issues connected to director

compensation.


                                             37
their weaker bargaining position. In essence, a less-independent board is play-
ing a “lash itself to the mast” strategy because it knows it won’t be able to
resist the ceo’s demands as well as it would otherwise like. Because a less-
independent board has a stronger incentive to gather information, the strength
of the compensation incentives it requires is less than would be required by a
more independent board. Hence, it is cheaper for the shareholders to employ
a less dependent board in terms of inducing the board to learn payoff-relevant
information. Of course, the fact that it is a more dependent board means the
shareholders bear other costs; but as Kumar and Sivaramakrishnan show, it is
possible for the former effect to be great enough to outweigh these other costs.
    Kumar and Sivaramakrishnan’s model is quite rich and, thus, complex. For-
tunately, a much simplified version of it can be used to illustrate the article’s
most important insights. A firm can have one of two possible projects. One
project requires an investment of Iℓ and pays off V , the other requires an in-
vestment of Ih and also pays off V . Assume V > Ih > Iℓ . Let the commonly
known probability that the project is the ℓ-type be p. Before approaching the
board for the investment funds, I, the ceo learns the project type; this is his
private information. However, by expending c > 0, the board can also learn
the project type. Whether or not it has done so is known by the ceo, but
not by the shareholders. The ceo’s preferences are u(w) + I, where w is his
compensation and u(·) his utility for money. Note the ceo prefers to run a
larger project, in terms of investment funds, than a smaller project. This is a
fairly standard assumption in the literature, reflecting either a preference for
empire building and grandiose projects, or that having greater funds available
provides the ceo more perks. Consequently, regardless of its true type, the ceo
would like to claim the project is the h type. Because the ceo’s marginal utility
from each dollar invested is 1, it is clear that there is no incentive contract that
can be employed (short of selling him the enterprise) that would induce him to
announce the project type accurately. Because of the asymmetry of information
with respect to the value of the firm, selling it to the ceo would not be in the
shareholders’ interests. Hence, there is no incentive contract for the ceo; we
can think of his utility as just being I. There are two kinds of boards that can
be employed, independent and dependent. The utility of an independent board
is α(V − I), where α is the proportion of the firm granted the directors as an
incentive. The utility of a dependent board is α(V − I) + δI, where δ > 0 is
a parameter that reflects the board’s dependence on the ceo, specifically the
degree to which it worries about the ceo’s utility. The timing of the model is
that the shareholders determine which kind of board to employ and what its
compensation will be. Next the ceo learns the project type and the board, if it
elects to expend c, also learns the type. The ceo then seeks approval from the
board to invest. Finally, payoffs are realized.
    To begin to solve the model, consider a situation in which the board is
ignorant. The board has a choice, it can fund all projects, which means it will
always be asked to invest Ih by the ceo, or it can restrict itself to only allowing
the ceo to invest Iℓ (assume if the project is h, there is no value to the ceo
of proceeding with insufficient funding; that is, he just shuts the firm down).

                                        38
Observe from the shareholders’ perspective or the perspective of an independent
board, the board should pursue the latter course of action if

                              p(V − Iℓ ) > V − Ih .                           (8)

Observe that this is a sub-optimal rule because, recall, V > Ih . The sharehold-
ers/independent board forgo some profitable investment to avoid paying the
ceo an information rent. Hence if (8) holds—as we will henceforth assume to
be the case—there is potential room for improvement. A dependent board will
fund all projects if

                     α(V − Ih ) + δIh > pα(V − Iℓ ) + pδIℓ .                  (9)

Observe it is possible that both (8) and (9) hold, in which case the shareholders
are worse off with an ignorant dependent board than they would be with an
ignorant independent board.
   The board does not have to remain ignorant; that is, it can choose to expend
c and learn the project’s type. If it does so, then it will fund all projects, but
can restrict the ceo to Iℓ if the project is the ℓ type. The expected payoff if
the board will learn the project type is

                              V − pIℓ − (1 − p)Ih .                          (10)

Observe that (10) is the highest expected value the firm can have. Obviously,
expending c would be a waste if the dependent board was so weak that it would
approve funding of Ih even if it knew the project was the ℓ type. To avoid that,
we require
                      α(V − Iℓ ) + δIℓ ≥ α(V − Ih ) + δIh                   (11)
Expression (11) holds whenever α ≥ δ. Note that the parameters can be such
that (8), (9), and (11) all hold.
   The expected gain for an independent board from learning the project type
is
                                α(1 − p)(V − Ih ) .
Hence, the minimum value of α such that an independent board will wish to
learn the project type is
                                            c
                            αind =                    .
                                     (1 − p)(V − Ih )
The expected gain for a dependent board from learning the project type is
                                                           
                                        
            αV − (α − δ) pIℓ + (1 − p)Ih − αV − (α − δ)Ih .

Hence, the minimum value of α such that a dependent board will wish to learn
the project type is
                                          c
                          αdep = δ +             .
                                     p(Ih − Iℓ )

                                        39
Observe that if the probability of the h-type project or its return (or both) are
relatively small, while the probability of the ℓ-type project or the cost savings it
represents (or both) are relatively large, then it is less costly for the shareholders
to induce a dependent board to learn the project’s type than it is for them to
induce an independent board to learn the project’s type (i.e., αdep < αind in
such situations). In essence, because a dependent board knows it will lose more
in the future if ignorant, the value of information is intrinsically greater for it.
Because it can be cheaper to induce a dependent board to learn the project’s
type, shareholders can rationally prefer a dependent board to an independent
board. For example, suppose:
                                         77      1                     1
            V = 10 ,   Iℓ = 0 ,   Ih =      ,p =    ,   and c = δ =      .
                                         8       16                    8
Then
                                  205                16
                           αdep =       and αind =      .
                                  616                45
Because the former is less than 1/3 and the latter greater than 1/3, it follows
that αdep < αind . The only thing left to check is that the shareholders wouldn’t
wish to set α = 0 (assume ignorant independent directors still restrict the firm to
the ℓ-type project even when α = 0). Expected return to shareholders if α = 0
is 5/8 if the directors are independent and 3/8 if the directors are dependent.
The shareholders’ payoff if they incentivize dependent directors is
                                     
                411       1      15 3      51, 375    50, 000   5
                    ×       10 +        =          >          = .
                616      16      16 8      78, 848    80, 000   8

Hence, for the parameter values above, the shareholders do best to hire and
incentivize dependent directors. Note, though, for other parameter values, the
shareholder do best to hire independent directors. For example, if we change
p = 1/8 and Ih = 9, then
                                     17           1
                            αdep =      and αind = ;
                                     72           7
hence, an independent board would be best.

5.1.2   Empirical Work
There has been some empirical work on the determinants of director compen-
sation. Vafeas (1999) conducts a matched-sample analysis with a sample of
122 firms that adopted a director compensation scheme (a plan providing for
the grant of stock or options) between 1989 and 1995 and 122 that did not
(and had not). He finds that a strongly significant predictor of adoption is the
proportion of outside directors, which is positively related to adoption. Compar-
ing adopters and their matched non-adopters three years after plan adoption,
Vafeas finds adopters continue to have a higher proportion of outside direc-
tors. A comparison of differences between adopters and non-adopters, along


                                          40
with suggestive, but not always statistically significant, regression coefficients,
indicate that firms that adopt tend to be larger (as measured by sales), are less
likely to have an unaffiliated blockholder, and have busier directors. Vafeas puts
forth the interpretation that adopting firms are more reliant on the board as a
monitoring device and, thus, contingent compensation is part of this governance
strategy.
    Consistent with Vafeas, Bryan and Klein (2004) find evidence that firms with
greater agency problems make greater use of option compensation for outside
directors.38 In contrast to Vafeas, they find no evidence that the percentage of
outside directors is a significant predictor of option compensation.
    Like Bryan and Klein, Fich and Shivdasani (2005) find that firms with high
market-to-book ratios are more likely to utilize option compensation for their
directors than firms with low market-to-book ratios. They further find that,
consistent with an attenuation-of-agency-problems story, the stock market re-
acts favorably to the adoption of a director stock-option plan. Adoption led
to significant cumulative abnormal returns (0.31% for all adopters, 0.18% for a
subsample of “uncontaminated” events). Adoption also led to an improvement
in the earnings-per-share forecast.
    On the other hand, it is possible that, instead of being a solution to an
agency problem, director compensation plans are evidence of an unresolved
agency problem. Brick et al. (2006) find a strong positive correlation between
excess ceo compensation and excess director compensation, where excess com-
pensation is defined as the residual from a pay-for-performance regression. If
the regression residuals were truly random errors, then they should be uncor-
related. Correlation indicates systematic factors within each firm. Brick et al.
suggest that one such systematic factor could be “cronyism” between the direc-
tors and the ceo; that is, the directors and ceo collude together against the
shareholders to improperly increase their compensation.
    Other authors (Perry, 1999; and Adams and Ferreira, 2008a) have sought
to determine whether incentive pay for directors has an effect on their actions.
Adams and Ferreira (2008a) estimate the effect of meeting-attendance fees on
directors’ decisions to attend board meetings. These authors find, somewhat
surprisingly given the high opportunity cost of most directors’ time, that receiv-
ing as little as $1000 per meeting significantly increases attendance. Consistent
with the view that incentive pay improves performance, Perry finds that incen-
tive pay makes outsider-dominated boards even more likely to dismiss the ceo
for poor financial performance.
  38 The authors use measures of investment opportunities (either r&d expenses or market-to-
book ratio) as an agency variable; the idea being that having more potentially squanderable
investment opportunities means the agency problem is worse. Other agency variables are
leverage and being regulated; the disciplining nature of debt or outside regulation reduces
agency problems. More controversial is a measure of closeness to financial distress; the au-
thors argue that distress leads to greater creditor control, which reduces the agency problem.
Alternatively, the higher likelihood that the stock will be worthless reduces the value of stock
options, making them a less-powerful incentive for directors. Or, as another alternative, the
creditors, worried about the asset-substitution problem, want to avoid giving directors incen-
tives to gamble.



                                              41
    An important consideration when evaluating studies of director compensa-
tion is that both directors’ compensation and their actions could be a function of
some third factor. For example, one possible source of variation in governance is
between professionally managed and family firms. It is likely that professionally
managed firms are more likely to hire compensation consultants when design-
ing director compensation systems, and consequently are more likely to include
incentive-based plans, and are also likely to have higher levels of compensation
(given directors must be hired via arms-length transactions). Such an expla-
nation is often difficult to rule out—although Adams and Ferreira (2008a) are
largely able to do so by using both director fixed effects and directorship effects
(which control for family versus non-family firms) and instrumental variables to
address endogeneity problems. It is also likely that these professionally managed
firms have higher market-to-book ratios, higher attendance at board meetings,
and more performance-based evaluation of the ceo. The professionalism of the
management team is only one of many possible omitted variables. On the other
hand, there is no “smoking gun” to indicate that one or more omitted factors
are the explanation for the results of these studies (and, as noted, Adams and
Ferreira, 2008a is very careful). Nevertheless, as we have emphasized, omitted
variables are always a worrisome possibility when interpreting these (and other)
findings.

5.2     Reputational Concerns
What other motivations, besides direct compensation, could affect director be-
havior? A possible motive that has been heavily investigated is the concern that
directors have for being seen as able business people. An idea, dating back at
least to Fama (1980), is that concern for his reputation will cause an agent to act
more in his principal’s interests than standard approaches to agency might sug-
gest. On the other hand, as Holmstrom (1999) observes, reputational concerns
are not sufficient to eliminate agency problems and they can, in fact, create
additional ones. With respect to the latter, reputational concerns can generate
agency problems with respect to the agent’s choice of risky projects.39
    Directors’ reputations would seem particularly important in the market for
directorships. A strong reputation presumably aids in getting more board seats
or retaining the ones already held, a weak reputation the opposite. Gilson (1990)
and Kaplan and Reishus (1990) examine this possibility empirically. They find
that poorly performing ceos are less likely to gain board seats on other com-
panies than well-performing ceos (with poor performance being indicated by
financial distress or a reduction in dividends, respectively, in the two studies).
   39 In Holmstrom (1999), reputational concerns cause the agent to shy away from risky

projects. As, however, others have noted, that conclusion depends on whether outside ob-
servers know the risk of the project taken. If they do, then an agent could rationally be overly
risk loving when choosing projects. The reason is that observers will not update their beliefs
about the agent’s abilities much in response to a risky project’s outcome, because it is a noisy
signal; consequently, the risk to the agent’s reputation is lower than if he undertook a less
risky and, hence, more informative project. See, e.g., Hermalin and Weisbach (2008) for a
more complete discussion of this issue in a governance context.


                                              42
Fich (2005) looks at the stock-price reaction to adding directors of different qual-
ities. Most noticeably, he finds that the cumulative abnormal return in response
to the addition of a director who is ceo of another firm is significantly greater
the higher the industry-adjusted roa of his firm is. The new director’s holding
an mba also has a positive impact on the cumulative abnormal return, albeit
at a marginal level of significance. As a possibly sobering finding about our
reputations, adding academics to a board is associated with a negative return,
although the effect is not statistically significant.
    Fich and Shivdasani (2007) examine the effect on directors’ reputations if
they sit on the boards of firms that are the subject of shareholder class-action
lawsuits alleging financial fraud. They find that outside directors are no more
likely to leave the board of the sued firm than they would be otherwise. These
directors do, however, see a significant drop in other board seats held. The size of
this drop is greater the more severe the fraud allegations (there is an associated
formal action by the sec) and when they arguably bear greater responsibility for
monitoring fraud (they serve on the audit committee). Finally, these “tainted”
directors are more likely to lose directorships at firms with arguably stronger
corporate governance (as measured by the Gompers et al., 2003, index) and
their departure is associated with positive cumulative abnormal returns for these
firms.
    Although such studies are valuable, it is worth observing that they touch
only on measures of reputation visible to the econometrician; they don’t nec-
essarily pick up on “soft” dimensions of reputation. In particular, a director
who wishes to maintain or obtain board seats could, at least in theory, face a
reputational tradeoff. As the studies above indicate, a director who develops a
public reputation as a poor monitor is hurt with respect to the number of board
seats he or she holds. At the same time, however, a director who develops a
private reputation as a poor monitor—that is, as someone unlikely to rock the
boat—might be favored by ceos who are looking to acquire power at the ex-
pense of the board. Certainly, a number of the models discussion in Section 2.2
rely on there being observable (to the ceo at least) differences across directors
in the intensity with which they carry out their monitoring roles.
    A model that partially gets at this dual tension is Warther (1998). In his
model, there is a three-person board consisting of two outside directors and the
ceo. The outside directors care about their public reputation, so wish to remove
a poorly performing ceo. The ceo, of course, never votes for his own removal,
so any removal requires unanimity between the outside directors. A problem in
achieving unanimity is that the two outside directors receive private signals of
the ceo’s ability that are, conditional on his ability, independently distributed.
The outside directors can share information, but only in a costly manner: an
outside director who indicates she has a negative signal of the ceo’s ability will
be punished for her disloyalty to the ceo by losing her board seat if she fails
to oust him. Consequently, both directors can receive moderately bad signals
about the ceo, such that it would be optimal to oust him, but neither speaks
up for fear of losing her seat. If, however, a director’s signal is bad enough, then
(i) her concern for her public reputation will be more severe and (ii) the more

                                        43
likely it is that her co-outside director has also received a bad signal; hence, in
this case, she speaks out against the ceo. The overall result is that only truly
awful ceos get fired, with too high a proportion of weak ceos’ getting to keep
their jobs.
    As formulated, there are two points of concern with the Warther model.
First, why has the ceo been granted the power to determine who remains on the
board? If the ceo can’t retaliate against a boat-rocker, the problem disappears.
Second, why don’t the outside directors share their evidence privately from
the ceo and coördinate their subsequent actions? In the Warther model, the
directors, having shared information, will agree as to the ceo’s ability and will,
thus, agree about whether he should go or stay; hence, the ceo’s power to rid
himself of a trouble-making director is no longer relevant. As noted previously,
granting the ceo an ability to influence board membership is consistent with
field studies (e.g., Mace, 1971), but this doesn’t explain why he has that power.
It is possible that integrating Warther’s model into a bargaining-type model of
board determination (e.g., Hermalin and Weisbach, 1998) could rationalize the
ceo’s ability to retaliate against dissenting directors. The second issue might
also be finessed by a suitable change in the model. Suppose the directors, for
some reason, do not agree what the standard for dismissal should be. The more
hard-nosed director could be reluctant to approach the more lenient director for
fear (i) they would reach different conclusions and (ii) the more lenient director
might rat her out to the ceo (perhaps to curry favor with the ceo, to avoid
future problems with a dissident director, or to promote a private reputation
among ceos as a director who doesn’t rock the boat).


6     Conclusions
Corporate governance, and in particular the role of boards of directors, has been
the topic of much attention lately. Although this attention is particularly topical
due to well-publicized governance failures and subsequent regulatory changes,
corporate governance is an area of longstanding interest in economics (dating
back to at least Adam Smith, 1776).40 Because of corporations’ enormous share
of economic activity in modern economies, the extent to which corporations
deviate from value-maximization is extremely important. Consequently, corpo-
rate governance and the role of boards of directors is an issue of fundamental
importance in economics. Understanding the role of boards is vital both for
our understanding of corporate behavior and with respect to setting policy to
regulate corporate activities.
    Given the fundamental importance of the issue and its prominent place in
the public eye, it is not surprising that there has been a surge of research on
  40 With respect to directors, Smith wrote “The directors of such companies, however, being

the managers rather of other people’s money than of their own, it cannot well be expected that
they should watch over it with . . . anxious vigilance . . . Negligence and profusion, therefore,
must always prevail, more or less, in the management of the affairs of such compan[ies]”
(Book v, Part iii, Article i, “Of the Publick Works and Institutions which are necessary for
facilitating particular Branches of Commerce,” paragraph 18).


                                               44
boards of directors; indeed, perhaps the surprising fact is that it has taken so
long for boards to become such an active topic of research. We survey this
literature here, paying special attention to that done by the economics and
finance professions, and also to that research done subsequent to the Hermalin
and Weisbach (2003) survey. We apologize in advance to authors whose work
we have neglected; one of the difficult aspects of writing this survey is that there
are new papers appearing nearly every day, outstripping our capacity to write
about them!41
    Boards of directors are difficult institutions to study. The two questions most
asked about boards concern what determines their makeup, and what deter-
mines their actions. These questions are, however, fundamentally intertwined—
the makeup of boards is interesting because it affects what the board does; and,
consequently, their makeup is influenced by a desire to affect what they do.
This problem of joint endogeneity is vexing for both theoretical and empirical
research on boards; research that focuses on one side of the equation while ignor-
ing the other is necessarily incomplete and the results misleading. Nevertheless,
progress has been made, much of it since the Hermalin and Weisbach (2003)
survey (no causal link is implied).
    Empirical study of boards is difficult for a number of reasons. First, one must
deal with broader than ideal classifications of directors. An outside director, for
instance, gets coded as such whether she is truly independent or she’s the ceo’s
oldest friend.42 Second, nearly all variables of interest are, as discussed, jointly
endogenous. Unlike the situation in some other areas of economics, there are
no cure-all instruments that one can use to deal with this endogeneity. Ulti-
mately, much of what one learns about boards is about equilibrium associations.
Causality, in the usual sense, is often impossible to determine. For example, con-
sider Weisbach’s (1988) findings that outside directors appear more responsive
to performance in the ceo retention decision than inside directors. Because the
directors in question were determined through some equilibrium (albeit, possi-
bly, second-best) selection process, one does not have a classic experiment in
which different director types are randomly assigned to control and treatment
pools. Whether random allocations of directors would yield similar findings
is unknowable and, thus, one cannot be sure that the findings, although both
sensible and suggestive, are not driven by some unseen third force that deter-
mines the proportion of outsiders on the board, the performance of the ceo,
and proclivities of the former to fire the latter.
    Ultimately, many of the strongest empirical regularities that have been found
can best be interpreted as statements about both the director-selection process
and their direct effect on board actions. For example, staggered boards tend
  41 A possible reason for the growth in the literature is better data availability. A number of

new databases on boards have become available and have been used in a number of studies.
A database provided by Compact Disclosure has a long time series, running from 1988 to
the present, while an alternative database provided by IRRC has detailed information on
committee structure and the professional background of directors. Both databases are used
and described in Fahlenbrach (in press).
  42 Hwang and Kim (in press) and Cohen et al. (2008) are two recent attempts to estimate

which outside directors are truly independent.


                                              45
to base ceo-retention decisions less on their ceo’s performance than do non-
staggered boards. Why? Because, perhaps as the consequence of past good
performance, the ceo gains bargaining power, which he uses to protect himself.
Thus, for instance, he arranges for his board to become staggered; but increasing
his power in this way comes at the cost of a reduced ability to discipline him in
the future should circumstances warrant. Hence, in the longer run, firms with
staggered boards will have lower valuations than do firms with non-staggered
boards. A similar story can be told for any decrease in board power, such as
the creation of interlocked boards.
    Other empirical results can be interpreted sensibly by considering both the
selection and actions of boards. For example, there are a number of studies that
look at the actions of outside directors that tend to find that boards dominated
by outsiders tend to be more shareholder-friendly than boards dominated by
insiders.43 Yet, studies that have examined the overall performance of firms
with different kinds of boards have all found little or no difference in overall
performance.44 These ostensibly conflicting results make sense when both the
selection and action issues are considered. Outside directors are probably better
from a shareholder perspective, but because they tend to be added following
poor performance (see, e.g., Hermalin and Weisbach, 1988) or most demonstrate
their value in crisis situations, the relation between outsider directors and firm
value is obscured.
    Theory, too, faces its hurdles. Boards are only part of the corporate gover-
nance equation, but an all-inclusive model is impractical given the complexities
of governance. Even limiting attention to boards, it is hard to decide which
institutions should be treated as exogenous and which as endogenous. Letting
too much be endogenous and the models become unwieldy and often fail to yield
definitive results. Treating too much as exogenous and critical points of joint
endogeneity get overlooked, rendering conclusions that are suspect.
    Despite these issues, progress has been made. Models linking the determi-
nants of the board and its monitoring function have proved reasonably robust
and broadly consistent with subsequent empirical analyses. There has also been
progress on models that examine the board’s role in setting strategy, although
their conclusions are difficult to test empirically and these models have not
always been as sensitive to joint-endogeneity issues as would be ideal.
    Where do we see research on boards headed? The open questions are many
and often fundamental. For instance, are the various means of governing a
corporation complements or substitutes? That is, do firms tend to be strong-
governance firms across all the various dimensions of incentive compensation,
openness to takeovers, and board independence? Or does strength in one area
correspond to weakness in another? At a theoretical level, this question is almost
surely impossible to answer, but one can hope to see progress on the empirical
side. Even understanding whether governance mechanisms are complements or
substitutes, one is left to ponder the sources of heterogeneity in governance that
 43 See,for example, Weisbach (1988), Shivdasani (1993), and Brickley et al. (1994).
 44 See,for example, MacAvoy et al. (1983), Hermalin and Weisbach (1991), or Bhagat and
Black (1999).


                                          46
we observe; how is such heterogeneity best explained? Although there has been
some work in this area (consider, e.g., Hermalin, 1994, as an early attempt),
there are still many open questions. Other promising areas for theory are how
the board fits into the ceo succession process; the role of the complexity of a
firm’s operations and environment on the choice of directors and their actions
(we sketched possible paths to explore above); more dynamic models of board
evolution and the long-term path of governance; modeling board interactions
(Warther, 1998, representing one line of approach); and what benefit, other than
protecting the ceo, insiders on a board might play.
    Empirical work will need to continue to devise ways of dealing with the
joint-endogeneity issue. A possible strategy in this regard is to look for “nat-
ural experiments.” One set of such experiments are changes in regulation. In
particular, if a new regulation is put in place, it is possible that some firms
are already in compliance with it, while others are not. If bargaining models
of governance (e.g., Hermalin and Weisbach, 1998) are correct, then we should
see little to no change in ceo compensation for those firms that were already
in compliance, while ceo compensation should rise sharply for those firms that
must come into compliance. If firms set their governance structure optimally
given their constraints, then the long-run performance of those firms for which
the new regulations bind should be worse than that of those already in com-
pliance. In the short run, however, the results could be more confused, to the
extent that the regulation holds up the ceo for the shareholders’ benefit; that
is, to the extent that the ceo bargained for something that benefitted him at
shareholder expense, but had that bargain subsequently undone by the regu-
lation, there would be short-term gain by shareholders (this is why it may be
more relevant to consider ceo compensation than firm value).




                                      47
References
Adams, Renée B., “What do Boards do? Evidence from Board Commit-
 tee and Director Compensation Data,” 2003. Working Paper, University of
 Queensland.
   and Daniel Ferreira, “A Theory of Friendly Boards,” Journal of Finance,
  January 2007, 62 (1), 217–250.
   and , “Do Directors Perform for Pay?,” Journal of Accounting and Eco-
  nomics, 2008, 46 (1), 154–171.
   and , “Women in the Boardroom and Their Impact on Governance and
  Performance,” 2008. Working paper, University of Queensland.
  , Heitor Almeida, and Daniel Ferreira, “Powerful CEOs and their Impact
  on Corporate Performance,” Review of Financial Studies, 2005, 18, 1403–
  1432.
Agrawal, Anup and Charles R. Knoeber, “Do Some Outside Directors
 Play a Political Role?,” Journal of Law and Economics, 2001, 44, 179–198.
Almazan, Andres and Javier Suarez, “Entrenchment and Severance Pay
 in Optimal Governance Structures,” Journal of Finance, April 2003, 58 (2),
 519–547.
Anderson, Kirsten, Daniel N. Deli, and Stuart L. Gillan, “Boards of
 Directors, Audit Committees, and the Information Content of Earnings,”
 2003. Working Paper, Arizona State University.
Anderson, Ronald C., Sattar A. Mansi, and David M. Reeb, “Board
 Characteristics, Accounting Report Integrity, and the Cost of Debt,” Journal
 of Accounting and Economics, September 2004, 37, 315–342.
Baker, Malcolm and Paul A. Gompers, “The Determinants of Board Struc-
 ture at the Initial Public Offering,” Journal of Law and Economics, October
 2003, 46 (2), 569–597.
Baranchuk, Nina and Philip H. Dybvig, “Consensus in Diverse Corporate
 Boards,” Review of Financial Studies, in press.
Baysinger, Barry D. and Henry N. Butler, “Corporate Governance and
 the Board of Directors: Performance Effects of Changes in Board Compo-
 sition,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, Spring 1985, 1 (1),
 101–124.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Alma Cohen, “The Costs of Staggered Boards,”
 Journal of Financial Economics, 2005, 78, 409–433.
   and Jesse M. Fried, Pay without Performance, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
  University Press, 2004.

                                     48
  , John C. Coates, and Guhan Subramanian, “The Powerful Anti-
  takeover Force of Staggered Boards, Theory, Evidence, and Policy,” Stanford
  Law Review, 2002, 54, 887–952.
Becht, Marco, Patrick Bolton, and Ailsa Röell, “Corporate Governance
 and Control,” in George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René Stulz, eds.,
 The Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Amsterdam: North-Holland,
 2003.
Bhagat, Sanjai and Bernard Black, “Is There a Relationship Between Board
 Composition and Firm Performance?,” Business Lawyer, 1999, 54, 921–963.
   and Richard H. Jefferis, The Econometrics of Corporate Governance
  Studies, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002.
Bizjak, John, Michael Lemmon, and Ryan Whitby, “Option Backdating
  and Board Interlocks,” Review of Financial Studies, in press.
Bolton, Patrick and Mathias Dewatripont, Contract Theory, Cambridge,
 MA: MIT Press, 2005.
Boone, Audra L., Laura Casares Field, Jonathan L. Karpoff, and
 Charu G. Raheja, “The Determinants of Corporate Board Size and Com-
 position: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, July 2007,
 85 (1), 66–101.
Booth, James and Daniel Deli, “Factors Affecting the Number of Outside
 Directorships Held by CEOs,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1996, 40 (1),
 81–104.
Borokhovich, Kenneth A., Robert P. Parrino, and Teresa Trapani,
 “Outside Directors and CEO Selection,” Journal of Financial and Quantita-
 tive Analysis, September 1996, 31 (3), 337–355.
Bowen, William G., Inside the Boardroom: Governance by Directors and
 Trustees, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1994.
Brick, Ivan E., Oded Palmon, and John K. Wald, “CEO Compensation,
 Director Compensation, and Firm Performance: Evidence of Cronyism?,”
 Journal of Corporate Finance, 2006, 12, 403–423.
Brickley, James A., Jeffrey L. Coles, and Gregg A. Jarrell, “The Lead-
 ership Structure: Separating the CEO and Chairman of the Board,” Journal
 of Corporate Finance, 1997, 3, 189–220.
  , , and Rory L. Terry, “Outside Directors and the Adoption of Poison
  Pills,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1994, 35 (3), 371–390.
Brown, Katherine M., “New Demands, Better Boards: Rethinking Director
 Compensation in an Era of Heightened Corporate Governance,” New York
 University Law Review, October 2007, 82, 1102–1138.

                                     49
Bryan, Stephen and April Klein, “Non-Management Director Options,
 Board Characteristics, and Future Firm Investments and Performance,” 2004.
 SSRN Working Paper 550506.
Byrd, Daniel T. and Mark S. Mizruchi, “Bankers on the Board and the
 Debt Ratio of Firms,” Journal of Corporate Finance, March 2005, 11 (1–2),
 129–173.
Calvo, Guillermo A. and Stanislaw Wellisz, “Hierarchy, Ability, and In-
 come Distribution,” Journal of Political Economy, October 1979, 87 (5, Part
 1), 991–1010.
Carter, David A., Betty J. Simkins, and W. Gary Simpson, “Corpo-
 rate Governance, Board Diversity, and Firm Value,” The Financial Review,
 February 2003, 38 (1), 33–53.
Clark, Robert C., Corporate Law, Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1986.
Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy, “Hiring
 Cheerleaders: Board Appointments of ‘Independent’ Directors,” 2008. Har-
 vard Business School Working Paper.
Coles, Jeffrey L., Michael L. Lemmon, and J. Felix Meschke, “Struc-
 tural Models and Endogeneity in Corporate Finance: The Link Between Man-
 agerial Ownership and Corporate Finance,” 2007. Working Paper, Arizona
 State University.
  , Naveen D. Daniel, and Lalitha Naveen, “Boards: Does One Size Fit
  All?,” Journal of Financial Economics, February 2008, 87 (2), 329–356.
Conyon, Martin J. and Laura E. Read, “A Model of the Supply of Ex-
 ecutives for Outside Directorships,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 2006, 12,
 645–659.
Crawford, Vincent P. and Joel Sobel, “Strategic Information Transmis-
 sion,” Econometrica, 1982, 50, 1431–1451.
Dahya, Jay, John J. McConnell, and Nickolaos G. Travlos, “The Cad-
 bury Committee, Corporate Performance, and Top Management Turnover,”
 Journal of Finance, 2002, 57 (1), 461–483.
DeGroot, Morris H., Optimal Statistical Decisions, New York: McGraw-Hill,
 1970.
Deli, Daniel N. and Stuart L. Gillan, “On The Demand for Independent
 and Active Audit Committees,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 2000, 6, 427–
 445.
Demb, Ada and F.-Friedrich Neubauer, The Corporate Board, Oxford:
 Oxford University Press, 1992.


                                     50
Demsetz, Harold and Kenneth Lehn, “The Structure of Corporate Own-
 ership: Causes and Consequences,” Journal of Political Economy, December
 1985, 93 (6), 1155–1177.
Dominguez-Martinez, Silvia, Otto H. Swank, and Bauke Visser, “In
 Defense of Boards,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, in press.
Eisenberg, Theodore, Stefan Sundgren, and Martin T. Wells, “Larger
  Board Size and Decreasing Firm Value in Small Firms,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, April 1998, 48 (1), 35–54.
Fahlenbrach, Rüdiger, “Shareholder Rights, Boards, and CEO Compensa-
  tion,” Review of Finance, in press.
  , Angie Low, and René M. Stulz, “Why do Firms Appoint CEOs as
  Outside Directors?,” 2008. Working Paper, Ohio State University.
Faleye, Olubunmi, “Are Large Boards Poor Monitors? Evidence from CEO
  Turnover,” December 2003. Working Paper, Northeastern University.
  , “Classified Boards, Firms Value, and Managerial Entrenchment,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 2007, 73, 501–559.
  , Vikas Mehrotra, and Randall Morck, “When Labor Has a Voice in Cor-
  porate Governance,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 2006,
  41 (3), 489–510.
Fama, Eugene F., “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm,” Journal
  of Political Economy, 1980, 88 (2), 288–307.
Farrell, Kathleen A. and Philip L. Hersch, “Additions to Corporate
  Boards: The Effect of Gender,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 2005, 11,
  85–106.
Ferris, Stephen P., Murali Jagannathan, and Adam C. Pritchard, “Too
  Busy to Mind the Business? Monitoring by Directors with Multiple Board
  Appointments,” Journal of Finance, 2003, 58, 1087–1111.
Fich, Eliezer M., “Are Some Outside Directors Better than Others? Evidence
  from Director Appointments by Fortune 1000 Firms,” Journal of Business,
  2005, 78 (5), 1943–1971.
   and Anil Shivdasani, “The Impact of Stock-Option Compensation for
  Outside Directors on Firm Value,” Journal of Business, 2005, 78 (6), 2229–
  2254.
   and , “Are Busy Boards Effective Monitors?,” Journal of Finance, 2006,
  61 (2), 689–724.
   and , “Financial Fraud, Director Reputation, and Shareholder Wealth,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 86, 306–336.

                                    51
   and Lawrence White, “Why do CEOs Reciprocally Sit on Each Other’s
  Boards?,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 2005, 11, 175–195.
Fields, M. Andrew and Phyllis Y. Keys, “The Emergence of Corporate
  Governance from Wall St. to Main St.: Outside Directors, Board Diversity,
  Earnings Management, and Managerial Incentives to Bear Risk,” The Finan-
  cial Review, February 2003, 38 (1), 1–24.
Freedman, James O., “Presidents and Trustees,” in Ronald G. Ehrenberg,
  ed., Governing Academia, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2004.
Gillan, Stuart L. and Laura T. Starks, “Corporate Goverance Proposals
 and Shareholder Activism: Motivation and Empirical Evidence,” Journal of
 Financial Economics, 2000, 57, 275–305.
Gillette, Ann B., Thomas H. Noe, and Michael J. Rebello, “Corpo-
 rate Board Composition, Protocols, and Voting Behavior: Experimental Ev-
 idence,” Journal of Finance, 2003, 58, 1997–2031.
  , , and , “Board Structures Around the World: an Experimental Inves-
  tigation,” Review of Finance, 2008, 12, 93–140.
Gilson, Stuart C., “Bankruptcy, Boards, Banks and Blockholders: Evidence
 on Changes in Corporate Ownership and Control when Firms Default,” Jour-
 nal of Financial Economics, 1990, 27, 355–387.
Goldman, Eitan, Jörg Rocholl, and Jongil So, “Do Politically Connected
 Boards Affect Firm Value?,” Review of Financial Studies, in press.
Gompers, Paul A., Andrew Metrick, and Joy Ishii, “Corporate Gover-
 nance and Equity Prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 2003,
 118 (1), 107–155.
Gorton, Gary and Frank A. Schmid, “Capital, Labor, and the Firm: A
 Study of German Codetermination,” Journal of the European Economic As-
 sociation, 2004, 2 (5), 863–905.
Goyal, Vidhan K. and Chul W. Park, “Board Leadership Structure and
 CEO Turnover,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 2002, 8, 49–66.
Grandori, Anna, ed., Corporate Governance and Firm Organization, Oxford:
 Oxford University Press, 2004.
Graziano, Clara and Annalisa Luporini, “Ownership Concentration, Moni-
 toring, and Optimal Board Structure,” 2005. CESifo Working Paper No. 1543.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart, “An Analysis of the Principal-
 Agent Problem,” Econometrica, 1983, 51, 7–46.
Güner, A. Burak, Ulrike Malmendier, and Geoffrey Tate, “Financial
 Expertise of Directors,” Journal of Financial Economics, in press.

                                    52
Guo, Re-Jin, Timothy A. Kruse, and Tom Nohel, “Undoing The Powerful
 Anti-Takeover Force of Staggered Boards,” Journal of Corporate Finance,
 2008, 14, 274–288.
Hallock, Kevin, “Reciprocally Interlocking Boards of Directors and Executive
 Compensation,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, September
 1997, 32 (3), 331–344.
Hambrick, Donald C., Theresa S. Cho, and Ming-Jer Chen, “The Influ-
 ence of Top Management Team Heterogeneity on Firms’ Competitive Moves,”
 Administrative Science Quarterly, 1996, 41, 659–684.
Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv, “A Theory of Board Control and Size,”
 Review of Financial Studies, in press.
Hayes, Rachel M., Hamid Mehran, and Scott Schaefer, “Board Com-
 mittee Structures, Ownership, and Firm Performance,” 2004. Working Paper,
 University of Utah.
Hermalin, Benjamin E., “Heterogeneity in Organizational Form: Why
 Otherwise Identical Firms Choose Different Incentives for their Managers,”
 RAND Journal of Economics, Winter 1994, 25 (4), 518–537.
  , “Higher Education Boards of Trustees,” in Ronald G. Ehrenberg, ed., Gov-
  erning Academia, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2004.
  , “Trends in Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (5), 2351–
  2384.
   and Michael L. Katz, “Moral Hazard and Verifiability: The Effects of
  Renegotiation in Agency,” Econometrica, November 1991, 59 (6), 1735–1753.
   and Michael S. Weisbach, “The Determinants of Board Composition,”
  RAND Journal of Economics, Winter 1988, 19 (4), 589–606.
   and , “The Effects of Board Composition and Direct Incentives on Firm
  Performance,” Financial Management, Winter 1991, 20 (4), 101–112.
   and , “Endogenously Chosen Boards of Directors and Their Monitoring
  of the CEO,” American Economic Review, March 1998, 88 (1), 96–118.
   and , “Boards of Directors as an Endogenously Determined Institution:
  A Survey of the Economic Literature,” Economic Policy Review, April 2003,
  9 (1), 7–26.
   and , “Information Disclosure and Corporate Governance,” 2008. Univer-
  sity of California Working Paper.
   and Nancy E. Wallace, “Firm Performance and Executive Compensation
  in the Savings and Loan Industry,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2001,
  61, 139–170.

                                     53
Himmelberg, Charles P., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Darius Palia, “Un-
 derstanding the Determinants of Managerial Ownership and the Link between
 Ownership and Performance,” Journal of Financial Economics, September
 1999, 53 (3), 353–384.
Hirshleifer, David and Anjan V. Thakor, “Managerial Performance,
 Boards of Directors, and Takeover Bidding,” Journal of Corporate Finance,
 1994, 1 (1), 63–90.
Holmstrom, Bengt, “Moral Hazard and Observability,” Bell Journal of Eco-
 nomics, Spring 1979, 10 (1), 74–91.
  , “Moral Hazard in Teams,” The Bell Journal of Economics, Autumn 1982,
  13, 324–340.
  , “Managerial Incentive Problems—A Dynamic Perspective,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, January 1999, 66 (226), 169–182.
  , “Pay without Performance and the Managerial Power Hypothesis: A Com-
  ment,” Journal of Corporation Law, 2005, 30, 703–713.
Huson, Mark R., Robert Parrino, and Laura T. Starks, “Internal Mon-
 itoring Mechanisms and CEO Turnover: A Long-Term Perspective,” Journal
 of Finance, December 2001, 55 (6), 2265–2297.
Hwang, Byoung-Hyoun and Seoyoung Kim, “It Pays to Have Friends,”
 Journal of Financial Economics, in press.
Jarrell, Gregg and Annette Poulsen, “Shark Repellents and Stock Prices:
  The Effects of Antitakeover Amendments Since 1980,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 1987, 19, 127–168.
Jensen, Michael C., “The Modern Industrial Revolution, Exit, and the Failure
  of Internal Control Systems,” Journal of Finance, 1993, 48 (3), 831–880.
Jenter, Dirk and Fadi Kanaan, “CEO Turnover and Relative Performance
  Evaluation,” 2008. MIT Working Paper.
John, Kose and Lemma W. Senbet, “Corporate Governance and Board
  Effectiveness,” Journal of Banking & Finance, May 1998, 22 (4), 371–403.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Bernadette A. Minton, “How has CEO Turnover
 Changed? Increasingly Performance Sensitive Boards and Increasingly Un-
 easy CEOs,” July 2006. Unpublished working paper, University of Chicago
 GSB.
   and David Reishus, “Outside Directorships and Corporate Performance,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 1990, 27 (2), 389–410.




                                    54
Klausner, Michael, Bernard S. Black, and Brian R. Cheffins, “Out-
 side Directors Liability: Have WorldCom and Enron Changed the Rules?,”
 Stanford Lawyer, Winter 2005, (71), 36–39.
Klein, April, “Firm Performance and Board Committee Structure,” Journal
 of Law and Economics, 1998, pp. 137–165.
  , “Audit Committee, Board of Director Characteristics, and Earnings Man-
  agement,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 2002, 33, 375–400.
Kofman, Fred and Jacques Lawarrée, “Collusion in Hierarchical Agency,”
 Econometrica, May 1993, 61 (3), 629–656.
Kramarz, Francis and David Thesmar, “Social Networks in the Board-
 room,” 2006. IZA Discussion paper No. 1940.
Kumar, Praveen and K. Sivaramakrishnan, “Who Monitors the Monitor?
 The Effect of Board Independence on Executive Compensation and Firm
 Value,” Review of Financial Studies, 2008, 21 (3), 1371–1401.
Larcker, David F., Scott A. Richardson, Andrew J. Seary, and Irem
  Tuna, “Director Networks, Executive Compensation and Organizational Per-
  formance,” 2005. Working paper, The Wharton School.
Laux, Volker, “Board Independence and CEO Turnover,” Journal of Account-
  ing Research, 2008, 46, 137–171.
Lehn, Kenneth, Sukesh Patro, and Mengxin Zhao, “Determinants of the
  Size and Structure of Corporate Boards,” Financial Management, in press.
Linck, James S., Jeffry M. Netter, and Tina Yang, “The Determinants
  of Board Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2008, 87, 308–387.
  , , and , “The Effects and Unintended Consequences of the Sarbanes-
  Oxley Act on the Supply and Demand for Directors,” Review of Financial
  Studies, in press.
Lorsch, Jay W. and Elizabeth MacIver, Pawns or Potentates: The Reality
  of America’s Corporate Boards, Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1989.
Lublin, Joann S., “Corporate Whistle-Blowers Can Salvage Their Careers,”
 Wall Street Journal, February 6, 2002, on line.
MacAvoy, Paul and Ira M. Millstein, “The Active Board of Directors and
 Its Effect on the Performance of the Large Publicly Traded Corporation,”
 Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 1999, 11 (4), 8–20.
  , Scott Cantor, James D. Dana Jr., and Sarah Peck, “ALI Proposals
  for Increased Control of the Corporation by the Board of Directors: An Eco-
  nomic Analysis,” in “Statement of the Business Roundtable on the American
  Law Institute’s Proposed Principles of Corporate Governance and Structure:
  Restatement and Recommendations,” New York: Business Roundtable, 1983.

                                     55
Mace, Myles L., Directors: Myth and Reality, Boston: Harvard Business
 School Press, 1971.
Mahoney, James M. and Joseph T. Mahoney, “An Empirical Investiga-
 tion of the Effect of Corporate Charter Amendments on Stockholder Wealth,”
 Strategic Management Journal, 1993, 14, 17–32.
Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole, “Unforeseen Contingencies and Incomplete
 Contracts,” Review of Economic Studies, January 1999, 66 (1), 83–114.
Murphy, Kevin J. and Ján Zábojnı́k, “Managerial Capital and the Market
 for CEOs,” December 2003. Marshall School of Business Working Paper,
 University of Southern California.
   and , “CEO Pay and Appointments: A Market-Based Explanation for
  Recent Trends,” American Economic Review, May 2004, 94 (2), 192–196.
Naveen, Lalitha, “Organizational Complexity and Succession Planning,”
 Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 2006, 41, 661–683.
Palia, Darius, “The Endogeneity of Managerial Compensation in Firm Value:
 A Solution,” Review of Financial Studies, Autumn 2001, 14 (3), 735–764.
Parrino, Robert, “CEO Turnover and Outside Succession: A Cross-Sectional
 Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1997, 46, 165–197.
Perry, Tod, “Incentive Compensation for Outside Directors and CEO
 Turnover,” 1999. Working Paper, Arizona State University.
Pfeffer, Jeffrey, “Size and Composition of Corporate Boards of Directors: The
  Organization and its Environment,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 1972,
  17, 218–229.
Raheja, Charu G., “Determinants of Board Size and Composition: A Theory
 of Corporate Boards,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, June
 2005, 40 (2), 283–306.
Ravina, Enrichetta and Paola Sapienza, “What Do Independent Directors
 Know? Evidence from Their Trading,” Review of Financial Studies, in press.
Rechner, Paula L. and Dan R. Dalton, “CEO Duality and Organiza-
 tional Performance: A Longitudinal Analysis,” Strategic Management Jour-
 nal, 1991, 12, 155–160.
Roe, Mark, Strong Managers, Weak Owners: The Political Roots of American
 Corporate Finance, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994.
Ryan, Harley and Roy Wiggins, “Who is in Whose Pocket? Director Com-
 pensation, Bargaining Power, and Board Independence,” Journal of Financial
 Economics, 2004, 73, 497–524.


                                     56
Shavell, Steven, “Risk Sharing and Incentives in the Principal and Agent
  Relationship,” Bell Journal of Economics, Spring 1979, 10 (1), 55–73.
Shivdasani, Anil, “Board Composition, Ownership Structure, and Hostile
  Takeovers,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, Jan./April/July 1993, 16
  (1/2/3), 167–198.
  and David Yermack, “CEO Involvement in the Selection of New Board
  Members: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Finance, 1999, 54, 1829–1853.
Smith, Adam, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Na-
 tions, Indianapolis: Liberty Press, 1776.
Song, Fenghua and Anjan V. Thakor, “Information Control, Career Con-
  cerns, and Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance, August 2006, 61 (4),
  1845–1896.
Tirole, Jean, “Hierarchies and Bureacracies: On the Role of Collusion in Or-
  ganizations,” Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization, Fall 1986, 2 (2),
  181–214.
  , “Collusion and the Theory of Organizations,” in Jean-Jacques Laffont, ed.,
  Advances in Economic Theory: 6th World Congress, Cambridge, England:
  Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Vafeas, Nikas, “Determinants of the Adoption of Director Incentive Plans,”
 Journal of Accounting, Auditing & Finance, Fall 1999, 14 (4), 453–474.
Vancil, Richard F., Passing the Baton: Managing the Process of CEO Suc-
 cession, Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1987.
Warner, Jerold B., Ross L. Watts, and Karen H. Wruck, “Stock
 Prices and Top-Management Changes,” Journal of Financial Economics,
 Jan./March 1988, 20 (1/2), 461–492.
Warther, Vincent A., “Board Effectiveness and Board Dissent: A Model
 of the Board’s Relationship to Management and Shareholders,” Journal of
 Corporate Finance, 1998, 4 (1), 53–70.
Weisbach, Michael S., “Outside Directors and CEO Turnover,” Journal of
 Financial Economics, Jan./March 1988, 20 (1/2), 431–460.
Westphal, James D., “Collaboration in the Boardroom: Behavioral and Per-
 formance Consequences of CEO-Board Social Ties,” Academy of Management
 Journal, 1999, 42 (1), 7–24.
   and Edward J. Zajac, “Who Shall Govern? CEO/Board Power, De-
  mographic Similarity, and New Director Selection,” Administrative Science
  Quarterly, 1995, 40, 60–83.



                                     57
Whisler, Thomas L., The Rules of the Game: Inside the Corporate Board-
 room, Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-Irwin, 1984.
Williamson, Oliver E., Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Im-
 plications, New York: The Free Press, 1975.
  , “Franchise Bidding for Natural Monopolies—in General and with Respect
  to CATV,” The Bell Journal of Economics, Spring 1976, 7 (1), 73–104.
Xie, Biao, Wallace N. Davidson III, and Peter J. DaDalt, “Earnings
 Management and Corporate Governance: The Role of the Board and the
 Audit Committee,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 2003, 9, 295–316.
Yermack, David, “Higher Valuation of Companies with a Small Board of
 Directors,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1996, 40 (2), 185–212.
  , “Remuneration, Retention, and Reputation Incentives for Outside Direc-
  tors,” October 2004, 59 (5), 2281–2308.
  , “Board Members and Company Value,” Financial Markets and Portfolio
  Management, 2006, 20, 33–47.
Zajac, Edward J. and James D. Westphal, “Director Reputation, CEO-
 Board Power, and the Dynamics of Board Interlocks,” Administrative Science
 Quarterly, 1996, 41, 507–529.




                                    58
