NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FLATTENING FIRM AND PRODUCT MARKET COMPETITION:
THE EFFECT OF TRADE LIBERALIZATION
Maria Guadalupe
Julie Wulf
Working Paper 14491
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14491

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2008

We would like to thank Tim Baldenius, Luis Garicano, Tom Hubbard, Amit Khandelwal, Michael
Raith, Tano Santos and Catherine Thomas for very helpful comments and discussions, as well as audiences
at Columbia, HBS, Rochester, Stanford SITE conference, UCLA, USC, LSE, UCL, NYU-Stern, Harvard-MIT
Org Economics seminar, Egon Sohmen Symposium. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Maria Guadalupe and Julie Wulf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Flattening Firm and Product Market Competition: The Effect of Trade Liberalization
Maria Guadalupe and Julie Wulf
NBER Working Paper No. 14491
November 2008
JEL No. L2,M2,M52
ABSTRACT
This paper establishes a causal effect of competition from trade liberalization on various characteristics
of organizational design. We exploit a unique panel dataset on firm hierarchies (1986-1999) of large
U.S. firms and find that increasing competition leads firms to become flatter, i.e., (i) reduce the number
of positions between the CEO and division managers (DM), (ii) increase the number of positions reporting
directly to the CEO (span of control), (iii) increase DM total and performance-based pay. The results
are generally consistent with the explanation that firms redesign their organizations through a set of
complementary choices in response to changes in their environment.

Maria Guadalupe
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 624
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
mg2341@columbia.edu
Julie Wulf
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 241, Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
jwulf@hbs.edu

1.

Introduction
Firm hierarchies are becoming flatter. Spans of control have broadened and the number of

levels within firms has declined. These trends are suggested and documented in a number of
academic papers (e.g., Osterman, 1996; and Whittington, et al., 1999; Rajan and Wulf, 2006) and
are often discussed in the business press. However, much less is known about the causes behind
these trends. In this paper, we investigate the role of changes in the firms’ product markets and,
in particular, product market competition resulting from trade liberalization as a potential driver
of organizational change.1 In doing so, we shed some light on the possible reasons behind certain
organizational choices and on the importance of communication and decision-making processes
inside firms.
Our main finding is that greater international competition following trade liberalization leads
to flatter firms. U.S. firms in manufacturing industries more exposed to the trade liberalization
reduce the number of hierarchical levels, broaden the span of control for the CEO, and increase
total pay and incentive-based pay for division managers. Furthermore, firms appear to adjust
organizational elements in a coordinated manner: certain changes appear to occur together.
We use a unique panel dataset of the internal organization of large U.S. manufacturing firms
in various industries. We exploit variation within firms (and within division manager positions)
in an array of organizational variables -such as hierarchical depth, CEO span of control, pay and
incentives- over a 14-year period. This allows us to address concerns about unobserved
heterogeneity.

1The economic importance of organizational change is non-negligible since the internal hierarchy of the firm
(Liberti, 2006; Garicano and Hubbard, 2007) and organizational and workplace practices (Black and Lynch, 2001)
have a significant impact on productivity.

2

In order to identify a potential causal effect of foreign competition on organizational change,
our primary identification strategy exploits the Canada-United States Free Trade Agreement of
1989 (FTA) that eliminated tariffs and trade barriers between the two countries (Trefler, 2004).
This can be thought of as a quasi-natural experiment that implied a greater reduction in entry
barriers (a larger increase in competition) for firms in industries with high U.S. tariffs on
Canadian imports prior to 1989 allowing us to implement a difference-in-differences strategy. 2
Since the trade liberalization was bilateral, it also implied a reduction in Canadian tariffs on U.S.
exports potentially leading to market expansion opportunities for our U.S. firms. However, while
we find significant effects of these market expansion opportunities on other outcomes (such as
firm size and market value), they had no significant impact on the firm’s hierarchy: all the effect
is driven by the fall in import tariffs. Finally, we show that our results are not driven by
alternative factors that could also lead to flattening, such as increases in expenditures on IT,
changes in business scope, location of activities, and a host of other potential factors.
Our findings suggest that it is the increased competition from falling U.S. tariffs that causes
firms to simultaneously reorganize along several dimensions.. These results are consistent with
theories arguing that complementarities exist among a firm’s organizational design elements
(e.g. Milgrom and Roberts, 1995). As such, our paper is related to the limited empirical research
on the existence of complementary human resource management practices (e.g. Ichniowski,
Shaw, and Prennushi, 1997; and Bresnahan, Brynjolfson, and Hitt, 2002; Cockburn, Henderson
and Stern, 2004). Within this literature, an important contribution of our paper is that we show

2 When studying competition, it is important to exploit exogenous changes to entry barriers, instead of standard
measures of product market competition, such as, industry Herfindahl indices and average price cost margins. These,
as is well known, are subject to numerous concerns: they do not measure the underlying competition parameter (the
entry barrier), they are endogenous to changes in the competitiveness of markets, and they are non-monotonic in
competition (Sutton, 1991; Schmalensee, 1989).

3

that following an exogenous shock to the firm’s competitive environment firms redesign their
organizations arguably to “fit” the environment in which they operate.3 To our knowledge, much
of the research on adoption of complementary work practices does not capture responses to
exogenous shocks.4
While we establish a robust causal relationship between the trade liberalization and the
flattening of firms, an important question remains: what is the economic mechanism driving this
change? Management scholars have long argued that increased competition leads firms to search
for new organizational practices in an attempt to replace traditional hierarchical structures. Since
additional layers in the hierarchy impede information flows, firms eliminate layers (i.e.,
“delayer”) to improve response times to changes in competitive forces. Moreover, firms
decentralize decision-making to respond more quickly to changes in the business environment
and to exploit the knowledge of lower level managers.5 Alternatively, in a world with Xinefficiency, firms may eliminate layers in an attempt to cut costs when faced with more
competition. We provide a set of additional results that explore the different potential
mechanisms. Our findings show little support for the cost-cutting story and are more consistent
with flattening as reflecting changes in decision-making in response to more competition. In this
sense, we complement Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2007) who document a cross-sectional
relationship between competition (measured by import penetration and survey responses) and
greater decision-making authority of plant managers across countries.

3

This idea is captured in the following quote: “Achieving high performance in a business results from establishing
and maintaining a fit among three elements: the strategy of the firm, its organizational design, and the environment
in which it operates. (Roberts, 2004, pg. 12).
4
One exception, and relatedly, Baker and Hubbard (2004) document how an exogenous change in technology affects
the ownership structure of trucking firms.
5
Refer to Whittington, Pettigrew, Peck, Fenton and Conyon (1999) for a review of the relevant literature in
management. For early works that discuss the link between organizational change and the environment, refer to
Lawrence and Lorsch (1967).

4

There are certainly other reasons why firms may change their organizational structures.
Information technology is a prominent candidate and a number of papers have explored the
relationship between IT and organizational characteristics including work practices (Bresnahan,
Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2002), skill-biased organizational change (Caroli and Van Reenen, 2001),
adoption of new management practices (Bartel, Ichniowski, and Shaw, 2007), firm boundaries
(Baker and Hubbard, 2004) and delegation of authority (Acemoglu, Aghion, Lelarge, Van
Reenen and Zilibotti, 2007). Even though our main focus is whether there is a causal effect of
changes in product markets on the observed flattening of firms, we acknowledge and address the
importance of information technology in our analysis.
Given that we find a significant effect from a specific trade liberalization, it is likely that
increasing domestic and foreign competition from other sources (such as deregulation and
reductions in trade, communication and transport costs) is also an important contributor to the
flattening of firms. Analyzing these other drivers of increasing competition is beyond the scope
of this paper. However, to the extent that one thinks that these are major forces, this paper is an
important step in the understanding of the role of product markets in explaining organizational
change.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the related theoretical
literature on organizational design and discusses the potential links between the competitive
environment, internal hierarchies, and managerial incentives. Section 3 describes the data and
our empirical strategy. Section 4 outlines our results and discusses potential interpretations.
Section 5 concludes.

2.

Theoretical Background

5

M-form organizations, as described and documented in the pioneering work of Alfred
Chandler (1962), are comprised of a central administrative unit or “headquarters” and operating
units or divisions. Economic models typically characterize headquarters (or the CEO) as the
principal with the objective of maximizing firm profits and division managers as self-interested
agents that are better informed about local markets. The optimal design of an organization
depends on trade-offs associated with various characteristics such as information, incentives, and
coordination which in turn are a function of the environment in which the firm operates (Roberts,
2004).
An external shock to the environment, such as an increase in the intensity of product market
competition, can cause firms to reorganize along various dimensions. One traditional explanation
is that firms are not optimizing and that competition forces firms to eliminate organizational
slack or X-inefficiency (Liebenstein, 1966). However, explicit changes to organizational design
need not be the result of earlier inefficient behavior, but could be an optimal response to the
trade-offs inherent in distinct strategic and design choices.
For example, under certain theories of hierarchies, firms have to trade-off adaptation and
coordination: decentralized decision-making may replace centralized structures as quick
adaptation to local markets becomes paramount. Yet, local decisions by autonomous business
unit managers may be more costly for corporate headquarters to coordinate (e.g., Alonso,
Dessein, and Matouschek, 2008). Firms may also trade-off loss of information and loss of
control when making organizational decisions as the delegation of decision rights can encourage
generation of higher quality information, but comes at a cost of lack of control (e.g., Aghion and
Tirole, 1997). A further dimension that firms can optimize is the generation and processing of
information. The elimination of management levels may facilitate faster and more accurate flow

6

of information throughout the hierarchy, but broader spans of control associated with fewer
levels can lead to loss of control and the inability to process information by headquarters (e.g.,
Williamson, 1967). Firms also choose the appropriate level of incentive provision as the return to
managerial effort increases: the optimal performance-pay sensitivity depends on the
characteristics of the environment (Raith, 2003).
Finally, decentralization and incentive provision may also interact (e.g., Mookerjee, 2006)
and decentralized decision-making can be coupled with higher performance pay to appropriately
align incentives (e.g., Prendergast, 2002; Wulf, 2007). However, local incentives can be costly as
they fail to realize synergies across business units (e.g. Athey and Roberts, 2001). 6
But beyond making explicit the existence of a series of trade-offs facing firms, an important
result of organizational theory highlights the interactions and potential complementarities among
different subsets of organizational design choices. Milgrom and Roberts (1995) analyze
complementarities among different features of modern production technologies, while
Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994) examine levels of incentives to elicit effort for various tasks and
the interactions among incentives, asset ownership and job restrictions. Other more recent papers
include Friebel and Raith (2007), Dessein, Garicano and Gertner (2007) and Athey and Roberts
(2001), each of which examines the determination of incentives and decision-making authority
from various perspectives.
As a consequence of changes in the competitive environment, firms are likely to face
different costs and benefits of various trade-offs. This will cause firms to adjust their set of
6

There is a growing theoretical literature in economics that relates to each of these features. Several models explore
the role of a hierarchy in enabling a firm to process and communicate information among agents (e.g. Radner, 1993;
Bolton and Dewatripont, 1994; Garicano, 2000). More recent research focuses on the trade-off between information
and authority or control (e.g. Aghion and Tirole, 1997 and Alonso, Dessein and Matouschek, 2008). The early
theoretical work which is less central to this paper considers hierarchies as a means to create incentives (e.g. Lazear
and Rosen, 1981), to supervise workers (e.g. Williamson, 1967; Calvo and Wellisz, 1978) or to assign talent (e.g.
Rosen, 1982).

7

complementary organizational practices including, but not limited to, the location of decision
rights, the layers in a hierarchy, and the design of incentives. Rantakari (2008) models these
choices and makes predictions about interactions among different organizational design
parameters and the joint fit with the volatility of the firm’s environment.
Other related work that explicitly links product market competition to the internal
organization of firms is Marin and Verdier (2003). They develop a model of hierarchies based on
Aghion and Tirole (1997) and show that greater international competition leads to a delegation of
authority from the CEO to the managers.7 In addition to altering the location of decision rights,
increased competition is likely to change the importance of incentives provided through pay
independently of the effect on hierarchies (e.g. Raith, 2003; Cuñat and Guadalupe, 2006).
In sum, the effect of competition on various organizational choices—hierarchy, location of
decision rights, and performance pay--is ultimately an empirical issue.
Of course there are other explanations besides intensified competition for the flattening of
firms, the most obvious being the rise of information technology. Managers receive, process,
and transmit information, and improvements in the technology of communication and
computation may directly affect organizational design and may have differential effects in more
competitive environments. For example, improvements in communication technology may allow
more efficient processing of information thereby increasing spans of control, and this effect may
be more pronounced in competitive environments in which quick decision-making is essential.
As discussed in the introduction, a number of empirical papers demonstrate that IT is an

7

Askenazy, Thesmar and Thoenig (2006) consider how new technologies increase the value of innovation which
causes firms to design more “reactive” organizations. Thesmar and Thoenig (2000) show that an increase in the rate
of creative destruction (the arrival of new products) has an impact on organizational choice. Finally, Conconi,
Legros and Newman (2008) develop a trade model to examine how liberalization affects the ownership structure of
firms.

8

important determinant of organizational design and we will address its role in our empirical
analysis.
Finally, increased competition can affect organizational design through many channels,
including, but not limited to: changes in business scope, the reduction of organizational slack (or
X-inefficiency), and outsourcing or offshoring. While it is beyond the scope of the paper to
consider each of these various channels, we will attempt to consider several of these mechanisms
in our empirical specifications.
3.

Data and Empirical Strategy

3.1

Organizational Data
The primary dataset from which we draw our sample is an unbalanced cross-industry panel

of more than 300 publicly traded U.S. firms over the years 1986-1999. This dataset includes
detailed information on job descriptions, titles, reporting relationships, and reporting levels of
senior and middle management positions. The dataset is rather unique because it allows us to
identify changes in hierarchies within firms over a 14-year period that is characterized by
significant organizational change.
The data are collected from a confidential compensation survey conducted by Hewitt
Associates, a leading human resources consulting firm specializing in executive compensation
and benefits. The survey is the largest private compensation survey (as measured by the number
of participating firms). The survey participants are typically the leaders in their sectors and the
survey sample is most representative of Fortune 500 firms. For a more detailed description of
the data and their representativeness, see Rajan and Wulf (2006).
An observation in the dataset is a managerial position within a firm in a year. This includes
both operational positions (e.g., Chief Operations Officer and Division Managers) and senior

9

staff positions (e.g., Chief Financial Officer and General or Legal Counsel). The data for each
position include all components of compensation including salary, actual bonus, and grants of
restricted stock, stock options, and other forms of long-term incentives (e.g., performance
units)8; as well as position-specific characteristics such as job title, the title of the position that
the job reports to (i.e., the position’s boss), number of positions between the position and the
CEO in the organizational hierarchy, and both the incumbent’s status as a corporate officer and
tenure in position.
We analyze changes in organizational structure by focusing on two characteristics: breadth
and depth of the hierarchy. These can be defined consistently across firms and over time and
reflect important information about two important positions in the hierarchy, namely the division
manager and the Chief Executive Officer (CEO). We also analyze changes in division manager
pay—both levels and performance sensitivity.
Our first measure, span, is a firm-level measure that captures a horizontal dimension or
breadth of the hierarchy. It measures CEO span of control and is defined as the number of
positions reporting directly to the CEO. One obvious question when using this variable is: what
information is reflected in a direct reporting relationship to the CEO? First, the CEO should
have direct authority over the manager in the position (i.e., his subordinate). Second, presumably
the exchange of information between the CEO and the manager is more direct than it would be if
the “chain of command” included other intermediary positions. Since the CEO is at the top of the
lines of authority and communication, his job involves decision-making at the highest level, but
also includes a role as coordinator of information and decisions that are associated with a
complex, multidivisional firm.
8

The Hewitt database is thus far more comprehensive than the SEC filings which form the basis for the ExecuComp
database. Because firms are required to only file information on the top five executive officers, information on
division managers is rarely included in these sources.

10

Our other measure, depth, is defined at the division level and represents a vertical dimension,
or steepness, of the hierarchy. It is defined as the number of positions between the CEO and the
division manager. Division managers (DM) are the highest authority in the division, where a
division is defined as “the lowest level of profit center responsibility for a business unit that
engineers, manufactures and sells its own products.” We focus on the division manager position
for two reasons: (i) it is the position furthest down the hierarchy that is most consistently defined
across firms; and (ii) it is informative about the extent to which responsibility is delegated in the
firm.
Figure 1 displays an example of a hierarchy that demonstrates both measures of span and
depth. In this example, the measure of span equals 4 -- there are four positions reporting directly
to the CEO -- and the measure of depth equals 2 — there are two positions between the CEO and
the division manager. Average span increased from 4.5 positions in 1986 to 7 positions in 1999
and average depth fell from around 1.5 to 1.
In this paper, we focus on the subset of firms that operate in the manufacturing sector for
which we have data on tariffs. This leads to a sample of approximately 1962 firm-years and 5702
division-years that includes 230 firms and 1524 divisions. We will report both firm-level
regressions (span of control is a firm level variable) and division-level regressions (division
depth and division manager pay will vary by division within the firm).
We also have information on division level sales and employment and the above data are
supplemented with financial information from Compustat. Finally, we construct a number of
variables that are used as controls and that we will describe in the results section (see Table A3
on how these are built).
3.2

Product Market Changes: The 1989 Canada U.S. Free Trade Agreement

11

In January 1989, U.S. President Reagan and Canadian Prime Minister Mulroney signed the
Canada U.S. Free Trade Agreement (FTA) to eliminate trade barriers, and in particular, all tariffs
between Canada and the United States. In October 1987, when the details of the agreement were
first revealed, they encountered substantial opposition in Canada. By early 1988, the Liberal
Party announced that it would use its majority in the Senate to block passage of the free trade
agreement until Canadian voters decided the agreement's fate in a general election. The Liberal
party had an advantage of 20 points in the polls over the Conservative party. The highly
contested election took place in October 1988 with a narrow Conservative victory. Three months
later the agreement came into effect and the first round of tariff reductions took place.
The advantages of this turn of events for our empirical strategy are threefold (see discussion
in Trefler, 2004). Since the passage of the agreement was highly improbable and unexpected, it
can be interpreted as an exogenous shock. Furthermore, it was not a response to a
macroeconomic shock, but rather to the lack of progress in the Tokyo round, so that it was
unaccompanied by other economic packages that could affect industries simultaneously. Finally,
there were no other important trade agreements during that period so that the shock to trade with
Canada is unlikely to be confounded with other factors.
This reduction of U.S. tariffs on imports from Canadian firms affected a substantial fraction
of U.S. trade since the U.S.-Canada trade relationship is the world’s largest in volume and
Canadian imports represented an average of 20% of total U.S. imports at the time (in comparison
to Mexico at around 5%). In addition, Canada is similar to the U.S. in terms of product
specialization, so that Canadian products are likely to compete directly with U.S. products. In
fact, Head and Ries (2001) estimate the elasticity of substitution between U.S. and Canadian
goods at approximately 8, suggesting a potentially large response of Canadian imports from the

12

tariff reductions. They also document substantial trade-distorting non-tariff barriers suggesting a
potentially even larger effect from the trade liberalization. Below we discuss the effect the
liberalization had on North-American trade.
In order to evaluate the effect of the trade agreement on organizational change, we exploit the
fact that U.S. firms in industries with high tariffs on Canadian imports prior to 1989 suffered a
bigger ‘competitive shock’ following the liberalization than firms facing low tariffs. We define
AvT89 s to measure the level of exposure of the firm to the liberalization. This is the average

tariff on Canadian imports by industry s for the period between 1986 and 1988 (Feenstra et al.,
1996),9 where tariffs are defined as duty divided by customs value by 4 digit SIC (or 3 digit SIC)
by year, and we take the average of the three years before 1989.10 Our dependent variables are a
set of organizational variables ORG dst by division d (or firm), industry s and year t. For example,
division-level depth, division manager pay, and CEO span of control (defined at the firm level),
such that our basic empirical specification is as follows:

ORG

dst

= θ 3 AvT 89 s * Post 89 t + X dst ' β + d t + η d + η d * t + ε dst

(1)

Where AvT89 s is the level of tariffs on Canadian imports in the industry pre-89, Post89t is
a dummy that equals one after 1989, X dst are division (or firms) characteristics such as size,
d t are year dummies, η d are division fixed effects that absorb any permanent cross-sectional
division/firm/industry differences and ε dst is an error term. This is a standard quasi-difference in
differences specification that exploits the trade liberalization, where AvT89 s (the “treatment”) is
continuous. The coefficient of interest, θ 3 , captures the differential effect of the liberalization on
9

The data are available from http://www.internationaldata.org/ in the “1972-2001 U.S. import data”.
We report the average tariff by industry (3 digit SIC) for firms in our sample and list examples of Canadian firms
operating in these industries (see Tables S1 and S2 in the Supplemental Appendix). Unfortunately, we do not have
non-tariff barriers, however to the extent that these are correlated with tariffs, we can interpret the tariff effect as the
overall trade-liberalization effect (Trefler, 2004).

10

13

firms according to their trade exposure prior to 1989, net of the general change post 1989 and net
of possible permanent differences across industries.11 Finally, we also include division specific
trends in the organizational variable, η d *t.
One concern in estimating equation (1) is that our organizational variables—both span and
depth--exhibit a strong trend over time (as suggested in Figures 2 & 3) leading to autocorrelated
errors. Not surprisingly, a test of autocorrelation strongly rejects the null of no autocorrelation,
even when allowing for division-specific time trends (F statistic of 431.2). This implies that the
fixed effects (within) estimation is inefficient. We estimate equation (1) in first-differences, since
this removes the autocorrelation (F statistic of 2.6), and thus is the efficient estimator in this case.
Furthermore, since AvT89 s is defined at the industry level, we cluster standard errors by four
digit SIC in all specifications to allow for correlation across observations within an industry.
A. Validity of the trade liberalization as a “Quasi-natural experiment”
We argued earlier that the agreement itself was largely unexpected and therefore one can
consider it as an exogenous shock to the different industries. In order to make sure that there are
no differential pre-existing trends in organizational variables that are correlated with tariff
levels, we include division trends. We will also run a “placebo” test on the main specification, to
assess potential anticipation effects of the liberalization. A potential source of endogeneity is the
phase-out schedule of the tariffs. Some tariff reductions took effect immediately, while others
were scheduled to be phased out over a period of five or ten years. Since that choice is

11

Firms and divisions are assigned the industry reported as the firm’s primary four digit SIC in the first year they
appear in the sample using historic SICs. This industry classification is not allowed to vary over time since these
changes are endogenous and we use three digit SICs if four digit SICs are not reported. 70% of the firms in the
sample appear before 1989; for those that appear after, we keep the first SIC reported. We conduct a series of
robustness tests using a variety of methods in classifying the industry or industries in which a firm operates.

14

endogenous and subject to lobbying, we treat all industries equally regardless of their phase-out
schedule.12
But even if the implementation of the agreement was unexpected, and if we do not allow for
endogenous phase-out of tariffs to identify our results, we still need to address the fact that the
pre-89 level of tariffs is not necessarily random. We do this in two different ways. Trefler (2004)
argues that one source of tariff endogeneity is that declining industries may have high tariff
levels. He addresses this concern by controlling for industry specific trends. We address this
concern by controlling for division specific time trends (η d * t ) that absorb the industry secular
trends. We further control for other pre-existing industry characteristics that are typically related
to tariff protection: skill intensity, capital intensity and TFP growth of U.S. industries. The
vector Z s includes the averages of each of these measures by industry before the FTA (between
1986 and 1988). Analogous to our tariff measure, we also allow organizational change to vary
along these dimensions after 1989 through the interaction term ( Z s * Post 89t ) .
Once we include these variables and take first differences, the regression we estimate is:

Δ ORG dst = θ 3 Δ AvT 89 s * Post 89 t + Δ X dst ' β + Δ d t + η d + Δ ( Z s * Post 89 t )' ϕ + Δ ε dst (2)
B. Economic Significance of the FTA for U.S. firms
A final question before we proceed to the results is to what extent we could expect the FTA
to significantly affect U.S. firms. Clausing (2001) studies the FTA using disaggregated data at
the commodity level (10 digit product categories) and finds that the increase in U.S. imports
from Canada was larger the larger the tariff reduction (the higher the pre-1989 tariff). For
imports that saw a tariff reduction in excess of 5%, trade doubled in size between 1989 and 1994
and over half of the $42 billion increase in imports from Canada between 1989 and 1994 was the
12

We also run a robustness check that shows that the effect of the liberalization on organizational change was larger
in industries with faster reductions in tariffs.

15

result of the trade agreement. Head and Ries (2001) and Romalis (2007) also find a sizable effect
of the tariff reductions on trade volumes.
So, overall the trade liberalization increased bilateral trade flows and import penetration,

13

which is consistent with an increase in competitive pressure for firms on both sides of the border.
In fact, there is substantial micro-econometric work documenting the effect of the FTA on
Canadian firms. For example, Trefler (2004) finds a substantial increase in labor productivity of
Canadian companies following the agreement. Further, the paper finds that the reduction in U.S.
tariffs on exports from Canada led to a 6 % expansion of the most productive, export-oriented
plants (and to a contraction of the most import-competing). This suggests that the liberalization
allowed them to expand production, increase sales to the larger U.S. market, and move down
their average cost curve.
Regarding the effect of the FTA on U.S. firms, Feinberg and Keane (2006) study the
import/export behavior of U.S. multinationals (and their Canadian subsidiaries) and show that
the reduction in tariffs led to a substantial increase in arms-length exports of U.S. multinationals
to Canada (20% increase) and of their Canadian subsidiaries to the U.S. (29.8% increase). They
also find increases in U.S. domestic sales and employment for these firms. Changes in tariffs
explain most of the change in arms-length trade, but not changes in intra-firm trade (trade
between affiliates and their U.S. parents).
In this study, we also found a significant effect of the FTA on firms in our sample (Table
A1). In fact, we found a qualitatively different response to U.S. tariff reductions (that implied
more import competition) than to Canadian tariff reductions (that presented more export
opportunities). Using the same specification as in equation (2), we found that reductions in U.S.
13

The evidence on whether the increase in trade was at the expense of trade with other countries is more mixed:
Clausing (2001) and Head and Ries (2001) find no evidence of trade diversion, but Romalis (2007) does.

16

tariffs on Canadian imports led to reductions in average price-cost margin for our firms
suggesting a significant negative effect of competition on accounting measures. However, we
found no significant changes on market value (excess returns) or employment. On the other
hand, Canadian tariff reductions14 did raise firm employment and excess market returns (and had
no effect on price-cost margins), which is consistent with the market expansion interpretation
and with earlier results by Feinberg and Keane (2001, 2006). Even though a thorough analysis of
the effect of the liberalization on productivity and the profitability of U.S. firms is beyond the
scope of this paper, the overall evidence suggests that the FTA led to greater competitive
pressure from the reduction in U.S. tariffs, but also increased opportunities for market expansion
from Canadian tariff reduction. Next, we assess the organizational response to the liberalization.
4.

Results

4.1

Trade Liberalization and the Flattening Firm: Changes in Division Depth and CEO
Span of Control
In this section, we focus on the effect of the trade liberalization on changes in division depth

and CEO span of control as the main organizational variables. In a subsequent section, we will
explore how other aspects of organizations (in particular, levels of pay and incentive
compensation for division managers) are also changing over time in order to provide a fuller
picture of organizational change and to explore the possible mechanisms by which these changes
occur.
Before turning to the regression results, let us begin by discussing Figures 2 and 3 that show
the main variation that we exploit in our empirical analysis. We divide firms and divisions

14

This is the average Canadian tariff by 4 digit SIC (3 where 4 is missing) on US exports, measured as the mean
tariff between 1986 and 1989 (computed in an analogous way to U.S. AvT89). The data on Canadian tariffs are from
Trefler (2004), and we use a converter provided by the author to convert Canadian industry codes into US SIC
codes.

17

according to whether the firm is in an industry with a tariff above or below the median tariff pre1989. We plot the average span (Figure 2) and depth (Figure 3) by year for the two subgroups.
While we observe trending in organizational variables in both groups, there is a distinct
difference in the change in trend after 1989 between the groups. Firms in high tariff industries
increase their span by more and decrease depth by more after the trade liberalization in
comparison to firms in low tariff industries. The patterns suggest that firms in industries facing
increased competition alter the shape of their organizational hierarchy--greater span and
decreased depth. 15 These graphs restrict the sample to firms that are present in the data before
1989 to avoid compositional changes driving these patterns (we observe even starker patterns in
the whole sample). While the figures depict raw differences in organizational change of firms in
industries facing different competitive shocks, they do not take into account firm or division
characteristics, unobserved heterogeneity, or the overall time trend. For this, we turn to our
regression analysis.
Clearly, changes in span and depth are correlated. As division managers get closer to the top
of the hierarchy and are more likely to report directly to the CEO, span increases.16 In Tables 2
and 3, we report our results of the effect of the FTA on division depth and CEO span of control
respectively. The tables have a similar structure with specifications reported in roughly the same
order. Since these organizational variables are related, we will describe and discuss our findings
for both depth and span in parallel to provide a more coherent picture. In the depth regressions

15

In the Figure S1 in the Supplemental Appendix, we illustrate an example of the changes in a firm’s hierarchy preand post-FTA. This firm operated in the textile manufacturing industry which faced average Canadian tariffs on US
imports of 8.8%. The firm flattened through the elimination of an intermediary position (Chief Operating Officer)
and in the process moved the division manager positions one level closer to the CEO. As a result, span increased
from 5 to 7 and average depth decreased from 2 to 1.
16
In Section 3 and Table S5 of the Supplemental Appendix, we show that this relationship is not simply a
mechanical one.

18

(Table 2) the unit of observation is the division-year (there are 1524 divisions in the data); while
in the span regressions (Table 3), it is the firm-year (230 firms).17
All regressions follow the structure of equation (2) and include year dummies and controls
for firm size (as the natural logarithm of sales) and the endogeneity of tariffs through interactions
of industry characteristics (skill intensity, capital intensity and TFP growth) with a post 89
dummy. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level. The regressions also account for
permanent unobserved heterogeneity (firm or division) that might bias our estimates. This is a
big advantage of this dataset, in that the estimates are exclusively identified from within firm
variation in their exposure to the FTA (and not from differences across firms).
The coefficient of interest is the interaction of the average tariff in the industry before the
1989 FTA with a post 89 dummy (variable AvT89*Post89). The agreement specified that all
tariffs be eliminated (within a time frame) after 1989. As such, we expect the agreement to
reflect a greater increase in competitive pressure (i.e., a larger fall in entry barriers) in industries
with high tariffs relative to low tariff industries.
The main results are shown in column 1 of Tables 2 and 3. In column 1 of Table 2 (depth)
the coefficient on the interaction term is negative and statistically significant. This suggests that
firms in industries with higher tariffs prior to the trade liberalization decreased division depth
more over the period as their product markets faced greater competition due to a decline in
tariffs. A firm in an industry with average U.S. tariffs on Canadian imports (4 %) decreased
division depth by 0.146 positions following the trade liberalization (3.661*0.04). This represents

17

It is important to run the depth regressions at the division level –instead of averaging by firm- in order to look at
changes of the same division over time, and to be able to control for division size. Given that the coverage of
divisions within a firm can fluctuate (firms do not report all divisions in the data), changes in average depth within
firms may be capturing compositional changes. We also checked whether the coverage of divisions (as the fraction
of total sales represented by the divisions in the sample out of total firm sales as reported by Compustat) changed
with the experiment, and found that it did not (column 1 Table S3 in the Supplemental Appendix).

19

11.2 % of average depth in the sample. One way to interpret the magnitude of this effect is to
imagine a firm with six division managers each with one position between them and the CEO
(i.e., depth of 1). Following the trade liberalization, a firm with average tariffs would move one
of the six division managers to report directly to the CEO. Since this only requires a change in
the level of reporting for a subset of the divisions, it is relatively easy to implement and, as we
will show, most of the change occurs within the first year.
Turning to span of control, in Table 3 column 2, we find a positive and statistically
significant coefficient suggesting that firms increase span of control more in response to a greater
fall in tariffs in their industries. A firm with average tariffs before 1989 increased span by 0.324
positions following the trade liberalization (8.106*0.04), or 6 % of average span in the sample.
This implies that one of every three firms in our sample increased the CEO’s span of control by
one position.
In Table 2 (depth) columns 2 through 10, we also control for division specific time trends
and for division size (the log of division employment). We lose around 700 observations where
division employment is missing, but this does not substantially alter the results. Perhaps not
surprisingly, larger firms have greater depth and larger divisions within firms are closer to the
top. Controlling for division employment also allows us to indirectly control for the potential
down-sizing of divisions due to outsourcing, or off-shoring of certain activities, since this would
possibly lead to a reduction in employment. The stability of the main coefficient of interest
suggests that outsourcing is unlikely to be driving our main findings. Even conditional on
division size, we find that divisions in firms more affected by the FTA repositioned their DMs
closer to the top of the hierarchy.

20

Column 2 of Table 3 (span) controls for firm specific time trends, and we obtain a similar
though slightly larger effect than in column 1 (coefficient of 9.9 instead of 8.1). This indicates
that the result is not driven by pre-existing trends in span that may have pre-dated the
liberalization agreement.18
Next, since the trade liberalization implied not only a fall in U.S. tariffs on Canadian imports,
but also a reduction of Canadian tariffs on U.S. exports, we allow for an effect of this second
aspect of the liberalization. Column 3 includes an interaction of the average Canadian tariff on
U.S. exports with a post 1989 dummy (labeled as Export AvT89 and defined in an analogous
way to U.S. AvT89). The effect is positive for depth and negative for span, suggesting that on
average the market expansion possibilities given by easier exporting to Canada by U.S. firms led
to increases in depth and decreases in span, relative to the trend. This is the opposite effect of
what we find for import tariffs, and since this effect is never statistically significant, it seems that
increasing competitive pressure leads firms to flatten rather than greater export opportunities.
What might explain this? One explanation is that the Canadian market is small relative to the
U.S. market, so that the market expansion opportunities are not substantial. But this is unlikely
since we do find that employment and market value increased significantly for these firms (Table
A1). Alternatively, to the extent that market expansion does not generate competitive pressure, it
may lead to other types of organizational changes different from those that we can identify in our
data.

18

Since the increase in the number of direct reports may come from senior officer positions as well as from lower
level managers, and since the presence of the Chief Operating Officer (COO) has decreased substantially over the
sample period, we also controlled for the presence of a COO and a Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) that may
report directly to the CEO. We found that the effect of the liberalization is slightly reduced suggesting that the
estimated increase in span also includes other senior officer positions as well as managers traditionally lower in the
hierarchy (unreported).

21

For the remaining columns in both Tables 2 and 3, we explore the robustness of the main
results to the inclusion of a number of controls and to alternative explanations. Column 4
provides a test of the main specification, specifically the assumption that the shock was
unanticipated. We replace the Post 89 dummy in AvT*Post89 with a post 1988 dummy variable
and keep the same set of controls (this is a standard placebo test for differences in differences). If
the liberalization was anticipated, or if there was a pre-existing trend, then this new variable
would pick up what we argue is a discrete “shock” before it occurred. But, the coefficient is
statistically insignificant in both tables, lending credibility to the fact that the liberalization was
truly unanticipated and that firms only started to respond after 1989.
In column 5 of both tables, we further analyze the timing of the effect by considering if there
was a lag in the firm’s response or if some of the change occurred around the time of the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Since NAFTA did not alter trade agreements
between Canada and the U.S. (it was only an extension to Mexico), we expect it to have a
negligible effect. To test this, we include an interaction of the average tariff between 1990 and
1993 with a post-94 dummy variable (AvT94*Post94). This captures the differential effect of
NAFTA across firms operating in industries with different levels of protection after 1989, but
before 1994. We find statistically insignificant coefficients on both the interaction term
associated with the 1994 experiment and on the lagged term. These findings suggest that most of
the effect came from the 1989 agreement. The absence of an effect for the 1994 experiment is
also consistent with the fact that there were no radical changes in the tariff agreements of
NAFTA with respect to Canada. Furthermore, it suggests that we are not just capturing a
spurious time trend. If it was spurious, the 1994 experiment coefficient should be significant,
particularly since substantial flattening occurred during the late 1990s. We also allow for a

22

lagged effect of the 1989 experiment and find that it is not significant suggesting that most of the
organizational change occurs within the first year. This is not particularly surprising given that
changes in the level of reporting don’t have large implementation costs.
All the results above are based on average U.S. tariffs on Canadian imports in the firm’s
primary 4 digit SIC code (3 digit if reported at 3 digits) in which the firm operated before 1989.
We use the industry classification that is reported prior to the trade liberalization to isolate the
effect from endogenous changes in the main industry reported. Since our sample is comprised of
multidivisional firms that typically operate in different industries and may change industry focus
over time, we analyze the effect of the trade liberalization on a number of sub-samples to assess
the validity of the main results.
For firms that operate in more than one industry, there may be considerable noise in the
industry tariff measure as a proxy for the change in competition that a firm faces. To address this
concern, instead of using industry tariffs of the firm’s primary SIC code, we construct a firmspecific measure that recognizes the firm’s business mix. We use the weighted average of U.S.
tariffs for the industries in which the firm operates before the liberalization, where the weights
are the fraction of sales of each of the firm’s segments (as reported in 1988 from Compustat
segment data). The weights are kept constant over the sample period to avoid endogeneity in
choice of industry (for the same reason we kept the primary SIC constant). This comes at a cost
in that, if segment data are noisy, the weights will be as well and this could induce measurement
error. We report the results based on this firm-specific tariff measure in column 6 of both tables.
The estimated effect is approximately 14 to 20 % larger for depth and span respectively and still
statistically significant (although the standard errors are larger, and there is no statistical
difference from the main effect).

23

Relatedly, we might expect industry tariffs to be a more precise measure of competition for
firms that report their industry at a lower level of aggregation (i.e., 4 digit SIC codes instead of 3
or 2). When we restrict the sample to firms that report a 4 digit SIC, we find a larger and more
precisely estimated main effect (unreported). Finally, in column 7 in both tables, we restrict the
sample to firms that report the same SIC throughout the sample period. In these regressions,
since we exclude firms that may have endogenously changed their primary industry of
operations, we would expect tariff reductions to more closely approximate actual changes in
competition. This should lead to larger and more precisely estimated effects and this is exactly
what we find in column 7 in both tables.19
Overall, we find convincing evidence that the effect of the trade liberalization on the
flattening of firms took place around the 1989 period, that the liberalization was unanticipated,
and that the effect was larger in industries where we have better measures of changes in
competition. To reiterate the main findings: we find systematic evidence that U.S. firms, in
response to trade liberalization with Canada, flattened the structure of their organizations. They
reduced division depth by moving division managers closer to the top of the hierarchy and they
increased the CEO span of control. 20 Next we consider two important alternative explanations
that could affect our main results.

19

Further robustness checks of the main results are presented in Table S4 in the Supplemental Appendix (depth in
Panel A and span in Panel B). The results are similar if we restrict the sample to firms that are present in the sample
before 1989 (column 1), if we include all services firms in the estimation as a control group (with average tariff
AvT89 of zero, column 2) and when controlling for fluctuations in the exchange rate that may differentially affect
industries with different levels of import penetration (column 3). The magnitude of the effect is larger when we
restrict the sample to firms: (i) with no Canadian subsidiaries (column 4), and (ii) with a faster scheduled reduction
in tariffs (column 5).
20
One could also wonder to what extent these effects are restricted to the FTA, or if they generalize to other
measures of competition. In fact, we also found evidence that division depth and CEO span significantly respond to
other standard measures of competitive pressure (Table A2). We found that higher competition as reflected in lower
trade costs (defined as tariffs plus transport costs, columns 1 and 4), a lower industry Lerner Index (columns 2 and
5) or higher import penetration (columns 3 and 6) significantly reduces depth and increases CEO span of control
(although for the latter, only the trade costs variable is significant). While these measures can be subject to many

24

One frequent reason for why firms change their organizations is explained by changes in firm
leadership. Very often reorganizations come about when the CEO is replaced. In column 8 in
both tables, we address this question by including a dummy variable that controls for a change in
CEO. We find that depth decreases by 0.182 positions (division managers move closer to the
top) in the event of a change in the CEO, and that span increases by 0.446 positions. The effect is
highly statistically significant for both depth and span and contributes substantially to the Rsquared of both regressions. However, the point estimate of the coefficient on AvT89*Post89
hardly changes (from 3.5 to 3.3 for depth and no change for span) and is estimated with similar
precision, suggesting that the trade liberalization has an independent effect on organizational
change that is distinct from CEO turnover. We also checked whether the probability of a CEO
change increased with the liberalization, with positive but statistically insignificant results
(column 2 Table S3 in the Supplemental Appendix).
Finally, we try to consider the relevance of IT as a driver of organizational change. The mere
availability of IT and falling IT prices should not be a problem for our identification since the
availability of IT was similar across industries and our experiment exploits the differential effect
across industries after 1989. However, to the extent that firms in different industries adopt IT in
similar ways, we control for two types of IT investment at the industry level: total IT in column
9 (includes hardware, software and communications) and communication technology (CT) in
column 10 of Table 2. These are defined as the investment in IT (CT) capital stock at the 2-digit
SIC industry level based on data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) (refer to Table
A3 for specifics). The data are very aggregated relative to what one would require for a

criticisms and are by no means exogenous –that is why we use the FTA as our core specification- they provide
evidence consistent with the main result in this paper: that flattening is a response to competitive pressure.

25

conclusive analysis, however, they allow us to evaluate the robustness of our main results to
investments in information technology. We find that our coefficient of interest is unaffected.
Regarding the coefficient on overall IT in column 9 in both tables, we find it is positive for
both depth and span suggesting that increases in IT are associated with deeper organizations and
wider spans of control. However, both coefficients are statistically insignificant. When we
exclusively focus on the communications component of IT (Table 2 column 10), we find a
positive and statistically significant coefficient in the depth regression (but, insignificant for span
(unreported)). This suggests that firms in industries that are investing in IT and, in particular CT,
are steeper (Garicano, 2000). Therefore the effect on delayering of more IT (CT) goes in the
opposite direction to the competition effect that we have shown in this study. While these results
are only suggestive, and while a more detailed analysis of IT and hierarchical change is needed,
it is unlikely that the effect we are capturing with the FTA is due to IT.
Overall, we find systematic evidence that firms experiencing a larger shock following the
trade liberalization (those in more protected industries prior to 1989) reduced division depth and
increased CEO span of control more relative to firms less affected by the liberalization. This
effect is robust to a number of specifications and implies that, on average, the trade liberalization
led U.S. manufacturing firms to flatten.
4.2

Why Are Firms Flattening?
The previous results show that the trade liberalization partially explains some of the

flattening of US firms—both the increased span of control of the CEO and the decreased depth
of division managers (or the delayering of levels in the hierarchy). Arguably, they represent
causal estimates of an exogenous shock to the product market that go beyond the simple
correlations of prior research. However, even though they capture a significant causal effect, they

26

are silent on the reasons for why firms alter their organizational structure and what the flattening
actually means. While it is difficult to identify precise channels for the causal mechanism, in the
next three sub-sections we attempt to shed some light on this issue. We explore several possible
explanations including simple cost-cutting, changes in decision-making, and changes in firm
scope.
4.2.1

Division Manager (DM) Compensation and Incentives

As shown earlier, following the trade liberalization, division managers are closer to the CEO
in the organizational hierarchy. One possible explanation is that this may reflect the increased
responsibility of division managers (DM) and potentially greater delegation of authority as an
optimal response to competition (consistent with Marin and Verdier, 2003). Strictly speaking,
our depth measure reflects “number of reporting levels” without any information on the actual
role of the DM or the decisions they make. However, by looking at DM compensation and the
importance of performance pay in their contracts, we can potentially infer a difference in job
scope. 21
The first four columns in Table 4 show the effect of the liberalization on the level of pay and
on DM incentives based on division-level performance. The dependent variable is the logarithm
of division manager total compensation. Total pay for DMs is the sum of salary, bonus, and
long-term compensation.22 The regressions are again as in equation (2). Column 1 shows that

21

One concern is that the notion of a division varies across firms and what we are picking up in our pay regressions
is either just differences in a firm’s definition of a division or differences in firm compensation policies. Since we
have division fixed effects, permanent cross-sectional differences in how firms define a division will not affect our
estimates. Moreover, the results are robust to controlling for division depth.
22
The value of the long-term compensation includes restricted stock, stock options and other components of longterm incentives and is determined by a modified version of Black-Scholes that is computed by Hewitt Associates
and therefore is consistent across firms and over time. Stock options are valued using a modified version of BlackScholes that takes into account vesting and termination provisions in addition to the standard variables of interest
rates, stock price volatility, and dividends. As is standard practice among compensation consulting firms, the other
components of long-term incentives (i.e. restricted stock, performance units and performance shares) are valued

27

higher competitive pressure leads to higher total pay within the division (it includes division
fixed effects). That is, the same DM position earns higher total pay after the competitive shock.
Division managers in industries with average tariffs pre-1989 received a 7.0% increase
(1.751*0.04) in total compensation after the trade liberalization relative to managers in industries
with no tariffs. But, while interesting in itself, this could be driven by firms replacing managers
with more skilled ones following the FTA. If firms are hiring more talented managers that
require higher pay, then our result is a mixture of more skilled hires combined with changes in
job scope. To address this, columns 2 through 4 include manager times division fixed effects (so
that the effect is identified out of changes in pay of an individual in a division).23 The results in
column 2 for the level of pay are similar to those in column 1 suggesting that firms respond to
increased competition, not by replacing existing managers with new, higher-skilled managers,
but instead by paying existing managers more. This result is robust to controlling for manager
specific linear trends in pay (column 3).24
One way to interpret this increase in pay along with the simultaneous reduction in depth and
increase in span is that firms in more competitive environments are more likely to delegate
authority from the senior most positions to division managers. The CEO may face greater time
constraints as his span of control increases, thereby delegating more decision-making authority
to division managers. The increase in division manager pay may be commensurate with the
increase in responsibilities and job scope. However, in order to more convincingly make this

using an economic valuation similar to Black-Scholes that takes into account vesting, termination provisions, and
the probability of achieving performance goals.
23
Even though we do not know the identity of the manager filling the position (the unit of observation in the data is
a position), for most divisions in our sample we can identify managerial turnover using changes in tenure for the
position over time. Therefore these estimates are net of individual unobserved ability and division (and firm)
permanent unobserved characteristics.
24
These manager fixed effects also capture any other variables that determine wages and do not change over time
such as gender differences and education. The individual trends also account for linear age and tenure effects.

28

argument, it is important to look at changes in performance-based pay and not just to changes to
total pay.
In conjunction with greater delegation of decision-making, firms may increase performancebased pay to ensure that division managers make decisions that are optimal for the firm. It is
often argued that delegation and incentive provision are complementary (Prendergast, 2002): in
the absence of multi-tasking, delegating authority will be more productive for the firm the more
incentives the division manager has to take initiative, collect information, and make the right
decisions for the business unit.
Column 4 of Table 4 assesses how the basic sensitivity of DM pay to division performance
(as measured by the natural log of division sales) changes with trade liberalization. The
estimated coefficient on division sales is the elasticity of pay to sales: we find that a 1 % increase
in division sales (controlling for division employment and firm size) leads to a 0.098 % increase
in pay. The coefficient of interest is on AvT*Post89*lnDiv Sales which reflects the effect of the
trade liberalization on the performance pay sensitivity of division managers. The results indicate
that the estimated performance pay sensitivity for DMs increased by more in industries with
greater increases in competition. In particular, the sensitivity increases by 0.02 for the division in
an industry with average tariffs (0.499*0.04) which reflects an increase in incentives. As
mentioned above, we know from theoretical work that delegation and incentive provision are
often complements. So, the fact that performance pay sensitivities are increasing as the DM
moves closer to the CEO suggests that the delayering is possibly accompanied by delegation.
However, an important cost of excessive reliance on division level incentives is that DMs as
agents are motivated by the performance of their division and not of the firm as a whole. While
there are benefits of delegating decision-making, there are offsetting costs in the loss of

29

coordination across divisions. Division manager decisions/actions may impact other divisions
(through internal capital market allocations, information sharing, or lack thereof, etc). In order to
reduce the cost of delegation, firms may tie a larger fraction of incentives to overall firm
performance and not just division-level performance. Of course, the power of firm level
incentives is relatively low (since the manager only gets a small fraction of his contribution to
firm level performance), but firms can use firm level incentives to induce coordination across
divisions.
In columns 5 through 7 of Table 4, we further evaluate changes in incentive provision by
firms where now the dependent variable is the fraction of long-term incentives out of total pay
that division managers receive. The results show that the trade liberalization led to a higher
fraction of total pay in the form of long-term incentives for division managers. For the firm
facing average tariffs, the increase in the share of long-term incentives is 3.5 % (0.882*0.04)
relative to the average share of 28% for all division managers. Stronger links between pay and
firm performance should encourage DMs to consider the effect of their decisions on overall firm
performance and to coordinate their actions with other division managers.
Finally, just as we can test for the sensitivity of DM pay to division performance, we can
estimate its sensitivity to firm performance. We do this in column 8 of Table 4 where we use the
log of total stock market value of the firm as our performance measure (includes dividends).25
Since the equation is in first differences, this estimates the change in log pay from increases in
log stock returns (including dividends). The positive coefficient on the interaction term

25

We obtain similar results if we use log firm sales as the performance measure.

30

(AvT89*Post89*lnFirm Perf.) suggests that the sensitivity of DM pay to firm performance
increased more in industries that faced greater competition after the liberalization.26
Table 4 shows that competition from the FTA triggered changes in both the level and
performance sensitivity of pay for division managers: increased overall pay, increased sensitivity
to division performance, as well as an increased importance of firm level performance in total
compensation. This set of facts is consistent with the explanation that increased competition
leads to a greater need to quickly adapt to local conditions. Firms respond by delegating
authority to division managers. However, since delegation is costly because it exacerbates
agency and coordination problems, firms increase the performance sensitivity of division
manager pay, especially pay that is linked to firm performance.
The results so far show that the trade liberalization had an effect on a number of different
organizational practices and strongly suggest that our organizational variables are highly
complementary within firms. In fact, we found a strong correlation between the different
practices in a regression framework, allowing for division fixed effects, division trends, and
controls for division and firm size (see discussion in Section 3 and Table S5 in the Supplemental
Appendix). Even though we do not observe returns to firm organizational choices, it seems that
firms adjust organizational elements in a coordinated manner and redesign their organizations
through a set of potentially complementary choices in response to changes in their
environment.27
4.2.2

Heterogeneous Effects in R&D and Advertising-Intensive Industries

26

Although it is not the focus of the paper, we also analyzed the evolution of CEO pay following liberalization. We
found the changes in CEO pay to mirror those of division managers. Total CEO compensation and the fraction of
long-term incentives in total pay (columns 3 and 4 in Table S3 in the Supplemental Appendix) increased more in
highly affected industries after 1989.
27
For example, changing one organizational design choice, such as moving the division manager closer to the top of
the hierarchy may be more effective in improving firm performance when it occurs in conjunction with other design
elements. Hence, when division managers are closer to the top of the hierarchy, firms may provide stronger firmlevel incentives to encourage division managers to make decisions that enhance firm value.

31

If the mechanism through which firms flatten their organizations is related to how decisions
are made—either through improved flow of information or delegated decision-making—we
might expect different responses to competition from firms operating in different industries. In
particular, if firms delegate authority to more effectively exploit the informational advantage of
the division manager relative to the CEO, we would expect more delegation to occur in
industries where information about local markets is harder to communicate, such as industries
characterized by high R&D and advertising intensity. In these industries, products are more
likely to be differentiated with firms competing along the quality dimension. In contrast, firms
offering homogeneous products generally compete on price where a low-cost position generates
a competitive advantage. To capture the importance of product or quality differentiation, we
characterize industries by the degree of spending on research and development (R&D) and
advertising. In these industries, we might expect the value of quick decisions or adaptations to
local markets to be greater relative to industries with homogeneous products. If so, then we
should see stronger organizational responses to trade liberalization in firms operating in R&D
and advertising-intensive industries.
To evaluate this, we classify firms as having a high R&D and advertising to sales ratio (where
high refers to above median) using two different sources. From Compustat, we measure the
average R&D plus advertising expenses over sales of the 4 digit SIC industry between 1986 and
1988. We also used an alternative measure based on the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
1975 Line of Business Survey (Kugler and Verhoogen, 2008). We report the results in the first 4
columns of Table 5. In columns 1 and 3 with depth as the dependent variable, we find a negative
and significant coefficient on the three-way interaction term (AvT89*Post89*High R&D+ADV).
This implies that for a given tariff reduction, firms in a high R&D and advertising industry will

32

reduce depth by more. Turning to division manager pay (columns 2 and 4), we find a positive
coefficient on the interaction term, although the coefficient is statistically significant only when
using the Compustat measure. These results suggest that firms in response to trade liberalization
delayer their hierarchies by moving DMs closer to the CEO and increase their pay, particularly if
they operate in R&D and advertising-intensive industries. They also highlight the fact that firms
change different organizational practices together, in a coordinated way. We interpret this
finding to be consistent with firms changing the way in which they make decisions either
through improved transmission of information or delegation of authority.
4.2.3

Changes in Costs and Firm Scope

In the two sub-sections above, we present evidence that is generally consistent with firms
restructuring their organizations to alter the way in which decisions are made—either through
increased delegation or improved transmission of information. Let us now explore other potential
mechanisms. A simple explanation often provided for why firms reorganize is to downsize or cut
costs. Under this line of reasoning, firms delayer and eliminate managerial positions (i.e.,
division managers move closer to the CEO) primarily to cut costs -- the reorganization has little
to do with changes in how decisions are made. To evaluate this, we consider our pay results in a
different light. If the reorganizations were simply about cost-cutting, we would expect the level
of division manager pay to decline with the trade liberalization. We find the opposite. However,
these pay increases might be specific to division manager positions, and the firm may be
eliminating other senior manager positions and/or reducing their pay. To evaluate this, we focus
on the intermediary position between the CEO and the division manager for which we have some

33

information: the group manager. These managers have multiple profit center responsibility and
are typically positioned between the CEO and the division manager.28
In column 5 of Table 5, we regress the number of group positions in the firm on our
competition measure and include firm fixed effects and trends and control for firm size. We find
that the trade liberalization reduces the number of group managers (although not statistically
significant). So, there is some (weak) evidence of downsizing: firms are reducing the number of
group managers in the face of greater competition. But, to really shed light on the downsizing
explanation, we need to ask: what is happening to the pay of these group managers? If firms are
cutting costs, we would expect pay to be declining. Again, we find the opposite. In column 6, the
dependent variable is the logarithm of the total wage bill for the group positions (i.e., the number
of group managers * total compensation per group manager). We find a positive and statistically
significant coefficient suggesting that, while firms may be reducing the number of group
positions, they are increasing their average pay faster in industries facing more competition. This
is also at odds with cost-cutting. But, firms may also be cutting pay of other senior executive
positions. To address this, in column 7 we define the dependent variable as the logarithm of total
pay for a group of senior executive positions (CEO, group managers, division managers, CFO,
General Counsel, Head of Human Resources, and Head of Strategic Planning). We find that
trade liberalization has a positive and significant effect on the pay of this larger group of
executives. Since we do not observe labor costs for all senior management positions, it still could
be that firms eliminate and reduce pay of other positions. Never-the-less, the documented

28

In the paper, we do not focus on the group manager position for several reasons. First, not all firms report them:
they are more likely to appear in larger, more diversified firms. Second, since group managers are defined on the
basis of their position in the hierarchy (proximity to CEO and COO), it is harder to infer facts about depth or
responsibility from their position. By contrast, division managers are defined on the basis of their responsibility, and
hence we can infer more about hierarchies from where they are placed.

34

increases in senior management pay in response to the trade liberalization are inconsistent with
the simple explanation of cost-cutting.
Another explanation for some of the changes that we observe is that firms broaden their
scope. For example, firms may diversify into more businesses as the result of the liberalization –
maybe to diversify risk- and as a result span of control increases as the additional business unit
managers report directly to the CEO. We use the Herfindahl index of sales across different 2
digit segments, as an inverse measure of firm diversification, and find evidence against the
diversification story: multidivisional firms tend to decrease scope and focus their business
operations (become less diversified) in the presence of increased competition. Column 8 in Table
5 shows this result.
Since many of these firms have multinational operations, and some are likely to have
Canadian subsidiaries before 1989, we tried to test whether their choice of being located in
Canada changed with the liberalization. If U.S. firms created Canadian subsidiaries because of
trade barriers, we might expect the benefits of local presence in Canada to disappear with freer
trade. Column 9 presents the results where the dependent variable is the number of Canadian
subsidiaries of the firm. We only have information for 1988 and 1993, and therefore rely on the
change between the two years. Even though we find a negative sign (firms for whom the
reduction in tariffs was greatest reduced the number of subsidiaries), it is not significant,29 so it is
hard to ascribe the main effect we find on depth and span to this explanation.
These results are suggestive of firms responding in a variety of ways to the trade
liberalization. These include focusing on their core businesses and rationalizing the location of
their operations. The findings on flattening that we establish in this paper are possibly part of the
implementation of this new corporate strategy.
29

This is consistent with the results in Feinberg and Keane (2001).

35

5.

Conclusion
Conventional wisdom and recent empirical evidence suggest that firm hierarchies are

flattening— hierarchies have fewer levels and broader spans of control. What are the possible
explanations for the flattening of firms? Do hierarchies flatten because of the adoption of
information technology, changes in work practices or managerial skill, or new plans for firm
strategy and shifts in business mix?

Many have argued that increased competition from

globalization has driven firms to search for new organizational forms to replace traditional
hierarchical structures. In this paper, we focus on this explanation.
The main contribution of the paper is to establish a causal effect between increased foreign
competition measured by the trade liberalization between Canada and the U.S. and the flattening
of firms. We use a unique panel-dataset of organizational practices that allows us to identify our
results from variation within divisions and firms over time, and not from cross-sectional
differences. Since the trade liberalization was bilateral, it also implied a reduction in Canadian
tariffs on U.S. exports potentially leading to market expansion opportunities for our U.S. firms.
But, our findings suggest that it is increased competition that causes firms to reorganize rather
than greater market expansion opportunities.
We find that U.S. firms in manufacturing industries more exposed to the trade liberalization
reduce the number of hierarchical levels, broaden the span of control for the CEO, and radically
change the structure of compensation of division managers with more incentives based on
division performance as well as on firm performance. Thus, the firms in our sample appear to
change a number of practices simultaneously following a shock to their economic environment
which is consistent with theories of complementarities in organizational practices. It is the

36

simultaneous change of these complementary practices that allows us to provide an interpretation
for the reasons behind firms’ choices.
Our evidence suggests that firms may be fundamentally altering how decisions are being
made. While we do not directly observe changes in decision-making, the greater importance of
performance-based pay for division managers in conjunction with closer proximity to the CEO is
consistent with this interpretation. Moreover, stronger organizational responses by firms in R&D
and advertising-intensive industries—where firms compete through product differentiation--is
also consistent with changes in decision-making. To the extent that competition increases the
value of quick and responsive decision-making, firms can eliminate layers to improve the quality
and speed of the transmission of information or increase the authority of division managers to
become more adaptive to local information. Delegation is then accompanied by an increase in
local (division-based) incentives since these tend to be complementary practices. However, since
delegation and local incentives come at the cost of less coordination across divisions, firms also
raise the power of global incentives (based on total firm performance). Furthermore, the
broadening in the CEO’s span of control possibly enabled more accurate transmission of
information and a more important coordinating role for the CEO. Our findings are generally
consistent with this account of the evolution of complementary choices as a response to an
external shock.
We also explore a number of other explanations for our results, the simplest one being costcutting by firms. However, we find that pay of division managers (and other senior management
positions) increases in more competitive environments which seems at odds with the simple costcutting explanation.

37

Finally, we only identify one channel for the flattening of firms, and there are possibly many
others, such as the increased availability of IT. Moreover, firms may be responding to the new
competitive environment along other dimensions, with the changes in organization being
complementary. We find some evidence that, in response to competition, firms “refocus” on core
competencies and become less diversified. Further investigation of how organizational structure
interacts with other corporate responses and the overall impact of these changes on firm
performance is left for future research.

38

References
Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, C. Lelarge, J. Van Reenen and F. Zilibotti. Forthcoming. “Technology,
Information and the Decentralization of the Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Aghion, P., and J. Tirole. 1997. “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations,” Journal of Political
Economy, 105: 1-27.
Alonso, R., W. Dessein, and N. Matouschek. 2008. “When Does Coordination Require
Centralization?,” American Economic Review, 98(1): 145-179.
Askenazy, P., D. Thesmar, and M. Thoenig, 2006. “On the Relation Between Organizational
Practices and New Technologies: The Role of Time Based Competition,” The Economic Journal, 116:
128-154.
Athey, S. and J. Roberts. 2001. “Organizational Design: Decision Rights and Incentive Contracts,”
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, l.91: 200-205.
Baker, G. P., and T. Hubbard, 2004. “Contractibility and Asset Ownership: On-Board Computers
and Governance in US Trucking,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(4): 1443-1479.
Bartel, A., C. Ichniowski, and K. Shaw. 2007. “How Does Information Technology Affect
Productivity? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation, Process Improvement and Worker Skills,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4): 1721-1758.
Bartelsman, E. J. and W. B. Gray. 1996. “The NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database,”
(1958-1996), NBER Working Paper 205.
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen and P. Schott. 2006. “Survival of the Best Fit: Low Wage Competition
and the (Uneven) Growth of US Manufacturing Plants,” Journal of International Economics, 68: 219237.
Black, S. and L. M. Lynch. 2001. “How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices and
Information Technology on Productivity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(3): 434-445.
Bloom, N., R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen. 2007. “The Organization of Firms Across Countries,”
Stanford Working Paper.
Bolton, P. and M. Dewatripont. 1994. “The Firm as a Communication Network,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 109(4): 809-839.
Bresnahan, T., E. Brynjolfsson and L. Hitt. 2002. “Information Technology, Workplace
Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, February: 339–376.
Calvo, G. and S. Wellisz. 1979. “Hierarchy, Ability, and Income Distribution,” Journal of Political
Economy, 87(5): 991-1010.
Caroli, E. and J. Van Reenen. 2001. “Skill Biased Organizational Change,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 116: 1448-1492.
Chandler, A. D., Jr. 1962. Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of Industrial Enterprise,
Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press.
Clausing, K. A. 2001. “Trade Creation and Trade Diversion in the Canada-United States Free Trade
Agreement,” The Canadian Journal of Economics, 34(3): 677-96.
Cockburn, I.; R. Henderson, and S. Stern. 2004. “Balancing Incentives: The Tension Between Basic
and Applied Research,” Northwestern University (Kellogg), working paper.

39

Conconi P., P. Legros, and A. F. Newman. 2008. “Trade Liberalization and Organizational
Choice,” CEPR working paper.
Cuñat, V. and M. Guadalupe. 2006. “Globalization and the provision of incentives inside the firm:
The effect of foreign competition”, Columbia University working paper.
Dessein W., L. Garciano and R. Gertner. 2007. “Organizing for Synergies,” CEPR Discussion
Paper No. 6019.
Feenstra, R. C. 1996. “NBER Trade Database, Disk1: U.S. Imports, 1972-1994: Data and
Concordances,” NBER Working Paper no. 5515.
Feinberg, S. E. and M. P. Keane. 2006. “Accounting for the Growth of MNC-Based Trade Using a
Structural Model of U.S. MNCs,” American Economic Review, 96(5): 1515-1558.
________. 2001. “US-Canada Trade Liberalization and MNC Production Location,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 83(1): 118-132.
Freibel, G. and M. Raith. 2007. “Resource Allocation and Firm Scope,” Mimeo, University of
Tolouse and Simon School of Business, University of Rochester.
Garicano, L. 2000. “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production,” Journal of
Political Economy, 108(5): 874-904.
Garicano, L. and T. Hubbard. 2007. “The Return to Knowledge Hierarchies,” Working Paper
Chicago
Head, C. Keith and J. Ries. 2001. “Increasing Returns versus National Product Differentiation as an
Explanation for the Pattern of US-Canada Trade,” American Economic Review, 91(4): 858-876.
Holmstrom, B. and P. Milgrom, 1994. “The firm as an Incentive System,” The American Economic
Review, 84(4): 972-991.
Ichniowski, C., K. Shaw and J. Prennushi. 1997. “The Effects of Human Resource Management
Practices on Productivity,” American Economic Review, 86: 291-313.
Kugler. M. and E. Verhoogen (2008) “The Quality-Complementarity Hypothesis: Theory and
Evidence from Colombia.,” mimeo
Lawrence, P. R. and J. W. Lorsch. 1967, 1986. Organization and the Environment, Harvard
Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Lazear, E. and S. Rosen. 1981. “Rank Order Tournaments as Optimal Labor Contracts,” Journal of
Political Economy, 89: 841-864.
Leibenstein, H. 1966. “Allocative Efficiency vs. “X-Efficiency,” The American Economic Review,
56(3): 392-415.
Liberti, J. M. 2006. “Initiative, Incentives, and Soft Information: How Does Delegation Impact the
Role of Bank Relationship Managers?,” Northwestern University, working paper.
Marin, D. and T. Verdier 2003. “Globalization and the New Enterprise,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, MIT Press, 1(2-3): 337-344.
Milgrom, P. and J. Roberts. 1995. Complementarities and fit: Strategy, structure and organizational
change in manufacturing,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 19: 179-208.
Mookherjee, D. 2006. “Decentralization, Hierarchies, and Incentives:
Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, XLIV: 367-390.

A Mechanism Design

40

Osterman, P. 1996. Broken ladders: Managerial careers in the new economy. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Prendergast, C. 2002. “The Tenuous Trade-Off between Risk and Incentives,” Journal of Political
Economy, 110(5): 1071-102.
Radner, R. 1993. “The Organization of Decentralized Information Processing,” Econometrica,
61(5): 1109-1146.
Raith, M. 2003. “Competition, risk, and managerial incentives”, The American Economic Review,
93(4): 1425.
Rantakari, H. 2008. “Organizational Design and Environmental Volatility,” University of Southern
California, Marshall School of Business, working paper.
Rajan, R. G. and J. Wulf. 2006. “The Flattening Firm: Evidence on the Changing Nature of Firm
Hierarchies from Panel Data,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4): 759-773.
Roberts, J. 2004. The Modern Firm: Organizational Design for Performance and Growth. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Romalis, J. 2007. “NAFTA’s and CUSFTA’s impact on international trade,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 2007, 89(3): 416.
Rosen, S. 1982. “Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings,” The Bell Journal of
Economics, 13: 311-323.
Schmalensee, R. 1989. “Inter-Industry Studies of Structure and Performance,” Handbook of
Industrial Organization, 2, edited by Richard L. Schmalensee and Robert D. Willig.
Sutton, J. 1991. Sunk Costs and Market Structure, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thesmar, D. and M. Thoenig. 2000. “Creative Destruction and Firm Organizational Choice,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(4): 1201-37.
Trefler, D. 2004, “The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement” The American
Economic Review, 94(4): 870-896.
Whittington, R., A. Pettigrew, S. Peck, E. Fenton, M. Conyon. 1999. “Change and
Complementarities in the New Competitive Landscape: A European Panel Study, 1992-1996,”
Organization Science, 10(5): 583-600.
Williamson, O. E. 1967. “Hierarchical Control and Optimum Firm Size,” Journal of Political
Economy, 75(2): 123-138.
Wulf, J. (2007). “Authority, Risk, and Performance Incentives: Evidence from Division Manager
Positions Inside Firms,” Journal of Industrial Economics, LV (3) pp. 169-196.

41

Figure 1 An Example of a Hierarchy: Span and Depth

CEO

Span=4

Depth=2

Div Mgr Div Mgr Div Mgr

Div Mgr Div Mgr Div Mgr

Span=number of positions reporting to CEO
Depth=number of positions between the CEO and Division Manager

4.5

Span High and Low
5
5.5

6

Figure 2 The Differential Effect of the FTA on Span -High vs. Low Tariff Industries

1986

1988

1990
Year
Span_H

1992

1994

Span_L

1.2

Depth High and Low
1.3
1.4
1.5

1.6

Figure 3 The Differential Effect of the FTA on Depth -High vs. Low Tariff Industries

1986

1988

1990
Year
Depth_H

1992

1994

Depth_L

42

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Mean

S.D.

# Observations

Division level variables:
Div.Depth
ln DM Tot.Comp.
Share LT Incent.
ln Div.Empl.
ln Division Sales
IT invest (2digit)
CT Invest.

1.432
12.729
0.29
-0.033
12.454
0.054
0.021

0.791
0.66
0.157
1.42
1.404
0.041
0.016

6396
6396
6396
5857
5869
6396
6396

Firm level variables:
CEO span
lnCEO comp.
CEO LT/Total
ln Firm Sales
lnFirm Performance
# Group Mgrs.
ln Pay Group Mgrs.
ln Pay Senior Exec.
Segment HHI
#Can. Subsid

5.473
14.629
0.435
8.296
8.095
2.7
14.91
16.03
0.761
2.413

2.82
0.778
0.187
1.228
1.596
1.596
0.846
0.692
0.243
3.046

1962
1962
1962
1962
1902
1450
1445
1445
1941
1459

Trade variables:
AvT89
Export: AvT89

0.039
0.053

0.041
0.065

1962
1962

Notes: Div. Depth is the number of managers between the DM and the CEO; ln DM Tot Comp. is the log of Div.
Manager total pay; Share LT Incent. is the fraction of long term incentives over Div. Manager total pay; IT invest
(CT invest) is the annual change in IT (Communication Technologies) capital stock at 2 digit SIC from BEA data;
CEO Span is the number of managers that report directly to the CEO; lnCEO comp. is the log to total CEO pay;
CEO LT/Total is the fraction of long term incentives over total CEO pay; ln Firm Performance is log total
market value for the year including stock returns and dividends; # Group Mgrs is the number of group managers
between the DM and the CEO; ln Pay Group Managers is # Group managers multiplied by group manager's
average pay (in logs); ln Pay Senior Exec. is the log of pay for CEO, group managers, division managers, CFO,
General Counsel, Head of Human Resources, and Head of Strategic Planning; Segment HHI is the Herfindahl
index of 2 digit segment sales (inverse measure of diversification);
AvT89 is the average US tariff rate on
Canadian imports in 86-88, by industry. Export: AvT89 is the Canadian Tariff on US exports (see Table A3 for
more details and sources).

43

Table 2: Division Depth and Trade Liberalization
Div.Depth

Div.Depth

Div.Depth

1
-3.661
[1.191]***
Export: AvT89*Post89

2
-3.501
[1.190]***

3
-3.73
[1.147]***
0.655
[0.894]

AvT89*Post89

AvT89*Post88(placebo)

Div.Depth
Placebo
4

Div.Depth
Timing
5
-3.501
[1.196]***

Div.Depth
Weighted
6
-4.069
[2.079]*

Div.Depth
Same SIC
7
-5.084
[1.322]***

Div.Depth
Change CEO
8
-3.279
[1.177]***

Div.Depth
IT
9
-3.539
[1.177]***

1.5
[1.443]

AvT94*Post94

2.622
[1.868]
0.711
[1.323]

LAGAvT89*Post89
Change of
CEO

-0.182
[0.025]***

IT invest
(2digit)

4.981
[3.693]

CT Invest.
ln Firm Sales

Div.Depth
CT
10
-3.739
[1.118]***

0.238
[0.145]

ln Div.Empl.
Division FE
Yes
Division trends
Observations
6396
R-squared
0.016
Number of Divisions

0.216
[0.120]*
-0.07
[0.019]***
yes
yes
5702
0.031
1524

0.216
[0.121]*
-0.07
[0.019]***
yes
yes
5702
0.03
1524

0.217
[0.123]*
-0.071
[0.019]***
yes
yes
5702
0.026
1524

0.217
[0.126]*
-0.068
[0.019]***
yes
yes
5538
0.033
1480

0.231
[0.122]*
-0.07
[0.019]***
yes
yes
5687
0.029
1523

0.082
[0.138]
-0.087
[0.024]***
yes
yes
3818
0.039
1031

0.231
[0.122]*
-0.068
[0.019]***
yes
yes
5661
0.062
1517

0.2
[0.113]*
-0.07
[0.019]***
yes
yes
5702
0.033
1524

56.901
[17.044]***
0.185
[0.109]*
-0.07
[0.019]***
yes
yes
5702
0.043
1524

Notes: Std. Errors in brackets, clustered by industry (SIC4). All regressions include year dummies and the interaction of Post89 with US industry skill intensity, capital intensity
and TFP growth pre-89 to account for tariff endogeneity. Div Depth is the number of managers between the DM and the CEO. AvT89 (AvT94) is the average US tariff rate on
Canadian imports in 86-88 (90-93), by industry. Column 3 also includes the Canadian tariff on US exports. Column 6 uses weighted averages of tariffs on Canadian imports by
firm where the weights are the 1988 fractions of sales in the firm’s different segments; Column 7 restricts the sample to firms that do not change primary SIC; Change CEO is a
dummy variable indicating a CEO change; see notes to Table 1 for definition of other variables.

44

Table 3: CEO Span of Control and Trade Liberalization

AvT89*Post89

CEO Span

CEO Span

CEO Span

1

2

3

8.106
[3.613]**

9.908
[3.839]**

11.386
[3.590]***
-3.544
[3.529]

Export: AvT89*Post89
AvT89*Post88(placebo)

CEO Span
Placebo
4

CEO Span
Timing
5

CEO Span
Weighted
6

CEO Span
Same SIC
7

CEO Span
Change CEO
8

CEO Span
IT
9

11.314
[3.724]***

12.814
[5.038]**

11.961
[5.858]**

9.89
[3.739]***

9.777
[3.883]**

-5.61
[4.601]

AvT94*Post94

-0.507
[4.256]
-5.556
[3.429]

LAGAvT89*Post89
Change of CEO

0.446
[0.133]***

IT invest (2 digit)
ln Firm Sales
Firm FE
Firm trends
Observations
R-squared
Number of firms

0.461
[0.262]*
yes

0.947
[0.294]***
yes
yes

0.961
[0.294]***
yes
yes

0.959
[0.290]***
yes
yes

1962
0.015
230

1962
0.021
230

1962
0.021
230

1962
0.02
230

yes
yes

0.933
[0.292]***
yes
yes

0.586
[0.383]
yes
yes

0.918
[0.280]***
yes
yes

16.904
[20.164]
0.951
[0.292]***
Yes
Yes

1929
0.022
227

1962
0.02
230

1403
0.027
173

1957
0.031
229

1962
0.021
230

Notes: Std. Errors in brackets, clustered by industry (SIC4). All regressions include year dummies and the interaction of Post89 with US industry skill intensity, capital
intensity and TFP growth pre-89 to account for tariff endogeneity. Span is the number of managers that report directly to the CEO. AvT89 (AvT94) is the average US
tariff rate on Canadian imports in 86-88 (90-93), by industry. Column 3 also includes the Canadian tariff on US exports. Column 6 uses weighted averages of tariffs on
Canadian imports by firm where the weights are the 1988 fractions of sales in the firm’s different segments; Column 7 restricts the sample to firms that do not change
primary SIC; Change CEO is a dummy variable indicating a CEO change; see notes to Table 1 for definition of other variables.

45

Table 4: Division Manager (DM) Compensation
ln DM
Tot.Comp.
1
AvT89*Post89

1.751
[0.629]***

Division-Performance Based Incentives
ln DM
ln DM
ln DM
Tot.Comp.
Tot.Comp.
Tot.Comp.
2
3
4
1.829
[0.558]***

1.817
[0.564]***

lnDivision Sales
(AvT89*Post89)*lnDiv Sales

-5.015
[3.378]
0.098
[0.032]***
0.499
[0.244]**

Firm-Performance Based Incentives
Share LT
Share LT
Share LT
ln DM
Incent.
Incent.
Incent.
Tot.Comp.
5
6
7
8
0.882
[0.292]***

0.901
[0.308]***

0.988
[0.314]***

-3.107
[2.071]

lnFirm Performance
(stock returns)
(AvT89*Post89)*1nFirm Perf.
ln Firm Sales
ln Div.Empl.

0.18
[0.034]***
0.109
[0.011]***

0.195
[0.035]***
0.103
[0.012]***

0.222
[0.046]***
0.089
[0.012]***

0.185
[0.047]***
0.058
[0.013]***

1n Div. Sales
Division FE
Indiv*Div FE
Indiv*Div Trend

yes
yes

Yes
Yes

yes
yes

0.026
[0.016]

0.027
[0.017]

0.017
[0.023]

0.112
[0.044]**
0.491
[0.244]**
0.105
[0.057]*

0.014
[0.004]***
yes

0.013
[0.005]**

0.012
[0.007]*

0.105
[0.026]***

yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

Observations
5718
4737
4737
4560
5842
4836
4836
4739
R-squared
0.165
0.183
0.148
0.164
0.05
0.054
0.051
0.161
Number of Divisions
1460
1460
1460
1405
1494
1494
1494
1462
Notes: Std. Errors in brackets, clustered by industry (SIC4). All regressions include year dummies, interactions between AvT89 and each performance measure
and interactions between Post89 and each performance measure, and the interaction of Post89 with US industry skill intensity, capital intensity and TFP growth
pre-89 to account for tariff endogeneity. Share LT Incent. is the fraction of long term incentives over Div. Manager total pay. AvT89 is the average tariff rate on
Canadian imports in 86-88, by industry. ln DM Tot Comp. is the log of Div. Manager total pay. AvT89 is the average US tariff rate on Canadian imports in 8688, by industry. 1nFirm performance is log total stock market returns including dividends. See notes to table 1 for definition of other variables.

46

Table 5: Possible Explanations for Flattening

AvT89*Post89
AvT89*Post89*
High R&D+ADV
Post89*High R&D+ADV

Source for R&D+ADV Intensity
Division FE & Trends
Firm FE
Firm trends

Div.Depth
1

DM Pay
2

Div.Depth
3

DM Pay
4

# Group
Mgrs.
5

ln Pay
Gr. Mgrs.
6

ln Pay
Sr. Exec.
7

Segment
HHI
8

#Can.
Subsid
9

-0.17
[2.150]

0.121
[1.036]

2.755
[1.700]

1.573
[1.039]

-1.07
[2.28]

2.35
[0.79]***

1.31
[0.51]**

0.57
[0.22]***

-10.34
[7.05]

-5.41
[2.393]**
0.303
[0.125]**

3.254
[1.123]***
-0.166
[0.050]***

-7.989
[2.028]***
0.235
[0.124]*

0.845
[1.351]
-0.06
[0.057]

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

yes

Compustat 86-88
yes

yes

FTC Report 1975
yes

yes

Observations
5349
5365
5074
5090
1349
1341
1341
1941
1459
R-squared
0.035
0.135
0.045
0.128
0.02
0.03
0.13
0.04
0.01
Number of Firms
191
191
191
230
158
Number of Divisions
1434
1440
1364
1370
Notes: Std. Errors in brackets, clustered by industry (SIC4). All regressions include year dummies, ln firm sales and the interaction of Post89 with US industry
skill intensity, capital intensity and TFP growth pre-89 to account for tariff endogeneity. AvT89 is the average US tariff rate on Canadian imports in 86-88, by
industry. High R&D+ADV is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the firm operates in a 4 digit sic industry with an above median ratio of R&D plus advertising
expenses to sales (1986-1988). Columns 1 to 4 control for ln division employment. See notes to table 1 for definition of other variables.

47

Table A1: Effect of the Trade Liberalization on Stock Returns, Employment and Average Price Cost Margins
Excess Returns
Excess Returns
1n Firm Employ
1n Firm Employ
Avg. PCM
Average PCM
1
2
3
4
5
6
AvT89*Post89
0.441
1.244
0.175
0.056
-0.089
-0.258
[1.015]
[1.310]
[0.279]
[0.384]
[0.065]
[0.083]***
Export: AvT89*Post89
1.612
1.451
0.483
0.559
0.023
0.059
[0.611]***
[0.656]**
[0.154]***
[0.178]***
[0.030]
[0.050]
Firm FE
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Firm trends
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
Sample
all
main>50%
all
main>50%
all
main>50%
Observations
1838
1411
1954
1499
1962
1508
R-squared
0
0
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.04
Number of firms
217
173
230
184
230
184
Notes: Std. Errors in brackets, clustered by industry (SIC4). All regressions include year dummies. The dependent variables are the excess stock market returns
(col. 1 and 2), the log of total firm employment (col. 3 and 4), and average price cost margin (col. 5 and 6); AvT89 is the average tariff rate on Canadian imports
in 86-88 by industry (Export: AvT89 for U.S. exports respectively). Columns 2, 4 and 6 restrict the sample to firms whose largest segment represented at least
50% of sales before the liberalization (in 1988).

Table A2: Correlation between Organizational and Competition Variables

Competition Variable

Trade Costs
1
2.822
[1.304]**
yes

Division Depth
Lerner Index
2
0.14
[0.067]**
yes

Import Penetration
3
-0.781
[0.362]**
yes

Trade Costs
4
-21.927
[9.384]**

CEO Span
Lerner Index
5
0.128
[0.367]

Import Penetration
6
-0.01
[1.448]

Division FE& trends
Firm FE& trends
yes
yes
yes
Observations
4503
5600
4018
1378
2046
1196
Number of Div.
1161
1500
1100
R-squared
0.021
0.014
0.02
0.025
0.009
0.011
Number of Firms
157
258
156
Notes: Std. Errors in brackets, clustered by industry (SIC4). All regressions include year dummies. Trade costs are the sum of tariff and transport costs by
industry, Lerner index is the industry average price cost margin (4 digit SIC), and import penetration is the percentage of imports out of total domestic
consumption by 4 digit industry. Columns 2 and 5 include firms in services and manufacturing, while 1, 3, 4 and 6 are restricted to manufacturing industries.
See Table A3 for exact definitions and sources.

48

Table A3: Additional Firm and Industry Data
ln Firm Performance/
ln Firm Sales/
ln Firm Employment

U.S. industry average
skill intensity/
U.S. industry average
capital intensity/
TFP growth
IT (CT) Investment

R&D and Advertising
intensity

HHI Segment

Excess stock returns

Avg.PCM
Trade Costs
Import Penetration
Lerner index

Number of Canadian
Subsidiaries by Firm

Natural log of total market value at the end of the year, calculated as
number of shares outstanding times stock price at calendar year end and
dividends per share. (in million dollars)/ Natural logarithm of firm sales
(in million dollars)/ Natural log of total firm employees (in thousands).
Source: Compustat.
Ratio of non-production to production workers by industry/ ratio of Total
capital expenditure to Total employment/4-factor TFP annual growth rate;
for all 3 measures, we take the average for 1986-1988
Bartelsman, et al (1996). The NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry
Database (1958-1996)
Change in the logarithm of average real stock of the components of
Information Technology (Communication Technology) capital, per year
and industry (at 2 digit SIC). IT includes hardware, software and
communication equipment. Data are estimates of real non-residential
fixed assets (all corporations and proprietorships) from Detailed Fixed
Assets Tables available on the BEA website. Series are adjusted using
the quality-adjusted PPI deflator.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
Average R&D plus advertising expenses over sales (1) of the 4 digit SIC
industry between 1986 and 1988 from Compustat. (2) based on the U.S.
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) 1975 Line of Business Survey
Source: Compustat and U.S. FTC 1975 Line of Business Survey
Herfindhal index (HHI) of 2 digit segment sales is the sum of squared
shares of each reported segment sales over total sales. Business Segments
are declared by firms that report the industries they operate in.
Source: Compustat Business Segment data.
Computed as the difference between calendar year company and market
returns. Company returns are compounded daily and include all
dividends. Total market returns are CRSP’s NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ
market weighted returns.
Source: CRSP
Average price cost margin [=(firm sales-cost of sales)/firm sales].
Source: Compustat.
Sum of import tariff and transport costs by industry.
Source: Bernard et al. (2006)
Import Penetration by industry.
Source: Bernard et al. (2006).
Approximated as the industry average price cost margin based on all
Compustat firms.
Source: Compustat.
Source: Directory of Corporate Affiliations

49

Supplemental Appendix
1. Supplemental Figure
Figure S1: Textile Manufacturer: Changes in Hierarchy pre-FTA versus post-FTA
(Industry SIC 221: Broadwoven Fabric Mills, Cotton--U.S. Tariffs on Canadian Imports: 8.8%)

Pre-FTA (1988)

Post-FTA (1991)

CEO
CCEOEO

CEO
CCEOEO

Span = 7

Span = 5

CFO

General
Counsel

Chief
Operating
Officer

Human
Resources

Public
Relations

CFO

General
Counsel

Finished
Fabrics

Home
Furnishings

Industrial
Fabrics

Human
Resources

Public
Relations

Depth = 2
Home
Furnishings

Division
DivisionB

Division
DivisionC

Industrial
Fabrics

Division
DivisionA

Division B
Division

Division
DivisionC

Depth =
1

Division
DivisionD

Division
DivisionD

Span = number of positions reporting to CEO
Depth = number of positions between the CEO and Division Manager
50

2. Supplemental Tables
Table S1: Top 20 Industries with High U.S. Tariffs on Canadian Imports
US SIC 87
(3-digit)
302
233
211
225
282
202
314
203
287
221
364
201
382
208
366
375
284
267
329
384

Industry Name
Rubber & Plastics Footwear
Women’s, Misses, Juniors Outerwear
Cigarettes
Knitting Mills
Plastics, Syn. Resins, Syn. Rubber, Cellulosic, Other
Fibers, Ex. Glass
Dairy Products
Footwear, Except Rubber
Canned, Frozen, Preserved Fruit & Vegetables
Agricultural Chemicals
Broadwoven Fabric Mills, Cotton
Electric Lighting & Wiring Equipment
Meat Products
Lab. App., Analytical, Optical, Measuring & Controlling
Instruments
Beverages
Telephone & Telegraph Apparatus
Motorcycles, Bicycles & Parts
Soap, Detergent, Cleaning Preparation, Perfumes,
Cosmetics, & Other
Converted Paper, Paperboard Products, Except Boxes
Abrasive, Asbestos, Misc. Nonmetallic Mineral Products
Surgical, Medical, & Dental Instruments & Supplies

U.S. Tariffs on Canadian
Imports
1986-1988 Average
36.06%
21.55%
19.33%
16.81%
11.26%
10.46%
10.01%
9.76%
9.76%
8.81%
7.29%
7.16%
6.94%
6.77%
6.61%
6.38%
6.13%
5.97%
5.83%
5.72%

The third column shows the tariff faced by firms in the sample and used in the analysis, averaged by industry (3 digit SIC).

Table S2: Examples of Canadian Companies in High Tariff Industries
US SIC 87
(3-digit)
211

Industry Name
Cigarettes

U.S. Tariffs on
Canadian Imports
1986-1988 Average
19.33%

Examples of Canadian
Companies
(Sales in U.S. $)
Imperial Tobacco ($4.2 b)
Rothman’s ($400 m)

225

Knitting Mills

16.81%

Dominion Textiles ($1.4 b)

282

Plastics, Syn. Resins, Syn.
Rubber, Cellulosic, Other
Fibers, Ex. Glass

11.26%

Nova Chemicals ($4.8 b)

208

Beverages

6.77%

Seagram ($4.5 b)
Molson ($2.1 b)

366

Telephone & Telegraph
Apparatus

6.61%

Nortel Networks ($6.1 b)

51

Table S3: Other results

AvT89*Post89

%Sales represented
1

Change CEO
2

Ln CEO Comp.
3

CEO LT/Total
4

0.597
[0.620]

0.474
[1.297]
0.032
[0.106]
yes
yes

2.544
[0.615]***
0.347
[0.079]***
yes
yes

0.906
[0.257]***
0.002
[0.035]
yes
yes

ln Firm Sales
Firm FE
Firm trends

yes
yes

Observations
1920
1960
1965
1965
R-squared
0.007
0.012
0.071
0.02
Number of firms
232
231
232
232
Notes: Std. Errors in brackets, clustered by industry (SIC4). All regressions include year dummies. The
dependent variable in col.1 is the percentage of sales from divisions available in the Hewitt data, out of total
firm sales; in col.2 it is the dummy variable for whether the firm changed CEO in that year; in col.3 it is the
log of total CEO Pay, and in col.4 the share of long-term incentives out of total pay. AvT89 is the average US
tariff rate on Canadian imports in 86-88, by industry.

52

Table S4: Robustness Checks

AvT89*Post89

Div.Depth
In 1988
1
-3.49
[1.199]***

Exch.Rate*OriginImp.Pen.
Division FE
Division trends
Observations
Number divisions
R-squared

Yes
yes
5631
1490
0.032

Panel A: Division Depth
Div.Depth
Div.Depth
Incl. Serv.
2
3
-3.21
-3.398
[1.248]**
[1.259]***
0.806
[1.190]
yes
yes
yes
yes
6965
5702
1895
1524
0.023
0.032

Div.Depth
No Subsid.
4
-5.7
[4.017]

Div.Depth
Fast
5
-5.491
[1.245]***

yes
yes
1150
290
0.118

Yes
Yes
1697
509
0.084

Panel B: CEO Span of Control
CEO Span
CEO Span
CEO Span
CEO Span
Incl. Serv.
No Subsid.
Fast
2
3
4
5
AvT89*Post89
7.545
10.453
21.576
5.648
[ 4.025]*
[4.155]**
[10.532]**
[6.926]
Exch.Rate*OriginImp.Pen.
4.649
[7.736]
Firm FE
yes
yes
yes
yes
Yes
Firm trends
yes
yes
yes
yes
Yes
Observations
1914
2711
1962
339
531
Number of firms
222
340
230
42
65
R-squared
0.021
0.019
0.021
0.114
0.059
Notes: Std. Errors in brackets, clustered by industry (SIC4). All regressions include year dummies. All regressions also
include the interaction of Post89 with US industry skill intensity, capital intensity and TFP growth pre-89 to account for
tariff endogeneity (except col. 2 because these are not available for services industries). Div Depth is the number of
managers between the DM and the CEO. AvT89 is the average US tariff rate on Canadian imports in 86-88, by
industry. Exch.Rate*OriginImp.Pen is the bilateral Canada U.S. dollar exchange rate multiplied by the level of import
penetration of the industry in 1988, Source: IMF-IFS and Bernard et al. (2006) .Column 1 restricts the sample to firms
present in the sample as of 1988; col. 2 also includes services firms in the estimation, with AvT89=0; col. 3 includes
the interaction of the Canada-US exchange rate and the level of import penetration in the industry before 1989; col. 4
restricts the sample to firms that report zero Canadian subsidiaries in 1988; col. 5 restricts the sample to firms in
industries that had experienced at least 60% tariff reductions from their original level by 1994.
CEO Span
In 1988
1
8.874
[3.972]**

53

3. Complementarities in Organizational Design
In Table S5 (below), we correlate the different practices in a regression framework, allowing
for division fixed effects, division trends, and controls for division and firm size.
We find strong correlations between these variables. For example, each additional layer
between the CEO and the division manager is associated with a decrease in division manager
pay: a 7.2% decline in the logarithm of total compensation (column 1) and a 1.2% decline in the
share of long-term incentives to total compensation (column 2). Depth and span are also strongly
negatively correlated (columns 3 and 4). As firms move division managers closer to the top, the
span of the CEO increases. And, this is not a purely “mechanical” result. In column 4, we find
that depth is related to the number of DM positions that report to the CEO excluding the own
division (thereby removing the purely mechanical part of the correlation) as well as to the
number of senior functional positions that report directly to the CEO (such as the CFO, General
Counsel, Chief Information Officer, Head of Human Resources, etc.).
With regard to pay and span, the results are more subtle (columns 5 through 8). While
division manager pay and incentives are positively related to the number of other division
managers reporting directly to the CEO, they are negatively related to the number of functional
managers reporting directly to the CEO. This suggests that division positioning in the hierarchy
and managerial pay are complements, but interestingly, that senior staff positioning and division
manager pay are substitutes. One plausible explanation for this finding is that when senior staff
managers report directly to the CEO and certain functions are centralized, their increase in
authority comes at the expense of division manager authority and job scope.
In sum, the strong correlations found between CEO span of control, division depth and the
design of division manager compensation are consistent with the view that these organizational
choices are indeed complements. Moreover, the trade liberalization, as an exogenous shock to
the

environment,

triggered

a

series

of

organizational

changes

that

illustrate

the

complementarities.

54

Table S5: Panel Correlations between Organizational Practices

Div.Depth

ln DM
Tot.Comp.
1

Share LT
Incent.
2

-0.072
[0.014]***

-0.012
[0.006]*

CEO Span

Div.Depth
3

Div.Depth
4

-0.063
[0.012]***

#DM dir.
excl.own

Division FE
Division trends

0.216
[0.051]***
0.093
[0.011]***
yes
yes

0.022
[0.021]
0.02
[0.003]***
yes
yes

0.237
[0.101]**
-0.067
[0.017]***
yes
yes

Observations
Number of Div.
R-squared

5702
1524
0.14

5702
1524
0.048

5702
1524
0.102

5702
1524
0.077

ln Firm Sales
ln Div.Empl.

ln DM
Tot.Comp.
6

-0.006
[0.004]
-0.126
[0.020]***
-0.015
[0.009]*
0.231
[0.103]**
-0.069
[0.017]***
yes
yes

# FUNCT.Direct

ln DM
Tot.Comp.
5

Share LT
Incent.
7

Share LT
Incent.
8

0
[0.002]

0.199
[0.053]***
0.099
[0.011]***
yes
yes

0.014
[0.007]**
-0.011
[0.006]*
0.197
[0.054]***
0.099
[0.011]***
yes
yes

0.023
[0.021]
0.021
[0.003]***
yes
yes

0.009
[0.004]**
-0.004
[0.002]**
0.018
[0.021]
0.021
[0.003]***
yes
yes

5718
1530
0.127

5702
1524
0.13

5718
1530
0.045

5702
1524
0.053

Notes: Std. Errors in brackets, clustered by firm. All regressions include year dummies. ln DM Tot Comp. is the log of Div. Manager total pay. Div
Depth is the number of managers between the DM and the CEO. Span is the number of managers that report directly to the CEO. #DM dir. excl.own is
the number of DMs in the firm that report directly to the CEO excluding the own division. # FUNCT.Direct is the number of senior functional positions
that report directly to the CEO. Share LT Incent. is the fraction of long term incentives over Div. Manager total pay. See notes to table 1 in the paper for
definition of other variables.

55

