                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           UNDERSTANDING PPPS AND PPP-BASED NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

                                            Angus Deaton
                                             Alan Heston

                                        Working Paper 14499
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14499


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2008




We are grateful to Shaida Baidee, Misha Belkindas, Erwin Diewert, Yuri Dikhanov, Nada Hamadeh,
Mick Silver, Eric Swanson, Fred Vogel, and two referees for helpful comments on an earlier version.
Both authors were members of the Technical Advisory Group for the 2005 International Comparison
Program, which was chaired by Heston. This paper represents their personal views, and should not
be taken to represent the views of the ICP, the World Bank, or any other international institution, none
of which supported this work financially. Support from NSF grant SES-0648769-002 is gratefully
acknowledged by Heston. Parts of this paper were presented at CRIW-NBER Summer Workshop,
July 14-15, 2008. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Angus Deaton and Alan Heston. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Understanding PPPs and PPP-based national accounts
Angus Deaton and Alan Heston
NBER Working Paper No. 14499
November 2008, Revised November 2009
JEL No. E01,N1,O47

                                              ABSTRACT

PPP-based national accounts have become an important part of the database for macroeconomists,
development economists, and economic historians. Frequently used global data come from the Penn
World Table (PWT) and the World Bank’s World Development Indicators; a substantial fraction of
the world is also covered in the PPP accounts produced by the OECD and the European Union. This
paper provides an overview of how these data are constructed, and discusses both the theory and the
practical problems of implementing it. All of these data are underpinned by the International Comparison
Program (ICP), which collects data on prices worldwide. The most recent round of the ICP was for
2005 with final results published in early 2008; version 7.0 of the Penn World Table will soon incorporate
these results. The 2005 ICP, like earlier rounds, involved substantial revisions to previous data, most
notably revising downwards the size of the Chinese (40 percent smaller) and Indian (36 percent) economies.
We discuss the reasons for the revisions, and assess their plausibility. We focus on four important
areas: how to handle international differences in quality, the treatment of urban and rural areas of large
countries such as China, India, and Brazil, how to estimate prices for government services, health,
and education, and the effects of the regional structure of the ICP. All of these affect the interpretation
of previous data, as well as the current revisions. We discuss previous revisions of the PWT, and their
effects on various kinds of econometric analysis. The paper concludes with health warnings that should
be kept in mind when using these data, which are not always suitable for the purposes to which they
are put. Some international comparisons are close to impossible, even in theory, and in others, the
practical difficulties make comparison exceedingly hazardous.


Angus Deaton
328 Wallace Hall
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu

Alan Heston
433 12th St. SE
Washington DC 20003
aheston@econ.upenn.edu
1. Introduction

Over the last thirty years, more and better data have fundamentally changed the practice

of both microeconomics and macroeconomics. No new data have been more important

and more influential than those from the International Comparison Program (ICP). The

ICP collects prices in countries around the world, and uses them to calculate price index

numbers or purchasing power parities (PPP), whose aim to measure how much local

currency is needed to buy as much as does the currency in the numeraire country, usually

the US dollar. The “as much” can refer to GDP, or to one of its components, such as

investment or consumption. As with price indexes within a country, PPPs can be thought

of as statistical averages of prices, or given a cost-of-living interpretation. They are also

used to deflate nominal local currency measures to yield “volume” measures expressed in

a common currency unit, such as current US dollars for the year of the comparison.

Adjusted for inflation in the numeraire country, the ICP yields real GDP accounts in

constant internationally comparable dollars.

   By the late 1960s, the theory of economic growth that had begun with Robert Solow’s

great paper had become a largely theoretical enterprise. But by the late 1980s, the Penn

World Table had evolved from a small set of illustrative calculations into a multi-country

panel big enough for econometric analysis, particularly Mark 5 which contained up to 39

years of data on 138 countries, Robert Summers and Alan Heston (1991). These data

helped bring about a new growth economics, with theoretical developments consistently

related to evidence. There has been a huge explosion of work since then, trying to

understand the mechanics of growth, linking growth and politics, and forging an

integration of macroeconomics, economic development, and economic history, the last



                                               1
supported by the companion creation of long-run historical data by Angus Maddison

(2003). Purchasing power parity data provide a common measuring rod that allows

comparison, not only of India and America now, but of India now with Britain before the

industrial revolution. It allows the World Bank to estimate the number of poor in the

world, and permits plausible conjectures about which places and which times have seen

the greatest riches and the greatest poverty in human history, Lant Pritchett (1997).

   Although the international data are widely used, the way that they are constructed is

not always as widely understood. Nor is it easy to find out why different, commonly used

sources give different estimates. Perhaps the most familiar of these sources are the PPP

data given in the PWT, on the one hand, and in the World Bank’s World Development

Indicators (WDI) on the other. Eurostat and the OECD currently cover 55 countries in the

OECD, Europe, and the Confederation of Independent States (CIS), and publish time-

series data back to 1980 for a subset of those countries. This paper aims to provide an

overview of the most recent round of data collection, together with the underlying

economic theory, an explanation of why different sources give different numbers, and

some health warnings for their use. We pay particular attention to the PWT because it is

the only source that gives long time series for a disaggregated set of national accounts.

There is an enormous amount of detail that goes into the collection of the data and the

construction of the accounts, but our aim here is to focus on a few key issues that are

likely to be important to practicing macroeconomists, and where we think more

knowledge is likely to be useful in practice.

   An overview of the most recent round of international price comparisons is provided

in the final report of the ICP, World Bank (2008a), and the details can be found online in



                                                2
the ICP Handbook, World Bank (2008b). Our account here starts with the price-index

theory that underlies the international accounts, and emphasizes the differences between

multilateral and standard price comparisons. This also allows us to explain why the same

set of underlying prices can give rise to several sets of apparently inconsistent national

accounts. We then discuss some of the practical difficulties. Among the most important

of these are how to handle international differences in the quality of goods and services

across countries, how to price “comparison resistant” items such as government services

or the imputed rents of owner occupiers, and how to calculate accounts for countries and

periods that are not covered by the underlying data collection. There are also specific

“health warnings” with any specific set of accounts; in the latest round the most

important concern the regional structure of the data collection, the balance between urban

and rural data collection, and the role of India, China, and the countries of the former

Soviet Union. Even so, we emphasize the great progress in the ICP over time; there are

many fewer health warnings for the 2005 round than for earlier rounds, and many of the

most marked differences reflect corrections of problems in earlier rounds. There are also

important warnings that apply to all rounds, particularly the unsuitability of these data for

analysis at annual frequencies.

   Most economists who use PPP data would currently work with the latest versions of

the Penn World Table, Versions 6.2 or 6.3, which do not include the data from the latest

ICP round for 2005. Version 7.0 of the PWT, which is currently in preparation, will

incorporate these data, and will adjust the past data to provide a coherent set of numbers

as far back as 1950. So we emphasize some of the areas where the 2005 round is different

from earlier rounds, in part because these will cause substantial revisions compared with



                                              3
Version 6, but also to illustrate the changes that have taken place in the past with every

new round of data collection. These revisions are often substantial. For example, the 2007

version of the World Development Indicators (WDI), World Bank (2007), lists 2005 per

capita GDP for China as $6,757 and for India as $3,452, both in current international

dollars. The 2008 version, World Bank (2008c), which includes the new ICP data, gives,

for the same year, and the same concept $4,088 for China and $2,222 for India. For

comparison, GDP per capita at market exchange rates is $1,721 for China and $797 for

India. We shall have something to say about what drives these revisions but it is hard not

to speculate about which previously established econometric results survive the

incorporation of these revisions into the PWT.

   Economists are most familiar with PPP accounts through the PWT and, secondarily,

through Maddison’s data. The underlying data all come from one or more rounds of the

ICP, which started as a joint project between the United Nations Statistical Office

(UNSO) and the University of Pennsylvania, then a UNSO project, and most recently—

from the 1993 round on—a World Bank managed project endorsed by the UN Statistical

Commission. The main business of the ICP is to collect data on the prices of thousands of

comparable goods and services in many countries, 146 in the 2005 round. These prices,

together with the national accounts for each country, are used to construct a set of price

indexes that compare, for example, the price of consumption or investment in India

relative to the price of consumption or investment in the US, expressed in rupees per

dollar. “Volume” estimates—in temporally current prices—come from dividing

expenditures by the price indexes, in the example, giving estimates of both Indian and US




                                             4
consumption or investment in current international dollars. Several preliminary points

follow from this structure.

   First, there are many different reasonable formulas for price indexes, and these will

give rise to different indexes and different sets of accounts, which is (one of the reasons)

why the GDP estimates published by the World Bank in the WDI are different from those

that appear in the PWT. Which of these is most appropriate depends on the purposes to

which the data are to be put; as is the case with most index number questions, there is

typically no unique right answer. These issues are familiar from standard within-country

accounting where, for example, Paasche and Laspeyres indexes are not identical. But the

differences tend to be more important in international comparisons over space than in

national comparisons over time because the patterns of relative prices and of expenditures

are much more different between India and the US, for example, than within the US or

within India a few years apart.

   Second, the ICP must typically rely on local country estimates of GDP and its

components based on the production, expenditure or (in some cases) the income side of

the national income accounts. Many non-OECD countries do not routinely disaggregate

their GDP into the categories that are required for the ICP. An important goal of recent

rounds of the ICP has been to improve statistical capacity in participating countries,

which in 2005 included major efforts in developing more detailed and accurate

expenditure estimates. The national income accounts of many low-income countries

remain very weak, with procedures that have sometimes not been updated for decades,

see in particular Dudley Seers (1983, 18–27) who describes many of the problem areas,




                                              5
albeit as they were 25 years ago. In many cases, the prices collected under the auspices of

the ICP may be more accurate than the GDP numbers with which they are combined.

   Third, it is important to understand that aspects of the exercise are close to being

impossible in theory, and are therefore not amenable to data improvement. Making price

comparisons between Canada and the US, or between the countries of the OECD, is

relatively straightforward because the same goods and services are widely available in

all. But when it comes to comparing a rural Thai agricultural laborer, who lives on rice,

with his Ethiopian counterpart, who lives on teff, we have no basis for comparison. Rice

is hard to find in Ethiopia and teff is impossible to find in Thailand, so price comparisons

are not possible. This is an extreme case, but many goods and services that are widely

consumed in rich countries are not available at all in poor countries, or are only available

at high-priced specialty stores in a few large cities. One general rule is that the

comparisons become less reliable the further apart are the structures of GDP (or its

components) of the countries being compared. This is essentially the same phenomenon

as the increasing unreliability of long-run historical comparisons the further back we go.

   With these caveats in mind, we plunge into the formulas, which assume that prices

and expenditures are available for all countries on a common set of goods and services.

We shall return to the reality in Section 3.



2. Multilateral price indexes in theory

In a world in which the law of one price were true, market exchange rates would be all

that we would need for converting accounts in one currency into another. The price of

any item in one country would be the price in any other converted at the exchange rate,



                                               6
and the same would be true for a price index for consumption, investment, GDP or

whatever. For various reasons, see Kenneth Rogoff (1996) for a review, relative prices

are different in different countries, so that it is useful to compare prices directly, and to

calculate price indexes for GDP and its components. Given a set of prices of all the goods

and services in consumption (say, and we use consumption as an example), it is

straightforward to use standard formulas (Paasche, Laspeyres, or Fisher, for example) to

compute consumer price indexes for any one country in terms of any other. But these

“binary” indexes do not give us what we want. If there are M countries, they yield an M

by M matrix of price indexes, not a vector of M price indexes, one for each country

which, like exchange rates, would allow us a unique way of converting the price level of

one country into another. More formally, we require that the matrix of the price indexes

have two properties, first that the price index of country c in terms of country d should be

the reciprocal of the price index of d in terms of c, and second, that the indexes be

transitive, so that the price of Thailand with Botswana as base is the same whether

computed in one step, or computed in two or many steps, from Thailand to Peru and then

from Peru to Botswana, or through other intermediate countries. It is straightforward to

show that these requirements are satisfied if, and only if, there exists a vector of M price

indexes such that element c, d of the matrix is given by the ratio of the price index for d

to that of c.

    Perhaps the obvious approach to economists—though not to national income

statisticians—is to work with cost-of-living indexes which, in theory, provide the price

indexes that we need. If prices in country c are written as an n-vector p c , and if tastes are

homothetic and identical in all countries, the cost or expenditure function can be written


                                               7
as u c ( p c ) for utility level u c and some linearly homogeneous function  (.) which is

not indexed on c. The  (.) functions immediately give us the price indexes that we need,

so that if we (arbitrarily) take country 1 as numeraire (the US in all of these calculations),

the consumption PPP for c in international dollars is simply

                                     P c   ( p c ) /  ( p1 ).                               (1)

These PPPs make no assumption about relative prices being the same in all countries;

essentially the assumption of identical homothetic tastes replaces identical relative prices

in allowing us to construct indexes. The indexes in (1) can be estimated by specifying a

demand system and fitting it to the world data, or through a finite, nonparametric

revealed preference approach pioneered by Sydney Afriat (1967), more recently

developed by Steve Dowrick and John Quiggin (1994).

   The assumption that all countries have identical homothetic tastes is contradicted by

much empirical evidence. For example, it implies that the income elasticities of all goods

are unity so that, at fixed relative prices, all expansion paths are rays from the origin, a

proposition that has been falsified by more than 150 years of empirical demand analysis.

That tastes are identical across countries implies that all differences in the patterns of

demand must be attributable to international differences in the structure of relative prices.

While relative prices are certainly important, so are habits and tastes generated by past

consumption, David Atkin (2009), and there are many places in the world, such as North

and South India, where there are large differences in consumption patterns of food in

spite of only modest differences in relative prices, possibly because relative prices were

much more different in the past. For a broad classification, such as food, water, and

shelter, it might be argued that everyone’s needs are much the same, but the ICP works


                                                 8
with 120 basic heads of consumption—basic heads are the level below which there are no

expenditure data—and collects prices on more than a thousand individual consumption

items. To assume that tastes are identical and homothetic when they visibly are not would

compromise both the accuracy and the relevance of the calculations. For example, if we

think about comparing India and China using assumed homothetic tastes that might be

dominated by American consumption patterns (although inconsistent with them), it is

easy to understand Afriat’s (1972) claim that to make such an assumption leaves “the

significance of such calculations quite obscure, even as to the locus of injustice.”

   Although identical non-homothetic tastes are usually assumed in trade theory, we

would argue this is no more plausible as a description of the world. If tastes are identical

but non-homothetic, then the COLI-based system of PPPs depends on a reference utility

level—effectively real income—and this modification is not insubstantial. For example, it

is not clear that it makes sense to compare Mexican and Peruvian prices as if both were

as rich as Japan, or even at some mean level of world income. Peter Neary’s (2004)

GAIA system of PPPs, which is the leading example of the approach, is constructed on

this basis, with explicit assumptions about tastes, and a common system of demand

functions estimated worldwide. Identical tastes can be further modified to include “taste-

shifters,” such as temperature or rainfall, but this just extends the number of reference

characteristics that need to be fixed and further stretches the credibility of the numbers. It

seems odd, to say the least, to compare the relative costs of living in, say, Congo and

Ghana under the supposition that both have the Russian climate. Indeed, many of us

would argue that price indexes are not always the same thing as the cost-of-living

indexes. If all prices were identical in Moscow and in Ouagadougou, it seems meaningful



                                              9
to say that the price level is the same in both, even if the cost-of-living is higher in the

colder, northern city. In the rest of this paper, we shall follow the national income

accountants’ practice of thinking in terms of price indexes, not cost-of-living indexes.

Critics of this approach argue that it leaves the welfare basis of the calculations unclear;

we agree, but do not know how to do better, and therefore endorse a statistical over a

welfare interpretation of the price indexes from the ICP.

    One element of cost-of-living theory remains useful in the international context; this

is W. Erwin Diewert’s (1976) concept of a superlative price index. Superlative indexes,

such as the Fisher ideal index, or the Törnqvist index, are defined as indexes that are

consistent with preferences that are flexible enough to provide a local second-order

approximation to arbitrary preferences. Such indexes, unlike the Paasche and Laspeyres,

construct indexes using weights that depend on both the reference and comparison

situations, and automatically satisfy the reversal property, that the price level in d based

on c is the reciprocal of the price level of c based on d. Diewert (2001) also shows that

superlative indexes can be regarded as “symmetric means” of the two different indexes

that we would otherwise have, just as the Fisher index is a symmetric average (here

geometric mean) of the Laspeyres for d based on c, and the reciprocal of the Laspeyres

for c based on d, which is identical to the Paasche for d based on c. Since we shall use the

Fisher as one of our running examples, these relations are worth recording, and also allow

us to establish some notation. With M countries, labeled c, d, etc, and N goods, labeled i,

j, k, etc, the Laspeyres, Paasche and Fisher for d with c as base are
                                              1
                N
                 pd          N     pc 
        P   s ic ; PPcd    sid id   PLdc ; PFcd  PLcd PPcd  PLcd / PLdc
          L
           cd       c
                    i                                                                          (2)
            i 1 pi          i 1 pi 



                                              10
where sic is the share of expenditure devoted to good i in country c. Note that, in ICP

practice, these shares come from the National Accounts of each country, while the prices

are collected by the ICP.

   We need one more step to convert the bilateral indexes into multilateral indexes,

which we discuss below. But that final step is less important than understanding the

implications of (2), and the conceptual problems that are involved in choosing one

particular index formula, such as the Fisher. When relative prices differ across countries,

different index number formulas will give different answers, and if we cannot rely on

identical tastes and cost-of-living indexes, we have a wide margin of choice, which can

be thought of as a large margin of statistical uncertainty. One standard way of assessing

the size of that margin is to look at the ratio of the Laspeyres price index to the Paasche

price index, the ratio that is being “resolved” by using the geometric mean that gives the

Fisher index. Table 1 shows the Paasche and Laspeyres index between the US and

selected other countries, in the left panel, and between Nigeria and selected other

countries, in the right panel. These are prices indexes for GDP excluding the balance of

foreign trade calculated from the 2005 ICP data. Not surprisingly, Canada and Western

European economies are closest to the US, and the Laspeyres indexes for prices in those

countries relative to the US are only a few points greater than the Paasche indexes.

Similarly, Nigeria is “close” to a number of its African neighbors, and more surprisingly,

three countries in Eastern Europe, Latvia, Albania, and Estonia. But it is among the

countries in the next panel that we see the problem. The US-based Laspeyres indexes for

Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan are 9.6 and 5.1 times the corresponding Paasche index; and

although these two countries—especially Tajikistan—are outliers—other countries in


                                             11
Africa and the CIS have ratios more than 2. With spreads this large, the choice of price

index can make a very large difference in bilateral comparisons, and in some cases, we

might reasonably doubt whether the data support any such calculation. We return to these

issues below.

    Equations (2) give us a set of bilateral superlative indexes which need to be made into

multilateral indexes. If we denote by A the M by M matrix of logarithms of the Fisher

indexes, we have guaranteed—by the superlative property—that A is skew-symmetric,

and it has zeros along the diagonal. However, in general it will not be transitive, in the

sense that, for all c, d and e,

                                        ace  aed  acd                                      (3)

which is what we need. (This property is sometimes referred to as “circularity,” see

Diewert, 1987 for earlier references.) It is straightforward to show that transitivity holds

if, and only if, there are M numbers, interpretable as the logarithms of the PPPs, such

that, for all c and d,

                                         acd  bd  bc                                       (4)

There is no principled (backed by economic theory) way of enforcing (4). Corrado Gini

(1924) suggested choosing b to fit the calculated A by minimization of least squares

distance, a suggestion repeated later by O. Eltetö and P. Köves (1964), and B. J. Szulc

(1964), after whom this EKS method is (somewhat unjustly) named; GEKS is more

appropriate and we use that term here. Given that we need to choose b1  0 for the base

country, the solution is readily shown to be, in terms of the original price indexes,

                                                              1
                                            M               M
                                     PFc    PF1 j PFjc                                   (5)
                                            j 1         

                                               12
so that the GEKS-Fisher multilateral index, one for each country, is derived by taking the

geometric mean over all of the possible M “indirect” Fisher indexes from the base

country to the country in question.

   Many PPPs, such as the Eurostat-OECD and World Bank PPPs, are calculated using

some version of the GEKS method outlined above. In practice, it is surely impossible to

do without the transitivity assumption; we cannot feasibly work with a matrix of price

indexes. Yet transitivity comes at a serious price, specifically that the price index for any

pair of countries depends on prices and budget shares in third countries, a violation of

“the independence of irrelevant country” property. Indeed, Matthijs Van Veelen (2002)

has shown that, given other mild conditions, transitivity and the irrelevance property are

mutually inconsistent. As has been known at least since Fisher, price indexes cannot

satisfy all of the properties that our price-based intuition suggests for them: price indexes

are not prices. One possible source of comfort is an observation based on experience, but

without theoretical foundation except in special cases, W. F. Alterman, Diewert, and

Robert C. Feenstra (1999), which is that the matrix of bilateral superlative indexes, such

as the Fisher indexes with which we began, are usually close to being transitive without

further adjustment, so that the GEKS step has little effect on the calculations. By the

same token, comparisons between pairs of countries using GEKS price indexes are not

very sensitive to prices or budget shares in third countries. We also have a nice

compromise between statistical practice and cost-of-living theory in the sense that the

Fisher indexes are superlative indexes with a COLI interpretation if we are prepared to

make the assumption of identical tastes, at least for some countries.




                                             13
   These indexes have (at least) one compensating drawback, which is responsible for

the fact that they have not been provided in the Penn World Table until the latest version.

The Penn World Table is a set of national accounts, with consumption, investment, GDP

and so on, and these national accounts satisfy the standard national accounting identities,

for example that consumption plus investment plus government plus exports minus

imports is equal to GDP. When each component is converted to PPP by using a GEKS

index for each, and expenditures converted to international currency by division, these

identities no longer hold. Components of aggregates in international prices do not sum to

their aggregates in international prices. For some purposes such as the World Bank’s

poverty work which uses only the PPP for household consumption, this is of no

consequence. And Eurostat estimates appear to be widely used, at least within

government agencies, without satisfying this requirement, though OECD also produces

alternative, additive, estimates with a lag. For example, in Eurostat’s 2005 benchmark

data for France, “real” GDP at average OECD prices is 0.27 percent less than the sum of

individual and collective consumption, gross fixed capital formation, the change in stocks

and net exports, OECD (2009, Table 1.7). But economists studying the structure and

dynamics of macro economies might find the violation of identities to be disconcerting,

and the PWT is constructed along principles that preserve them.

   The aggregation formula used by PWT was proposed by Roy C. Geary (1958), and is

usually referred to as the Geary-Khamis (GK) method, Salem Khamis (1972). In the GK

system, the prices in each country are compared with those of an imaginary composite

country, itself constructed from averaging the countries in the system. The GK PPP index




                                            14
for country c is computed as a Paasche index that compares domestic prices with “world”

prices, which are the prices of the composite so that, for c = 1, 2,

                                                   N

                                                  p q   c c
                                                         n n
                                         c
                                       PGK       n 1
                                                   N
                                                                                           (6)
                                                  
                                                  n 1
                                                         n   qc
                                                              n




where  n is the world price of good n, which is itself defined as the quantity weighted

average of the prices of good n in each country, expressed in the global currency:

                                           M
                                                   pnc       qnc
                                     n           c    M
                                                                                           (7)
                                                         q
                                           c 1   PGK              d
                                                                   n
                                                         d 1


Equations (6) and (7) must be solved simultaneously, which can be done iteratively, or as

shown by Diewert (1999) as the solution to an eigenvalue problem.

   The advantage of this Geary-Khamis system of PPPs is that it preserves aggregation;

because it uses a world price for each good, each item of GDP is re-priced at the world

price, and added up to give re-priced subgroups or totals. The GK system also has a

number of disadvantages that need to be balanced against this. Unlike the indexes

underlying the EKS approach, it is not superlative. In consequence, if the two countries

had the same homothetic tastes, the Geary-Khamis index would not be a second-order

approximation to the “true” cost-of-living index. If this were the main concern, Geary-

Khamis could be replaced by Neary’s (2004) GAIA system which is a consumer-theory

consistent version of Geary-Khamis. If we do not want to assume identical tastes, nor use

the cost-of-living framework that would be arguably appropriate if tastes were identical,

these objections to Geary-Khamis are not decisive.




                                                  15
   The central problem with GK (or with other methods that use a one price vector for

all countries) is that it uses a single set of relative prices to value consumption or GDP in

all countries, no matter how different are the actual relative prices. More specifically in

the case of GK, the quantity weighting of prices in (7) means that the country with the

larger physical volume of consumption of a good gets greater weight in the construction

of the composite world prices; in this sense, GK gives a “plutocratic” set of international

prices. If, for example, we used Geary-Khamis to compute a PPP for Bangladesh relative

to the US, the world prices would be close to those of the US. In the Penn World Table as

a whole, Daniel Nuxoll (1994) has argued that the composite world prices are those that

would characterize a relatively rich country such as Italy or Hungary. Such prices are

unlikely to be useful for comparing two countries whose relative prices are quite different

from those in Italy or Hungary. Beyond that, the use of such plutocratic prices is likely to

overstate the level of consumption in poor countries. For example, many services—

haircuts, domestic service, restaurant meals—are cheap in poor countries because people

are poor, because such services cannot be traded, and because labor is not free to move

around the world. If we use (say) Italian prices to value (for example) Indian

consumption, these components of consumption will be valued very highly, and will

inflate the value of Indian consumption at international prices. This is called the

Gershenkron effect after Alexander Gershenkron (1947), although once again Gini

deserves priority; it is the overvaluation of one country’s consumption when evaluated at

another country’s prices.

   Doris M Iklé (1972) proposed an alternative to GK that shares its use of a single set

of world prices, and that thereby preserves adding-up in national accounts, but replaces



                                             16
the plutocratic weighting by aggregate quantities by a “democratic” weighting that gives

each country equal weight. Iklé’s method, which was given little attention for many

years, was recently clarified by Yuri Dikhanov (1997) and Bert Balk (1996), and Diewert

(2008b) refers to it as the Iklé, Dikhanov, Balk (IDB) index. In the 2005 ICP, it was used

to calculate the PPPs for the African region. Using Diewert’s formulation, the IDB index

replaces the definition of the global price vector (7) by

                                                                  1
                                            M  p c  1 
                                              cn  snc 
                                    n   c 1  MIDB    
                                                    P
                                                                                          (8)
                                                       s c
                                                           n 
                                                  c 1     

        c
where PIDB is the IDB PPP index for country c, which is calculated simulataneously with

(8) using the Paasche formula (6) with  n replacing  n . Equation (8) defines the global

relative prices as budget-share weighted harmonic means of each country’s relative

prices. Although the IDB index, like the GK index, uses the same relative prices for all

countries, those relative prices are closer to those of poor countries than are the

plutocratically-weighted GK prices; these prices are likely to be more relevant for

comparing income levels in poor countries, and will reduce the size of the Gershenkron

effect for the world as a whole.

   If we compare the Paasche index in (6) with the superlative indexes presented earlier,

the latter always averages weights from both countries, whereas the GK and IDB indexes

use only domestic weights, and this is what generates the Gershenkron effect. Goods

from rich countries are often rare and expensive in poor countries, if they exist at all, and

goods which are rare in countries with no taste for them—alcohol in Muslim countries or

English sausages in the US—can be very expensive when they are found at all. If alcohol

                                                17
has a small share in Bangladesh, but a high relative price, weighting that price relative by

Bangladeshi budget shares will understate Bangladeshi prices, while weighting it by

OECD shares will greatly overstate them. The superlative indexes, which combine the

weights, make a compromise that is arguably the best that can be done in the

circumstances.

   Compared with the superlative indexes, GK indexes will tend to understate PPPs in

poor countries relative to rich ones, and thus tend to overstate their living standards. They

make the world look too equal, and understate poverty in the poorest countries. For

analyses of the world distribution of income or of world poverty, this would militate

against using GK indices and in favor of GEKS or even IDB type methods. For work on

growth on or other macroeconomic questions, the additivity properties of GK or IDB may

be more important, and the GK deficiencies may not be serious when the analysis is

dominated by relatively similar rich countries. When such analyses involve poor

countries in a substantial way, it should be borne in mind that the GK international prices

that are used to value their goods and services are biased towards rich country prices,

with the risks that this entails, for example in overvaluing cheap goods and services that

have relatively little domestic value. For these, IDB is worth serious consideration.

   Table 2 illustrates the various indexes for the same selected set of countries as in

Table 1. Column 1 repeats the Laspeyres–Paasche spread as a reminder of where we

would expect the different multilateral indexes to differ; the GEKS indexes are modified

Fisher indexes, while the GK and IDB are modified Paasche indexes and will inherit at

least some of their properties. We also show the bilateral Fisher index with the US as

base, and then our own calculations of the GEKS, GK and IDB indexes using 128 basic



                                             18
headings of GDP, excluding only the trade balance. The final column is the PPP index

from the World Development Indicators 2008, which we shall discuss below.

   There are several points to notice. First, the bilateral Fisher indexes and the GEKS

indexes are usually not far apart, so that the GEKS modification to the bilateral indexes is

not having much effect; there are exceptions such as Chad and Zimbabwe where the

Laspeyres–Paasche spread is large, the data are weak, or both. If this limited difference

holds more generally—as we suspect is the case—the GEKS indexes can be thought of

much as we would think of Fisher indexes. The GK indexes are further away from both

Fisher and GEKS indexes than the latter are from one another. Even so, the differences

are small for similar countries where the Laspeyres–Paasche spread is small, but can

become substantial where the spreads are large, or in other cases where the data are weak,

such as Zimbabwe or Tajikistan. In the worst case—Tajikistan—the GK index is only 55

percent of the GEKS. The ratio of GEKS to GK is 1.056 in Nigeria, which is probably the

worst of the large countries The IDB index is larger than the GK index (countries are

poorer relative to the US numeraire) for all countries in the world except Cyprus; the

Gershenkron effect is consistently less for the IDB than the GK index.

   Second, the GEKS indexes are consistently larger than the GK indexes for the middle

group of largely poor countries. The Gershenkron effect is most apparent here, though we

emphasize that many other factors are at work, most notably differences in consumption

patterns that are not attributable to relative prices, as well as data errors. For the bottom

group, there is no consistent inequality relationship between the GEKS and GK indexes;

the contributions of these countries to world production are now large enough to remove

any consistent Gershenkron effect for countries in the middle of the income distribution.



                                              19
   Third, for the second group of countries, the IDB price indexes are sometimes smaller

and sometimes larger than the GEKS indexes while for the “other important country”

group, the IDB indexes are always larger than the GEKS, so that, with democratic

weighting, the Gershenkron effect has switched direction for the largest middle income

countries.

   Whether these differences are significant depends on the use to which the data are to

be put, on which we shall have more to say below. One illustration comes from looking at

world inequality, or at least the (dominant) between-country component of world

inequality. We compute this from the local currency value of per capita GDP, and deflate

by the three indexes. As predicted, inequality is smaller using the GK PPP; the population

weighted gini coefficient for per capita GDP is 0.533 for EKS, compared with 0.527

using GK. With the IDB index, this Gini is 0.542, even larger than the EKS.



3. Operational issues with major implications for use of the data

3.1 Prices of items, prices of basic headings, and quality

The ICP collects and constructs the prices that go into the formulas, and although we try

to avoid much of the complexity, some understanding of this process is necessary. While

we emphasize operational issues, almost all raise theoretical and conceptual questions.

   We begin with the regional organization of the ICP. Since 1980, the ICP has had a

regional structure; one reason is logistical—local offices can better organize local data

collection—and such a structure also allows the ICP to take advantage of data and

expertise that already exist, for example in Eurostat who produce their own regional PPPs

for other purposes. More substantively, PPP comparisons are almost certainly more



                                             20
reliable between countries that have a similar economic structure, whether through tastes

or conditions of production, so that regional systems of PPPs are probably more reliable

than global systems, indeed the relative reliability of comparisons between close

neighbors is clear from Table 1. In 2005, the ICP was decentralized into Africa, Asia-

Pacific, Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), South America, Western-Asia, and

Eurostat-OECD. In the first stage of the ICP, each region collected prices using its own

detailed list of goods and services. Each of these lists further disaggregates the common

global list of 128 “basic headings” of GDP, “basic headings” being defined as the most

disaggregated level at which there exist matching expenditure data from the national

accounts.

   The detailed prices for the goods and services below the basic heading level were

then used to calculate a regional set of price indexes or parities for each of the basic

headings, as well as a regional set of PPPs. Each region had its own numeraire country,

sometimes a real country—Argentina in South America—and sometimes an imaginary

composite country. At the end of this first stage, the ICP has a set of parities for each

basic heading (sometimes also called PPPs, though they are commodity specific rather

than country-wide PPPs), in which the parity for each good in Argentina (say) is 1, while

for Chile, Brazil, and the other South American countries, there is a parity for each basic

head which can be thought of as the basic-heading specific PPP exchange rate relative to

Argentina. It is these parities that are taken to the formulas in Section 2, with expenditure

data from the national accounts providing the weights, to yield an overall PPP for each

country relative to Argentina. The same is done for each of the regions. Because the lists

are not the same for each region, it is impossible to make direct comparisons between



                                             21
countries in different regions, so that a separate method had to be developed to link the

regions into a global system; this is the “ring” procedure, which is discussed in Section

3.2 below.

   To illustrate from the final set of global calculations, “rice” is one basic heading in

the consumption account. Some country parities for rice from the 2005 round are 4,304

Vietnamese dongs per dollar, 0.65 British pounds per dollar, or 44.6 Kenyan shillings per

dollar. If rice were the only component of consumption (or GDP), these would be the

PPP exchange rates for those countries relative to the US; in fact, the actual consumption

(GDP) PPPs for those countries are 5,920 (4,713) Viet Nam, 0.66 (0.65) UK, and 32.7

(29.5) for Kenya. Clearly, knowledge of the price of one good, or at least one group of

goods, takes us some way, which is why the Economist’s Big Mac index is useful; of

course, relative prices differ greatly from one country to another, which is why the Big

Mac index is far from sufficient (or safe), and the ICP tries to do better by covering all

the expenditures in GDP.

   Below the basic heading level, there are no expenditure or quantity data, so the

detailed prices have to somehow be aggregated up to prices for basic headings without

weights, and the way in which this first-stage is handled turns out to have important

consequences for the end result. As always, this two-stage process parallels the

construction of domestic price indexes, such as the US CPI, where many of the same

issues arise. The formulas for aggregating prices into basic heads differed somewhat from

region to region, but looking at one of the methods is instructive. Suppose that in region

r, for basic head i (these are the same goods and services in Section 2), we have

j  1,..., N ir price quotes for goods within the basic head, e.g. six different kinds of rice,



                                              22
long-grained, short-grained, brown, etc. In the absence of weights, there are combined

into a geometric price index for the basic heading in country c

                                                           1/ Nir
                                              Ni     
                                                   r


                                       pic    pijc                                       (9)
                                              j 1 
                                                     

and the regional parity is given by (9) for c divided by (9) for the numeraire country in

the region. (Note that, because of the structure of (9), these parities are both symmetric

and transitive across countries.) In practice, except for the OECD which uses a somewhat

different method, (9) is replaced by a “country product dummy” (CPD) regression of the

form

                                     ln pijc   ic   cj   ijc                         (10)

in which the logarithms of the price of each variety is projected on to a dummy for the

country,  ic , and a dummy for the variety  cj . For each region, regression (10) is run for

each basic head i, over data pooled over countries and varieties within the basic head for

the regional list. The pic in expression (9)—or divided by pi1 --is then replaced by

exp( ic ) in expression (10)—note that country 1 is the omitted country in (10). When all

the varieties within the basic head are present in all countries, the two procedures are

equivalent. But there are typically many missing values, when some countries are unable

to price all items on the list, and (10) can deal with this, simply by including all available

observations in the regression.

        Note that (10) calculates parities for a basic head for two countries where the

available items within the basic head do not overlap, provided there is at least one other

country with both sets of items; for example, if there are two goods, one of which is



                                                 23
priced in country 1, p11 , one in country 2, p22 , and both in country 3, p13 and p23 , (10)

calculates the parity for 2 relative to 1 as the product of p13 / p11 and p22 / p23 , which is the

parity of 3 relative to one multiplied by the parity of 2 relative to 3, so that transitivity is

used to fill in the blank. It could be argued that this is a “solution” to a problem that ought

not to have one—it is essentially the rice and teff problem of the introduction—and it is

certainly arbitrary in the sense that the parity between two countries depends entirely on

information from third countries.

        We can use these formulas to discuss the difficult issue of what happens when

some goods are “representative” in some countries, but not in others. This is a milder

version of the case where consumption patterns of different countries do not overlap.

Consider two neighboring countries, one of which consumes wheat as its staple, and the

other rice. In the wheat eating country, there is a substantial rice eating minority, and

wheat and rice are easily available at the same price per kilo, p1 (for country 1) say. In

the rice eating country, very few people eat wheat, which is sold in specialty stores in the

capital city at a price per kilo that is four times the price of rice. We thus have p 2 and

4 p 2 for the prices of wheat and rice in country 2. The regional list for the ICP for cereal

contains both rice and wheat, so that when (9) is applied, the price of cereals is p1 in

country 1, and 2 p 2 in country 2, so that the cereal parity is 2 p 2 / p1. Without the

specialty shops, the cereal parity would be p 2 / p1 , which is arguably the right answer.

The underlying problem, of course, is the absence of expenditure weights below the basic

head; if these were available, the unrepresentative consumption would get virtually no

weight, and the calculation would give the right answer.


                                                24
   To deal with the issue of uncommon goods at high prices, Eurostat-OECD and the

CIS developed procedures in which national statisticians judgmentally marked items as

either representative or not representative of consumption in each country, and these

ratings are used to downweight unrepresentative goods in formulas different from but

with the same function as (9) and (10), see World Bank (2008, pp 157–8) for the details

of Eurostat’s procedure. In the 2005 round of the ICP, it was planned to use

representativity-weighting for all of the regions, for example by running weighted

versions of (10), but the responses of countries were not encouraging; for example, all

items priced in a country were often designated representative. As a result, no such

corrections were made for regions outside the OECD and CIS.

   One persistent criticism of ICP rounds prior to 2005 has been that the quality of items

priced has not been strictly enough controlled, so that lower quality items in poor

countries were often matched to higher quality items in rich countries, leading to an

understatement of price levels in poor countries and to an overstatement of their output

and income levels, World Bank (1993). This concern is more pervasive than just the

worry that brain-surgery in Nairobi is unlikely to be identical to brain-surgery in Geneva.

For many goods, the outlets sampled in poor countries may be closer to discount stores

than to the typical outlet in the US or other rich countries. In consequence, successive

rounds of the ICP have developed ever more precise descriptions of the goods to be

priced, leading in 2005 to a formal set of descriptions known as “structured product

descriptions” (SPDs). These SPDs represent a major improvement in the description of

products compared with earlier rounds. They were designed to follow the United Nations

Classification of Individual Consumption According to Purpose, known as COICOP,



                                            25
which made it more probable that countries would use the coding for their own national

purposes. Illustrative examples, here taken from the African regional specifications, are

(a) Nescafé classic: product presentation, tin or glass jar, 100 grams: type, 100%

Robusta: variety, instant coffee, caffeine, not decaffeinated: brand, Nestlé-Nescafé classic

(b) Boubou (item within women’s clothing): product specification, no package, 1 unit:

fibre type, cotton 100%: production, small scale: type, boubou: sleeve length, sleeveless:

fabric design, brocade: details/features, embroidery (c) light bulb: product presentation,

carton, 1 piece: type, regular: power 40 watts: brand name, indicate brand.

   Each region of the ICP has a list of goods, with SPDs, and there are typically many

items within each of the common basic headings. Even within a region, not all countries

can price all items, and some of the regions contain countries at very different levels of

development, or with very different patterns of consumption and relative prices: for

example, the OECD-Eurostat region contains both Japan and Mexico, Africa contains

South Africa, Guinea Bissau, and Tanzania, and Asia Pacific Hong Kong, Taiwan, India,

and Nepal. Given this heterogeneity, the use of SPDs and the more precise definition of

goods is likely to increase the number of missing values in the CPD, as well as the risks

of finding some high and unrepresentative prices as in the rice and wheat example above.

If those non-representative prices are well-distributed across all of the countries in the

region, they may not cause serious distortion, even in the absence of a representativity

correction. The more difficult case, to which we will return in Section 3.2, is when we are

directly comparing rich and poor countries, and the unrepresentative high-end prices are

all in the poor countries. But this is mainly an issue for comparisons between regions, not

within them, and there is no doubt that for the prices of items in the regions, ICP 2005 did



                                             26
a much more thorough job of comparing like with like, of validating prices, and of

involving country participation than in previous world ICP rounds. One caveat concerns

the fact that, as the ICP pricing has evolved from its CPI beginnings, many more SPDs

have been developed for goods than for services, even personal services that can be

bought in shops, in part because quality definition is much harder. Measured at an

average of PPP and local prices, more than half of the countries in the ICP have a share

of expenditures on services in GDP of between 45 and 65 percent, and finding prices for

some of these is much more difficult, an issue to which we return in Section 3.3



3.2 Linking the regions

One of the most difficult issues in the ICP is how to link the regions. Doing so requires

some kind of direct comparisons between rich countries and poor countries, or more

generally between countries whose structures of GDP and relative prices are very

different. In the previous 1993 round, the linking was never satisfactorily completed,

because different regions were linked in different years, because the bridging was done

retrospectively, rather than as part of the original exercise, and because the lists of basic

headings were not comparable across regions. The idea in that round was to work with

“bridge” countries that appeared in more than one region, just as bridge periods are used

to link time-series of prices on different bases. Another major issue was the sensitivity of

the linking to the economic structure of the bridge country, so that in cases where there

was more than one possible bridge country, the results were sensitive to which one was

chosen, as well as to the level (basic heads or whole country) at which the linking was

done. In the 2005 round, the bridging method was replaced by a ring of 18 countries,



                                              27
chosen so that there were two or more in each region, and those countries priced a

specially constructed common ring list of more than 1,000 consumption items; the ring

prices were then used to link the regions. (Although it was not planned in advance,

Russia was treated as a bridge; it was included in both the EU-OECD and CIS regions,

and priced both lists. It was then used to link the two regions into a single EU-OECD-CIS

region with a single set of basic-heading parities and country PPPs relative to one

numeraire.)

    The ring linking follows a procedure proposed by Diewert (2008a). For each basic

head i in country c and region r, the ICP runs a CPD regression of the form

                                ln p ijcr  ln picr   ri   ij   ijcr                (11)

where p ijcr is the ring price of good j within basic heading i in country c of region r. The

prices are converted into the regional numeraire for the relevant basic heading using the

regional basic heading parities picr , and their logarithms projected on to a set of regional

and basic head dummies. The quantity exp( ri ) , which will be unity in the numeraire

region—the omitted region in (11)—is the overall regional parity for basic heading i.

Matching aggregate regional expenditures are calculated from the expenditures for each

basic head in each country converted to each region’s numeraire using the regional basic

heading parities, so that

                                                  Cr
                                          e   eicr / picr
                                           r
                                           i                                               (12)
                                                 c 1



where eicr is the local currency expenditure (quantity times price) on basic head i in

country c in region r, and the basic heading parities picr from the regional calculations are

used to convert these into regional numeraire units. For example, if the region is South
                                                   28
America, (12) is total expenditure in South America on basic heading i in Argentinean

prices. The regional aggregate basic heading expenditures eir from (12), and the regional

aggregate basic heading prices exp(  ri ) are then slotted into the GEKS formula to give a

set of global PPPs for each region. This regional PPP is 1 for the numeraire region, say

OECD-Eurostat within which the US is numeraire, with the other numbers used to scale

up the regional numeraire countries, e.g. Argentina, from 1 to its PPP relative to the US

dollar, which comes directly from the ring GEKS. The global parities for each basic

heading for each country are also calculated as the regional parities scaled by the regional

basic heading parity, exp(  ri ).

    Diewert’s procedure is only one of many possible ways of using the ring prices. For

example, in the African region, the ring countries are Cameroon, Egypt, Kenya, Senegal,

South Africa, and Zambia, and the ring prices can be used to calculate basic heading

parities for this group of countries which are different from the basic heading parities

calculated in the original regional exercise. In effect, (11) privileges the original parities,

discarding the information from the ring prices, except to calculate the regional factors,

exp(  ri ) , in this case for all of Africa. The main reason this was done is to respect the

principle of “fixity,” that the regional parities for each basic heading be incorporated into

the ICP but not be disturbed by them. Starting in the 1980 round with Eurostat, whose

freedom of action is restricted by EU regulation, all regions from 1985 onward made

their participation in the ICP dependent on the condition that their own regional PPPs

were respected in the final calculations. This is essentially a political, not a statistical

constraint—for example, social funds within the EU are distributed on the basis of per



                                               29
capita GDP at PPP—that must be respected by the World Bank in the official ICP

calculations,

   The global parities for the basic headings for each country, which are available to

researchers for further analysis, have one aspect of fixity built into them through equation

(11) and cannot be recalculated—for example by a single global calculation—without

access to the underlying regional data, which are not available. Similarly, the

forthcoming new versions of the PWT must use those parities for the basic headings,

even though it is under no obligation to respect regional fixity in the future, and it has not

done so in the past. But at the very least, not enforcing fixity within regions is one of the

reasons why the PWT differs from other PPP data sets. One calculation is perhaps

instructive. The 128 by 152 matrix of global parities by basic headings and countries can

be used to recalculate a set of GEKS PPPs for all countries in one step, without respect to

regional fixity, and the broad picture shown by these results does not differ much from

the official ICP. However, for some countries the differences are not trivial, for example,

the PPP for China is 6.6 percent lower (real GDP 6.6 percent higher) in a GEKS global

calculation without fixity than in a GEKS two-stage calculation with fixity imposed.

Further experimentation on alternatives to (11) using the ring data—which is also

available to researchers—is clearly be desirable.

   In the limit, if every country were to demand fixity of its price level relative to all

other countries, transitivity would be impossible, and we would not have an international

system of accounts. Actual fixity is less severe, but it also places restrictions on the way

that transitivity is imposed, and so will cause the final global system of PPPs to be further

away from the matrix of pairwise superlative Fisher indexes that would be the basis for



                                             30
an unrestricted calculation for all countries simultaneously. On the other hand, it is also

clear that the Fisher indexes between two countries in different regions, between the US

and Tajikistan, or between Nigeria and Japan, say, are worth less than those between the

US and Canada, or Nigeria and South Africa, see again Table 1, and fixity recognizes this

fact, albeit in a crude way. The PPPs from the ICP, which incorporate the fixity

constraints, are listed in the final column of Table 2. For several of the countries, these

estimates are outliers relative to the other indexes shown. This is true, not only where it is

to be expected, in the countries with very large Laspeyres-Paasche spreads, but also in

some of the important countries in the bottom panel. For example, the PPP for China in

the ICP is more than ten percent higher than the EKS or bilateral Fisher index, while that

for India is 7.5 percent higher. These results are somewhat puzzling given the EKS basis

of the Asian numbers, more so than the also large difference for Nigeria, where the ICP

does not use the EKS method. We suspect that the interaction of the productivity

adjustment (discussed in Section 3.4 below) and the regional aggregation may be largely

responsible for the differences. It is perhaps also worth noting that the use of the PPPs

from the ICP also has a mild positive effect on measures of inequality between countries;

the population weighted gini coefficient of GDP per head, which was 0.533 and 0.527 for

the EKS and GK becomes 0.580 using the ICP official data.

    Perhaps the most difficult aspect of linking the regions is not the fixity constraint, but

the fact that the ring must price identical items in all of the countries. In addition to the

six African countries already listed, the ring included the UK, Japan, Slovenia, and

Estonia from the Eurostat-CIS region, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Philippines, and Sri Lanka

from Asia-Pacific, Brazil and Chile from South America, and Jordan and Oman from



                                              31
Western Asia. It is clearly a considerable challenge to develop a list of more than a

thousand items to be priced in all countries in such a group. It is also here that we face the

sharpest tradeoff between, on the one hand, matching quality by pricing identical items

using the detailed SPDs and, on the other, risking the high price unrepresentative good

problem by pricing rich country goods in poor countries. Note too that (11), like (9) and

(10), aggregates item prices up to basic heads, so that there are no expenditure weights,

nor is there any representativity correction to offset prices collected in the occasional

high-end shops that are added to the list of usual CPI outlets for ICP purposes.

   Again, to illustrate, ring items that were successfully priced in Cameroon included

frozen shrimp (Fish basic heading: 90-120 shrimp per kilo, pre-packed, peeled),

Bordeaux red wine (Wine basic heading: Bordeaux supérieure, with state certification of

origin and quality, alcohol content 11-13%, vintage 2003 or 2004, with region and wine

farmer listed), Heineken (Beer basic heading: 0.33 to 0.5 liter bottle), and a frontloading

washing machine (Major household appliances whether electric or not basic heading:

capacity 6 kg, energy efficiency class A, Electronic program selection, free selectable

temperature, spin speed up to 1200 rpm, medium cluster well-known brand such as

Whirlpool.) If the expenditure share of wine in Cameroon is small, the choice of items

within it is not very important, though recall that the GEKS calculations begin from

bilateral Fisher indexes that use weights from both countries, so that the price of wine in

Cameroon will attract some of the much larger French weight on wine. However, if

almost everyone in Cameroon drinks local beer (and domestic lager beer is an item in the

ring list), the calculated parity for beer will give the same weight to Heineken as to the

domestic beer, which will help overstate the price level in Cameroon, and help understate



                                             32
the size of its economy. (Note that working only with domestic beer does not resolve the

problem if domestic beer in Cameroon is of lower quality than domestic beer in Germany

or the Czech Republic.) The same considerations apply to the basic heading for

appliances. It is perhaps not surprising therefore that, when country parities are calculated

using only the ring data, Cameroon’s price level—the ratio of its PPP to market exchange

rate—was higher than that of the much richer Hong Kong. This may be more accurate as

an estimate of the relative costs of a Hong Kong businessman posted to Cameroon than

as an estimate of the relative costs of living in the two countries.

   Our intent here is to highlight the inherent difficulty of making price index

comparisons, not to criticize the ICP procedures in 2005, which were vastly better than

those in earlier rounds. Indeed, the clarity of these pricing problems in the 2005 round is

itself a compliment to the quality of the data collected, and the range of countries

covered. In this respect, the regional structure and the fixity requirement might actually

be helpful, because (11) makes the minimum use of the ring prices, using them only to

link the regions, so that the ring prices enter into the final calculations only through the

estimates of exp(  ir ). Even so, there is a conflict between the search for more precise

quality matching, on the one hand, and representativity on the other, and this is not

resolvable without expenditure weights below the basic heading level or, more

fundamentally, a better developed theoretical idea of what we mean by a comparison of

the cost-of-living between Cameroon and Hong Kong, or Oman and Japan. In the

meantime, we judge it likely that the ring comparisons in 2005 have overstated the price

level in the poorer regions, and have thus exaggerated the inequality of PPP per capita

incomes between rich and poor countries, certainly compared with previous rounds, and


                                              33
probably compared with better measures. But this judgment is far from solidly

established on the current evidence, see also Deaton (2010).



3.3 China, India and other large countries

Until 2005, China had never participated in a full ICP round, though China did participate

in a limited comparison in the 1993 ICP between Beijing and Hong Kong under the

regional coordination of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific,

ESCAP (1999). Consequently in all versions of the PWT to date, the Chinese numbers

were estimated using partial information and shortcut methods. India, which also

participated in 2005, had not previously done so since 1985, and its prices since then

have been estimated by a mixture of updating and regression methods of the kind

described in Section 4 below. The estimates for both India and China, whether in the

PWT, or other PPP databases, are therefore relatively uncertain compared with more

recently benchmarked countries. The Chinese and Indian data from the 2005 round,

which will be incorporated into version 7.0 of the Penn World Table, are therefore of

more than usual interest. Discussion of China and India also brings up an important

general issue, which is differences in prices across space, both between different cities,

and between urban and rural sectors within a country. In principle, prices for the ICP are

national average prices, but in practice, rural prices are not always collected, something

that is a more serious issue in large economies than in small ones.

   We start with China, where the 2005 price levels are much higher than previously

projected, so that there is an immediate question whether prices were overstated through

some combination of choice of brand, outlet or location, though it is also possible that the



                                             34
data underlying the previous price projections were understated. Price collection by

China in 2005 took place in 11 cities and in their immediately surrounding areas which

are mostly urban, but with some rural characteristics. Apart from these, no rural prices

were collected. Reported price differences between the 11 cities or between the cities and

their surrounding rural areas were not reported, but they were apparently not large.

Because the Chinese expenditure data refer to the whole country, the Asian Development

Bank (ADB), which was the relevant regional authority, corrected the collected Chinese

prices to put them on an all-China basis. The ADB convened an Expert Group (Asian

Development Bank, 2006) who decided to make no adjustment of the 11 city prices,

though it did weight the 11 city prices according to the expenditures of the provinces to

which they assigned on the basis of clustering of census characteristics. This adjustment

takes no account of possible differences between urban and rural prices.

   That urban prices are substantially higher than rural prices has been documented by

Loren Brandt and Carsten A. Holz (2006, Table 7), Shaohua Chen and Martin Ravallion

(2008) and by Cathy Honge Gong and Xing Meng (2008). Chen and Ravallion also note

that the Chinese National Bureau of Statistics chose the 11 cities because they were most

likely to have outlets carrying the types of products and brands in the ICP specifications,

and those prices are likely to be unrepresentatively high. The provinces in which the 11

cities were located had rural and urban incomes substantially above the all China average,

suggesting that there would be regional price differences. In addition, the counties in

which the 11 cities are included provided poverty claims to their residents that were 50

percent higher than the national average. Taking the various estimates together, we think

a conservative adjustment would be to treat the urban prices as collected in the 2005 ICP



                                            35
as 20 percent higher than national prices. Taking into account the distribution of

consumption between urban and rural areas, this adjustment would raise estimates of

Chinese GDP in 2005 by about 10 percent.

   Do similar spatial differences exist in other large countries? Bettina Aten (2006)

reports that for the 38 urban centers used by the US for the CPI the differences between

small southern urban areas and San Francisco are large, 80 versus 130 percent of the US

average in 2003. From more than a million collected prices, Aten is able to obtain about

25,000 annual average price observations for 256 entry-level items collected by the BLS

and uses these to estimate price level differences over all of consumption. This is a rich

data set that has now been updated annually up to 2007 with similar findings, so that we

can be fairly certain that the range across US urban areas is around 60 percent, suggesting

that for China, where spatial price differences are almost certainly larger, a 20 percent

downward adjustment is conservative. Aten also finds that the gradient of prices from

low to high is not large for goods, but it is much steeper for services, a common finding

of previous rounds of the ICP across countries. Unfortunately, it is service items like

housing, medical, and personal services that have not been surveyed or measured very

well in the ICP, nor in the expenditure surveys that underlie many of the studies of

Chinese price differences.

   There is a clear problem for the ICP in comparing large versus small countries. If all

countries had the same ratio of urban to rural prices, the PPPs based on urban samples of

prices would be the same as those for national prices. For Belize, Bermuda, Hong Kong,

Luxembourg or Singapore, the frame of outlets for the CPI covers the country and

provides a good basis for the ICP. But this is much less true for large countries, at least



                                             36
for those that have a substantial share of their population and transactions in rural areas.

Not only are large parts of these countries not covered in the CPI, but the sample of

outlets is typically not well suited to the ICP’s lists of items—the problem of comparable

goods once again. In consequence the degree to which large developing countries rely

mainly on urban prices varies greatly across countries. India has a long tradition of

collecting rural and small center prices, while Brazil, Indonesia, Pakistan and Thailand

have typically collected urban prices. Even in India, the usual outlets for collection of

rural prices would not typically include outlets in smaller regional centers where some of

the ICP items are more likely to be available.

   In proposing that Chinese prices should be adjusted it is recognized that this might

not be appropriate for comparisons with other Asian countries that primarily rely on city

prices, and it is these comparisons that most concern the ADB, for example. However,

comparisons of China with the G-20 countries are also an important dimension of the

global ICP and for this purpose a downward adjustment of Chinese national prices seems

appropriate. The general problem of large countries providing estimates of national

average prices remains a problem to which resources will be put in the 2011 ICP round



3.4 Comparison resistant items: housing and government services

The ICP uses the term “comparison resistant” to refer to goods and services for which it

is difficult or impossible to observe market prices that can be compared across countries.

Examples are housing rental, government services, health, and education. Measurement

of these is problematic for the national accounts within countries, but becomes still more

hazardous in international comparisons. We focus on services provided by government



                                             37
and services from the housing stock, but will have something to say about health and

education too. Many macroeconomists using these data may be interested only in

aggregates such as national income or consumption, and not in these items for their own

sake. But the measurement problems for these items are large enough to have major

effects on the larger aggregates; indeed we suspect that the largest single factor

responsible for the decline in the relative size of the Indian and Chinese economies is a

change in the treatment of government services.

   How does one compare the output of civil servants and health and education workers

across countries? Within countries over time, national accounts deflate nominal salaries

to a quantity basis by making assumptions about changes in the productivity of the

relevant workers. Similarly, in the ICP, assumptions about differential productivity across

space fill in for the missing prices. In past ICP rounds, volumes were derived by dividing

compensation by a PPP derived from a detailed comparison of salaries for occupations

typical of government staff expenditures. Such an assumption implies that productivity in

the provision of these services is identical across countries in a given occupation, which

is unlikely given very different amounts of accompanying capital per worker across

countries. Further, there is little inducement to organize the work environment to improve

productivity of employees in administrative, health and education services in very low-

wage economies.

   In the 2005 benchmark, the range of countries was much greater than in previous

rounds, so that the consequences of the equal-productivity assumption loomed much

larger. In Asia for example, salaries for government health workers measured at market

exchange rates are 120 times larger in Hong Kong than in Laos; similar differences exist



                                             38
between Yemen and Kuwait in the Western Asia region. If we assume that productivity is

the same, per capita volumes of these comparative-resistant services in Yemen or Laos

greatly exceed those of its richer neighbors, an improbable finding. The situation in

Tajikistan is similar and helps account for its large Paasche-Laspeyres spread in Table 1.

Such adjustments have been considered earlier by the OECD and the ICP, but the 2005

comparisons in the Asia-Pacific, Africa, and Western Asia regions are the first actual

cases where the equal productivity assumption has been significantly modified.

Productivity differences in OECD-Eurostat, CIS, and South America were not dealt with,

either because they were thought to be too small to warrant it or because there was no

agreement on how the correction should be made.

    Irving B. Kravis, Heston and Summers (1982, Chapter 5) discussed comparison

resistant services for 34 benchmark countries in 1975. A comparison was made between

the PPPs for priced services and non-priced services, based on input prices. Priced

services were higher than non-priced services in low income countries with the

relationship reversed in higher income countries. The OECD considered using this

relationship to estimate PPPs for non-priced services, but eventually decided against it

partly because many countries did not price enough market services. The OECD also

considered making productivity adjustments on the basis of reference PPPs but could not

agree on a procedure. In the 2011 ICP the OECD will make estimates of educational

output based on students at various educational levels with some quality adjustment

based on standardized tests. For rounds beyond 2011 they have begun research on the

health sector.




                                            39
   In the 2005 ICP, Asia, West Asia and Africa made productivity adjustments based on

estimates of capital per worker in each economy as a whole. In Asia, for example, this

has meant that the volume of GDP of China and India relative to Hong Kong or

Singapore is lower than in previous ICP rounds. For example, government services per

capita in China are 54.9 percent of Hong Kong without the productivity adjustment and

24.2 percent of Hong Kong without it. There is therefore a comparability issue across

regions in 2005 because Europe, the OECD, the CIS, and South America made no such

adjustments. Further, because capital per worker data were not available for many

countries, it was often necessary to apply the same adjustment factor to low- income

countries that were at different stages of development. The actual procedure used is

described in the final Reports of Asian region and the ICP as a whole, Asian

Development Bank (2007) and World Bank (2008a).

   The productivity adjustment is clearly in the right direction relative to earlier

benchmarks which attributed too large a volume of such services to poorer countries and

biased upwards their PPP converted GDPs. However, the particular procedure was based

upon limited information applied uniformly over groups of countries within each region,

so there is an unknown, but likely significant error associated with the actual adjustments,

even for countries within the same region. Further the adjustments in Africa and West

Asia were each calibrated differently than for Asian countries. What does this mean for

comparing the 2005 results to previous benchmarks? In previous benchmarks, the volume

of administrative, health and education services for very low wage countries in Africa,

Asia, and Western Asia would have been substantially lowered if the 2005 procedure had




                                             40
been adopted in those earlier years. The earlier procedures have thus artificially

compressed the distribution of income between countries.

   The large decline in the size of the Chinese economy in 2005 compared with earlier

benchmarks is in part attributable to the way that the productivity adjustment interacts

with the requirement that regional parities be respected. The productivity correction in

Asia changes China relative to Hong Kong or Singapore, but this correction can only

have limited effect given regional fixity within the Asia Pacific region. If we remove

fixity and calculate a global GEKS for all 146 countries, we introduce direct comparisons

between compensation in colective government, education and health in China and in

countries such as the US. A one-step GEKS calculation reduces the price level in China

by 12 percent compared with the official ICP, about half of which is attributable to fixity,

and the rest to other features of the ICP calculation. Our adjustment for rural prices

discussed in Section 3.3 above reduces the Chinese price level by another 12 percent, so

that the two adjustments together account for about half of the “shrinkage” in the size of

China relative to estimates prior to the 2005 ICP. Of the remaining half, some should be

attributed to the productivity adjustment itself (rather than its interaction with fixity), and

some to weaker data prior to the 2005 round. Of course the productivity adjustment is

also subject to a good deal of guesswork, so that we are not exactly on firm ground in

making these comparisons.

   What is the consequence for the 2005 comparison of the mixed application of an

adjustment for productivity in some regions and not in others? Certainly Asian GDP

(excluding Korea and Japan) was reduced compared to the OECD countries (here

including Korea and Japan) as a consequence of the productivity adjustment. This would



                                              41
also affect the comparisons of Asian countries with countries like Brazil, Mexico and

many eastern European countries where the productivity adjustment was not carried out.

This is not an argument against a productivity adjustment, though the actual

implementation was perhaps insufficiently tailored to country specifics. But a knowledge

of the actual adjustment helps us better understand why the position of China and India

has changed so much in the recent round. And it certainly points to the need to gain

agreement on a standard method of treating un-priced services for future rounds.

   Another important comparison-resistant component of GDP is rental of housing,

including both actual rents and the imputed rents of owner-occupiers. The share of

housing rent in GDP is about 10 percent in the US, 9 percent in the UK, but only 4.7

percent in India, 2.2 percent in Nigeria, and an incredible 0.5 percent in Ghana; some of

these differences are likely to reflect difficulties in measuring rent in the national

accounts, or failure to make an imputation for owner-occupier rents.

   Prior to 2005, ICP comparisons were based on surveys of rents, which allowed

market rent comparisons for various size and amenity groups of housing and, assuming

rental equivalence, for owner occupied housing. The EU and OECD countries used a

similar survey approach until their expanding memberships included countries that were

not suitable for surveys of market rents. A new member country might have a small

expatriate community that paid market rents, and if other rentals existed, they were

subsidized. The approach of the EU for such countries was to make direct comparisons of

quality-adjusted volumes of housing, the “quantity” as opposed to the “survey” approach,

and to find a link member country or countries, initially Austria, that would both survey

rents and provide quantity information on their housing stock. Of course, other countries



                                              42
had faced similar problems earlier, including those with rural housing stocks that are

rarely if ever rented and had adopted a range of methods.

   For the 2005 comparison the plan was to use both a quantity and survey approach or

some combination in other regions. In practice the quantity approach was used in South

America, and a combination in Western Asia. In Asia, however, neither approach

appeared feasible for all countries so measurement was effectively abandoned in favor of

the assumption that the per capita volume of housing services for each country was the

same proportion of the world average volume of housing services as was the remainder of

actual household consumption. The same approach was adopted in Africa. One

consequence is that it is not meaningful to compare housing volumes in any country in

Asia and Africa with a country in the other regions. Another is the bizarre consequence in

countries, like Ghana, whose national accounts show little expenditure on rents. In these

cases, the PPP for the rental category is calculated by dividing a very small number by a

relatively large one, so that the parity for this basic heading is wildly out of line with the

overall PPP. For Ghana, the parity for the rental heading is 178, less than 5 percent of the

overall PPP of 3721. This is an extreme case, but there are others that are almost as

extreme; Malawi also has a ratio of 5 percent, and Chad a ratio of 6.9 percent. Although

the local (Ghana, Chad, Malawi) expenditure weights attached to these prices are also

very small, the same is not true of the countries with which they are compared in

calculating the bilateral Fisher indexes that go into the PPPs. For the three countries

listed, their overall PPPs are reduced by close to ten percent comparing PPPs with and

without the rental category, and the size of their estimated incomes inflated by the same




                                              43
amount. Perhaps this is not very large given the overall quality of African GDP data, but

it is worth bearing in mind.

   We shall not discuss health and education here, but there is an associated issue that

might not be familiar to all economists. The most recent versions of the United Nations’

System of National Accounts (SNA), adopt a definition of household consumption,

referred to as “actual consumption” which includes services provided for households by

government and non-governmental organizations, including health and education. From a

national accounts perspective, this makes a certain amount of sense, because it prevents

the size of consumption depending on the extent to which health and education are

publically or privately provided. However, there are many countries around the world

where government-provided health and education is inefficient, sometimes involving

mass absenteeism by teachers and health workers, Nazmul Chaudhury, Jeffrey Hammer,

Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan and Halsey Rogers (2006), so that such “actual”

consumption is anything but actual. To count the salaries of AWOL government

employees as “actual” benefits to consumers adds statistical insult to original injury. The

more traditional concept of household consumption, is sometimes presented—though

sometimes hard to find—and is typically labeled “individual consumption expenditures

by households” or some other term not containing the word “actual.”



4. Filling in over space and over time

Since the ICP was begun in 1968, there has been an interest in covering non-benchmark

countries, and PWT was launched to serve that interest. In addition the international

agencies wish to cover as many of their member countries as possible. A brief discussion



                                            44
of filling in non-benchmark estimates is given in section 4.1. This involves both spatial

and temporal extrapolation. Section 4.2 is about the extent to which successive revisions

of the PWT are compatible, and reports important lessons from recent research. In these

subsections, we give most attention to the PWT, since it has been most heavily used in

economic research, and because it is the only one of the databases that provides a long

time series of disaggregated national accounts for the world as a whole. (Similar data for

Europe and the OECD, stretching back to 1980, and including some higher frequency

data—quarterly and monthly—come from the Eurostat-OECD PPP program. The World

Bank’s World Development Indicators and the IMF World Economic Outlook also

provide PPP related numbers for member countries for GDP and some of its

components.)



4.1 Non-benchmark countries and updating over time

When non-benchmark estimates were launched in the mid 1970s the number of

benchmark countries was only 16. In 2005 there are 146 benchmark countries, so the

number of non-benchmark countries is about 40, many of which are in the Caribbean

which was the only significant country grouping that did not participate. Different

databases use different imputation procedures for the countries without data, although all

rely on the strong positive relationship between national income and the price level of

GDP, defined as the ratio of the PPP to the market exchange rate. Poorer countries are

relatively richer in PPP terms, proximately because non-tradable goods are cheap where

wages are cheap, and more fundamentally, because of the Balassa-Samuelson conjecture,

that rich countries are relatively more productive in the traded-goods sector. Figure 1



                                            45
shows this relationship for the 2005 round, plotting the logarithm of the price level of

GDP, with the US as 0, against the logarithm of GDP per capita expressed in market

exchange rates; the heteroskedasticity in the Figure may reflect data quality as much as

failure of Balassa-Samuelson at low incomes. Each country is plotted with a circle whose

diameter is proportional to population size; the gross outlier here is Zimbabwe. The PWT

uses the log of the price level of domestic absorption as the dependent variable and adds,

in addition to the logarithm of GDP per capita, direct (although admittedly imperfect)

information on prices taken from foreign-posting cost of living adjustment indexes from

the International Civil Service Commission (ICSC), as well as from the US and Canadian

foreign offices, and an openness to trade variable that captures involvement in

international financial flows, and regional dummies for Africa and the OECD. The

World Bank, subsequent to the 2005 round, improved their approach, and these improved

results are now incorporated into the WDI, Changqing Sun and Eric Swanson (2009).

   The filling-in of non-benchmarked countries is today a much smaller problem than it

has been in the past, and should be an even smaller issue in the 2011 round whose

coverage will be larger still. However, even now there is a six year gap between the most

recent and next ICP, and the gaps in the past have been larger. Years between

benchmarks are filled in by extrapolation of country parities. The World Bank’s

calculations typically update the PPP exchange rates in the simplest way possible, using

the domestic rates of inflation relative to the United States. Hence, if the PPP of country c

at benchmark t is x units of local currency per dollar, the consumption PPP in year t  k

is given by

                               xt  k  xt .( Pt c k / Pt c ) / ( Pt1 k / Pt1 )          (13)


                                                     46
where Pt c is the domestic price level in country c at time t, and country 1 is the numeraire

country, in this case the US. The domestic price level will be the price deflator of GDP if

we are updating the PPP for GDP, or the CPI if we are updating the PPP for

consumption. In general, (13) will not match the new benchmark for many reasons,

including the facts that the items priced in domestic price indexes do not match the

international lists in the ICP, that local and ICP prices often have different geographical

coverage, and that (13) is unilateral (or bilateral relative to the US) not multilateral, as in

the benchmark.

    In the PWT, updating according to (13) is carried out separately for consumption,

investment, and government expenditure. These trial PPPs are then combined their

corresponding current price expenditures and a new (multilateral) Geary-Khamis

aggregation is carried out. The net foreign balance in current prices is converted at the

PPP for domestic absorption and added to domestic absorption to obtain GDP.

    The PWT provides two distinct constant price (say 2000—this “reference” year need

not be an ICP benchmark year) GDP series, a fixed weight index, and a chain weighted

index which differ in the way that they are updated. The fixed weight index uses the

share of C, I, and G in the reference years as the weights applied to national constant

price growth rates for each of these expenditure aggregates; this is equivalent to growing

each component of GDP at its local real growth rate, and adding. This fixed-weight

procedure becomes less attractive the older the benchmark, which is the reason for the

chain weighted index. This applies the current price weights of the year t as described in

the previous paragraph to the growth of C, I and G between t and t  1. This provides an

estimate of the growth rate of domestic absorption between t and t  1 which can then be


                                              47
applied to domestic absorption in year t in constant (2000) prices. These procedures,

together with (alternative) treatments of the net foreign balance, are discussed in more

detail in Summers and Heston (1991, 343–44), and also in Simon Johnson, William

Larson, Chris Papageorgiou, and Arvind Subramanian (2009). It should be noted that

neither of the methods used in PWT for handling the foreign balance are fully satisfactory

and indeed trade is an important area for future improvement in both the ICP and PWT.

   A final issue worth noting is the treatment of the formerly communist countries of

Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Until events of 1990-91, PWT followed the

prevailing practice of making estimates for “market economies”, and treating “non

market economies” separately. Several of the latter, Hungary, Poland, Romania and

Yugoslavia had participated in the ICP, but their constant price national accounts were

not in a form that could be moved to non-benchmark years. The European non market

economies and occasionally Cuba, though never China, had been carrying out purchasing

power comparisons since the 1960s under the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance

(aka COMECON) making binary comparisons with the Soviet Union. These studies were

not officially published until the last comparison for 1990, but they appeared in journals

and were the basis of the early treatment in PWT.

   The integration of estimates of these countries into PWT began with PWT 5.6.

However, there were major obstacles for those COMECON countries that had not

previously recast their national accounts from the Material Products System into the SNA

form. Further, price indexes over time for many of these countries were particularly

difficult because the movement from administered to market prices posed a major data

collection problem because there did not exist any framework for collecting prices in the



                                            48
field. Hungary and Poland were well equipped for the transition, but to varying degrees

the quality of data is uneven; those former Soviet Union (FSU) and Eastern European

countries now members or associates of the EU have the most reliable data for ICP and

PWT purposes. An exception would be those areas affected by the break-up of

Yugoslavia. The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and its statistical office

CISSTAT (the former COMECON secretariat in Moscow) now coordinates PPP and

other studies for the nine member countries. Russia, which also participates directly in

OECD PPP studies, has a strong statistical apparatus, while the other countries are quite

mixed as is illustrated by the case of Tajikistan in Tables 1 and 2. Further the constant

price national accounts series for the COMECON countries are all much more reliable

after the mid to late 1990s than earlier, with Hungary and Poland as (positive) exceptions.



4.2 Is PWT consistent across versions?

In his Principles of Economics, Marshall began with a variation of the Latin proverb,

natura non facit saltum, there are no jumps in nature. Reviews of studies based on

different versions of PWT raise questions about whether some of the jumps in PWT are

real or rather in the nature of PWT’s construction. As PPP estimates have evolved over

the years the underlying data-base of PWT has also been revised. New benchmark

estimates bring in additional countries and revised estimates for multiple benchmark

countries. As we have seen from the discussion of the 2005 round of the ICP, substantial

methodological changes continue to be made. National accounts are subject to revisions,

and changing reference years of PWT also introduces elements of non-comparability

between different versions of PWT. Users have been advised of these changes with each



                                             49
update of PWT, but it is not always clear that the advice has been heeded. Figure 2

provides some evidence from a comparison of versions 6.1 and 6.2 of the PWT. These

show annual growth rates of real chained per capita GDP, computed over ten year

periods, starting in 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990, with 6.1 on the horizontal axis, and 6.2

on the vertical axis. Although most countries cluster close to the 45-degree line, there are

a substantial number of revisions, particularly in the decade beginning in 1970, and

particularly—but by no means exclusively—for African countries. As we might expect,

revisions are greater for the poorer countries. The decade beginning 1950, and not shown

here, had very little revision between the two rounds.

      Work by Johnson, Larson, Papageorgiou and Subramanian (2009, hereafter JLPS)

sheds some light on the consequences of these revisions. One issue is differences in

growth rates between PWT versions. Annual growth rates of GDP based on the chain

series were compared by JLPS from PWT 6.1 and 6.2 for 40, 10 and annual intervals.

Why would they differ? The discussion above suggests the main reasons: weights for

growth of C, I and G change for both the fixed and chain indexes, national accounts are

revised and rebased, and new benchmark information becomes available. Quoting JLPS

(2009, p.7), “One basic aspect of data variability between PWT revisions—namely that it

increases when the data are at higher frequency—becomes evident when we compute the

growth rate over 1-, 10-, and 29--year periods.” Differences are lower for high-income

countries, and larger for both low and middle-income countries, which is parallel with the

grades assigned to country data quality in PWT.

   Do these growth differences between versions of PWT make a difference? JLPS

undertook an extensive literature search and replicated 13 published papers using



                                             50
alternative versions to those used by the authors from PWT 5.6, PWT 6.1 and PWT 6.2.

The guidelines that emerge are:

      SAFE: Studies that mainly use long-term growth, 40 year intervals, are fairly

       robust with respect to use of any of the above versions of PWT. This may also be

       true for 10 year intervals, or at least the conclusions of such studies do not appear

       dependent on which version of PWT is used.

      SAFE: Use of annual growth rates for the A and B grade countries is safe.

      NOT SAFE: It is not safe to use annual growth rates from different versions of

       PWT for non-OECD countries.

      NOT SAFE: Different versions of PWT are not robust for dynamic analysis at

       annual frequencies.

    A recent paper by Antonio Ciccone and Marek Jarocinski (2009) (CJ) identifies

another type of analysis for which revisions in the PWT are a serious problem. These are

attempts based on automatic model selection procedures to have the data choose which

variables should appear in growth regressions. CJ apply these procedures to version 6.2

and 6.1 and obtain very different variables; in one of their experiments, the two data sets

disagree on 13 out of 23 growth determinants, some of which are widely used in the

literature. When they restrict the range of variables over which selection is possible, the

results are a good deal more robust, if not perfectly so. These experiments may tell us as

much or more about the failings of statistical model selection than about the failings of

the PWT. Such procedures have are sensitive to small changes in the data that makes

them unsuited for use with the PWT, none of which implies that the data are not well-

suited to answering better-structured or more theoretically informed questions.


                                            51
   This brings us to the problem of integrating the new view of the world economy in

the 2005 ICP with the older view in the WDI and PWT. The World Bank will simply

begin anew with ICP 2005 and not consider earlier ICP rounds in future WDIs and other

publications. When ICP 2011 is completed there will be a problem of reconciling the two

rounds but until then, WDI extrapolations will be done at the GDP level. As far as PWT

is concerned, the plan is to present a reasonable view of the world economy in 2005 and

to move that backward and forward in time. The work of JLPS suggests that PWT should

follow standard national statistical practice and provide a consistent set of accounts on a

2005 base in PWT 7.0, with full incorporation of the 2005 ICP. The JLPS research also

suggests that more alternatives need to be considered for updating and backdating the

PWT numbers through time. They also suggest that more consideration be given to

earlier rounds of the ICP going back perhaps as far 1970; they argue that each round of

ICP captures the structure of quantities and prices in that year across a spectrum of world

countries. Finding a way to integrate these unique data sets across benchmarks, as will

also need to be done when the 2011 round is complete, would be make a major

contribution to our understanding of the growth process. It is easier to agree with this

conclusion than to decide exactly how to implement it.

   For the reasons already discussed, the results of ICP 2005 will not be woven into

PWT 7.0 without adjustment. For example, the fixity restrictions will not be respected,

and some preliminary analysis suggests that this will make a marked difference to some

of the PPPs, see again Table 2. Other possible adjustments include modifications for the

special character of Chinese prices, the lack of comparability of non-priced goods and

services across the regions, and presentation of alternative aggregation methods. What



                                             52
can be said is that because of ICP 2005 there is a much richer data set available for those

researchers interested in differences of economic structure and income across countries

than has been available until now.



5. Conclusions

This summary of PPPs in both the ICP and the Penn World Table has covered only a

fraction of the issues that go into the construction of these data. An example of an

important omission is the unsatisfactory treatment of exports and imports, an issue that is

unresolved, in the ICP, the PWT or other data, see Feenstra, Heston, Marcel P. Timmer

and Haiyen Deng (2009) Experience suggests that it is hard to know in advance which

features of the data are likely to be decisive for which purpose, or which particular detail

will be responsible for some new or potentially interesting finding. Perhaps the

overriding message is to exercise caution, particularly with comparisons between

countries whose economies are very different, and particularly with the national accounts

data provided by countries whose statistical capacity is weak. On the former, there are

deep conceptual difficulties that cannot be resolved by collecting better data. On the

latter, it must always be remembered that the international accounts are no better than the

national accounts of the participating countries. The quality ratings in the PWT contain

useful information that should be more heavily used.

   There are also some specific health warnings that are worth emphasizing. One is

about index numbers, and the general point that price indexes are not prices. Although

most economists know that different price indexes give different answers, the comfort

that comes from thinking that it matters little in practice is a strictly domestic comfort



                                             53
that does not always travel well. Differences between Paasche and Laspeyres indexes are

sometimes very large in the ICP, and these extend to differences between EKS and GK

aggregations that are used by different agencies, see again Tables 1 and 2. Second, given

the regional structure of the ICP, it is always worth taking into account the possibility that

the regions are not comparable in some important respect. Regional dummies are often

included in growth regressions for substantive reasons—or as an admission of

ignorance—but there are also statistical reasons for including them, or even, when

possible, treating the regions separately. Third, there are particular reasons for caution in

using the data for countries of the CIS and the former Soviet Union. Fourth, some

important components of GDP, including government services, health care, education,

construction, and the rental of housing, are extremely difficult to compare across

countries, and are often handled by sensible, but more or less arbitrary assumptions. Not

only is it dangerous to rely on the benchmark estimates for these items, but their

treatment can affect overall PPPs between countries, or even regions.

   Researchers have a wide range of data sources. The World Bank’s WDI contain time-

series for GDP in current and constant international dollars, but not for the other

components of the national accounts. Eurostat provides PPP accounts for Europe and the

OECD, with GK versions following the EKS data with a one year lag. Time series data

go back to 1980 in some cases, and there are some data at higher than annual frequency.

For researchers who do not need data from Asia, Africa, or Latin America, these are

worth serious consideration. The PWT, on which we have focused, is essentially the only

option for long time series containing the main variables of the national accounts.




                                             54
   We end with a warning. Successive editions of the ICP have tended to revise upward

the PPPs of poor countries relative to those of rich, even in the same year. Closer

comparability of the goods and services to be priced is one of the reasons; most recently,

more appropriate assumptions about the productivity of government workers has had the

same effect. In particular, successive revisions have tended to make India and China

poorer than the previous revision, though by no means at the same rate. For several years,

in spite of China’s much more rapid growth, the ratio of Chinese to Indian per capita

GDP did not rise by as much as would seem warranted, leading to suspicions that the

government of China wished simultaneously to exaggerate its growth rate and to

understate its level of per capita GDP, see T. N. Srinivasan (1994, p.10). The recent

(apparent) shrinkage of both India and China in the 2005 ICP has provoked similar

concerns, most notably from Surjit Bhalla (2008), a long-time critic of the World Bank.

Using the numbers here, a version of Bhalla’s argument is as follows. The 2005 estimate

of Chinese per capita GDP at 2005 international dollars is $4,091. According to the

PWT6.2, which is based on the Chinese official data, China grew at 5.52 percent a year

from 1952 to 2004; at this rate, GDP per capita in 1952 would have been $279 in 2005

international dollars, or $153 at 1985 international dollars converted using the US CPI.

Pritchett (1997) has persuasively argued that approximately $250 in 1985 international

dollars is the minimum level of per capita GDP that is required to sustain a population, or

that has ever been observed for more than a short period. If so, it is simply not possible

that both the current PPP estimate of Chinese GDP and the official growth rates of the

economy can be correct. On the latter, Maddison (2007) estimates Chinese GDP growth

since 1952 at “only” 4.4 percent a year, but this still leads to $229 in 1985 international



                                             55
dollars, still below Pritchett’s cutoff. Reducing the PPP by twenty percent or so, as

suggested in Section 3.4 above, would bring this number into a somewhat more plausible

range. More broadly, the point remains that many of these numbers have substantial

uncertainty, and that extrapolations over long periods can easily lead to results that make

no sense.



References

Afriat, Sydney, 1967, “The construction of utility functions from expenditure data,”
   International Economic Review, 8(1), 67–77.
Afriat, Sydney, 1972, “The theory of international comparisons of real income and
   prices,” in D. J. Daly, ed., International comparisons of prices and output,
   Proceedings of the conference at York University, Toronto, New York, National
   Bureau of Economic Research, 13–84.
Alterman, W. F., W. Erwin Diewert, and Robert C. Feenstra, 1999, International trade
   price indexes and seasonal commodities, Washington, DC. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Asian Development Bank, 2007, Purchasing power parities and real expenditures,
   Manila, December.
Aten, Bettina, 2006. ‘Interarea price levels: an experimental methodology’, Monthly
   Labor Review, 129(9), September, 47–61.
Atkin, David, 2009, “Trade, tastes, and nutrition in India,” Department of Economics,
   Yale University, October. http://www.econ.yale.edu/~da334/Tastes_and_Nutrition.pdf
Balk, Bert M., 1996, “A comparison of ten methods for multilateral international price
   and volume comparisons,” Journal of Official Statistics, 12:2, 199-222.
Bhalla, Surjit S, 2008, “World Bank—most Asians dead in 1950,” Business Standard,
   August 23.
Brandt, Loren, and Carsten Holz, 2004, “Spatial Price Differences in China: Estimates
   and Implications,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 55(1), 43–86.




                                            56
Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan, and F.
  Halsey Rogers, 2006, “Missing in action: teacher and health worker absence in
  developing countries,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(1), 91–116.
Chen, Shaohua, and Martin Ravallion, 2008, “China is poorer than we thought, but no
  less successful in the fight against poverty,” Washington, D.C., Policy Research
  Working Paper 4621 (May).
Ciccone, Antonio and Marek Jarocinksi, 2008, “Determinants of economic growth: will
  data tell?, ICREA-Universitat Pompeu-Fabra, September.
  http://www.crei.cat/people/ciccone/growth_determinantswp.pdf
Deaton, Angus, 2010, “Quality, inequality, and the measurement of global poverty,”
  American Economic Review, March. (AEA Presidential Address.)
Diewert, W. Erwin, 1976, “Exact and superlative index numbers,” Journal of
  Econometrics, 4(2), 115–45.
Diewert, W. Erwin, 1999, “Axiomatic and economic approaches to international
  comparisons,” in Alan Heston and Robert Lipsey, eds., International and interarea
  comparisons of income, output, and prices, University of Chicago Press, 13–52.
Diewert, W. Erwin, 2001, “The consumer price index and index number purpose,”
  Journal of Economic and Social Measurement, 27, 167–248.
Diewert, W. Erwin, 2007, “Index numbers,” in John Eatwell, Murray Milgate, and Peter
  Newman, eds., The new Palgrave: a dictionary of economics, Vol. 2, 767–80.
Diewert, W. Erwin, 2008a, “New methodology for linking the regions,” Dept. of
  Economics, University of British Columbia (September.) Available at
  http://www.econ.ubc.ca/diewert/dp0807.pdf
Diewert, W. Erwin, 2008b, “New methodological developments for the International
  Comparison Program,” Dept. of Economics, University of British Columbia
  (September.) Available at http://www.econ.ubc.ca/diewert/dp0808.pdf
Dikhanov, Yuri, 1997, “Sensitivity of PPP-based income estimates to choice of
  aggregation procedures,” Development Data Group, World Bank, Washington, DC.
  Available at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/ICPINT/Resources/icppapertotal.pdf




                                          57
Dowrick, Steve, and John Quiggin, 1994, “International comparisons of living standards
  and tastes: a revealed preference approach,” American Economic Review, 84:1, 332–
  41.
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (1999), ESCAP Comparisons
  of Real Domestic Product and Purchasing Power, 1993, United Nations, Bangkok.
Eltetö, O., and P. Köves, 1964, “On a problem of index number computation relating to
  international comparison,” Statisztikai Szemle 42, 507–18.
Feenstra, Robert C., Alan Heston, Marcel P. Timmer and Haiyan Deng , 2009,
  “Estimating Real Production and Expenditures Across Nations: A Proposal for
  Improving the Penn World Tables”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 91:1, 201–12.
Geary, Roy C., 1958, “A note on the comparison of exchange rates and purchasing power
  between countries,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A (General),
  121(1), 97–99.
Gershenkron, Alexander, 1947, “The Soviet indices of industrial production,” Review of
  Economic Studies, 29(4), 217–26.
Gini, Corrado, 1924, “Quelques considerations au sujet de la construction des nombres
  indices des prix et des questions analogues,” Metron, 4, 3–162.
Gong, Cathy Honge and Xin Meng (2008) “Regional Price Differences in Urban China
  1986-2001: Estimation and Implication,” Discussion Paper No. 3621, July, Australian
  National University and IZA, iza@zia.org.
Heston, Alan (2008) “The 2005 Global Report on PPPs: A Preliminary Review,”
  Economic and Political Weekly (Mumbai), March 15, 2008, 65–9.
Iklé, Doris M., 1972, “A new approach to the index number problem,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 86:2, 188–211.
Johnson, Simon, William Larson, Chris Papageorgiou and Arvind Subramanian (2009),
  “Is newer better? Penn World Table revisions and their impact on growth estimates,”
  NBER Working Paper No. 15455, October.
Khamis, Salem H., 1972, “A new system of index numbers for national and international
  purposes,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A (General), 135(1), 96–
  121.
Maddison, Angus, 2003, The world economy: historical statistics, Paris, OECD.

                                           58
Maddison, Angus, 2007, Chinese Economic Performance in the Long Run: Second
   Edition, Revised and Updated 960-2030 AD, Paris, OECD. Appendix D.
Neary, J. Peter, 2004, “Rationalizing the Penn World Table: true multilateral indexes for
   international comparisons of real income,” American Economic Review, 94(5), 1411–
   28.
Nuxoll, Daniel A., 1994, “Differences in relative prices and international differences in
   growth rates,” American Economic Review, 84(5), 1423–36.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2009,
   http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?datasetcode=SNA_TABLE4# (downloaded Oct. 25,
   2009).
Pritchett, Lant, 1997, “Divergence, big time,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(3),
   3–17.
Rogoff, Kenneth, 1996, “The purchasing power parity puzzle,” Journal of Economic
   Literature, 34(2), 647–68.
Seers, Dudley, 1983, The political economy of nationalism, Oxford. Oxford University
   Press.
Sun, Changqing, and Eric Swanson, 2009, “Estimation of PPPs for non-benchmark
   economies for the 2005 ICP round,” ICP Bulletin, 6:1, 20–23.
Srinivasan, T. N., 1994, “Data base for development analysis: an overview,” Journal of
   Development Economics, 44, 3–27.
Summers, Robert, and Alan Heston, 1991, “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An
   expanded set of international comparisons, 1950–1988,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 106(2), 327–68.
Szulc, B., 1964, “Indices for multiregional comparisons,” Przeglad Statystyczny, 3, 239–
   54.
Van Veelen, Matthijs, 2002, “An impossibility theorem concerning multilateral
   international comparisons of volumes,” Econometrica, 70, 369–75.
World Bank, 1993, Purchasing power of currencies, prepared for the socioeconomic data
   division, international economics department.
World Bank, 2007, World Development Indicators, Washington, DC. (CD.)



                                            59
World Bank, 2008a, Global purchasing power parities and real expenditures: 2005
  international comparison program, Washington, DC.
World Bank, 2008b, “ICP 2003–2006 Handbook,” available online at
  http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/DATASTATISTICS/ICPEXT/0,con
  tentMDK:20126612~pagePK:60002244~piPK:62002388~theSitePK:270065,00.html
World Bank, 2008c, World Development Indicators, Washington, DC. (CD)




                                         60
Table 1: Ratios of Laspeyres to Paasche price indexes, USA and Nigeria versus
selected other countries

                   USA                                               NIGERIA

 Ten smallest
 Ireland             1.048                            Congo               0.962
 Canada              1.057                            Latvia              1.003
 Austria             1.062                            Guinea              1.030
 Switzerland         1.068                            Mali                1.032
 Germany             1.072                            Zimbabwe            1.049
 Luxemburg           1.080                            Albania             1.050
 Italy               1.091                            Estonia             1.051
 Australia           1.092                            Equatorial Guinea   1.053
 Belgium             1.094                            Burkina Faso        1.055
 UK                  1.096                            Chad                1.062
 Ten largest
 Djibouti            2.798                            Oman                1.674
 Armenia             2.811                            Korea               1.707
 Moldova             2.905                            Japan               1.747
 Rwanda              2.943                            USA                 1.780
 Burundi             3.055                            Iran                1.781
 Zimbabwe            3.771                            Kuwait              1.945
 Chad                4.033                            Bahrain             1.978
 Gambia              4.210                            Luxemburg           2.095
 Kyrgyzstan          5.107                            Tajikistan          2.473
 Tajikistan          9.615                            Qatar               2.847
 Other important
 China               1.658                            China               1.375
 India               1.611                            India               1.390
 Indonesia           1.484                            Indonesia           1.405
 Brazil              1.508                            Brazil              1.329
 Nigeria             1.780                            South Africa        1.069
 Russia              1.823                            Russia              1.092




                                        61
Table 2: Bilateral Fisher, GEKS, Geary-Khamis, and Iklé-Dikhanov-Balk indexes,
selected countries as in Table 1

                     LP-Spread    Bilateral          GEKS      Geary-         IDB          ICP
                                  Fisher                       Khamis                      2005

 Ten smallest
 Ireland             1.048        1.042            1.023     1.100         1.143        1.023
 Canada              1.057        1.195            1.176     1.237         1.265        1.214
 Austria             1.062        0.878            0.852     0.902         0.928        0.874
 Switzerland         1.068        1.748            1.709     1.695         1.747        1.741
 Germany             1.072        0.896            0.860     0.873         0.904        0.893
 Luxemburg           1.080        0.938            0.924     0.854         0.884        0.922
 Italy               1.091        0.884            0.853     0.890         0.908        0.875
 Australia           1.092        1.375            1.319     1.401         1.413        1.388
 Belgium             1.094        0.889            0.880     0.889         0.942        0.899
 UK                  1.096        0.637            0.649     0.639         0.648        0.649
 Ten largest
 Djibouti            2.798        73.62            84.69     65.94         86.30        84.69
 Armenia             2.811        145.15           147.07    123.53        151.35       178.58
 Moldova             2.905        3.617            3.513     3.050         3.689        4.434
 Rwanda              2.943        176.28           188.63    152.94        195.87       186.18
 Burundi             3.055        315.61           343.34    276.49        360.99       342.96
 Zimbabwe            3.771        26702            30671     21900         29535        33068
 Chad                4.033        163.04           205.92    143.0         206.95       208.0
 Gambia              4.210        6.315            8.019     5.530         8.041        7.560
 Kyrgyzstan          5.107        8.157            9.068     6.390         8.404        11.354
 Tajikistan          9.615        0.457            0.542     0.296         0.425        0.744
 Other important
 China               1.658        3.127            3.059     2.941         3.290        3.448
 India               1.611        14.755           13.480    13.605        14.757       14.669
 Indonesia           1.484        3833             3606      3540          3867         3934
 Brazil              1.508        1.346            1.376     1.401         1.577        1.357
 Nigeria             1.780        54.77            57.42     54.38         65.31        60.23
 Russia              1.823        11.314           11.163    11.397        12.978       12.736

Notes: US is the base country. LP-spread is the Laspeyres-Paasche spread as in Table 1.
Bilateral Fisher is the Fisher price index for each country relative to the US, calculated as
a bilateral comparison. EKS, Geary-Khamis, and Iklé-Dikhanov-Balk are the multilateral
PPP indexes for GDP excluding the trade balance. ICP2005 is the PPP from the WDI
2008.

Source: Authors’ calculations using basic heading parities from the 2005 ICP.




                                              62
                                             .5
  Log of ratio of PPP to Exchange Rare: US=1
         -1           -.5   -1.5  0




                                                  4       6                   8               10             12
                                                      Logarithm of per capita GDP at market exchange rates



Figure 1: Price levels in relation to GDP




                                                                       63
                                                                            1960                       Ghana                                       1970
                                                              .1
                                                                                                                                                                   Romania




                                                                                                                                 .1
 Average annual growth over subsequent ten years in PWT 6.2

                                                                                                                                                                                                 Botswana
                                                                                                                                               Equatorial         Papua
                                                              .05

                                                                        Guinea Bissau                                                          Guinea




                                                                                                                                 .05
                                                                                                                     Singapore
                                                                                                                                                                                     Barbados
                                                                                                                 Congo
                                                                                                                                                                                      Jordan




                                                                                                                                 0
                                                              0




                                                                                                         Zimbabwe                                                             Cape Verde
                                                                                        Tanzania Burundi                                                                     Guinea Bissau




                                                                                                                                 -.05
                                                                                                                                                                              Chad
                                                              -.05




                                                                     -.05               0              .05                .1                 -.05             0               .05                .1


                                                                                                                                                                                    Equatorial Guinea




                                                                                                                                 .15
                                                              .1




                                                                            1980                             China                                 1990
                                                                                                                                                                                         China




                                                                                                                                 .1
                                                              .05




                                                                                                                                                             Tanzania
                                                                                                                                               Nigeria



                                                                                                                                 .05
                                                                            Chad
                                                                                                                                                     Yemen

                                                                                                                                 0
                                                              0




                                                                                                       Uganda Romania
                                                                                                                                 -.1 -.05

                                                                                                     Sao Tome
                                                                                                                                                             Congo
                                                              -.05




                                                                                        Trinidad

                                                                       -.05                 0          .05                .1                -.05              0                .05                .1

                                                                                                Average annual growth over subsequent ten years in PWT 6.1


Figure 2: Revisions to ten year growth rates in PWT6.1 and PWT6.2




                                                                                                                     64
