                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            UNDERSTANDING CRUDE OIL PRICES

                                         James D. Hamilton

                                        Working Paper 14492
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14492


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2008




¸˛I thank Severin Borenstein, Menzie Chinn, Lutz Kilian, David Reifen, and four anonymous referees
  for helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
  do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by James D. Hamilton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Understanding Crude Oil Prices
James D. Hamilton
NBER Working Paper No. 14492
November 2008
JEL No. Q3,Q4

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines the factors responsible for changes in crude oil prices. The paper reviews the
statistical behavior of oil prices, relates these to the predictions of theory, and looks in detail at key
features of petroleum demand and supply. Topics discussed include the role of commodity speculation,
OPEC, and resource depletion. The paper concludes that although scarcity rent made a negligible
contribution to the price of oil in 1997, it could now begin to play a role.


James D. Hamilton
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
jhamilton@ucsd.edu
1     Introduction.

How would one go about explaining changes in oil prices? This paper explores three broad

ways one might approach this. The first is a statistical investigation of the basic correlations

in the historical data. The second is to look at the predictions of economic theory as to

how oil prices should behave over time. The third is to examine in detail the fundamental

determinants and prospects for demand and supply. Reconciling the conclusions drawn from

these diﬀerent perspectives is an interesting intellectual challenge, and necessary if we are

to claim to understand what is going on.

    In terms of statistical regularities, the paper notes that changes in the real price of oil

have historically tended to be (1) permanent, (2) diﬃcult to predict, and (3) governed by

very diﬀerent regimes at diﬀerent points in time.

    From the perspective of economic theory, we review three separate restrictions on the

time path of crude oil prices that should all hold in equilibrium. The first of these arises from

storage arbitrage, the second from financial futures contracts, and the third from the fact

that oil is a depletable resource. We also discuss the role of commodity futures speculation.

    In terms of the determinants of demand, we note that the price elasticity of demand

is challenging to measure but appears to be quite low and to have decreased in the most

recent data.   Income elasticity is easier to estimate, and is near unity for countries in an

early stage of development but substantially less than one in recent U.S. data.          On the

supply side, we note problems with interpreting OPEC as a traditional cartel and with

cataloging intermediate-term supply prospects despite the very long development lead times


                                               1
in the industry. We also relate the challenge of depletion to the past and possible future

geographic distribution of production.

    Our overall conclusion is that the low price-elasticity of short-run demand and supply,

the vulnerability of supplies to disruptions, and the peak in U.S. oil production account for

the broad behavior of oil prices over 1970-1997. Although the traditional economic theory

of exhaustible resources does not fit in an obvious way into this historical account, the

profound change in demand coming from the newly industrialized countries and recognition

of the finiteness of this resource oﬀers a plausible explanation for more recent developments.

In other words, the scarcity rent may have been negligible for previous generations but may

now be becoming relevant..




2     Statistical predictability.

Let pt denote 100 times the natural log of the real oil price in Figure 1 as of the third month

of quarter t and let ∆pt denote the quarterly percentage change. The average value of ∆pt

over 1970:Q1-2008:Q1 is 1.12. The t statistic for that average growth estimate is 0.91, failing

to reject the hypothesis that the expected oil price change could be zero or even negative.

    One can also explore simple forecasting regressions of the form


                                       ∆pt = β0 xt−1 + εt                                    (1)


where xt−1 is a vector of variables known the quarter prior to t that might have helped predict

the oil price change in quarter t. Table 1 reports the results of testing for such predictability


                                               2
when xt−1 is based on the observed lagged behavior of real oil prices, U.S. nominal interest

rates, or U.S. GDP growth rates.       Those tests for predictability are summarized by the

p-value associated with the hypothesis test— if a p-value is below 0.05, we would reject the

null hypothesis at the 5% level, and conclude that the indicated xt−1 could help predict the

change in oil prices. The table shows that in fact there is no basis for claiming to be able

to predict oil price changes using any of the variables listed.

   How about predicting the level of pt rather than the rate of change?              One test for

whether we want to be specifying forecasting regressions in levels or rates of change is the

augmented Dickey-Fuller test (e.g., Hamilton, 1994, pp. 528-9), in which one looks for

whether the lagged level helps predict the change. This can be implemented by testing the

null hypothesis that η = 0 in the following regression:


                ∆pt = ηpt−1 + ζ 1 ∆pt−1 + ζ 2 ∆pt−2 + ζ 3 ∆pt−3 + ζ 4 ∆pt−4 + εt .


The t statistic for testing this hypothesis turns out to be +0.69, whereas one would need

a value less than -1.95 to reject the hypothesis.      Alternatively, as in Kwiatowski, et. al.

(1992) one can take as the null hypothesis that the forecasting regressions should really be

estimated in levels. The KPSS η̂ τ statistic exceeds 0.32 for all lag windows ` between 0 and

4; for any value above 0.22 we would reject the null hypothesis at the 1% level.

   All of the above test results are consistent with the claim that the real price of oil seems

to follow a random walk without drift. The price increased over the sample by 172% (loga-

rithmically), but a process like this one could just as easily have decreased by a comparable

amount. While one might have forecasting success with more detailed specifications over

                                                3
shorter samples, the broad inference with which we come away is that the real price of oil is

not easy to forecast. To predict the price of oil one quarter, one year, or one decade ahead,

it is not at all naive to oﬀer as a forecast whatever the price currently happens to be.

        Although you might be fully justified in oﬀering “no change” as your “best” short- and

long-run prediction for oil prices, it’s worth emphasizing how far wrong the forecast is likely

to prove to be. Let’s take for illustration the price of oil as of 2008:Q1 ($115/barrel). The

standard deviation of ∆pt over the sample is σ = 15.28%.                   If one took these log changes

as having a Gaussian distribution, that would mean our forecast for Q2 would have a 95%

confidence interval ranging from a low of $85 dollars a barrel to a high of $156.1               As you

try to forecast s quarters into the future, the standard error for a random walk becomes
 √
σ s. Table 2 gives some flavor for how the forecasts deteriorate the farther you try to peer

into the future, and shows that even the very wild swings subsequently observed in 2008:Q2

and 2008:Q3 are within the “normal” range. Four years from 2008:Q1, we may have still

“expected” the price of oil still to be at $115 a barrel, though we would in fact not be all

that surprised if it turned out to be as low as $34 or as high as $391!


3         Predictions from theory.

We turn next to a discussion of what economic theory predicts for the dynamic behavior of

crude oil prices, discussing three separate conditions that all should hold in equilibrium.
    1
        Note that the confidence intervals are symmetric in logs but asymmetric in levels.




                                                        4
3.1    Returns to storage.

Consider the following possible investment strategy.         You borrow money today (denoted

date t) in order to purchase a quantity Q barrels of oil at a price Pt dollars per barrel.

Suppose you pay a fee to the owner of the storage tank of Ct dollars for each barrel you store

for a year. Then you’ll need to borrow (Pt + Ct )Q total dollars, and next year you’ll have

to pay this back with interest, owing (1 + it )(Pt + Ct )Q dollars for it the interest rate. But

you’ll have the Q barrels of oil that you can sell for next year’s price, Pt+1 . If


                                 Pt+1 Q > (1 + it )(Pt + Ct )Q,                             (2)


then you’ll make a profit from putting more oil into storage today.

   Of course, you don’t know today what next year’s price of oil will be, but you have some

expectation based on information currently available, denoted Et Pt+1 . From (2), you’d

expect to make a profit from oil storage whenever


                                       Et Pt+1 > Pt + Ct∗                                   (3)


where Ct∗ reflects your combined interest and physical storage expenses:


                                    Ct∗ = it Pt + (1 + it )Ct .


Suppose people did expect Pt+1 to be greater than Pt + Ct∗ . Then anyone could expect to

make a profit by buying the oil today, storing it, and selling it next year. If there are enough

potential risk neutral investors, the result of their purchases today would be to drive today’s

price Pt up. Knowledge of all the oil going into inventory today for sale next year should

                                                5
reduce a rational expectation of next year’s price Et Pt+1 . As long as the inequality (3) held,

speculation would continue, leading us to conclude that (3) could not hold in equilibrium.

   What about the reverse inequality,


                                      Et Pt+1 < Pt + Ct∗ ?


Then anyone putting oil into storage is expecting to lose money, and it would not pay to

do so for purposes of pure speculation. That doesn’t mean that every storage tank will be

empty, because inventories of oil are essential for the business of transporting and refining

oil and delivering it to the market.     We could think of such factors as equivalent to a

“negative” storage cost for oil in the form of a benefit to your business of having some oil

in inventory, which is referred to as a “convenience yield”. We might then refine the above

specification, subtracting any convenience yield from physical and interest storage costs Ct∗

to get a magnitude Ct# , the net cost of carry. If people expect oil prices to fall so much that


                                      Et Pt+1 < Pt + Ct#,


then there is an incentive to sell oil out of inventories today, driving Pt down and Ct# up.

We’re then led to the conclusion that the following condition should hold in equilibrium


                                      Et Pt+1 = Pt + Ct#.                                   (4)


   We could in principle modify our definition of the cost of carry Ct# further to incorporate

any risk premium that may induce investors to want to hold more or less inventories.

   Insofar as expectations, convenience yield and risk premia are impossible to observe

directly, one might think that (4) does not imply any testable restrictions on the observed

                                               6
relation between Pt+1 and Pt . However, recall that the quarterly change in real oil prices

has a standard deviation of 15% (see Figure 2), and increases much larger than this are

observed quite often. It seems inconceivable that risk aversion or convenience yield would

exhibit quarterly movements of anywhere near this magnitude. The implication of (4) is

that big changes in crude oil prices should be mostly unpredictable. Given that it is the

big changes that dominate this series statistically, the finding in the previous section that

oil price changes are very diﬃcult to predict is exactly what the theory sketched here would

lead us to expect.

   It is sometimes argued that if economists really understand something, they should be

able to predict what will happen next.     But oil prices are an interesting example (stock

prices are another) of an economic variable which, if our theory is correct, we should be

completely unable to predict.

3.2    Futures markets.

If you thought oil prices were headed higher, there is an alternative investment strategy to

buying oil today and physically storing it. You could instead enter into a futures contract,

which would be an agreement you reach today to buy oil one year from now at some price, Ft ,

to which price you and the counterparty agree today. Abstracting from margin requirements

and broker’s costs, if you’ve agreed to buy oil at the price Ft , you will make money whenever

Ft < Pt+1 , because you could in this event sell the oil for which you pay Ft to someone else

on next year’s spot market at price Pt+1 , pocketing the diﬀerence as pure profit. If your

expectations were such that Ft < Et Pt+1 , everybody would want to be on the buy side of


                                              7
such contracts, bidding the terms of the contract Ft up. Equilibrium requires


                                      Ft = Et Pt+1 + Ht#                                   (5)


where Ht# is again a term incorporating any risk premium or complications induced by

margin requirements.

   Note that (5) is not an alternative theory to (4)— both conditions have to hold in equi-

librium.   For example, if there were an increase in Ft without a corresponding change in

Pt , that would create an opportunity for someone else to buy spot oil at time t for price Pt ,

store if for a year, and sell it through a futures contract.

   If we chose to ignore cost of carry and risk premia, conditions (5) and (4) together would

imply that the futures price simply follows the current spot price


                                            Ft = Pt .                                      (6)


   In practice, one finds in the data that the futures price and spot price diﬀer, but often

not by much, and when news causes the spot price to go up or down on a given day, futures

prices at every horizon usually all move together in the same direction as the change in

spot prices.   Figure 3 plots the futures prices for a couple of representative days.      On

August 21, 2007, one could buy oil at any future horizon between 4 months and 8 years for

between $67.49 and $68.70 per barrel. Over the next two months, spot and futures prices

at every horizon rose substantially, though the spot and near-term contracts went up more

quickly than the farther-out contracts, so that by October 4, the near-term futures prices

were substantially above those for longer-term contracts.

                                               8
   To the extent that Ft and Pt diﬀer, studies by Bopp and Lady (1991), Abosedraa and

Baghestani (2004), Chinn, LeBlanc and Coibion (2005), and Alquist and Kilian (2008) found

that Pt provides as good or even a better forecast of Pt+s than does the futures price Ft .

Interestingly, the first three studies nevertheless also failed to reject the hypothesis that Ft

embodies a rational expectation of the future spot price. The overall conclusion we might

draw is that Pt oﬀers about as good a forecast of the future spot price as one can achieve,

but, recalling Table 2, even the best forecast is none too accurate.

3.3    Scarcity rent.

Oil is a depletable resource— it is mined rather than produced, and once burned, cannot

be reused.   Harold Hotelling pointed out back in 1931 that in the case of an exhaustible

resource, price should exceed marginal cost even if the oil market were perfectly competitive.

   To understand Hotelling’s principle, suppose we take it as given that as a result of

unavoidable geological limits, global production of crude oil next year could only be 90% of

the amount being produced this year. If we assumed say a short-run demand price elasticity

of -0.10, that would imply a price of oil next year that is twice its current value.     As we

noted above, under such a hypothetical scenario it would pay anyone to buy the oil today in

order to store it in a tank for a year, waiting to sell into next year’s more favorable market.

   It would be more eﬃcient, however, for the owner of any oil reservoir to “store” the oil

directly by just leaving it in the ground, waiting to produce it until the price has risen.

In a competitive equilibrium, the owners of the reservoir will receive a compensation for

surrendering use of the nonreproducible resource that leaves them just indiﬀerent between


                                               9
producing today and producing in the future.2           We can think of that scarcity rent at time

t, denoted λt , as the diﬀerence between price Pt and marginal production cost Mt :


                                            λt = Pt − Mt .


Hotelling’s principle holds that the scarcity rent should rise at the rate of interest:


                                 Pt+1 − Mt+1 = (1 + it )(Pt − Mt ).                                 (7)


      The initial price P0 is then determined by the transversality condition that if the price Pt

follows the dynamic path given by (7) from that starting point, the resource is just exhausted

at t = ∞. Nordhaus, Houthakker, and Solow (1973) discussed the possibility of a “backstop

technology” which would allow an alternative energy source to be infinitely supplied at a

fixed price P , in which case the initial price P0 is determined by the condition that if the

subsequent price path follows (7), the resource is just exhausted when Pt reaches P . But as

the price exceeded $140/barrel in 2008, it was still unclear what such a backstop resource

might be. For example, the in-ground resource represented by oil sands is quite enormous,

and is currently quite profitable at production levels of 1.3 mb/d. However, water, natural

gas, pipeline, labor, and capital constraints make it diﬃcult to scale this up quickly , and

the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers is only predicting oil sands to contribute

4 mb/d by 2020.3
   2
     Mathematically, with perfect information, λt would correspond to the Lagrange multiplier (sometimes
referred to as the “shadow price”) associated with the transversality condition, which is the constraint
that the sum of production over all time cannot exceed a given finite number corresponding to ultimate
recoverable reserves; see for example Krautkraemer (1998, p. 2067).
  3
    See EIA, “Country Analysis Briefs: Canada,” May 2008, and CAPP, “Crude Oil Forecast, Markets,
and Pipeline Expansions,” 2008.

                                                  10
      Although Hotelling’s theory and its extensions are elegant, a glance at Figure 1 gives

us an idea of the challenges in using it to explain the observed data. The real price of oil

declined steadily between 1957 and 1967, and fell quite sharply between 1982 and 1986. One

can try to modify the simple Hotelling framework to allow for technological progress, which

could induce a downward trend in marginal production cost that for a while at least causes

Pt to fall even though Pt − Mt is rising.4         Alternatively, one can allow for unanticipated

resource discoveries producing an unanticipated downward shift in an otherwise upward-

trending time path for λt .      Krautkraemer (1998) surveyed some of the literature in this

area, a fair summary of which might be that eﬀorts along these lines are ultimately not

altogether satisfying. As a result, many economists often think of oil prices as historically

having been influenced little or none at all by the issue of exhaustibility.

      There is certainly no theoretical problem with postulating that in 1997, future supply

prospects were suﬃciently strong, and the perceived date at which the limit of ultimately

recoverable reserves would begin to aﬀect decisions was suﬃciently far into the future, that

the scarcity rent λt at that time could have been negligible relative to costs of extraction

for the marginal producer.        New information about surprisingly strong demand growth

prospects and limits to expanding production could in principle account for a sudden shift

to a regime in which λt is positive and quite important.

      Such an interpretation would still be inconsistent with the downward-sloping futures term

structure in October 2007 noted in Figure 3, which from (5) would be diﬃcult to square
  4
    According to this view, technological progress could account for the downward trend between 1981 and
1997 which was then taken over by the rising scarcity rent.


                                                  11
with the view that λt comprises a significant component of Pt and furthermore is expected,

as the theory predicts, to rise over time. On the other hand, it is sovereign governments

rather than private firms that control the vast majority of remaining petroleum reserves,

and although their decisions may not implement (7) perfectly, one can make a case that

the intertemporal calculation has started to influence current production decisions.          For

example, Kuwait is facing increasing domestic political pressure to reduce production rates

in order to preserve its resource for a longer period.5       And Reuters news service reported

the following story on April 13, 2008:


        Saudi Arabia’s King Abdullah said he had ordered some new oil discoveries left

        untapped to preserve oil wealth in the world’s top exporter for future generations,

        the oﬃcial Saudi Press Agency (SPA) reported.

        “I keep no secret from you that when there were some new finds, I told them,

        ‘no, leave it in the ground, with grace from god, our children need it’,” King

        Abdullah said in remarks made late on Saturday, SPA said.


      Although the sharp run-up in price through June of 2008 might be consistent with a

newly calculated scarcity rent, the dramatic price collapse in the fall is more diﬃcult to

reconcile with a Hotelling-type story.
  5
      EIA, “Country Analysis Brief: Kuwait,” November 2006.




                                                 12
3.4    Role of speculation.

Michael Masters, in testimony before the U.S. Senate in May 2008, estimated that assets

allocated to commodity index trading strategies had risen from $13 billion at the end of

2003 to $260 billion as of March 2008. These funds hold a portfolio of near-term futures

contracts (of which about 70% represent energy prices), following a strategy of selling the

expiring contract the second week of the month and using the proceeds to buy the subsequent

month’s contract.

   If investors were risk neutral and equally informed, we would not expect the volume on

the buy side to have any eﬀect on the price. In such a world, there would be an unlimited

potential volume of investors willing to take the other side of any bets if the purchases were to

result in a price that was anything other than the market fundamentals value. But with risk-

averse investors or with diﬀering information, the answer is a little diﬀerent. For example,

I might read your willingness to buy a large volume of these contracts as a possible signal

that you know something I don’t. Standard financial market micro-structure theory (e.g.,

Dufour and Engle, 2000) predicts that a large volume of purchases may well cause the price

to increase, at least temporarily, until I have a chance to verify what the true fundamentals

value would be. DeLong, et. al. (1990) described a case in which risk-averse investors would

never fully arbitrage away ill-informed speculators who are simply pouring money into any

asset that has recently experienced high rates of return. In the case of a product for which

the Hotelling Principle applies, Jovanovic (2007) noted that self-fulfilling bubble paths could

be indexed by the residual quantity of oil that never gets produced. Determining the current


                                               13
price associated with hitting complete exhaustion (that is, the price path that satisfies the

intertemporal Hotelling constraint) is a daunting task given real-world uncertainties, and one

could imagine that considerable time might be required for any price impact of commodity

“noise investor” speculators to be undone by other market participants.

   Suppose we believed that speculation as a force in and of itself could succeed in driving

the futures price up. The buyer of spot crude oil would be a refiner, whose primary decision

given gasoline demand is an intertemporal one. It can meet that demand with crude oil that

it purchases at the current spot price, or produce out of inventory buying its crude forward

at the futures price. If the futures price were to increase with the spot price fixed, there

would be a big increase in the demand for spot oil. If we thought of gasoline demand as

completely price-inelastic in the short run, the demand curve for spot crude would shift up

by $1 per barrel when the futures price increased by $1. As a result, the speculators who are

selling the expiring near-term contracts would find that they have indeed made a profit in an

environment in which an ever-increasing volume of futures purchases drives ever-increasing

futures and spot prices.

   Although it might appear that we have described a self-fulfilling speculative price bubble

here, in reality it is not, because the demand for gasoline is in fact not completely price

inelastic.   Ultimately there are physical producers of crude oil and physical consumers of

gasoline, and insofar as the activities of either have any response at all to the price, incentives

for consumption would be reduced and incentives for production increased whenever the price

of crude oil is driven up. For this reason, an ongoing speculative price bubble would have



                                                14
to result in continuous inventory accumulation, or else be ratified by cuts in production.

The former is clearly unsustainable, and if it is the latter, one might make the case that

the supply cuts rather than the speculation itself has been the ultimate cause of the price

increase.

    To complete a “bubble” story, we would need to postulate that mispricing by the futures

markets led producers of the physical product to keep the oil in the ground due to a miscal-

culation of the initial price associated with satisfying the Hotelling transversality condition.

To assess this possibility further, we now take a detailed look at the fundamentals of demand

and supply.


4     Petroleum demand.
4.1    Price elasticity.

The demand price elasticity measures the percentage change in quantity demanded divided

by the percentage change in price as we move along a given demand curve. Table 3 reports

estimates of the price elasticity of gasoline demand from four separate literature surveys,

which estimate the short-run elasticity to be around -0.25 and a long-run elasticity 2 or

3 times as large.    If crude oil represents half the cost of retail gasoline, a 10% increase

in the price of crude would translate into a 5% increase in the price of gasoline, and the

demand elasticities for crude oil would be about half those for gasoline. Dahl (1993) and

Cooper (2003) arrive at long-run demand elasticities for crude oil of -0.2 to -0.3 and short-run

elasticities below -0.1.

    Figure 4 reminds us why it is diﬃcult to be completely convinced by any of these esti-

                                              15
mates. Both the supply and demand in any given year t are responding to any of a number of

factors besides the current price. Important among these other factors are income (a key de-

terminant of demand) and previous years’ prices. The latter is important for both demand,

since it can take many years for the fleet of existing cars to reflect changes in purchasing

habits, and supply, since tremendous lead times are required between initial exploration

and eventual production. In any given year, both the demand curve and supply curve are

shifting as a result of these factors, and one cannot simply look at how price and quantity

move together to infer anything about the slope of either curve. The common methodology

of including lagged dependent variables in OLS regressions to distinguish between short-run

and long-run responses is also problematic (Breunig, 2008).

   Although we can not estimate the elasticity with much precision, Figure 5 illustrates

why it has to be a small number. The horizontal axis measures the cumulative logarithmic

change in real GDP at a given date relative to where it was in 1949, so that two years

separated by a distance of 0.1 on the horizontal axis correspond to a growth of real GDP of

about 10% between those two years. The vertical axis measures the cumulative logarithmic

change in U.S. oil consumption. Despite the 5-fold fluctuations in oil prices over this half-

century, it is rare to see much disturbance to the long-run trend of increasing oil use over

time.   The biggest exception occurs between 1978 and 1981, when U.S. oil consumption

fell 16.0% while U.S. real GDP increased by 5.4%.      This is one episode where one might

clearly attribute this to the demand response to a shift in the supply curve brought about

by exogenous geopolitical events, namely, a loss of Iranian production of 5.4 million barrels



                                             16
per day in the immediate aftermath of the 1978 revolution, and an additional 3.1 mb/d drop

from Iraq when the two nations subsequently went to war in 1980.        In response to these

supply disruptions, the real price of crude oil increased 81.1% (logarithmically) between

January 1979 and the peak in April 1980. If we assumed a unit income elasticity, one would

have expected oil consumption to have risen by 5.4% rather than declined by 16%, for a net

decrease in quantity demanded of 21.4% and an implied intermediate-run price elasticity of

                                ∆ ln(Q)    −0.214
                                         =        = −0.26,                                (8)
                                ∆ ln(P )   0.811

consistent with the consensus estimates in Table 3. On the other hand, the relative price of

oil increased 88% (logarithmically) between January 2002 and January 2007, despite which

U.S. oil consumption actually increased 4.5% between 2002 and 2007. With U.S. real GDP

growth of only 14.1% over this period, it is diﬃcult to reach any conclusion other than that

the price-elasticity of demand is even smaller now than it was in 1980. For example, Hughes,

Knittel, and Sperling (2008) estimated that short-run demand elasticity was in the range of

-0.21 to -0.34 over 1975-1980 but between only -0.034 and -0.077 for the 2001-06 period, and

conjecture that the falling dollar share of oil costs in total expenditures could be one cause

behind that— Americans continued to buy oil, despite the high price, because they could

aﬀord to ignore the price changes more easily in 2006 than they could in 1980.       Another

possibility is that nontransportation uses of oil, which used to be much more significant than

they are today, had more substitution possibilities than transportation.




                                             17
4.2    Income elasticity.

If a 10% increase in gasoline production requires a 10% increase in oil input, one would expect

similar income elasticities for crude petroleum and gasoline demand. Table 3 summarizes a

number of studies of income elasticity, which typically arrive at a value near unity, which for

a given price would be associated with all of the points in Figure 5 falling on the 45 degree

line. In fact U.S. oil consumption grew faster than GDP over the first decade, consistent with

an income elasticity of 1.2. The slope of the curve decreased slightly over the next decade,

though the 1960s could still be claimed to be characterized by an income elasticity greater

than unity. One then sees a significant adjustment following the 1973-74 oil shock and the

much more dramatic 1979-82 adjustment already mentioned. It is interesting however that

over the period from 1985-1997, oil use in percentage terms grew half as fast as real GDP,

despite the fact that the real price of oil fell 43% over this period, suggesting that the income

elasticity of U.S. petroleum demand has decreased significantly over time.

   The combination of an income and price elasticity both well below unity accounts for

the broad trends we see in the share of oil purchases in total expenditures over time. Price

inelasticity means that if the price of oil goes up, total expenditures on oil go up. Income

inelasticity means that as GDP goes up, the share of oil expenditures should fall. Figure 6

reveals that big price drops and growing GDP during the 1980s and 1990s together brought

the dollar value of oil expenditures as a share of total GDP down to 1.1% in 1998, a small

fraction of the 8.3% share reached at the peak in 1980.         The price increases since 1998

brought the share back up to 5.6% for the first half of 2008.


                                               18
      The impression from U.S. data that the income elasticity has declined as GDP per person

has increased is confirmed in data from a number of diﬀerent countries. Figure 7 establishes

that for a group of 11 important countries, the poorer the country was in 1960, the faster its

growth in oil demand over the last half of the twentieth century. Gately and Huntington

(2002) estimated an average income elasticity over 1971-1997 of 0.55 for 25 OECD countries

but 1.17 for 11 other countries characterized by rapid income growth over the period and

1.11 for 11 oil-exporting countries.

      And it is the latter countries from which petroleum growth is coming at the moment,

aggravated by gasoline subsidies in many of the oil producing countries. Although the U.S.

and Europe still account for almost half of all the oil used globally, these areas account for

less than 1/5 of the increase in world consumption between 2003 and 2006.6          Instead the

growth is coming from the rapidly growing countries and oil exporters, with the countries

in the Middle East accounting for 17% of the growth and China alone accounting for 33%.

China’s demand grew at a phenomenal 7.2% annual logarithmic rate between 1991 and 2006.

If that trend were to continue, by 2020 China would be consuming 20 million barrels per day

(about as much as the U.S. is currently consuming), and by 2030 that would have doubled

again to 40 mb/d (see Figure 8).

      Are such extrapolated demand figures plausible? Despite its remarkable growth already,

China still has a long way to go before we might expect the income elasticity of oil demand

to fall significantly.   During 2006, China used about 2 barrels of oil per person.          For
  6
    World consumption numbers were taken from Energy Information Administration, “World Petroleum
Consumption, Most Recent Annual Estimates, 1980-2007”.


                                               19
comparison, Mexico used 6.6— Chinese oil consumption could triple and they’d still be using

less per person than Mexico is today. The U.S. used almost 25 barrels per person. There

were 3.3 passenger vehicles per 100 Chinese residents in 2006, compared with 77 in the

United States.7

    But is the world capable of producing oil in such volumes? We turn to this question in

the next section.


5     Petroleum supply.

Figure 9 plots global oil production levels over the last quarter century. Global production

has stagnated over the last three years. Given the strong demand growth from China and

the Middle East, that required a big increase in price to restore equilibrium.                  The key

question is why supply failed to increase.

5.1     The role of OPEC.

Although there was once a time in which a few oil companies played a big role in world

oil markets, that era is long past.        ExxonMobil, the world’s largest private oil company,

produced 2.6 mb/d of oil in 2007, which is only 3.1% of the world total.                 The combined

market share of the 5 biggest private companies is less than 12%. In the modern era, it is

sovereign countries rather than private companies who would be calling the shots.

    The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries includes 12 of the important oil pro-
   7
     U.S. statistics are from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, Chinese kindly provided me by Maxi-
milian Auﬀhammer. For more details see Auﬀhammer and Carson (2008) and Congressional Budget Oﬃce,
“China’s Growing Demand for Oil and Its Impact on U.S. Petroleum Markets,” 2006.



                                                   20
ducing countries, two of which (Angola and Iraq) are currently not participating in OPEC’s

production agreements.        The OPEC-108 produced 36.7% of total world liquids produc-

tion in 2007, of which Saudi Arabia alone accounted for 12.1%. The 1.3 mb/d increase in

production outside of these 10 countries during 2006 and 2007 was just oﬀset by decreases

within the OPEC-10.

       If OPEC were operating as an eﬀective cartel, in the absence of a Hotelling scarcity rent it

would try to set the marginal revenue for the group equal to the marginal cost. The marginal

revenue for the group associated with producing one more barrel of oil would be calculated

as the price of that barrel minus the revenue that OPEC would lose if to sell that marginal

barrel it had to lower the price to all its previous buyers. By contrast, the marginal revenue

for an individual OPEC member would be the price minus the lost revenue to the member.

Because any one member is a small fraction of the entire group, the marginal revenue for an

individual member is always a bigger number than the marginal revenue for the group as a

whole. As a consequence, if group marginal revenue is set equal to marginal cost, individual

marginal revenue is greater than marginal cost, meaning there would always be an incentive

for members to try to “cheat” on the cartel’s production decisions, producing a little more

for themselves than the group agreed. An eﬀective cartel requires some mechanism to deter

such behavior.

       Alhaji and Huettner (2000) reviewed 13 studies, 11 of which found observed OPEC be-
   8
    The OPEC-10 are Algeria, Indonesia, Iran, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab
Emirates, and Venezuela. One of these (Indonesia) has actually become a net oil importer in recent years.
Data are from EIA, “World Production of Crude Oil, NGPL, and Other Liquids, and Refinery Processing
Gain”.



                                                   21
havior to be inconsistent with the cartel hypothesis.             Updated support for this view is

provided by Figure 10, which plots the quotas and actual production levels for the 5 biggest

OPEC producers.9          There is only a loose correspondence. Kuwait has always produced

more than its quota and Venezuela has always produced less. Saudi Arabia was well above

its quota during 2004-2005 and Iran well below its during 2006. In fact, the “quotas” and

measured production levels are themselves fairly vague. The Energy Information Admin-

istration, International Energy Agency, and private organizations such as Platts all have

diﬀerent estimates of what the actual production numbers are. In the description of quotas

that is posted on the OPEC website, the quotas for 1996-2006 are all described in terms of

actual production levels for each country, whereas the new policies implemented November

2006 are described in terms of changes from previous quotas rather than new target levels,

apparently reflecting a tacit acknowledgement that deviations of actual production figures

from earlier quotas were quite large, and making the new guidelines— such as a 176,000 b/d

cut for Iran from some unspecified previous level— having even less clarity in terms of what

was required than those that had been in place earlier. For the current guidelines imple-

mented November 2007, OPEC seems to have given up even on this, and has announced a

simple aggregate target of 27.253 mb/d target for the OPEC-10 without specifying who is

supposed to produce what. The only publicly available numbers I have seen on how this

27.253 figure is supposedly allocated among the OPEC members comes from an anonymous
   9
     Note that these production numbers exclude lease condensates, which is the definition with the closest
correspondence to the published OPEC quotas. If were were to include lease condensates, the apparent
widespread “cheating” would be even more dramatic.




                                                    22
website calling itself “Saudi Oil Production,” whose numbers are used for the final values in

Figure 10. It is clear that for these numbers in particular, it is the quotas that have moved

to match the production rather than the other way around.

      It is hard to find any clear monitoring or enforcement mechanism for implementing

OPEC’s announcements, which instead seem to have more of the character of each country

deciding what it wants to do anyway and the organization then making an announcement

of the collection of those individual decisions. Under such a view, the announcements of

the group then serve mainly political interests, giving countries like Iran and Venezuela an

opportunity to appear to their domestic constituencies to be fighting for higher oil prices,

and giving countries like Saudi Arabia an ability to spread the blame for its decisions over

a broader group.

      Since Saudi Arabia alone accounts for a third of the production from the OPEC-10, one

might alternatively consider the hypothesis that the kingdom makes a calculation based on

its unilateral monopoly power, with the rest of the world producing on a more competitive

basis. The condition for Saudi marginal revenue to equal its marginal cost can be written10


                                             µ           ¶
                                                     1
                                         P       1+          = MS
                                                    εS

where P denotes the price of oil, εS the price-elasticity of demand for Saudi oil, and MS the

kingdom’s marginal cost of production. Note further that if the Saudis control a share κS
 10
      Note marginal revenue can be written
                                                    µ        ¶    µ     ¶
                               ∂(P (Q) · Q)             Q ∂P          1
                          MR =              =P       1+        = P 1+     .
                                   ∂Q                   P ∂Q          ε



                                                    23
of the global market and the global demand elasticity is εG , then


                                        εS = εG /κS


since a 1% increase in Saudi production would only be a κS percent increase in global

production. Hence in the absence of a scarcity rent the Saudis’ objective would be to set a

markup of price over marginal production cost of

                                       P       1
                                          =          .
                                       MS   1 + κεGS

Suppose we used the price-elasticity estimate of −0.26 derived in (8) for illustration. With

a Saudi global share of κS = 0.12, we would expect a markup of

                                    1         1
                                      κS =          = 1.86.                              (9)
                                 1 + εG    1 − 0.12
                                               0.26


If, as in Horn (2004), we assumed a marginal production cost of $15/barrel, that would imply

an oil price of $28. Note further that the 0.26 estimate was an intermediate-run elasticity.

It is the long-run elasticity that should be used in a formula like this one, in which case

the predicted price would be even lower. The above calculation also assumed zero supply

elasticity from sources outside of Saudi Arabia; adding these would again give us a smaller

markup than calculated in (9).

   On the other hand, we noted above that oil demand may have become less price elastic

over time, in which case the predicted price would increase.    Indeed, as the elasticity εG

in (9) approaches −0.12, the predicted price goes to infinity, and the Hughes, Knittel and

Sperling (2008) recent estimates are even smaller in absolute value than −0.12. It certainly


                                             24
is the case that Saudi production decreased in 2006 and 2007 (see the top panel of Figure

10), and this has undoubtedly made a contribution to the 2008 price increase.            However,

if this is indeed the explanation for the 2008 run-up in prices, it raises the question of why

no one elsewhere in the world is able to produce oil for under $100 a barrel to undercut

the hypothesized Saudi monopoly price. We turn in the next section to an investigation of

global prospects for increasing oil production.

5.2    Long lead times.

There are enormous lead times between the initial discovery of a new oil reservoir and the

time at which the new oil is actually being delivered to a refinery to use. These lags mean

that, in the absence of significant excess production capacity, the short-run price elasticity

of oil supply is also very low, another factor contributing to the potential price implications

of supply disruptions. The thin line in Figure 9 plots a linear time trend fit to global oil

demand over 1983-2003.       Oil use actually grew much faster than this trend during 2001-

2005, and in fact remains above the trend as of the time of this writing. One possibility is

that the strength of global demand caught producers by surprise, and that some time would

be required for the necessary investments to catch up. But there are longer run challenges

that are relevant as well.

5.3    The challenge of depletion.

There are a variety of measures that can be taken to increase production from an existing

field or increase the percentage of original oil in a given reservoir that is ultimately uncovered.



                                                25
These options include drilling additional wells at alternative locations and pumping in water

or carbon dioxide to maintain pressure. New wells typically cause the production profile of a

given field to increase in the initial phase of development. However, as more oil is removed,

less remains in the original deposit and it becomes increasingly diﬃcult to continue to extract

oil at the same rate. In a given field, one inevitably observes a profile of initial increasing

production flow rates followed by eventual decline. To keep total production increasing, it

is necessary to find new fields continuously. Historically this has been achieved by moving

to new geographical areas.

   The top panel of Figure 11 displays this pattern for the rich oil producing areas in Texas,

from which production has been in steady decline since 1972. Production from the Prudhoe

Bay supergiant field in Alaska (middle panel) has declined on average by 8.5% per year since

1988. Overall, U.S. production today is about half of what it was in 1971.

   Figure 12 documents that this fall in U.S. production has not been for a lack of eﬀort.

In the 1980s, the U.S. was producing less oil using 3 times as many wells as in the 1970s.

We have also made a steady transition to relying on oﬀshore oil and deeper wells.

   A number of the producing areas outside the U.S. are also unambiguously now in decline.

As shown in Figure 13, production from the United Kingdom and Norway has declined by

7% per year since 2002. Mexico’s Cantarell complex, second only to Saudi Arabia’s Ghawar

in terms of its contribution to recent production levels, is dropping precipitously. China,

like the U.S., was once a net petroleum exporter. Production from its three largest fields

is now in decline (Kambara and Howe, 2007), though new Chinese fields have so far been



                                              26
suﬃcient to allow total Chinese production to increase modestly despite the maturity of its

major producing areas. Again, it is hard to deny that declining production from the mature

Chinese fields has been a factor influencing the recent course of world oil prices.

   Saudi production, shown in the top panel of Figure 14, has historically exhibited consid-

erable variation, as the kingdom dropped production in times of slack demand to keep prices

from falling, and raised production to moderate the price increases occasioned by historical

disruptions from Iran and Iraq. This behavior on the part of Saudi Arabia helped to make

the global supply curve considerably flatter than it otherwise would have been during the

era when the kingdom had lots of excess capacity. The drop in Saudi production since 2005,

however, appears to represent a diﬀerent regime, since these began at a time of rapidly rising

prices and stagnating production elsewhere. At a minimum, this is a radically diﬀerent con-

cept of “price stabilization” than seems reflected in earlier Saudi behavior, and may indicate

that, despite oﬃcial statements to the contrary, the Saudis’ excess production capacity has

been eroded.    The production declines coincided with a doubling in the number of their

active oil rigs, leaving some to speculate that the magnificent Ghawar oil field has begun to

decline. The necessary data to confirm or refute that conjecture are not publicly available.

But it seems likely that if production from Ghawar has indeed already started to decline,

the peak in global production cannot be far oﬀ.

   Apart from geological considerations, political instabilities and mismanagement have also

made a contribution to declining production in places such as Iraq, Nigeria, Iran, Venezuela,

Mexico, and Russia.    But there is an interaction between such ”above-ground risks” and



                                              27
resource depletion as well— insofar as it is not feasible to increase production from the

historically stable regions, the world has been forced to depend increasingly on less reliable

producers.

       At any given point in history, some of the world’s producing fields are well into decline,

some are at plateau production, and others are on the way up. It is not clear what “average”

or “typical” decline rate would be appropriate to apply to aggregate global production, but

a plausible ballpark number might be 4%.11                That means that in the absence of new

projects, global production would decline by 3.4 mb/d each year. To put it another way,

a new producing area equivalent to current annual production from Iran (OPEC’s second

biggest producer) needs to be brought on line every year just to keep global production from

falling.

       Despite these discouraging observations, a field-by-field analysis of new projects would

leave one still quite optimistic about near-term oil supplies. An open-source web database12

 tabulates a total of 6.9 mb/d in new gross production capacity from new projects that

are scheduled to begin producing in 2008. Projects in Saudi Arabia, Russia, and Mexico

account for about a third of this gross increase. Data currently available for the first two

months of 2008 show actual production in Saudi Arabia down 350,000 b/d from its average

2005 value and Mexican production down 400,000 b/d from 2005. Russian production is
  11
     A 2008 study by Cambridge Energy Research Associates estimated the global decline rate to be 4.5%
(Wall Street Journal, January 17, 2008). The IEA’s World Energy Outlook 2007 assumed a decline rate of
3.7% for their baseline calculations, while noting “But decline rates may, in fact, turn out to be somewhat
higher” (page 84).
  12
       http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oil_Megaprojects/2008.




                                                    28
down 100,000 b/d from its average level in the second half of 2007.

    Although declining production from mature fields and delays in ramping the new fields

up to full production will doubtless eat up a fair bit of the 6.9 mb/d new gross production

capacity, there is still a lot left over. In the absence of significant new geopolitical disruptions

to petroleum supply, some might anticipate an end to the recent plateau in global production,

and significant net gains in supply for 2008.

    However, it would not take too many years of 7% demand growth from China and other

economies to absorb a good part of even the most optimistic projections of what is likely

over the near term.


6     Conclusions.

In this paper we have reviewed a number of theories as to what produced the high price

of oil in the summer of 2008, including commodity price speculation, strong world demand,

time delays or geological limitations on increasing production, OPEC monopoly pricing, and

an increasingly important contribution of the scarcity rent. Rather than think of these as

competing hypotheses, one possibility is that there is an element of truth to all of them.

    Unquestionably the three key features in any account are the low price elasticity of

demand, the strong growth in demand from China, the Middle East, and other newly indus-

trialized economies, and the failure of global production to increase.        These facts explain

the initial strong pressure on prices that may have triggered commodity speculation in the

first place.   Speculation could have edged producers like Saudi Arabia into the discovery



                                                29
that small production declines could increase current revenues and may be in their long run

interests as well. And the strong demand may have moved us into a regime in which scarcity

rents, while negligible in 1997, became perceived to be an important permanent factor in

the price of petroleum.

   The $140/barrel price in the summer of 2008 and the $60/barrel in November of 2008

could not both be consistent with the same calculation of a scarcity rent warranted by

long-term fundamentals. Notwithstanding, the algebra of compound growth suggests that

if demand growth resumes in China and other countries at its previous rate, the date at

which the scarcity rent will start to make an important contribution to the price, if not here

already, cannot be far away.




                                             30
                                    References

   Abosedraa, Salah, and Hamid Baghestani. 2004. “On the Predictive Accuracy of Crude

Oil Futures Prices,” Energy Policy 32, pp. 1389—1393.

   Alhaji, A.F., and David Huettner. 2000. “OPEC and Other Commodity Cartels: A

Comparison,” Energy Policy 28, pp. 1151-1164.

   Alquist, Ron, and Lutz Kilian. 2008. “What Do We Learn from the Price of Crude Oil

Futures?” Working paper, University of Michigan.

   Auﬀhammer, Maximilian and Richard T. Carson. 2008. “Forecasting the Path of China’s

CO2 Emissions Using Province Level Information,” Journal of Environmental Economics

and Management 55(3), pp. 229-47.

   Bopp, Anthony E. and George M. Lady. 1991. “A Comparison of Petroleum Futures

versus Spot Prices as Predictors of Prices in the Future,” Energy Economics 13(4), pp.

274-282.

   Breunig, Robert V. 2008. “Should Single-Equation Dynamic Gasoline Demand Models

Include Moving Average Terms?”, working paper, Australian National University.

   Brons, Martijn Brons, Peter Nijkamp, Eric Pels, and Piet Rietveld. 2008. “A Meta-

Analysis of the Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand: A SUR Approach,” Energy Economics

30, pp. 2105—2122.

   Chinn, Menzie D., Michael LeBlanc, and Olivier Coibion. 2005. “The Predictive Content

of Energy Futures: An Update on Petroleum, Natural Gas, Heating Oil and Gasoline,”

NBER Working Paper. No. 11033.

                                           31
   Cooper, John C.B. 2003. “Price Elasticity of Demand for Crude Oil: Estimates for 23

Countries,” OPEC Review 27(1), pp. 1-8.

   Dahl, Carol A. 1993. “A Survey of Oil Demand Elasticities for Developing Countries,”

OPEC Review 17(Winter), pp. 399-419.

   Dahl, Carol and Thomas Sterner. 1991. “Analysing Gasoline Demand Elasticities: A

Survey,” Energy Economics 13, pp. 203-210.

   DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers and Robert J. Waldmann.

1990. “Positive Feedback Investment Strategies and Destabilizing Rational Speculation,”

Journal of Finance 45(2), pp. 379-395

   Dufour, Alfonso and Robert F Engle. 2000. “Time and the Price Impact of a Trade,”

Journal of Finance 55(6), pp. 2467—2498

   Espey, Molly. 1998. “Gasoline Demand Revisited: An International Meta-Analysis of

Elasticities,” Energy Economics 20, pp. 273-295.

   Gately, Dermot, and Hillard G. Huntington. 2002. “The Asymmetric Eﬀects of Changes

in Price and Income on Energy and Oil Demand,” Energy Journal 23(1), pp. 19-55.

   Graham, Daniel J., and Stephen Glaister. 2004. “Road Traﬃc Demand Elasticity Esti-

mates: A Review,” Transport Reviews 24(3), pp. 261—274.

   Hamilton, James D. 1994. Time Series Analysis. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University

Press.

   Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten. 2006. Penn World Table Version 6.2,

University of Pennsylvania.



                                           32
   Horn, Manfreid. 2004. “OPEC’s Optimal Crude Oil Price,” Energy Policy 32(2), pp.

269-280

   Hotelling, Harold. 1931. “The Economics of Exhaustible Resources,” Journal of Political

Economy 39(2), pp. 137-75.

   Hughes, Jonathan E., Christopher R. Knittel and Daniel Sperling. 2008. “Evidence of

a Shift in the Short-Run Price Elasticity of Gasoline Demand.” Energy Journal 29(1), pp.

93-114.

   Jovanovic, Boyan. 2007. “Bubbles in Prices of Exhaustible Resources,”, working paper,

New York University.

   Kambara, Tatsu, and Christopher Howe. 2007. China and the Global Energy Crisis,

Edward Elgar.

   Krautkraemer, Jeﬀrey A. 1998. “Nonrenewable Resource Scarcity,” Journal of Economic

Literature 36(4), pp. 2065-2107.

   Kwiatowski, Denis, Peter C. B. Phillips, Peter Schmidt, and Yongcheol Shin. 1992.

“Testing the Null Hypothesis of tationarity Against the Alternative of a Unit Root,” Journal

of Econometrics 54, pp. 159-178.

   Nordhaus, William D., Hendrik Houthakker, and Robert Solow. 1973. “The Allocation

of Energy Resources,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1973(3), pp. 529-576

   Roya, Joyashree, Alan H. Sanstadb, Jayant A. Sathayeb, and Raman Khaddaria. 2006.

“Substitution and Price Elasticity Estimates Using Inter-country Pooled Data in a Translog

Cost Model,” Energy Economics 28(5-6), pp. 706-719.



                                            33
Table 1. P-values for tests of null hypothesis that indicated variables are of no use in
predicting quarterly real oil price change, 1970:Q1-2008:Q1.

variable                     1 lag     4 lags   8 lags
real oil price change        0.69      0.88     0.62
U.S. nominal tbill rate      0.53      0.61     0.83
U.S. real GDP growth rate    0.24      0.48     0.49



Table 2. Ninety-five percent lower and upper bounds on forecast for inflation-adjusted
price of oil assuming a Gaussian random walk for the logarithm.

date        forecast   lower upper
2008:Q1     115
2008:Q2     115        85      156
2008:Q3     115        75      177
2008:Q4     115        68      195
2009:Q1     115        62      212
2010:Q1     115        48      273
2011:Q1     115        40      332
2012:Q1     115        34      391

Table 3. Estimates of demand elasticities.

    Study              Product               Method           short-   long-run long-run
                                                                run      price     income
                                                               price   elasticity elasticity
                                                            elasticity
Dahl and               gasoline         literature survey      -0.26     -0.86       1.21
Sterner (1991)
 Espey (1998)          gasoline         literature survey     -0.26      -0.58        0.88
Graham and             gasoline         literature survey     -0.25      -0.77        0.93
Glaister (2004)
Brons, et. al.         gasoline         literature survey     -0.34      -0.84         ---
(2008)
Dahl (1993)        oil (developing      literature survey     -0.07      -0.30        1.32
                       countries)
Cooper (2003)     oil (average of 23      annual time-        -0.05      -0.21         ---
                       countries)       series regression




                                                34
Figure 1. Oil price in 2008 dollars per barrel.


  160
  140
  120
  100
   80
   60
   40
   20
    0
    1945     1955    1965   1975    1985    1995   2005


Notes: Calculated as monthly average price (in dollars per barrel) of West Texas
Intermediate for 1947:M1 through 2008:M10 divided by the ratio of the CPI for the
previous month to the CPI in September 2008.


Figure 2. Quarterly percent change in real oil price, 1947:Q2-2008:Q1.


  100
   80
   60
   40
   20
    0
  -20
  -40
  -60
    1945     1955    1965   1975    1985    1995   2005




                                             35
Figure 3. Price of crude oil contract maturing December of indicated year.

  85

  80

  75

  70

  65

  60
   2007    2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013    2014       2015

Notes: solid line: contracts traded on August 21, 2007. Dashed line: contracts traded on
October 4, 2007.


Figure 4. Disentangling supply and demand.


       Price
                                                     St
                                                          St+1



          Pt
          Pt+1


                                                          Dt+1
                                                Dt

                                Qt     Qt+1
                                                          Quantity




                                                36
Figure 5. Changes in U.S. real GDP and oil consumption, 1949-2006.
       1.4




       1.2




        1
                          1961-73:                              1985-97:
                          slope = 1.04                          slope = 0.47
       0.8
 Oil




       0.6




       0.4



                        1949-61:
       0.2              slope = 1.2



        0
             0   0.25         0.5        0.75        1   1.25      1.5         1.75   2
                                                 GDP


Notes: Horizontal axis: cumulative change in natural logarithm of U.S. real GDP between
1949 and the year for which a given data point is plotted, from Bureau of Economic
Analysis Table 1.1.6. Vertical axis: cumulative change in natural logarithm of total
petroleum products supplied to U.S. market between 1949 and the year for which a given
data point is plotted, from Energy Information Administration, “Petroleum Overview,
1949-2007”, Table 5.1.




                                                37
Figure 6. Share of U.S. crude oil expenditures as a fraction of GDP.


  9.0

  8.0
  7.0

  6.0

  5.0
  4.0
  3.0

  2.0
  1.0

  0.0
    1970                       1975         1980     1985   1990        1995     2000     2005

Notes: Calculated as the number of barrels of oil consumed (from EIA, World Petroleum
Consumption) times the average price of West Texas Intermediate (from the FRED
database of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis) divided by nominal GDP. Values for
2008 based on first half of year.


Figure 7. GDP per capita and growth in petroleum demand.

                      14
                                      KOR
                      12
  Annual oil growth




                      10

                      8        CHI

                                 IND
                      6
                                            BRA     JAP
                                                  MEX
                      4                                     ITA
                                                                  FRA
                      2                                                    CAN
                                                                          UK       USA

                      0
                           $                      $5,000          $10,000               $15,000
                                     GDP/capita in 1960 in 2000 U.S. dollars



Notes: Horizontal axis: GDP per person in 1960, measured in 2000 U.S. dollars, from
Heston, Summers, and Aten (2006). Vertical axis: average annual logarithmic growth
rate in petroleum demand between 1960 and 2002. Countries included (in order of
decreasing average petroleum demand growth) are Korea, China, India, Japan, Brazil,
Mexico, Italy, France, Canada, US, and UK.


                                                                        38
Figure 8. Historical Chinese oil consumption and projection of trend.


   50
   40
   30                                                                             data

   20                                                                             trend

   10
     0
     1990           2000          2010            2020        2030

Notes: 1991-2006: Chinese oil consumption in millions of barrels per day. 2007-2030:
extrapolation of 7.2% compounded growth.


Figure 9. Global production of crude petroleum.


   90
   85
   80
   75
   70
   65
   60
   55
   50
    1975         1980      1985       1990        1995     2000         2005    2010


Notes: Bold line: From EIA, “World Production of Crude Oil, NGPL, and Other Liquids,
and Refinery Processing Gain”, in million barrels per day. Thin line: regression estimate
of time trend fit for 1983-2003 data.



                                           39
Figure 10. Quotas and actual production levels for 5 most important OPEC members.

                                         Saudi Arabia
  10000
   9500
   9000
   8500
   8000                                                             PRODUCTION   QUOTA
   7500
                 2004             2005                  2006       2007

                                             Iran
  4500
  4000
  3500
  3000
                                                                    PRODUCTION   QUOTA
  2500
                 2004             2005                  2006       2007

                                          Venezuela
  4000
                                                                    PRODUCTION   QUOTA
  3500
  3000
  2500
  2000
                 2004             2005                  2006       2007

                                           Kuwait
  3000
  2500
  2000
  1500
                                                                    PRODUCTION   QUOTA
  1000
                 2004             2005                  2006       2007

                                            UAE
  3000
  2500
  2000
  1500
                                                                    PRODUCTION   QUOTA
  1000
                 2004             2005                  2006       2007




Notes: Production levels from EIA Table 1.2, “OPEC Crude Oil Production (Excluding
Lease Condensate)”, in thousand barrels per day. Quotas taken from OPEC website
(http://www.opec.org/home/Production/productionLevels.pdf) with specific country
allocations for quotas adopted Nov. 1, 2007 taken from
http://saudioilproduction.blogspot.com/2007/09/new-opec-quotas.html.




                                             40
Figure 11. Production levels for state of Texas, Alaska’s Prudhoe Bay, and entire U.S.
                                                                    Texas
  4

  3

  2

  1

  0
         1935     1940     1945     1950     1955    1960    1965    1970    1975    1980    1985   1990   1995   2000   2005


                                                       Prudhoe Bay Alaska
  2.0

  1.5

  1.0

  0.5

  0.0
           1977     1979     1981     1983    1985    1987    1989    1991    1993    1995   1997   1999   2001   2003   2005


                                                                US total
  10.0

   7.5

   5.0

   2.5

   0.0
          1920 1925 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005




Notes: All data reported in millions of barrels per day. Top panel: annual production
from the state of Texas, 1935-2006, from Railroad Commission of Texas
(http://www.rrc.state.tx.us/divisions/og/statistics/production/ogisopwc.html). Middle
panel: annual production from Prudhoe Bay in Alaska, 1977-2005, from Alaska
Department of Revenue. Bottom panel: moving average of preceding 12 months of
monthly production figures for the United States, December 1920 to February 2008, from
EIA, “Crude Oil Production.”




                                                                     41
Figure 12. U.S. wells drilled, fraction of offshore production, and average well depth.
                                                    Number of wells
  4000
  3500
  3000
  2500
  2000
  1500
  1000
   500
     0
                1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007


                                                   Fraction offshore
  40
  35
  30
  25
  20
  15
  10
         1981      1983   1985    1987   1989   1991     1993    1995   1997   1999   2001   2003   2005    2007


                                                       Depth of wells
  6000

  5500

  5000

  4500

  4000

  3500
                1949 1952 1955 1958 1961 1964 1967 1970 1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003


Top panel: Monthly count of the number of U.S. crude oil exploratory and developmental
wells drilled, January 1973 to March 2008, from EIA, “Crude Oil and Natural Gas
Exploratory and Development Wells.” Middle panel: percent of U.S. total crude oil
production coming from federal and state offshore production, with both counts based on
12-month moving average of monthly production figures, December 1981 to December
2007, from EIA, “Crude Oil Production.” Bottom panel: Annual U.S. average depth of
crude oil, natural gas, and dry exploratory and developmental wells drilled (feet per well),
1949 to 2005, from EIA, “Average Depth of Crude Oil and Natural Gas Wells.”




                                                            42
Figure 13. Oil production from the North Sea, Mexico’s Cantarell, and China’s Daqing.
                                                                   North Sea
  6000
  5000
  4000
  3000
  2000
  1000
     0
          1973   1975     1977    1979    1981   1983    1985    1987   1989    1991    1993    1995     1997       1999   2001   2003    2005     2007


                                                                Cantarell Mexico
  2200
  2000
  1800
  1600
  1400
  1200
  1000
                 1996      1997          1998     1999      2000        2001     2002          2003          2004     2005        2006      2007


                                                                 Daqing China
  60000
  50000
  40000
  30000
  20000
  10000
     0
             1960       1963     1966    1969    1972    1975    1978    1981    1984    1987         1990     1993    1996   1999       2002    2005


Notes: all figures in thousand barrels per day. Top panel: sum of U.K. and Norway crude
oil production, monthly moving average of preceding 12 months, December 1973 to
June 2007, from EIA, Table 11.1b. Middle panel: annual production from Cantarell
complex in Mexico. Data for 1996 to 2006 from Pemex 2007 Statistical Yearbook. Data
for 2007 from Green Car Congress (http://www.greencarcongress.com/2008/01/mexicos-
cantare.html). Bottom panel: annual production from Daqing field in China, 1960-2005,
data from Kambara and Howe (2007), with missing observations linearly interpolated.




                                                                         43
Figure 14. Saudi Arabian production and oil rigs.
                                      Saudi Arabian production
  11000
  10000
   9000
   8000
   7000
   6000
   5000
   4000
   3000
   2000
            1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007


                                        Saudi Arabian oil rigs
  80

  70

  60

  50

  40

  30

  20

  10

   0
          1982   1984   1986   1988   1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006   2008

Top panel: monthly production in thousand barrels per day, January 1973 to January
2008, from EIA, Table 11.1a. Bottom panel: monthly count of number of land and
offshore oil rigs in Saudi Arabia, January 1982 to April 2008, from Baker Hughes
(http://investor.shareholder.com/bhi/rig_counts/rc_index.cfm).




                                                    44
