                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF THE INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION
                             OF LABOR

                                         Gordon H. Hanson

                                       Working Paper 14490
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14490


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2008




I thank Oana Tocoian Hirakawa for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Gordon H. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Economic Consequences of the International Migration of Labor
Gordon H. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 14490
November 2008
JEL No. F22,J61

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper, I selectively discuss recent empirical work on the consequences of global labor mobility.
I examine how international migration affects the incomes of individuals in sending and receiving
countries and of migrants themselves. Were a social planner to choose the migration policies that
would maximize global welfare, she would need to know, among other values, the elasticities of wages,
prices, taxes, and government transfers with respect to national labor supplies, as well as how these
parameters vary across countries. My goal is to evaluate the progress of the literature in terms of providing
these inputs.


Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS 0519
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu
1 INTRODUCTION

       Given its prominent coverage by national media, the economic consequences of

international migration would seem to be one of the burning issues or our time. In

receiving countries, public debate about immigration drives national politics, with recent

electoral campaigns in Australia, Denmark, France, Switzerland, and the US each

devoting substantial attention to the topic. Immigrants are blamed for disrupting civil

society, draining public coffers, and lowering wages, among other woes (Huntington,

2004). At the same time, skilled immigrants receive credit for spurring innovation and

the growth of technology sectors (Freeman, 2006).          Sending countries are no less

conflicted about labor mobility. Emigration has brought a welcome financial windfall in

the form of remittances (Acosta et al., 2008), but it also threatens to drain poor economies

of their most educated workers (Docquier and Rapoport, 2008).

       To an economist, it is no surprise that international migration is contentious. By

arbitraging the vast differences in wages that exist between countries, labor flows alter

the distribution of income in sending and receiving economies alike. In this dimension,

international migration is similar to international trade.     Both are mechanisms for

globalization that create winners and losers. But there are other dimensions in which

trade and migration differ significantly. In most receiving countries, immigrants pay

taxes and have the right to draw on at least some public services, changing the net tax

burden on native residents. Once they become citizens, immigrants generally obtain the

right to vote, altering domestic politics (Razin, Sadka, and Swagel, 2002). In sending

countries, emigrants cause corresponding fiscal and political disruptions by their

departure. Differences between trade and migration are evident in policy (Hatton and




                                                                                          1
Williamson, 2005). While most countries now belong to the World Trade Organization,

and maintain a nominal commitment to lowering trade barriers, a multilateral agreement

that would allow international labor mobility is a dim prospect, at best.1

        What does economic research have to say about the costs and benefits of

international migration?         Should we expect economists to advocate for the free

international movement of labor as intensely as they tend to support free trade? The

persistence of large differences in average income between countries is prima facie

evidence that allowing greater international labor mobility would raise world welfare

(Pritchett, 2006). Allowing labor to move across borders more freely would be a simple

and obvious way to help narrow global income gaps.

        In this paper, I selectively discuss recent empirical work on the consequences of

global labor mobility. I examine how international migration affects the incomes of

individuals in sending and receiving countries and of migrants themselves. Were a social

planner to choose the migration policies that would maximize global welfare, she would

need to know, among other values, the elasticities of wages, prices, taxes, and

government transfers with respect to national labor supplies as well as how these

parameters vary across countries. My goal is to evaluate the progress of the literature in

terms of providing these inputs. In considering the effects of labor mobility, I give equal

weight to sending and receiving countries, meaning neither receives in depth treatment.

For discussions of literature on how immigration affects receiving countries, see Borjas



1
  The closest sending and receiving countries have come to negotiating a multilateral deal on migration are
discussions under Mode IV of the Doha Development Agenda of the World Trade Organization, which if
adopted would permit the temporary movement of service providers across borders, addressing a limited set
international labor flows. Because of their narrow scope, even if enacted the provisions discussed would
likely increase global labor flows by only a modest amount. For analyses of the economic impacts of Mode
IV liberalizations see Jansen and Piermartini (2005) and Schiff (2007).


                                                                                                         2
(1999a) and Card (2005), and on research into how emigration affects sending countries,

see Docquier and Rapoport (2008) and Hanson (2007).2

        Is there a case to be made against the unfettered movement of labor? In low-

income sending countries, the complaint has long been that the wrong individuals leave

(Bhagwati and Hamada, 1974). In most of the developing world, the more skilled have

the highest propensity to emigrate (Docquier and Marfouk, 2006). If there are positive

spillovers associated with human capital (Lucas, 1988) or education is financed through

taxation (Bhagwati and Rodriquez, 1975), the emigration of skilled labor can hinder

economic development (Benhabib and Jovanovic, 2006). Possible corrections include

taxing the emigration of skilled labor (McHale, 2008) or requiring receiving countries to

admit more unskilled workers from the developing world (Pritchett, 2006).

        In high-income receiving countries, in contrast, the concern is that the wrong

individuals are trying to get in (Borjas, 1999b), though this position has generated

controversy (Card, 2005). In the US and Europe, the average immigrant has much less

schooling than the average native worker.          Increased inflows of low-skilled labor may

exacerbate distortions created by social-insurance programs or means-tested entitlement

programs (Wellisch and Walz, 1998), which would possibly increase the net tax burden

on native residents (Borjas and Hinton, 1996) and thereby fuel political opposition to

immigration (Hanson, Scheve, and Slaughter, 2008; Facchini and Mayda, 2006).

        By assessing the economic consequences of labor mobility, one could determine

whether existing restrictions on immigration might be justifiable on welfare grounds or

whether they are welfare-reducing policies, resulting from lobbying by special interests

2
  Nor do I address the growing literature on the causes of international migration. See Mayda (2005),
Clark, Hatton, and Williamson (2007), Rosenzweig (2007), Brücker and Defoort (2006), Belot and Hatton
(2008), and Grogger and Hanson (2008) for recent work on the topic.


                                                                                                   3
(Facchini and Willmann, 2007) or concerns about the impact of immigration on voters

(Benhabib, 1996; de Melo, Grether, and Müller, 2001). Though a WTO for international

migration is unlikely to form any time soon, one would still like to know whether such a

venture would be worthwhile. In addition to providing policy makers with guidance on

setting the scale of international migration, one would want the literature to give insight

on its desired composition. Emigration pessimists suggest labor outflows are too skilled

while immigration pessimists suggest labor inflows are not skilled enough.            Both

positions cannot be right.

       Unfortunately, policy makers would be hard pressed to infer the effects of

international migration on global welfare from existing literature. The issue is not so

much that economists disagree on the magnitudes in question. Rather, the problem is that

the empirical literature tends to eschew a global general equilibrium perspective. There

has been an immense amount of work on how immigration affects US wages, but this is

just one outcome of interest. There has been comparatively little work on the impact of

immigration on non-labor income, the consequences of emigration for labor markets in

sending countries, how global labor flows affect fiscal balances in labor importing or

labor exporting economies, or what changes in opportunities for emigration mean for the

incentive to acquire skill. To be sure, economists have made progress on each of these

topics. But taking the literature as a whole gives the impression that the most relevant

consideration for evaluating migration’s impact is how foreign labor inflows affect the

earnings of low-skilled US workers. If we want policy makers to make informed choices

about migration policy, we have a lot more work to do.

       In section II, I summarize facts about international migration that emerge from




                                                                                         4
recently available data. In section III, I outline a simple framework for evaluating the

welfare consequences of international migration.      In section IV, I discuss empirical

research on the consequences of labor flows for incomes in sending and receiving

countries and for migrants and their family members. And in section V, I consider

directions for future empirical work.



2 TRENDS IN INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION
       Perhaps the most striking fact about international migration is that it is so

uncommon. As summarized in Figure 1, data compiled by the United Nations imply that

in 2005 individuals residing outside of their country of birth comprised just 3.0% of the

world’s population. Moreover, during the last two decades the stock of international

migrants has grown only modestly, rising from 2.2% of the world population in 1980 to

2.9% in 1990 and marginally after that. Given substantial differences in average incomes

between countries, the small scale of global migration is surprising. In 2005, per capita

GDP (adjusted for PPP) was $33,600 in high-income OECD countries, compared to

$9,200 in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, $8,400 in Latin America and the Caribbean,

$6,200 in the Middle East and North Africa, $3,900 in East Asia and the Pacific, $2,100

in South Asia, and $1,700 in Sub-Saharan Africa. Of course, differences in average

income may overstate the gain to migration. In section IV, I discuss recent estimates of

cross-country earnings differences, which indicate that while per capita GDP differences

do exaggerate the income gain to moving abroad these gains are still substantial.

       One explanation for the small scale of international migration is that receiving-

country restrictions on immigration are binding.       Table 1 shows the share of the

population that is foreign born in select OECD countries. Aside from tiny Luxembourg,



                                                                                       5
the countries with the largest immigrant presence in 2005 are Australia (24%),

Switzerland (24%), New Zealand (19%), and Canada (19%). Australia, New Zealand,

and Canada are unique among receiving countries in using a point system (rather than

quotas) to govern applications for admission, in which individuals with higher levels of

skill are favored for entry. Next in line in terms of the scale of immigration are the large

economies of Germany (13%), the US (13%), France (10%), and the UK (10%). The US

alone hosts 40% of immigrants living in OECD countries, making it the world’s largest

receiving country. The US uses a quota system to govern legal immigration, with two

thirds of visas reserved for family members of US citizens or residents. European

countries tend to place more emphasis on an individual’s refugee or asylee status in

making immigrant admission decisions (Hatton and Williamson, 2004).              In the last

decade, there have been substantial increases in foreign-born population shares in a

number of rich countries, with the largest changes over 1995-2005 occurring in Ireland

(4.1%), the US (3.6%), New Zealand (3.2%), the UK (2.8%), Norway (2.7%), Canada

(2.5%), Belgium (2.4%), and Switzerland (2.4%).

       One indication that receiving-country restrictions on immigration are binding is

that inflows of illegal immigrants are both a substantial share of the total and on the rise.

In the US, Passel (2008) estimates that in 2007 there were 12 million illegal immigrants,

which accounted for 30% of the US foreign-born population, up from 28% in 2000 and

19% in 1996. Over two thirds of US illegal immigrants are from Mexico and Central

America, suggesting that proximity facilitates illegal entry (Hanson, 2006). In Europe,

Jandl (2003) estimates that in 2003 there were 4 million illegal immigrants in the EU 15

countries, with the largest stocks in Germany, the UK, Italy and France. Greece, Italy,




                                                                                           6
Portugal and Spain have engaged in repeated recent legalizations of illegal immigrants,

meaning that the current stock of illegal immigrants in these countries understates the

number of immigrants who gain entry illegally.

       In high-income OECD nations, low-income countries are an important source of

migrants. Table 2, using data from Beine, Docquier and Marfouk (2007), shows the

share of the immigrant population in OECD countries by sending region. In 2000, 67%

of immigrants in the OECD were from a developing country, up from 54% in 1990.

Among developing sending regions, Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean are the

most important, accounting for 20% of OECD immigrants in 2000, up from 15% in 1990.

Half of this region’s migrants come from Mexico, which in 2000 was the source of 11%

of OECD immigrants, making it the world’s largest supplier of migrants. The next most

important developing source countries are Turkey (3.5% of immigrants); China, India,

and the Philippines (each with 3%); Vietnam, Korea, Poland, Morocco, and Cuba (each

with 2%); and Ukraine, Serbia, Jamaica and El Salvador (each with 1%).

       Among sending countries, there is substantial variation in the propensity to

emigrate. As of 2000, there were 22 developing nations with 10% or more of their adult

population having migrated to the OECD, and 16 with emigration rates above 5%. At the

other extreme, 52 developing countries had emigration rates below 1%. There is strong

persistence in which countries send more people abroad, as seen in Figure 2, which plots

emigration rates in 1990 and against those in 2000.            Countries with the highest

emigration rates tend to be small, poor countries that are relatively close to the US.

       Within sending countries, emigrants tend not to be drawn randomly from the

population. Figure 3, taken from Grogger and Hanson (2008), plots the log odds of




                                                                                         7
emigration for individuals with tertiary education (13 or more years) against the log odds

of emigration for individuals with primary education (0 to 8 years).3 Nearly all points lie

above the 45 degree line, indicating that in most countries more educated individuals are

more likely to leave.          Migrants thus appear to be positively selected in terms of

schooling. It is high emigration rates for the more educated that raise concerns about

brain drain from developing countries.                Even though they are positively selected,

migrants often have education levels far below those of native residents, owing to the fact

that many come from countries with low average levels of schooling.

         More skilled emigrants tend to cluster in locations where the reward to skill is

relatively high. This phenomenon of positive sorting is evident in Table 3, also taken

from Grogger and Hanson (2008), which gives the share of international migrants

residing in OECD countries by major destination region. Countries in which the reward

to being a skilled worker is relatively large attract a disproportionate share of more-

educated emigrants. In the US and Canada, the difference in earnings between high-

skilled and low-skilled workers is much greater than in continental Europe, with this

difference being even larger once one accounts for Europe’s more progressive tax

system. The US and Canada receive 51.4% of the OECD’s immigrants, but 65.5% of its

immigrants with tertiary schooling. Europe, in contrast, receives 38.4% of the OECD’s

immigrants, but only 23.6% of its tertiary-schooled immigrants. Realizing potential

global welfare gains from migration may require not just allowing individuals to emigrate

from low-income countries in larger numbers but also allowing them to sort themselves

across receiving countries according to labor-market rewards to skill.


3
 The log odds are defined as the log ratio of adult emigrants with a given education level to the entire adult
population of a country (emigrants plus non-emigrants) with the same education level.


                                                                                                            8
         The small scale of international migration suggests that rich-country restrictions

on immigration are at least partially effective at impeding labor inflows from abroad.

Migrating legally involves costs associated with obtaining a visa, which can easily run

into the tens of thousands of dollars. Illegal entry is also subject to costs, with fees for

smuggler services to cross the US-Mexico border in 2006 and 2007 averaging around

$3,000 (Hanson, 2006) and fees to migrate from China and other distant countries to the

US surpassing $30,000. Either because of fixed costs to emigration or because of larger

gains in labor-market earnings from moving abroad, more-educated individuals tend

dominate labor outflows flows from poor sending countries to rich destinations.

Though migrants tend to be more educated than those that remain in sending countries,

they often have much lower education levels than native residents in receiving countries.

As a consequence, immigration from poor countries tends to increase receiving countries’

relative supplies of individuals with low education levels.



3 WELFARE CONSEQUENCES OF INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION
         What information would one need to gauge the effects of international migration

on national and global welfare?              Let V(p, yi) be the indirect utility enjoyed by an

individual with factor type i who faces price level for consumption goods and services, p,

and who receives after-tax income available for consumption, yi.4 To keep things simple,

I examine the welfare effects of migration in static terms. Another simplification is to

assume there are just two types of individuals, high skilled (i=H) and low skilled (i=L),

where all workers supply labor inelastically. A third is to impose constant returns to


4
 I take liberties with the indirect utility function by treating p as a price index and thus a scalar. If there
was more than one good in consumption, this would require redefining V(). As long as preferences are
homothetic, there would be no other complications.


                                                                                                             9
scale in production, such that goods’ prices are a function of unit factor costs.

        Consider the migration of low-skilled labor from a low-income sending country

(e.g., Mexico) to a high-income receiving country (e.g., the US). For country c, the

impact of migration on national welfare is given by

                                  ⎡ ∂Vi c ∂p ∂Vi c ∂yi ⎤ c
                         dW = ∑ α ⎢
                             c        c
                                      i     +          ⎥ dL                            (1)
                              i   ⎣ ∂p ∂L ∂yi ∂L ⎦

where αci is the fraction of the population with skill type i. The first term in the brackets

in (1) is the impact of migration on consumer prices; the second is the impact of

migration on factor income. In the US, there would be an increase in the supply of low-

skilled labor (dLc>0), whereas in Mexico there would be a decrease (dLc<0). Suppose

preferences are homothetic and the marginal utility of income, ∂Vci/∂yi, is a constant. In

this case, the impact of migration on national welfare in country c can be written as,

                                         ⎡ ∂y        ∂y    ⎤ c
                         dW c = βc + λ c ⎢ Lc L + H c H    ⎥ dL ,                      (2)
                                         ⎣ ∂L         ∂L   ⎦

where λc is the marginal utility of income divided by the population ( Lc + H c ) and

βc = ( ∂Vi c / ∂p )( ∂p / ∂L )dLc would be positive in the US (as long as immigration lowers

the average price of goods) and negative in Mexico (as long as emigration raises the

average price of goods). Stating the change in welfare relative to national income,

Y c = Lc yLc + H c yHc , equation (2) becomes,

                         dW c  c     c ⎡ c c M        c c M ⎤
                                                 c            c
                             = β  + λ     θ ε
                                        ⎢ L LL c   + θ  ε
                                                       H HL   c ⎥
                                                                  ,                    (3)
                          Yc            ⎣      L            H   ⎦

where β c = βc / Y c , θcL ( θcH ) is the share of low-skilled labor (high-skilled labor) in

national income, εiL = ( ∂yi / ∂L )( L / yi ) is the elasticity of income for factor type i with



                                                                                             10
respect to the supply of low-skilled labor, and Mc=dLc. Immigration (emigration) of low-

skilled labor lowers (raises) low-skilled wages in the US (Mexico) but raises (lowers)

high-skilled wages in the US (Mexico), owing to the fact that ε cLL < 0 and ε cHL > 0 .

       For the US, the term in brackets is equivalent to the immigration surplus,

described by Borjas (1999a), but expressed in terms of two factors of production, as in

Euwals and Hans Roodenburg (2004). For the US, the immigration surplus is positive,

since immigration raises GNP, defined to exclude migrant income.               The change in

Mexico’s GNP, defined to include the incomes of non-migrants and migrants, is also

positive. Since GNP increases in both countries, global welfare rises.

       Figure 4 captures the changes in income more formally, where I assume there is a

single good and that migration equalizes wages for low-skilled labor in the two countries.

The horizontal width of the box in Figure 4 gives the total labor supply in the US and

Mexico, L . US (Mexico) labor demand is given by Dus (Dmx), with origin 0us (0mx). In

the pre-migration equilibrium, at point 1, US labor supply is L1us and Mexico’s labor

supply is L − L1us , causing US wages to exceed Mexican wages: yLus > yLmx .

       If low-skilled labor is allowed to move freely between the countries, there will

migration from Mexico to the US up to the point where US and Mexican wages are

equalized at y*L , shown by point 2, with low-skilled wages rising in Mexico and falling in

the US.    US labor supply expands to Lus2 and Mexico’s contracts to L − Lus2 , as

Lus2 − L1us workers move between countries. In the US, the loss in income for native low-

skilled workers is given by area A and the gain in income for native high-skilled workers

is given by area A+B. The change in US GNP equals area B, which is the immigration



                                                                                          11
surplus. Migrants earn income C+D+E, meaning that US GDP (which includes the

income that migrants earn in the US) rises by an amount equal to area B+C+D+E.

        In Mexico, native high-skilled workers have an income loss equal to area D+F,

due to the departure of low-skilled labor. Non-migrating native low-skilled workers have

an income gain equal to area F and migrating native low-skilled workers have an income

gain equal to area C+D. Mexico’s gain in GNP equals area C, though it has a loss in

GDP equal to area D+E. The gain in world national income equals B+C, as migration

eliminates differences in labor productivity between countries.                  To ensure that

international migration generates Pareto gains in welfare, US low-skilled workers would

have to receive an income transfer equal to at least A and Mexican high-skilled workers

would have to receive a transfer of at least D+F.

        A change in the environment that could affect the implications of migration for

income is the introduction of redistributive taxes and transfers. Redefine yi as after-tax,

or net, income, which depends on pre-tax wage income, wi, the income-tax rate, ti, and

government transfers, gi, such that

                                yic = wic (1 − tic ) + gic .                            (4)

Under the assumption that wHc > wLc (i.e., there are positive returns to skill), an economy

with progressive taxes that redistributes income from high-income to low-income

individuals would have that t Hc > t Lc and g Hc / wHc < g Lc / wLc . Returning to equation (3),

the elasticity of net income with respect to the supply of low-skilled labor, εiLc , would

account for how immigration affects not just pre-tax labor income, wic , but also the tax

rate, tic , and government transfers, gic . This elasticity can be written as,



                                                                                              12
                        εiLc = ρcw,i ηcw,iL ( 1 − ti ) − ρtc,i ηtc,iL + ρcg ,i ηcg ,iL .   (5)

where for factor type i ρch ,i is the share of income type h in net income and ηch,iL is the

elasticity of income type h with respect to the migration of low-skilled labor (where

w=pre-tax wages, g=government transfers, and t=taxes).

        To interpret (5), consider the impact of low-skilled immigration on high-skill

labor in the US. Based on Figure 4, an inflow of low-skilled foreign labor raises wages

for high-skilled US workers (since ηcw,HL > 0 ). However, it might also raise the net tax

burden on these individuals. If in the US the net tax burden ( tic wic − gic ) is positive for the

high skilled and negative for the low skilled and immigrants have the right to receive

government transfers, then low-skilled immigration could increase US government

spending by more than it increases tax revenues. In order to balance the government

budget, the US would have to increase tax rates and/or decrease government transfers.

Were the US to keep its progressive tax system in place, the net tax burden on the high

skilled would rise, offsetting their gain in pre-tax income. For US low-skilled workers,

the loss from low-skilled immigration may be greater than without a tax system in place.

Not only would their pre-tax wage fall as a result of the increase in low-skilled labor

supply (since ηcw,LL < 0 ) but they could also face lower transfers and/or higher taxes.

        If the sending country also has a progressive tax system, the departure of low-

skilled emigrants could reduce the net tax burden on non-migrants, allowing the

government to decrease taxes on the high skilled and/or raise transfers to the low skilled.

However, the tax effects from low-skilled emigration are less clear cut once one accounts

for life cycle features of taxes and transfers. Many of the transfers individuals receive

over their lifetime come in their youth in the form of public education and subsidized

                                                                                                 13
health care. If low skilled workers enjoy these transfers while young and emigrate before

entering the labor force, sending country governments would be denied the returns on the

investments they have made in these individuals. In principle, low-skilled emigration has

the potential to increase the net tax burden on non-migrants in the sending country. With

an increase in high-skilled emigration, the change in net tax revenue for the sending

country is likely to be negative, given the magnitude of the investments sending country

governments make in their education and the high incomes these individuals earn.

       Equations (3) and (5) give a partial inventory of the parameters policy makers

would need to know to assess the welfare consequences of international migration. These

include the elasticities of wages, tax rates, government transfers, and consumption prices

with respect to national labor inflows and outflows. Allowing labor supply to be elastic

would exacerbate the welfare effects of tax and transfer policies.

       The effects of migration on skill accumulation are also important, given the

centrality of human capital to the process of economic growth. Theoretical literature has

devoted substantial attention to the impact of emigration on the incentive to acquire

human capital in sending countries (Docquier and Rapoport, 2008)). Absent distortions,

moving labor from a low productivity to high productivity environment raises global

income. However, if there are positive externalities associated with learning (e.g., Lucas,

1988), the exodus of skilled labor from a country may have adverse consequences for

economic development in sending countries (Bhagwati and Hamada, 1974). In theory,

the impact of brain drain on a sending country can be positive or negative. Miyagiwa

(1991) develops a model in which, because of human capital spillovers, the migration of

skilled labor from a low-wage, skill-scare economy to a high-wage, skill-abundant




                                                                                        14
economy reinforces the incentive for brain drain, depleting the low-wage country of

skilled labor. In Wong and Yip (1999), the negative effects of brain drain on the stock of

human capital reduce the labor-exporting country’s growth rate.

       It is also possible, however, that emigration would on net increase the supply of

human capital in a country, creating a brain gain (Stark and Wang, 2002). With high

incomes for skilled labor in rich countries and uncertainty over who will succeed in

emigrating, the option of moving abroad may induce individuals to accumulate enough

additional human capital to compensate for the loss in skill to labor outflows (Beine,

Docquier and Marfouk, 2001). Mountford (1997) shows that in the presence of human-

capital externalities an emigration-induced increase in the incentive to acquire skill can

help an economy escape a poverty trap and move to a high-growth equilibrium.

       To assess the welfare consequences of international migration, policy makers

would need to know, in addition to the elasticities in (5), how labor mobility affects the

incentive to acquire skill in sending and receiving countries. The framework I have

outlined, while very simple, has demanding informational requirements for assessing the

welfare effects of migration. I next examine how successful the literature has been in

meeting these informational requirements.



4 EMPIRICAL RESEARCH ON INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION
       I begin the discussion by considering the gain in income to migrants and evidence

on the extent to which migrants share these gains with family members in the sending

country. I then consider the impact of global labor flows on labor market earnings, net

tax burdens, and skill acquisition in sending and receiving countries.




                                                                                       15
A. INCOME GAINS TO MIGRANTS
           Consider the income gain to migrating from Mexico to the United States. In

2000, per capita GDP in Mexico was $9,700, compared with $34,500 in the US.5 While

the income gain from leaving Mexico for the US is likely to be large, it is surely

overstated by the difference in average income, reported in Table 4.

           One issue is that workers in Mexico and the US have different levels of education

and labor market experience. At the very least, one would want to compare incomes for

individuals with similar observable characteristics. Using data from US and Mexico

population censuses, Hanson (2006) reports that in 2000 the average hourly wage for a 28

to 32 year old male with 9 to 11 years of education was $2.40 in Mexico and $8.70 for

recent Mexican immigrants in the US. At a labor supply of 35 hours per week and 48

weeks per year this would yield a yearly income gain of $10,600. Combining household

data in developing countries with data from the US Census, Clemons, Montenegro, and

Pritchett (2008) estimate that in 2000 the annual income gain to migration for a 35 year-

old urban Mexican male with 9 to 12 years of education was $9,200.

           Simply by controlling for observable characteristics, the estimated gain to

migration from Mexico to the US falls from $25,000 to $10,000. Even still, migrants and

non-migrants with similar education and experience may not be comparable. They may

differ in terms of unobserved cognitive ability, motor skills, or motivation. The data in

Figure 3 suggest that emigrants are positively selected in terms of schooling. If migrants

are also positively selected on unobserved characteristics, the estimated $10,000 gain

would overstate the benefits from Mexican emigration. Using a range of econometric

techniques, Clemons, Montenegro, and Pritchett (2008) attempt to control for self-

5
    All monetary figures are in 2000 US dollars and adjusted for PPP.


                                                                                         16
selection on unobservables in migration, as well as for the possibility that the gains to

migration include compensation for the cost of moving abroad. They find that observed

gains to migration overstate true gains by 1.25 to 1.5 times. For the Mexico-US case, the

gain to migration would fall from $10,000 to $6,700 to $8,000.

        A better comparison would be to examine income for the same individual, before

and after migration. Rosenzweig (2007) uses data from the New Immigrant Survey to

estimate the change in income for new US permanent legal immigrants in 2003. He

compares their current US earnings with their earnings in the last job they held in their

country of origin. For a legal immigrant from Mexico with 9 to 12 years of education,

the average gain in income is $15,900 (at 35 hours a week and 48 weeks a year).

Comparing the same individuals in two countries corrects for selection on unobservables

but introduces other complications. If preparation for migration means a reduction in

labor supply, Rosenzweig’s estimates may overstate the gains to migration.6

        An alternative way to gauge the income gain to migration would be to compare

the incomes of two individuals from the same source country where one is randomly

selected to migrate to a particular destination and the other is not. McKenzie, Gibson,

and Stillman (2006) use data from New Zealand’s visa lottery to examine such an

experiment. They compare the income of lottery losers in Tonga (i.e., those who applied

for the visa lottery and were rejected) with the incomes of lottery winners who migrated

from Tonga in New Zealand. The average increase in income is 263%, which is half as

large as the difference in Tongan and New Zealand per capita GDP. McKenzie et al. are

also able to compare the incomes of lottery losers in Tonga with the incomes they


6
  Since Rosenzweig (2007) examines legal immigrants, his figures not directly comparable to Hanson
(2006) or Clemons, Montenegro, and Prichett (2008), whose samples include legal and illegal immigrants.


                                                                                                    17
expected to have earned if they had migrated. Expected gains are only 84%. Relatively

small expected gains may reflect informational asymmetries between domestic and

foreign residents regarding labor market conditions abroad.

       The income gain from migration captures the gross return from moving to another

country. While there has been research on the role of migration networks in migration

decisions (e.g., Munshi, 2003), there is little work that estimates the actual cost of

migration.   These costs include transport expenses in moving abroad, time lost in

changing labor markets, administrative fees for legal migration, border crossing costs in

illegal migration, the psychic costs of leaving home, and perceived changes in uncertainty

from living and working in another country. The absence of comprehensive data on

migration costs means that we are far from being able to produce estimates of the change

in net income emigration.

       Through remittances, migrants share a portion of their extra income with family

members at home. Remittances have increased markedly in East Asia and the Pacific,

Latin America and the Caribbean, South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa. As of 2005,

remittances exceeded official development assistance in all regions except Sub-Saharan

Africa and were greater than 65% of foreign direct investment inflows in all regions

except Europe and Central Asia. Among the smaller countries of Central America, the

Caribbean, and the South Pacific, remittances account for a large share of national

income, ranging from 10% to 17% of GDP in the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, El

Salvador, Honduras, Jamaica, and Nicaragua, and representing an astounding 53% of

GDP in Haiti (Acosta, Fajnzylber, and Lopez, 2007).

       Having migrants abroad provides insurance to households, helping them smooth




                                                                                       18
consumption in response to income shocks, be they domestic or foreign. Yang (2007)

examines changes in remittances to households in the Philippines before and after the

Asian financial crisis. As of 1997, 6% of Philippine households had a member that had

migrated abroad. Some had gone to countries in the Middle East, whose currencies

appreciated sharply against the Philippine peso in 1997-1998, while others had gone to

East Asia, where currencies appreciated less sharply or even depreciated. Consistent with

consumption smoothing, remittances increased more for households whose migrants

resided in countries that experienced stronger currency appreciation against the peso.

       There is some evidence that increases in remittances are associated with increased

expenditure on education and health. Yang (2007) also examines changes in household

expenditure and labor supply in the Philippines. Households with migrants in countries

experiencing stronger currency appreciation vis-à-vis the peso had larger increases in

spending on child education, spending on durable goods, children’s school attendance,

and entrepreneurial investments. In these households, the labor supply of 10-17 year old

children fell by more, particularly for boys. Using cross-section data on Mexican states,

Woodruff and Zenteno (2007) find a positive correlation between emigration and

business formation. These results suggest migration may help household overcome credit

constraints imposed by sending country financial markets.



       Differences in per capita GDP across countries appear to overstate the income

gain from migrating abroad by two to three times. Even after accounting for this bias, the

gross income gain to migration is still large. For a young male with some secondary

education, Clemons, Montenegro, and Pritchett (2008) estimate the median annual gain

from migrating to the US to be $11,200, while Rosenzweig estimates the annual gain to


                                                                                         19
legal migration to the US to be $10,600. The net gains to migration are unknown,

however, given the absence of information about the magnitude of total migration costs.

Remittances spread the income gains from migration to individuals in sending countries,

allow households to smooth consumption in response to income shocks, and perhaps

relax credit constraints on households.



B. LABOR MARKET CONSEQUENCES
        The labor-market consequences of international migration have inspired intense

debate among scholars. The vast majority of research has focused on the impact of labor

inflows on the US wage structure. Only recently has the literature begun to examine

other receiving countries or effects on sending economies. The US literature has been

extensively reviewed elsewhere (e.g., Borjas, 1999a; Card, 2005), allowing me to cover

the topic briefly. I summarize the current state of the debate and identify questions that

are central to resolving it.

        Research using data on the national US labor market suggests that immigration

depresses wages for US workers. Borjas (2003) defines labor markets at the national

level according to a worker’s education and labor-market experience. Over the period

1960 to 2000, education-experience cells in which immigrant labor supply growth has

been larger – such as for young high school dropouts –had slower wage growth, even

after controlling for education or experience specific wage shocks. The evidence is

consistent with immigration having depressed wages for low-skilled US workers. The

concern about this approach is that it might confound immigration with other labor-

market shocks that have hurt low-skilled workers, such as skill-biased technological

change. Absent controls for these other shocks, one cannot be sure the attributed wage



                                                                                       20
changes are really due to immigration.

       Applying a similar approach to Canada, Aydemir and Borjas (1997) find

comparable evidence of the wage effects of migration. In Canada, where immigration

has been dominated by workers toward to the top end of the skill distribution,

immigration is negatively correlated with wages across education-experience cells, with

more-educated workers being the ones who have suffered the largest wage effects. Since

Canada is presumably subject to many of the same technology shocks as the US, it would

not appear that unobserved technology shocks could explain away the wage effects of

immigration in both countries.

       The national-level approach also yields comparable results of the wage effects of

migration in sending countries.     Mishra (2005) finds a positive correlation between

emigration and wages across education-experience cells in Mexico.              In Mexico,

emigrants come disproportionately from the middle of the skill distribution, meaning

workers with close to average levels of education are those that have had the largest wage

gains from labor outflows. Aydemir and Borjas (1997) obtain similar results and also

find that the elasticity of wages with respect to labor supply is roughly similar in Canada,

Mexico, and the US. In all three countries, a 10% change in labor supply due to

migration is associated with a 4% to 6% change in wages.

       An older and larger literature has searched for immigration’s impact by

correlating the change in wages for low-skilled US natives with the change in the

immigrant presence in local labor markets, typically at the level of US cities. These area

studies tend to find that immigration has little if any impact on US wages (Borjas,

1999a). Card (2005) argues that if immigration has affected the US wage structure one




                                                                                         21
should see larger declines in the wages of native high school dropouts (relative to, say,

native high school graduates) in US cities where the relative supply of high school

dropouts has expanded by more. In fact, the correlation between the relative wage and

the relative supply of US high school dropouts across US cities is close to zero.

        Yet, one type of cross-sectional evidence is consistent with immigration having

lowered wages. Cortes (2008) finds that in the 1980s and 1990s US cities with larger

inflows of low-skilled immigrants experienced larger reductions in prices for

housekeeping, gardening, child care, dry cleaning and other labor-intensive services. A

10% increase in the local immigrant population is associated with decreases in prices for

labor-intensive services of 1.3% percent.            One obvious mechanism through which

immigration could have lowered prices is through its effects on wages.7

        The area study approach also has its problems. Immigrants may tend to settle in

US regions in which job growth is stronger, causing one to underestimate the wage

impact of immigration when using city or state-level data. As a correction, many studies

instrument for growth in local immigrant labor supply using lagged immigrant settlement

patterns. But this strategy requires strong identifying assumptions. It would be invalid,

for instance, if the labor demand shocks that influence immigrant settlement patterns are

persistent over time (Borjas, Freeman, and Katz, 1997).

        Research on other receiving countries tends to report negligible estimated impacts

of immigration on wages. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, there was a massive

migration of Russian Jews to Israel, which increased the Israeli population by 12% in the

span of just four years. Over the course of the Russian influx, Friedberg (2001) does find


7
  In Israel, Lach (2008) find negative prices effects from immigration, which are not limited to labor-
intensive goods. He attributes these to immigrants having more elastic demand and lower search costs.


                                                                                                    22
that occupations that employed more immigrants had slower wage growth, but this

correlation falls to zero once she instruments for immigrants’ occupational choice.8 In

applications of the area studies approach outside of the US, findings of little or no impact

of immigration on regional wages include Addison and Worswick (2002) for Australia;

Pischke and Velling (1997) for Germany; Zorlu and Hartog (2005) for the Netherlands

and Norway (2005); Carrasco, Jimeno, and Ortega (2008) for Spain; and Dustmann,

Fabri, and Preston (2005) in the UK.9

        In light of the theoretical results presented in section III, it is surprising that an

immigration-induced increase in the relative supply of low-skilled US labor would not

depress relative wages for native workers in this skill group. Yet, the estimated wage

impact of immigration depends in part on whether one treats the labor market as national

or local in scope. The literature offers several possible ways to reconcile the differences

in results at the national and sub-national levels.


1. An immigrant influx in a region induces natives to move out, such that estimating

immigration’s labor-impact at the sub-national level understates its true effect.

        The impact of immigration on the migration of native labor is another issue about

which there is disagreement. Card (2001, 2005) finds that across US cities, higher

presence of low-skilled immigrants is associated with higher levels of employment of

low-skilled labor, with one new immigrant on net adding about one new net worker to a

labor market, suggesting that native outmigration does not offset the labor supply effects

of arriving immigrant workers. Pischke and Velling (1997) find a similar absence of

8
  In earlier work, Hunt (1992) and Carrington and de Lima (1996) find evidence of minimal labor-market
effects from the forced return of expatriates in France and Portugal, following the end of colonialism.
9
  Negative wage effects of immigration have been found in Germany (De New and Zimmerman, 1994) and
Austria (Hofer and Huber, 2003).


                                                                                                    23
native displacement effects in Germany. Borjas (2006), using the regional counterpart to

the national-level education-experience cells in Borjas (2003), comes to the opposite

conclusion. He finds that the growth in the native workforce is smaller in regional

education-experience cells in which the growth in immigrant presence has been larger.

Moreover, he shows that not accounting for the internal migration of natives causes area

studies regressions to understate the wage effects of immigration by about half. Hatton

and Taini (2005), using data on regional labor markets in the UK, also find evidence that

the arrival of immigrant workers displaces local native workers.

       We have another instance in which time-series evidence suggests one thing while

cross-sectional evidence suggests something else. The cross-section evidence is again

subject to concerns about the endogeneity of immigrant settlement patterns, but these

concerns have been insufficient for the literature to come to a consensus about how

immigration affects the location decisions of natives.


2. Immigration induces firms to raise investment and increase innovation, partially or

fully offsetting the wage impacts of labor inflows.

       While this idea is plausible, there is relatively little empirical research on the

impact of immigration on investment or innovation at the regional or national level.

There is some evidence that immigration is associated with changes in technology, or at

least with changes in production techniques. Lewis (2005) finds that regions absorb

immigrants through their industries becoming more intensive in the use of immigrant

labor. In particular, industries in US metropolitan areas that have received larger inflows

of low-skilled immigrant labor have increased their relative labor intensity by more.

These industries have also been slower to adopt new technologies, suggesting changes in



                                                                                        24
labor supply may affect incentives for technology adoption, as in Acemoglu (1998).

Gandal, Hanson, and Slaughter (2004) find evidence of similar within-industry changes

in factor intensity in response to the Russian immigration in Israel in the early 1990s.

Incidentally, Lewis’ (2005) results rule out changes in sectoral mix accounting for

regional absorption of immigrant labor, as could occur in a simple Heckscher-Ohlin

model. He finds little evidence that regions have absorbed incoming immigrants by

shifting employment towards sectors that are more intensive in low-skilled labor.


3. Immigrant and native workers are imperfect substitutes in production, such that on net

foreign labor inflows do not hurt native workers (and may actually help them).

       In initial work, Ottaviano and Peri (2007) found evidence that immigrant and

native labor were imperfect substitutes.    They estimated a negative and significant

correlation between immigrant-native relative wages and immigrant-native relative

employment, across Borjas’ (2003) education-experience cells. However, their results

appear sensitive to how one defines skill groups. Simply by dropping high school

students from the sample, the finding of imperfect substitutability between immigrants

and natives disappears. More generally, Borjas, Grogger, and Hanson (2008) show that

across a wide variety of specifications one cannot reject the hypothesis that comparably

skilled immigrants and natives are perfect substitutes in employment, in line with earlier

work by Jaeger (1997). Whatever one thinks about the wage effects of immigration, low-

skilled immigrant and native workers appear to be in the same labor market.



       To date, the literature offers two approaches for estimating the wage effects of

migration, which yield quite different results. The national-level approach is subject to



                                                                                       25
concerns about how one controls for changes in technology, though these should be at

least partly allayed by the fact that countries with very different types of migration shocks

exhibit similar migration wage elasticities. The area studies approach is subject to

concerns about the endogeneity of immigrant settlement patterns, with it being difficult to

assess the validity of proposed solutions to this problem.

       The literature’s near obsession with the wage impacts of immigration leaves the

impression that these are sufficient to identify immigration’s impact on national income.

In an economy without distortions, even if all workers lose from immigration, the income

gain to capital owners will be sufficient to ensure that national income increases. Indeed,

it is unlikely that an economy could experience a gain in national income from

immigration without at least some workers being hurt. So far, empirical research has had

little to say about the impact of immigration on non-labor income.



C. FISCAL CONSEQUENCES
       By changing labor supply, international migration may alter a country’s fiscal

accounts. With emigrants being positively selection in terms of schooling, sending

countries are deprived of high-income taxpayers. To the extent that education and health

care are publicly provided, sending countries may have made substantial investments in

these individuals while young only to have receiving countries reap the returns.

       While there is a large body of theoretical literature on the taxation of skilled

emigration (see, e.g., Bhagwati and Wilson, 1989; Docquier and Rapoport, 2007),

empirical research on the subject is sparse. In a recent contribution, Desai, Kapur, and

McHale (2008) examine the fiscal effects of brain drain from India. In 2000, individuals

with tertiary education accounted for 61% of Indian emigrants but just 5% of India’s total



                                                                                          26
population. Between 1990 and 2000, the emigration rate for the tertiary educated rose

from 2.8% to 4.3%, but from just 0.3% to 0.4% for the population as a whole. Desai et

al. examine Indian emigration to the US, which in 2000 was host to 65% of India’s

skilled emigrants. First, they use Mincer wage regressions to produce a counterfactual

income series that gives emigrants the income they would have earned in India based on

their observed characteristics and the returns to these characteristics in India. On the tax

side, they calculate income tax losses by running the counterfactual income series

through the Indian income tax schedule. They also calculate indirect tax losses using

estimates of indirect tax payments per unit of gross national income. On the spending

side, they calculate expenditure savings by taking the categories for which savings would

exist and then estimating savings per individual. Their results suggest Indian emigration

to the US cost India net tax contributions of 0.24% of GDP in 2000. Remittances by

skilled emigrants generated a tax gain of 0.1% of GDP, partially offsetting these losses.

For India, the tax consequences of skilled emigration appear to be small, though small

countries with high emigration rates may face larger impacts.

       In receiving countries, immigration may exacerbate inefficiencies associated with

a country’s system of public finance. Where immigrants pay more in taxes than they

receive in government benefits, immigration reduces the net tax burden on native

taxpayers. The total impact of immigration on native residents—the sum of the

immigration surplus (the pretax income gain) and the net fiscal transfer from

immigrants—would be unambiguously positive. With progressive income taxes and

means-tested entitlement programs in many receiving countries, positive fiscal

consequences from immigration would appear to be more likely the more skilled the




                                                                                         27
labor inflow.   In contexts where immigrants pay less in taxes than they receive in

government benefits, immigration increases the net tax burden on natives, necessitating

an increase in taxes on natives, a reduction in government benefits to natives, or

increased borrowing from future generations.

       There are also dynamic fiscal effects from immigration (Auerbach and

Oreopoulos, 1999). If the net tax burden on residents of a country is expected to increase

in the future, immigration increases the tax base over which this burden can be spread

and reduces the increase that natives would have to bear (Collado and Valera, 2004). But

this is only true if the descendents of immigrants see their incomes rise to a point where

they make positive net tax contributions.      If the children of immigrants have their

educational attainment lag behind that of natives, high levels of immigration today could

instead increase the future tax burden on the native population.

       In the US, immigrant households have historically made greater use of subsidized

health care, income support to poor families, food stamps and other types of public

assistance (Borjas and Hinton, 1996). Immigrant households tend to be larger than native

households, have more children, and have very low incomes, making them eligible for

more types of benefits. In the last decade, however, the difference between immigrant

and native use of welfare programs in the US has fallen or even reversed, largely because

of a sweeping reform of welfare policy in 1996, one effect of which was to restrict non-

citizens from having access to many federally funded benefit programs.             While

immigrant households still make greater use of public healthcare than native households,

they make comparable or less use of other types of public assistance (Borjas, 2003;

Capps et al., 2005). In the European Union, the concern is that enlargement to include




                                                                                       28
lower income countries in Central and Eastern Europe will lead to low-skilled migration

to higher income countries, and increases in welfare usage (Sinn, 2002).

           Calculating the total fiscal consequences of immigration, while straightforward

conceptually, is difficult in practice. To estimate them correctly, one needs to know many

details about the income, spending, and employment behavior of the population of

immigrants. As a result, there are few comprehensive analyses of the fiscal impact of

immigration. In one of the few such studies, Smith and Edmonston (1996) estimate that

in 1996 immigration imposed a short-run fiscal burden on the average US native

household of $200, or 0.2 percent of U.S. GDP. In that year, a back of the envelope

calculation suggests that, following the logic of equation (3), the immigration surplus was

about 0.1 percent of GDP (Borjas, 1999b), meaning that immigration in the mid-1990s

reduced the annual income of US residents by about 0.1 percent of GDP. Given the

uncertainties involved in making this calculation, this estimate is unlikely to be

statistically indistinguishable from zero. While we cannot say with much conviction

whether the aggregate fiscal impact of immigration on the US economy is positive or

negative, it does appear the total impact is small.10

           Tax and transfer policies create a motivation for a government to restrict

immigration, even where the level of immigration is set by a social planner.                               If

immigrants are primarily individuals with low incomes relative to natives, increased labor

inflows may exacerbate distortions created by social-insurance programs or means-tested

entitlement programs, making a departure from free immigration the constrained social




10
     This estimate is based on short run considerations. Allowing for dynamics could change the results.


                                                                                                           29
optimum (Wellisch and Walz, 1998).11 Pay as you go pension systems create a further

incentive for politicians to manipulate the timing and level of immigration (Scholten and

Thum, 1996; Razin and Sadka, 1999).             Given its graying population and unfunded

pension liabilities, one might expect Western Europe to be opening itself more

aggressively to foreign labor inflows. However, concerns over possible increases in

expenditure on social insurance programs may temper the region’s enthusiasm for using

immigration to solve its pension problems (Boeri and Brücker, 2005).

        In the US, the fiscal consequences of immigration appear to matter for

immigration policy preferences. Hanson, Scheve, and Slaughter (2007) find that U.S.

natives who are more exposed to immigrant fiscal pressures – those living in states that

have large immigrant populations and that provide immigrants access to generous public

benefits – are more in favor of reducing immigration. This public-finance cleavage is

strongest among natives with high earnings potential, who tend to be in high tax brackets.

Facchini and Mayda (2006) obtain similar results for Europe. More educated individuals

are more opposed to immigration in countries where immigrants are less skilled and

governments are more generous in the benefits they provide.



        The evidence that does exist suggests that the short run consequences of

international migration are modest. However, the literature has only examined a handful

of countries.    While there is theoretical literature on the dynamic consequences of

migration, as well as its impacts on political economy, empirical work on these subjects




11
  In the long run, immigrants may affect voting outcomes directly through their participation in the
political process (Razin, Sadka, and Swagel, 2002; Ortega, 2004).


                                                                                                 30
is sparse.   We cannot say much to policy markers about the net fiscal impacts of

international migration other than preliminary evidence suggests they are not very big.


D. HUMAN CAPITAL ACCUMULATION
       International migration has the potential to affect the accumulation of human

capital in both sending and receiving countries. In receiving countries, migration may

increase the relative supply of high-skilled labor (e.g., Canada), low-skilled labor (e.g.,

Spain), or both high and low-skilled labor (e.g., the US). To the extent wages fall for the

skill group whose relative supply increases, native workers have an incentive to select out

of that skill group. Alternatively, immigration may affect native schooling decisions by

increasing competition for scarce educational resources.

       Using data on the US, Borjas (2004) estimates a negative correlation between the

number of foreign students and the number of native-born students in university graduate

programs, suggesting that foreign students may crowd out natives. Even with crowding

out, the arrival of foreign students may still lead to an increase in the net supply of skilled

labor in the US. Stuen, Mobarak, and Maskus (2006) find that university departments

with more foreign graduate students have more publications in scientific journals,

suggesting inflows of foreign students may spur knowledge creation.

       Looking lower down the skill ladder, Betts and Lofstrom (2000) and Hoxby

(1998) present evidence that immigration adversely affects college attendance for US

natives, particularly for minority students, and Betts (1999) finds that increases in the

number of student-age immigrants in a US locality are associated with decreases in the




                                                                                            31
likelihood that local black and Latino students will complete a high school degree.12 For

Israel, Paserman and Gould (2008) find that having more immigrants in one’s grade

school class is associated with a lower likelihood that a student will subsequently

matriculate in or graduate from high school. While the precise mechanisms behind these

relationships are unclear, it does appear that the performance of native students

deteriorates following a local influx of immigrant students.

        In sending economies, the focus of research has been on how opportunities for

emigration affect the incentive to acquire skill. In poor countries, the income gain from

emigration is often substantial. Moreover, the gain to migration is larger for individuals

with higher education levels (Rosenzweig, 2007; Grogger and Hanson, 2008).                           An

increase in the probability that individuals from a poor sending country will be allowed to

emigrate to the US or Europe may thus increase the incentive to obtain higher levels of

education. The quantitative impact of this brain gain effect depends on the elasticity of

the sending-country supply of educational services and the perceived probability of

migrating successfully. Where seats in colleges and universities are in limited supply,

increases in the demand for higher education may have little effect on the local number of

educated workers.13 Relatedly, where receiving countries allocate immigration visas in a

non-random manner (say, by reserving entry slots for family members of existing US

residents), many sending-country residents may have little hope of moving abroad,

leaving their incentive to acquire skill unaffected by emigration opportunities.

        Only a handful of empirical papers have examined the relationship between

emigration and human-capital accumulation. For a cross-section of countries, Beine,

12
   In related work, Betts and Farlie (2003) find that immigration induces natives to select out of public
schools and into private schools.
13
   Unless, of course, individuals are able to migrate abroad for their education. See Rosenzweig (2006).


                                                                                                      32
Docquier, and Rapoport (2006) report a positive correlation between emigration to rich

countries and the increase in the stock of human capital. This finding is consistent with

emigration increasing the incentive to acquire education. However, it is not clear that one

can make inferences about the causal impact of brain drain on educational attainment

from the cross-section correlation between emigration and schooling. Individuals are

likely to treat education and migration as joint decisions, making the two outcomes

simultaneously determined. For causal inference, one would need to observe changes in

human-capital accumulation in sending countries before and after there were unexpected

and exogenous shocks in the opportunity to emigrate. The literature has yet to uncover

such experiments in the data, meaning we still have an incomplete sense of how

emigration affects supplies of human capital.

       In a related line of research, the literature examines whether studying abroad is a

vehicle for more permanent migration. In the US, many of the individuals who succeed

in obtaining temporary or permanent immigration visas reserved for skilled workers are

foreign students enrolled in US universities. Coming to the US on a student visa may

increase the likelihood of obtaining an employment visa. Studying abroad is thus partly

about completing higher education and partly about creating opportunities for migration.

Rosenzweig (2006) finds that the latter effect tends to dominate. In the US, the inflow of

foreign students is higher from countries where earnings for skilled workers are lower

and where university capacity is higher, not lower.

       Other evidence suggests international migration may increase the flow of ideas

between countries. In China, India, and Taiwan, the migration of skilled labor to Silicon

Valley – where Indian and Chinese immigrants account for one third of the engineering




                                                                                        33
labor force – has been followed by increased trade with and investment from the US

(Saxenian, 2002).     Spilimbergo (2008) suggests there is an association between a

country’s democratic tendencies and the political systems of the countries under which its

students did their university training.    He finds a positive correlation between the

democracy index in for a sending country and the average democracy index in the

countries in which a country’s emigrant students have studied. Migration flows may also

help erode barriers to trade. Successive waves of emigration from China have created

communities of ethnic Chinese throughout Southeast Asia, as well as in South Asia and

on the east coast of Africa. Rauch and Trindade (2002) find that bilateral trade is

positively correlated with the interaction between the two countries’ Chinese populations,

consistent with ethnic business networks facilitating trade.



       In receiving countries, immigration appears to disrupt the schooling of natives.

The arrival of immigrants in native student’s age and schooling group is associated with

deterioration in his performance at school or in his access to schooling. The literature has

yet to uncover the mechanisms behind these effects. In sending countries, the literature

has yet to identify how opportunities to emigrate affect the incentive to acquire skill, an

issue of first order performance for understanding how emigration affects economic

development.    There is indirect and anecdotal evidence that international migration

promotes the flow of ideas between countries.



5 DISCUSSION
       There is ample evidence that international migration raises gross incomes for

migrants, while it redistributes incomes within sending and receiving countries. Because



                                                                                         34
the net impact of immigration on receiving countries appears to be small and because the

gain to migration appears to be so large (owing to enormous international differences in

labor productivity), it is natural to presume international migration raises global income.

At this point, however, the literature does not allow one to do much more than make

presumptions. There remain many unknowns in evaluating migration’s impact.

        Economic theory supports the presumption that international migration expands

global output.    Moving labor from low productivity to high productivity countries

improves allocative efficiency in the world economy. No study suggests there are large

negative consequences from global migration that would overturn this intuition. In the

US, which is the largest receiving country for immigrants, the short run net impact of

immigration, to a first approximation, appears to be a wash (Borjas, 1999b). The global

gains from migration are largely captured by migrants themselves, which they share with

family members at home through remittances.             Unless there are large unmeasured

negative externalities from migration or migration exacerbates existing distortions in

ways that have not yet been detected, one would be hard pressed, on economic grounds,

to justify highly restrictive barriers to global labor flows.

        While the gross income gain to migration appears to be large, the net gain is

unknown. There is little comprehensive evidence on the magnitude of migration costs.

Measuring these costs may explain why global labor flows are so small. Of course, a

portion of migration costs are a byproduct of receiving-country restrictions on

immigration. Restrictions raise the premium on obtaining a student visa, or other form of

temporary entry, which facilitate more permanent emigration.          They also create an

incentive for illegal migration, allowing smugglers to capture a portion of the gains to




                                                                                        35
migration and dissipating another portion by subjecting migrants to psychic costs and

physical risks associated with crossing borders without permission. There is evidence

that migrants underestimate the gains to migration (McKenzie, Gibson, and Stillman,

2007) and use networks to lower assimilation or job search costs (Munshi, 2003),

suggesting uncertainty and informational barriers affect labor mobility.

       The impact of immigration on receiving country labor markets is hotly disputed.

The evidence would seem to favor the argument that wage effects from immigration do

exist. Studies using national level data, while subject to concerns about their ability to

control for all relevant labor market shocks, yield consistent qualitative results across

sending and receiving countries (with Israel being an exception). The results are also

consistent with observed changes in native labor supply. Studies using local level data,

whose results suggest immigration has little wage impact, are subject to concerns about

the endogeneity of immigrant settlement patterns that have yet to be fully resolved.

       The literature has focused on the wage effects of immigration, while largely

ignoring impacts on non-labor income. In theory, one would expect the gains in non-

labor income (plus the gains to workers that complement foreign labor) to more than

offset the losses to workers than compete with immigrant labor. There seems to be an

implicit premise in existing research that knowing how immigration affects wages is

sufficient to know how it affects national income. Grounding empirical work in global

general equilibrium may help address this shortcoming.

       The net fiscal consequences of international migration are also poorly understood.

In sending countries, there have only been a handful of studies on emigration’s fiscal

impacts and these have focused on the movement of high-skilled workers to high-income




                                                                                       36
destinations. In receiving countries, the impact of immigration on the net tax burden of

the native population is a central issue in political opposition to labor inflows. While

there are many studies on how immigration affects government expenditure, there are

few on how it affects government revenue, making it difficult to evaluate the net fiscal

impact of labor inflows. The few studies that do exist are now dated.

       A further unknown is the effect of emigration on the incentive to acquire skill in

sending countries. In the cross-section, countries that have higher emigrant stocks abroad

also have faster growth in the number of educated adults, but this association may or may

not be informative about the consequences of brain drain. We still do not know how

changes in the opportunity to emigrate affect human capital accumulation.            Many

individuals migrate abroad to complete their education, with many ultimately returning to

their home countries. This circular migration is important for the accumulation of skill in

developing countries, though migrants from the poorest countries are those most tempted

to emigrate permanently. The policy implications for developing countries are unclear.

While a mantra of the development community is that education is a public good, and

therefore deserving of subsidies, improving high school or university training in the very

poorest nations might actually increase brain drain by making it easier for high-ability

individuals to obtain student visas, and ultimately employment visas, from rich countries

(Rosenzweig, 2006). Yet, even where migration is permanent, having emigrants abroad

may help a country lower its barriers to trade, investment, and technology flows.

       The economics literature has yet to provide policy makers all the inputs they

would need to choose sensible migration policies, even if officials were inclined to base

their decisions on welfare grounds. While the evidence suggests international migration




                                                                                        37
raises global income, there are many relevant details we do not know that are essential for

determining how open borders should be and whether receiving countries should favor

immigrants from particular countries or with particular characteristics.




                                                                                        38
REFERENCES
Acemoglu, Daron. 1998. “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed
Technical Change and Wage Inequality.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1055-1089.

Acosta, Pablo, Pablo Fajnzylber, and Humberto Lopez. 2007. “How Important are
Remittances in America?” In Pablo Fajnzylber and Humberto Lopez, eds., Close to
Home, Washington, DC: The World Bank, forthcoming.

Addison, Thomas, and Christopher Worswick. 2002. “The Impact of Immigration on the
Earnings of Natives: Evidence from Australian Micro Data.” The Economic Record,
78(1): 68-78.

Auerbach, Alan J., and Philip Oreopoulos. 1999. “Analyzing the Fiscal Impact of U.S.
Immigration.” American Economic Review. Papers and Proceedings, 89(2), pp. 176-180.

Aydemir, Abdurrahman and George J. Borjas. 2007. “A Comparative Analysis of the
Labor Market Impact of International Migration: Canada, Mexico, and the US.” Journal
of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.

Beine, Micahael, Frederic Docquier, and Hillel Rapoport. 2001. “Brain Drain and
Economic Growth: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Development Economics, 64(1):
275-289.

Beine, Micahael, Frederic Docquier, and Hillel Rapoport. 2006. “Brain Drain and
Human Capital Formation in Developing Countries: Winners and Losers.” IRES
Working Paper No. 2006-23.

Beine, Michel, Frédéric Docquier, and Hillel Rapoport. 2007. “Measuring International
Skilled Migration: New Estimates Accounting for Age of Entry.” World Bank Economic
Review, 21(June 2): 249-254.

Belot, and Timothy Hatton. 2008. “Immigrant Selection in the OECD.” CEPR Working
Paper No. 6675.

Benhabib, Jess. 1996. “On the Political Economy of Immigration.” European Economic
Review, 40: 1737-1743.

Benhabib, Jess, and Boyan Jovanovic. 2007.         “Optimal Migration:     A World
Perspective.” NBER Working Paper No. 12871.

Betts, Julian. 1999. “Have Inflows of Immigrants Diminished Natives Educational
Attainment?” Public Policy Institute of California.

Betts, Julian, and Robert Farlie. 2003. “Does Immigration Induce “Native Flight’ from
Public into Private Schools.” Journal of Public Economics. 87(5-6): 987-102.



                                                                                  39
Betts, Julian, and Magnus Lofstrom. 2000. “The Educational Attainment of Immigrants:
Trends and Implications.” In George J. Borjas, ed., Issues in the Economics of
Immigration, Chicago: University of Chicago and NBER.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. and Koichi Hamada. 1974. “The Brain Drain, International
Integration of Markets for Professionals, and Unemployment.” Journal of Development
Economics 1(1): 19-42.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. and Carlos Rodriguez. 1975. “Welfare Theoretic Analyses of the
Brain Drain.” Journal of Development Economics 2(3): 195-221.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. and John Wilson, eds.,      Income Taxation and International
Mobility, Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Boeri, Tito, and Herbert Brücker. 2005. “Migration, Co-ordination Failures, and EU
Enlargement.” Economic Policy, 20(44), 629-703.

Bonin, Holger. 2005. “Wage and Employment Effects of Immigration to Germany:
Evidence from a Skill Group Approach.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 1875.

Borjas, George J. 1999a. “The Economic Analysis of Immigration.” In Orley C.
Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Amsterdam: North-
Holland, pp. 1697-1760.

Borjas, George J. 1999b. Heaven’s Door: Immigration Policy and the American
Economy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Borjas, George J. “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the
Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118
(November 2003): 1335-1374.

Borjas, George J. 2003. “Welfare Reform, Labor Supply, and Health Insurance in the
Immigrant Population.” NBER Working Paper No. 9781.

Borjas, George J. 2004. “Do Foreign Students Crowd out Native Students from Graduate
Programs?” NBER Working Paper No. 10349.

Borjas, George J. “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of
Immigration,” Journal of Human Resources 41 (Spring 2006): 221-258.

Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1997. "How Much Do
Immigration and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?" Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1: 1-90.

Borjas, George J., Jeffrey Grogger, Gordon H. Hanson. 2008. “Imperfect Substitution
between Immigrants and Natives: A Reappraisal.” NBER Working Paper No. 13887.



                                                                                 40
Borjas, George J., and Lynette Hilton. 1996. “Immigration and the Welfare State: Immigrant
Participation in Means-Tested Entitlement Programs” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
111(2): 575-604.

Brücker, Herbert, and Cécily Defoort. 2006. “The (Self) Selection of International
Migrants Reconsidered: Theory and New Evidence.” IZA Discussion Paper 2052.

Capps, Randall, Michael Fix, Everett Henderson, Jane Reardon-Anderson. 2005. “A
Profile of Low-Income Working Immigrant Families.” Urban Institute Working Paper B-
67.

Card, David. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts
of Higher Immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics (January 2001): 22-64.

Card, David. 2005. “Is the New Immigration Really so Bad?” Economic Journal,
115(507): 300-323.

Carrasco, Raquel, Juan. F. Jimeno, and A. Carolina Ortega. 2008. “The Effects of
Immigration on the Labor Market Performance of Native Born Workers: Some Evidence
for Spain.” Journal of Population Economics, 21: 627-648.

Carrington, William, and Pedro de Lima. 1996. “The Impact of the 1970s Repatriates
from Africa on the Portuguese Labor Market.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
49(2): 330-347.

Chiquiar, Daniel and Gordon Hanson. 2005. “International Migration, Self-Selection,
and the Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the US.” Journal of Political
Economy, April 113(2): 239-281.

Clark, Ximena, Timothy Hatton, Jeffrey Williamson. 2007. “Explaining U.S. Immigration,
1971-1998.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2): 359-373.

Clemons, Michael, Claudio Montenegro, and Lant Pritchett. “The Great Discrimination:
Borders as a Labor Market Barrier.” Mimeo, Center on Global Development.

Collado Inigo Iturbe-Ormaetxe, M. Dolores, and Guadalupe Valera. 2004. “Quantifying
the Impact of Immigration on the Spanish Welfare State.” International Tax and Public
Finance, 11: 335-353.

Cortes, Patricia. 2008. “The Effect of Low-Skilled Immigration on U.S. Prices: Evidence
from CPI Data.” Journal of Political Economy.

De Melo, Jaime, Jean-Marie Grether and Tobias Müller. 2001. The Political Economy of
International Migration in a Ricardo-Viner Model. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2714.




                                                                                       41
De New, John P., and Klaus F. Zimmerman. 1994. “Native Wage Impacts of Foreign
Labor: A Random Effects Panel Analysis.” Journal of Population Economics, 7: 177-192.

Desai, Mihir, Devesh Kapur, and John McHale. 2008. “The Fiscal Impact of High
Skilled Emigration: Flows of Indians to the U.S.” Journal of Development Economics,
forthcoming.

Docquier, Frederic and Abdeslam Marfouk. 2006. “International Migration by Educational
Attainment, 1990-2000.” In Caglar Ozden and Maurice Schiff, eds., International
Migration, Remittances, and the Brain Drain. Washington, DC: The World Bank and
Palgrave McMillan, pp. 151-200.

Docquier, Frederic and Hillel Rapoport. 2008. “Skilled Migration: The Perspective of
Developing Countries.” In Jagdish Bhagwati and Gordon Hanson, eds., Skilled Immigration
Today: Problems, Prospects, and Policies. Oxford: Oxford University Press, forthcoming.

Dustmann, Christian, Francesca Fabbri, and Ian Preston. 2005. “The Impact of
Immigration on the British Labour Market.” The Economic Journal, 115: F324-F341.

Euwals, Rob, and Hans Roodenburg. 2004. “A Note of the Redistributive Effect of
Immigration.” Economics Letters, 85(2): 241-246.

Facchini, Giovanni, and Anna Maria Mayda. 2006. “Individual Attitudes towards
Immigrants: Welfare-state Determinants across Countries.” CEPR Working Paper No.
5702.

Facchini, Giovanni, and Gerald Willmann. 2007. “The Political Economy of
International Factor Mobility.” Journal of International Economics.

Freeman, Richard. 2006. “People Flows in Globalization.” NBER Working Paper No.
12315.

Friedberg, Rachel. 2001. “The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1373-1408.

Galosto, Andrea, Alessandra Venturini, and Claudia Villosio. 1999. “Do Immigrants
Compete with Natives?” Labour, 13(3): 603-622.

Gandal, Neil, Gordon Hanson, and Matthew Slaughter. 2004. "Technology, Trade, and
Adjustment to Immigration in Israel," European Economic Review, 48(2004): 403-428.

Grogger, Jeffrey, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2008. "Income Maximization and the
Selection and Sorting of International Migrants," NBER Working Paper No. 13821,
February 2008.




                                                                                    42
Hanson, Gordon H. 2006. “Illegal Migration from Mexico to the US.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 44: 869-924.

Hanson, Gordon H.     2007.   “International Migration and the Developing World.”
Mimeo, UCSD.

Hanson, Gordon H., Kenneth Scheve, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2007. “Local Public
Finance and Individual Preferences over Globalization Strategies.” Economics and
Politics, 19(2007): 1-33.

Hatton, Timothy J., and Massiliano Tani. 2005. “Immigration and Inter-Regional
Mobility in the UK, 1982-2000.” The Economic Journal, 115: F342-F358.

Hatton, Timothy J., and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2004. “Refugees, Asylum Seekers and
Policy in Europe.” NBER Working Paper No. 10680.

Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2005. “A Dual Policy Paradox: Why
Have Trade and Immigration Policies Always Differed in Labor-Scarce Economies.”
NBER Working Paper No. 11866.

Hofer, Helmut, and Peter Huber. 2003. “Wage and Mobility Effects of Trade and
Migration on the Austrian Labour Market.” Empirica, 30: 107-125.

Hoxby, Caroline M. 1998. “Do Immigrants Crowd Disadvantaged American Natives
our of Higher Education?” In Daniel S. Hamermesh and Frank D. Bean, eds., Help or
Hindrance? The Economic Implications of Immigration for African-Americans. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation, 282-321.

Hunt, Jennifer. 1992. “The Impact of the 1962 Repatriates from Algeria on the French
Labor Market.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 45(3): 556-572.

Huntington, Samuel. 2004. Who Are We? The Challenges to America’s National
Identity. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Jaeger, David A. 1997. “Reconciling the Old and New Census Education Questions:
Recommendations for Researchers.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 15(3):
300-309.

Jandl, Michael. 2003. “Estimates on the Number of Illegal and Smuggled Immigrants in
Europe.” International Centre for Migration Policy Development.

Jansen, Marion, and Roberta Piermartini. 2005. “The Impact of Mode 4 Liberalization
on Bilateral Trade Flows.” ERSD Working Paper, WTO.

Lach, Saul. 2008. “Immigration and Prices.” Journal of Political Economy, 115(4):
548-587.



                                                                                   43
Lewis, Ethan. 2005. “Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique.” Mimeo,
Dartmouth College.

Lucas, Robert E. 1988. “On the Mechanics of Economic Development.” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 22(3): 3-42.

Mayda, Anna Maria. 2005. “International Migration: A Panel Data Analysis of
Economic and Non-economic Determinants.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 1590.

McHale, John. 2008. “Taxation and Skilled Indian Migration to the US:
Revisiting the Bhagwati Tax.” In Jagdish Bhagwati and Gordon Hanson, eds., Skilled
Immigration Today: Problems, Prospects, and Policies. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
forthcoming.

McKenzie, David, John Gibson, and Steven Stillman. 2006. “How Important is
Selection? Experimental versus Non-experimental Measures of the Income Gains from
Migration.” Mimeo, The World Bank.

Mishra, Prachi. 2007. “Emigration and Wages in Source Countries: Evidence from
Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics, 82(1): 180-199.

Miyagiwa, Kaz. 1991. “Scale Economies in Education and the Brain Drain Problem.”
International Economic Review, 32(3): 743-759.

Mountford, Andrew. 1997. "Can a Brain Drain Be Good for Growth in the Source
Economy?" Journal of Development Economics, 53(2): 287-303.

Munshi, Kaivan. 2003. “Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the
US Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (May): 549-97.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco, and Giovanni Peri. 2007. “Rethinking the Effects of Immigration
on Wages.” Mimeo, UC Davis.

Passel, Jeffrey S. 2006. “Size and Characteristics of the Unauthorized Population in the
US: Estimates from the March 2005 Current Population Survey.” Pew Hispanic Center.

Pischke, Jorn-Steffen, and Johannes Velling. 1997.   “Employment Effects of
Immigration to Germany: An Analysis Based on Local Labor Markets.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 594-604.

Pritchett, Lant. 2006. Let Their People Come: Breaking the Gridlock on Global Labor
Mobility. Washington, DC: Center for Global Development.

Rauch, James E., 1999, “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of
International Economics, 48(1): 7-35.


                                                                                     44
Rauch, James E. and Vitor Trindade, 2002, “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International
Trade,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(1), February, 116-130.

Razin, Asaf, and Efraim Sadka. 1999. “Migration and Pensions with International
Capital Mobility.” Journal of Public Economics, 74: 141-150.

Razin, Asaf, Efraim Sadka, and Phillip Swagel. 2002. “Tax Burden and Migration:
Political Economy Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Public Economics 85: 167-190.

Rosenzweig, Mark. 2006. “Global Wage Differences and International Student Flows.”
Brookings Trade Forum.

Rosenzweig, Mark. 2007. “Education and Migration: A Global Perspective.” Mimeo,
Yale.

Rosenzweig, Mark, and Oded Stark. 1989. “Consumption Smoothing, Migration, and
Marriage: Evidence from Rural India.” Journal of Political Economy, 97(4): 905-926.

Saxenian, AnnaLee. 2002. Local and Global Networks of Immigrant Professionals in
Silicon Valley. Monograph, Public Policy Institute of California.

Scheve, Kenneth F., and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2001. Globalization and the Perceptions
of American Workers. Washington DC: Institute for International Economics.

Schiff, Maurice. 2007. “Optimal Immigration Policy: Permanent, Guest-worker, or
Mode IV?” Mimeo, World Bank.

Scholten, Ulrich, and Marcel Thum. 1996. “Public Pensions and Immigration Policy in a
Democracy.” Public Choice, 66: 347-361.

Sinn, Hans-Werner. 2002. “EU Enlargement and the Future of the Welfare State.”
Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 49(1): 1-4-115.

Smith, James P. and Barry Edmonston, eds. The New Americans: Economic,
Demographic, and Fiscal Effects of Immigration. Washington, DC: National Academy
Pres, 1997.

Spilimbergo, Antonio. 2008. “Foreign Students and Democracy.” American Economic
Review, forthcoming.

Stark, Oded, and You Qiang Wang. 2002. “Inducing Human Capital Formation:
Migration as a Substitute for Subsidies.” Journal of Public Economics 86(1): 29-46.

Stuen, Eric T., Ahmed Mobarak, and Keith Maskus. 2006. “Foreign Graduate Students
and Knowledge Creation at US Universities.” Mimeo, University of Colorado.


                                                                                  45
United Nations. 2006. “World Migrant Stock: The 2005 Revision Population Database”
http://esa.un.org/migration/.

Wellisch, Dietmar, and Uwe Walz. 1998. “Why Do Rich Countries Prefer Free Trade
over Free Immigration? The Role of the Modern Welfare States.” European Economic
Review, 42: 1595-1612.

Wilson, John D. 2008. “Income Taxation and Skilled Migration: The Analytical Issues.”
In Jagdish Bhagwati and Gordon Hanson, eds., Skilled Immigration Today: Problems,
Prospects, and Policies. Oxford: Oxford University Press, forthcoming.

Wong, Kar-yiu and Chong Kee Yip. 1999. “Education, Economic Growth, and Brain
Drain.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 23(): 699-726.

Woodruff, Christopher and Rene Zenteno.         2007.    “Migration Networks and
Microenterprises in Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.

Yang, Dean. 2006. “Why Do Migrants Return to Poor Countries? Evidence from
Philippine Migrants Responses to Exchange Rate Shocks.” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 88(4): 715-735.

Yang, Dean. 2007. “International Migration, Remittances, and Household Investment:
Evidence from Philippine Migrants’ Exchange Rate Shocks.” Economic Journal,
forthcoming.

Zorlu, Aslan, and Joop Hartog. 2005. “The Effect of Immigration on Wages in Three
European Countries.” Journal of Population Economics, 18: 113-151.




                                                                                    46
      Table 1: Percent of Foreign-Born Population in Total Population

                                                                    Change
                                     1995     2000     2005        1995-2005
Australia                            23.0     23.0     23.8           0.8
Austria                                       10.5     13.5
Belgium                              9.7      10.3     12.1           2.4
Canada                               16.6     17.4     19.1           2.5
Czech Republic                                 4.2      5.1           0.9
Denmark                               4.8      5.8      6.5           1.7
Finland                               2.0      2.6      3.4           1.4
France (a)                                    10.0      8.1
Germany (b)                          11.5     12.5
Greece (c)                                    10.3
Hungary                               2.8      2.9      3.3           0.5
Ireland (d)                           6.9      8.7      11.0          4.1
Italy (c)                                      2.5
Luxembourg                           30.9     33.2      33.4          2.5
Mexico                               0.4       0.5      0.4           0.0
Netherlands                           9.1     10.1      10.6          1.5
New Zealand (d)                      16.2     17.2      19.4          3.2
Norway                                5.5      6.8       8.2          2.7
Poland
Portugal                              5.4     5.1       6.3           0.9
Slovak Republic (c)                           2.5       3.9
Spain (c)                                     5.3
Sweden                               10.5     11.3      12.4          1.9
Switzerland                          21.4     21.9      23.8          2.4
Turkey                                        1.9
United Kingdom                        6.9      7.9      9.7           2.8
US                                    9.3     11.0      12.9          3.6

Notes: (a) 2000 value is from 1999; (b) 2004 value is from 2003; (c) 2000 value is
from 2001; (d) 1995 value is from 1996. Source: International Migration Outlook,
OECD, 2006 (1995 data) and 2007.




                                                                                     47
          Table 2: Share of OECD Immigrants by Sending Region, 2000

                                       Share of Immigrants by                Change in
                                       OECD Receiving Region                OECD Share
      Low Income                    All          North              Asia,
    Sending Region                 OECD         America   Europe   Oceania 1990 to 2000
 Mex., Cen. Am., Caribe            0.202         0.374     0.025    0.002      0.053
     Southeast Asia                0.102         0.137     0.039    0.160      0.016
    Eastern Europe                 0.099         0.049     0.161    0.116      0.042
      Middle East                  0.063         0.032     0.113    0.029      0.001
       South Asia                  0.052         0.052     0.055    0.036     0.011
      North Africa                 0.044         0.009     0.098    0.018     -0.006
     South America                 0.041         0.050     0.031    0.035      0.010
    Cen., So. Africa               0.036         0.021     0.061    0.021      0.007
  Former Soviet Union              0.029         0.023     0.042    0.010     -0.002
     Pacific Islands               0.004         0.003     0.001    0.027      0.000
         Total                     0.672         0.750     0.626    0.454      0.132

      High Income
     Sending Region
     Western Europe                0.244         0.152    0.336     0.368     -0.111
      Asia, Oceania                0.055         0.062    0.018     0.156     -0.010
     North America                 0.029         0.037    0.020     0.023     -0.011
          Total                    0.328         0.251    0.374     0.547     -0.132

Notes: This table shows data for 2000 on the share of different sending regions in the
adult immigrant population of the entire OECD and of three OECD subregions. High
Income North America includes Canada and the U.S. and High Income Asia and Oceania
includes Australia, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Singapore, and Taiwan.
Source: author’s calculations using data from Beine, Docquier and Rapoport (2007).




                                                                                   48
   Table 3: Share of OECD immigrants by destination region and education, 2000

                                                                     Education Group
                     Destination Region                     All Primary Secondary Tertiary



                       North America                       0.514 0.352    0.540    0.655

                           Europe                          0.384 0.560    0.349    0.236

                     Australia & Oceania                   0.102 0.088    0.111    0.109

                          All OECD                               0.355    0.292    0.353

Notes: This table shows the share of immigrants in OECD countries by schooling group
and destination region for North America (Canada, Mexico the US); Australia & Oceania
(Australia, Japan, New Zealand, Korea), and Europe (other OECD members as of 2000).
Source: Grogger and Hanson (2008).



       Table 4: Gain in annual income from migrating from Mexico to the US

Income measure                                          Source                Value
                                                  World Development
US-Mexico difference in per capita GDP                                       $24,800
                                                      Indicators
US-Mexico difference in average annual
    earnings of 28 to 32 year old males with 9-      Hanson (2006)           $10,600
    11 years of education
Estimated gain in annual earnings from US              Clemons,
    migration for a 35 year-old urban Mexican       Montenegro, and           $9,200
    male with 9-12 years of education               Pritchett (2008)
Average gain in income for a legal immigrant
                                                   Rosenzweig (2007)         $15,900
    from Mexico with 9-12 years of education

All figures are in 2000 US dollars and adjusted for PPP.




                                                                                       49
                                        Figure 1


              Fraction of World population comprised of international migrants

  3.0%


  2.8%


  2.6%


  2.4%


  2.2%


  2.0%
            1980          1985          1990         1995          2000          2005



Source: United Nations (2005).




                                                                                        50
                                              Figure 2: Persistence in Emigration Rates


              .5                                                                                               Suriname

                                                                                                Guyana
              .4



                                                                                            Jamaica
   Emigration rate, 2000




                                                                                               Barbados
                  .3




                                                                                           Malta
                                                                       Trinidad and Tobago
                                                                                 Cape  Verde
                                                                                     Ireland
                                                             Fiji
       .2




                                                         El Salvador
                                                                        Cyprus
                                                               Portugal
                                                                   Lebanon
                                                   Dominican
                                                 MexicoNew    Republic
                                                            Zealand
                                                        Bahamas,
                                                 Haiti Mauritius  The
                                                        Cuba
              .1




                                                   Lao PDR
                                 AlbaniaHonduras Hong   Kong
                                                   Iceland
                                                  Nicaragua
                                              Guatemala
                                                      Greece
                                            BulgariaLuxembourg
                                                Morocco
                                      EcuadorFinland
                                                UKPanama
                                                Austria
                                            Turkey
                                               Tunisia
                                            Netherlands
                                              Italy
                                         Philippines
                               EquatorialMacao,
                                         Hungary
                                            Algeria
                                             Guinea
                                         Poland
                                         Denmark
                                          Israel
                                        Cambodia
                                          Canada
                                    Comoros        China
                                         Switzerland
                                     Romania
                                      Czech
                                        NorwayRepublic
                                  Liberia
                                   Peru
                                   Sri
                                  Iraq Belgium
                                      Taiwan
                                        Germany
                                     Vietnam
                                        Brunei
                                   Somalia
                                  Gambia,
                                      West
                                      Angola  The and Gaza
                                      Singapore
                                      Costa
                                  Congo,      Rica
                                            Rep.
                                       Jordan
                                        Lanka
                                   Senegal
                                       Korea
                                   Colombia
                                    Sweden    Bank
                                    Uruguay
                                Sierra
                                  GhanaSpain
                                 Guinea-Bissau
                                    ChileLeone
                                    France
                                   Iran
                                    Syrian
                                Kuwait       Arab   Republic
                                 Bolivia
                                  Australia
                                   Kenya
                                  Malaysia
                                 Afghanistan
                                Zimbabwe
                                South
                                 Bahrain
                                Togo
                                 Uganda  Africa
                                Mauritania
                                Pakistan
                                 Argentina
                                 Venezuela,
                                 Papua
                                 Solomon
                                 Mali
                                 Libya
                                 Mozambique
                                Zambia
                                Gabon
                                 Egypt     New   RB
                                             Islands
                                                 Guinea
                                Cameroon
                                Paraguay
                               Cote
                               Nigeria
                                Congo,
                                Russia
                               Brazil
                               Guinea
                               Qatar
                               Ethiopia
                               Rwanda
                               Central
                               India
                               Nepal
                               Sudan
                               Namibia
                               Malawi
                               Myanmar d'Ivoire
                                Djibouti
                                Thailand
                                Tanzania
                                Madagascar
                                Japan
                               Mongolia
                               Bangladesh
                               Botswana
                               Benin
                                US
                               Burundi
                               Indonesia
                               United
                               Burkina
                               China
                               Saudi
                               Chad
                               Oman
                               Lesotho
                               Bhutan      Dem.
                                          African
                                       Arabia
                               Swaziland
                               Niger    Arab
                                          Faso    Rep.
                                                    Republic
                                               Emirates
              0




                           0                   .1                  .2                  .3                 .4         .5
                                                              Emigration rate, 1990


Source: author’s calculations using data from Beine, Docquier and Rapoport (2007).




                                                                                                                          51
                                                              Figure 3: Positive selection of emigrants, 2000

                                                                                                                   Guyana

                          2
                                                                                                 Haiti            Jamaica
                                                                                                           Trinidad and Tobago
   Log odds of emigration for tertiary educated

                                                                                               Gambia,   The The      Cape Verde
                                                                                                  Bahamas,      Fiji Barbados
                                                                                                                         Malta
                                                                               Sierra Leone                  Mauritius
                                        0


                                                                                     Ghana
                                                                                  Liberia
                                                                                  Mozambique                                    Suriname
                                                                               Kenya
                                                                            Uganda                        Lao Lebanon
                                                                                                               PDR
                                                                                     EritreaSomalia
                                                                                               Angola                Cyprus
                                                                                                                 El Salvador
                                                                    Papua New GuineaVietnam  Sri Lanka
                                                                                                  Nicaragua
                                                                                                       Hong
                                                                                                         CubaKong      Ireland
                                                                                                                      Macedonia
                                                                Rwanda            Afghanistan         Honduras
                                                                                                         Guatemala
                                                                                              Guinea-Bissau         Bosnia
                                                                                                                    Croatia and Herzegovina
                                                                                              Congo,  Rep.Dominican
                                                                                                     Comoros New
                                                                                                        Iceland        Republic
                                                                                                                  Zealand
                                                                                                                  Portugal
                                                               Malawi Zambia       Togo
                                                                           CameroonMali           Cambodia
                                                                                                Senegal
                                                                                                      UK    Morocco
                                                                                                                Slovakia
                                                                                Iran
                                                                             Gabon    Panama
                                                                                       Brunei    East
                                                                                             SingaporeTimor
                                                                                                  Macao,  China
                                                                                                     Poland     Mexico
                                                                           Congo,
                                                                      Zimbabwe     Dem.
                                                                                   Taiwan Rep.
                                                                                            Philippines
                                                                                                   Hungary    Serbia
                                                                                                           Austria
                            -2




                                                                    Tanzania
                                                                      BeninGuineaPakistan
                                                                                  Malaysia
                                                                             Djibouti      Iraq Equatorial
                                                                                      Mauritania         Tunisia
                                                                                                            Guinea
                                                                                                              Greece
                                                                                                        Romania
                                                                                                       Estonia
                                                                                                            Slovenia
                                                                Nigeria
                                                                  Ethiopia          Colombia           Czech
                                                                                                       Italy
                                                                                                   Ecuador     Republic
                                                                                                         Netherlands
                                                                                                       Algeria
                                                                 Burundi              Uruguay Switzerland
                                                                                               Armenia
                                                                                              Latvia
                                                                                             Israel Denmark    Albania
                                                                                                           Lithuania
                                                                                                             Luxembourg
                                                                         Madagascar
                                                                             South
                                                              SudanCentralSolomon    Africa
                                                                                 Kuwait
                                                                              African    Jordan
                                                                                     Costa
                                                                                        West Rica
                                                                                       Republic
                                                                                        IslandsBank  and   Finland
                                                                                                          Gaza
                                                                                                     Norway    Bulgaria
                                                     Niger Nepal            Bolivia
                                                                               Cote  Chile
                                                                                      Syrian   Arab
                                                                                      Peru Korea
                                                                                     d'Ivoire        Republic
                                                                                                          Turkey
                                                                                                             Germany
                                                                 India    Egypt
                                                                        BangladeshBahrain        Belgium
                                                                                                    Canada
                                                                                                Spain
                                                                                                Sweden
                                                    LesothoMyanmarChina
                                                                 Botswana
                                                                    NamibiaParaguay
                                                                      Venezuela,         France Ukraine
                                                                                   RBMoldova        Belarus
                                                                  Burkina
                                                         Chad Indonesia
                                                                    Brazil  Faso
                                                                    QatarThailand
                                                                            Argentina
                                                                                Libya   Australia
                                                                                  Azerbaijan
                 -4




                                                                                Georgia
                                                                                 Russia
                                                             United   Japan
                                                                     Mongolia
                                                                    Arab     Kazakhstan
                                                                           Emirates
                                                           Saudi Arabia
                                                      Bhutan            Kyrgyzstan
                                                               Uzbekistan
                                                  Swaziland Oman
                                                                  Tajikistan                  US
        -6




                                                              Turkmenistan
                          -8




                                                      -8                -6                 -4                -2                0              2
                                                                 Log odds of emigration for primary educated

Source: Grogger and Hanson (2008).




                                                                                                                                                  52
Figure 4




           53
