NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE FUTURE OF AMERICAN FERTILITY
Samuel H. Preston
Caroline Sten Hartnett
Working Paper 14498
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14498

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2008

This is a revised version of a paper presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference
on Demography and the Economy, Yountville Napa Valley, CA, April 11-12, 2008. This research
was supported by a grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) administered by NBER.
The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views
of SSA. We are grateful to Hans-Peter Kohler for detailed comments and suggestions and to Frank
Furstenberg, Gopi Shah Goda, Rob Mare, Philip Morgan, Kristin Harknett, and participants at the
NBER conference for their comments on the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Samuel H. Preston and Caroline Sten Hartnett. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Future of American Fertility
Samuel H. Preston and Caroline Sten Hartnett
NBER Working Paper No. 14498
November 2008
JEL No. H0,H55,J11,J13
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the major social and demographic forces influencing American fertility levels with
the aim of predicting changes during the next three decades. Increases in the Hispanic population and
in educational attainment are expected to have modest and offsetting effects on fertility levels. A cessation
of the recent pattern of increasing ages at childbearing will at some point put upward pressure on period
(but not cohort) fertility rates. Higher relative wages for women and better contraception have empowered
women and fundamentally altered marriage and relations between the sexes. But women's childbearing
has become less dependent upon stable relations with men, and educational differences in intended
fertility have narrowed. One explanation of higher fertility in the U.S. than in other developed countries
is that its institutions have adapted better to rising relative wages for women and the attendant increase
in women's labor force participation.

Samuel H. Preston
School of Arts and Sciences
289 McNeil Building
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6298
and NBER
spreston@sas.upenn.edu
Caroline Sten Hartnett
3718 Locust Walk, Rm 239
Population Studies Ctr
Philadelphia, PA 19104
csten@pop.upenn.edu

The level of fertility in a population is the principal determinant of the shape of its age
structure, which in turn is a critical factor in the terms of trade within a pay-as-you-go system of
public pensions. Simulations done by the Social Security Administration show that the 75-year
actuarial balance of the social security system would be higher by $2.6 trillion in present value if
fertility were high (2.3 children/woman) rather than low (1.7) (compiled from Trustees, 2007).
Partly because of their age structural consequences, national fertility levels are considered “too
low” by a majority of governments in developed countries (Kohler et al. 2006).
This paper reviews the major factors that appear to be affecting fertility levels in the
United States, with an eye towards making defensible statements about future directions of
fertility. The subject covers a vast disciplinary range including demography, economics,
sociology, public health, reproductive biology, evolutionary biology, political science, and
psychology. There is no single, widely-accepted framework for analyzing the determinants of
fertility at the level of a population. In its place, we will pursue an eclectic, inductive approach,
surveying the landscape of fertility variation in search of clues about its principal drivers. Our
search considers variation over time and space and across individuals.

Why Do People Have Children in the Twenty-First Century?
It is useful to begin with this provocative question posed by Morgan and King (2001). If
there were no compelling answer to the question, we would have to confront the possibility that
levels of fertility will approach zero. Clearly, the answer to the question does not lie in the
domain of finance, since children are very costly and probably always have been. Early
suggestions that children were a net economic asset in hunter-gatherer or subsistence economies

2

appear to have been inaccurate, although children’s greater contribution to the family economy
in such circumstance reduced their net costs relative to children in the present (Kaplan, 1994).
Sociologists have usefully distinguished between childbearing aimed at satisfying social
expectations and childbearing aimed at self-fulfillment. Thornton and Young-DeMarco’s (2001)
review of trends in attitudes about one’s own childbearing and that of others shows a huge
reduction during the 1960s and 1970s in the degree of “oughtness” regarding fertility. While the
desire to satisfy social expectations has not disappeared, people began to perceive less social
pressure to bear children and to have less rigid expectations of others’ performance. Increasingly,
people justified childbearing in terms of its impact on their personal well-being, satisfaction, and
happiness. One of the instrumental features of children that several sociologists have stressed is
their value in forming social networks (Schoen et al. 1997).
In view of the imperatives of reproduction for the survival of a species, it would be
surprising if the rewards from childbearing and childrearing did not have a deep evolutionary
basis imprinted in human biology (Foster 2000). Recent investigations in psychology help to
clarify the nature of these rewards. Bartels and Zeki (2004) use fMRI imaging to measure brain
activity in mothers when they viewed pictures of their own children and those of acquainted
children and adults. 1 Pictures of their own children, but not of others, activated regions of the
brain rich in oxytocin and vasopressin receptors-- neurohormones associated with pair-bonding-while deactivating regions associated with negative emotions and social judgment. Animal
studies confirm the central role of oxytocin and vasopressin in attachment and bonding (Carter et
al. 2005).
Mothers are aware of the intense emotions evoked by their children. “The Motherhood
Study,” a nationally representative telephone survey of 2,009 mothers, found that 93% agreed
1

To date, there have been no equivalent studies of fathers.

3

with the statement that “I have an overwhelming love for my children unlike anything I feel for
anyone else.” 81% said that they were very satisfied with their life as a mother and an equal
percentage agreed that “being a mother is the most important thing that I do” (Erickson and Aird
2005). The potential rewards of parenthood -- presumably social as well as emotional -- are
acknowledged by high school seniors, three quarters of whom believe that motherhood and
fatherhood will be fulfilling. Between 1976-77 and 1997-98, the percentage so reporting rose by
11 points for women and 7 points for men (Thornton and Young-DeMarco 2001). The increase
was greatest for females and males whose fathers had attended college (Sayer, Wright, and Edin,
2003).
It is possible that the rewards and costs of childbearing are not fully appreciated until one
has a child. One ethnographic study reports that mothers in fact did not anticipate how
completely they would fall in love with their offspring (McMahon 1995), which raises the
possibility that the motivations for having the first child are systematically different from those
of subsequent children. A study in Bulgaria (Buhler 2006) concluded that the principal attitudes
predictive of having a first child were beliefs that it would strengthen relations with partner and
parents, whereas the principal attitude predictive of a second child for both men and women was
the perception that it would bring “increased joy and satisfaction in life.” Companionship for the
first child is also often cited as a motivation for having a second child (Fawcett 1983). In a
careful study of reported happiness among monozygotic twins in Denmark, having one child was
found to increase the happiness of young women, but there was no increment in happiness from
additional children (Kohler et al. 2005). Once partnership status was controlled, a man’s
happiness was unaffected by the number of children he had, including the first.

4

Recent Trends in American Fertility
The most common measure of fertility is the period total fertility rate (TFR), which
indicates how many children would be born to a woman who survived to the end of her
reproductive years and experienced at each age the observed age-specific fertility rate of a
particular period. The level of the total fertility rate that allows each generation to replace itself
exactly is approximately 2.08 children per woman. Figure 1 shows the value of the TFR in the
United States since 1928. With virtually no interruption except the post-World War II baby
boom, the TFR fell continuously from 1820 to 1975 (not shown). Since 1989 it has remained in
the narrow range of 1.98 to 2.10. Figure 1 also shows the average number of children ever born
to cohorts who completed their childbearing and were aged 26 during the year shown on the xaxis. 2 Clearly, there has been less volatility in the completed family sizes of actual cohorts than
in the period measures based on synthetic cohorts. This relation is also evident in Europe
(Bongaarts 2002).
The period TFR is usefully considered to consist of a volume component, measuring the
completed family sizes of cohorts then bearing children, and a timing component, indicating
when in the course of their lives the cohorts will bear their children. During a period when ages
at childbearing are growing older, the period TFR will be systematically lower than the TFR of
relevant cohorts because of a “thinning out” of lifetime cohort births. 3 Based upon age-specific
rates of childbearing provided by the National Center for Health Statistics, the mean age at
childbirth in the US has risen fairly steadily from 26.00 in 1980 to 27.90 in 2005. Using an

2

The completed family size of a cohort would be identical to the TFR of the cohort if there were no differences in
fertility at a particular age between migrants and non-migrants or between those who survive to age 45 and those
who die before reaching that age.
3
In the extreme, imagine that the cohort born in 1970 had all of its births at age 29.0 and the cohort born in 1971
had all of its births at age 30.0. In 2000, there would be no births at all. This deficit in period rates would not be
offset by a subsequent surplus unless ages at childbearing eventually became younger again.

5

adjustment formula developed by Ryder, we find that this delay has reduced period total fertility
rates in the US during this period by about 0.15 children per woman. A more elaborate procedure
developed by Bongaarts and Feeney produces a similar reduction averaging 0.14 children per
woman over the period 1980-1997 (Schoen, 2004). Faster delays in Europe have had a slightly
bigger impact on period fertility levels there, averaging 0.26 in 18 countries over the period
1990-97 (Bongaarts 2002). So the volume components of European and American fertility levels
are somewhat more similar than would appear from period TFR measures.
The decline in American fertility is reflected in changes in the distribution of parities (the
number of children a woman has born) among women who have completed childbearing. Figure
2 shows that parity two has become the most common destination for women, while parities zero
and one have grown steadily in frequency; families of three have become somewhat less
common, and families of four or more children have fallen precipitously from being the most
common in 1976 (i.e., among mothers of the baby boom) to the least frequent in 2002.
Bearing children is subject to disturbances that can raise or lower the number of births
relative to intentions or expectations. Morgan (2003) finds that only 38% of women aged 22 in
the National Longitudinal Study of Youth in 1982 had realized their stated intended parity by age
40. A common form of interference is poor contraception, either through method failure or
failure to use any contraception when no conception is wanted. By European standards,
Americans have an unusually high incidence of unwanted or mistimed births. 14% of births
during the period 1997-2002 were retrospectively classified as “unwanted” (i.e. not wanted at
any time in the future) at the time of conception by their mother and 21% were mistimed (US
National Center for Health Statistics 2005a). While a mistimed birth will not necessarily increase
a woman’s parity above her intentions, an unwanted birth will. 44% of births to 22-44-year-old

6

women who had not completed high school were classified as unwanted or mistimed, compared
to only 15% among women who had completed college. The high incidence of unwanted and
mistimed births is somewhat surprising in view of the legality of abortion. However, abortion
may not be readily available, may be expensive, or may violate personal moral codes. Welleducated women are less likely to have an unwanted or mistimed birth in part because a higher
proportion of their unintended conceptions result in an induced abortion.
One factor that can cause fertility to fall short of intentions is subfecundity. 7.4% of
married women aged 15-44 in 2002 were classified as infertile: not practicing contraception and
not becoming pregnant for at least one year (US National Center for Health Statistics 2005a).
Separation from a partner may also cause women to fall short of childbearing expectations
(Quesnal-Vallee and Morgan, 2003). The balance of positive and negative forces resulted in
slightly fewer births than expected by respondents in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth;
not surprisingly, women who began childbearing late were particularly likely to fall short of
targets expressed at an earlier age. Falling somewhat short is the typical but not universal cohort
pattern (US Census Bureau 2000a; Hagewen and Morgan, 2005).

Women, Men, Partnerships, and Children
By long-standing practices supported by powerful social norms, childbearing and
childrearing in western countries occurred within marriage. The connection between marriage
and childbearing has become more tenuous in the United States:
- 37% of births in 2005 were out-of-wedlock, compared to 5% in 1960 and 18% in 1980
(US National Center for Health Statistics 2006a; US Bureau of the Census 1979).

7

- fewer than half of American children aged 15 live with both natural parents (Kiernan,
2004).
- 60% of first births conceived before marriage in 1960-64 were “resolved” by marriage,
compared to 23% in 1990-94 (Ventura and Bachrach 2000).
- two-thirds of adults now disagree with the statement that children are the main rationale
for marriage (Thornton and Young-DeMarco 2001).
In short, marriage has become less important as a sanctioning device for childbearing and
childrearing, as well as for sexual expression and cohabitation (Thornton and Young-DeMarco
2001). And marriage itself is changing as husbands and wives are becoming more similar in their
household and market activities. Married women are spending less time doing housework while
their husbands are spending more time (Bianchi, 2000). 68.5% of married women aged 25-34
participated in the labor force in 2003, compared to 38.8% in 1970 (US Census Bureau 2005b).
Signaling greater independence of decisions within the family, a married woman’s labor force
participation has become less responsive to her husband’s wage (Blau and Kahn 2005). It has
also become less responsive to the presence and ages of her children. The labor force
participation rate of women with a child under age one rose from 31% in 1976 to 55% in 2004
(US Census Bureau 2005a).
It is plausible to argue that the decline in marriage as a social institution and the changes
that are occurring within marriage during the last four decades have the same basic sources:
greater economic opportunities for women and vastly improved means of contraception
(Chiappori and Oreffice 2008; Lundberg and Pollak, 2007; Preston 1987). Both have given
women more power in their lives and in their relationships. The advent of the pill and the IUD in
the early 1960s provided methods that were highly effective in preventing pregnancy, in part

8

because they were independent of any particular act of intercourse and thus required less
cooperation from a partner. Marriage became less essential as a precondition for sexual
expression. Furthermore, women could invest in their education and in their careers with less
threat of disruption from an unwanted pregnancy whether inside a marriage or out (Goldin and
Katz 2002). Such investment was also encouraged by the rise in divorce.
If the rise in women’s labor force participation had originated exclusively from a supply
shift -- resulting, for example, from fertility declines induced by contraceptive improvements -- it
is likely that women’s wages would have declined relative to men’s. Instead, the median
earnings of women working full-time year-round rose from 61% of men’s in 1960 to 77% in
2005 (US Census Bureau 2007b). An important factor in the increase in women’s participation
and relative wages is probably the rise of service industries in which productivity is not
associated with physical strength. Changing norms relating to equity and inequality were
probably important as well. The increase in women’s labor force participation would not have
been as great had they not been able to find acceptable care for their children, and had they not
believed that their children were not endangered by such care (Rindfuss et al. 2003).
As Gary Becker (1981) foresaw, the “gains from trade” in the conventional
breadwinner/homemaker marriage eroded as women’s opportunities outside the home became
more similar to those of men. The reduction in gains was likely abetted by improvements in
technology for performing standard household tasks (Greenwood et al. 2005; see also Isen and
Stevenson, forthcoming). What was less foreseeable was that fertility would level off and even
rise modestly as the institution of marriage was fundamentally changing. Had bearing children
not been a powerful goal of most American women, they would have found ample reason to
avoid them by virtue of their increasingly tentative relationships and the growing attractions of

9

work outside the home. Instead, they took advantage of their new powers to maintain a fertility
level that is the envy of most other developed countries.

Individual-level Characteristics Associated with Fertility in the United States
In this section, we examine fertility variation according to major personal characteristics
in order to seek some guidance about future fertility levels. We focus on two variables whose
distributions are expected to change in predictable ways and that might therefore shed light on
the future of fertility.
One of these variables is women’s educational attainment, which has been shown to be
negatively associated with fertility in many societies, including historically in the US (Yu 2006;
Billari and Philipov 2004; Jones and Tertilt 2006). Prominent interpretations of this negative
relationship are that better educated women have a higher opportunity cost of time and are better
contraceptors. Table 1 presents the (virtually) completed family sizes of women aged 40-44 in
National Surveys of Family Growth (NSFG) from 1973 to 2004. 4 Fertility has fallen by
approximately one child per woman in three of the four educational classes and by 0.8 children
among high school graduates.
More contemporary evidence can be generated by including younger women and their
expected additional births. Table 2 is based upon women aged 30-44 in these same NSFGs. It
presents the coefficients relating years of completed schooling to children ever born; to
additional births expected; and to the sum of these two, which we term “total births expected.”
We use OLS regression, which has the convenient property that coefficients in the first two

4

The 1973 NSFG was applied only to ever-married women. Approximately 5.7% of the cohort was never-married at
age 40-44 (US Bureau of the Census 1972:104). This percentage varies from 4.5% for high-school graduates to
11.2% for college graduates. Conclusions would not be materially altered if these women and their relatively low
levels of fertility could be included.

10

regressions add up to that in the third. We control a woman’s age using a second-degree
polynomial. For total births expected, the coefficient of a woman’s years of schooling declined
from -0.153 to -0.126 to -0.097 over this period. Schooling became less closely associated with
fertility despite the fact that educational differentials in women’s earnings became much steeper
(Blau 1998; Goldin and Katz 2007). The reduction in the coefficient is entirely attributable to the
number of additional births expected; the effect of educational attainment on the number of
births that had already occurred to women remained very stable at -0.150 to -0.163. In other
words, better educated women have consistently borne fewer children than more poorly educated
women by their 30s and early 40s, but they increasingly expect to catch up before childbearing
ends.
In 2002 for the first time, the NSFG was administered to men. Using the same format
employed for women, Table 2 shows that the male coefficient of “total births expected” on
education is only -0.053 in 2002, about half of that for women. An obvious interpretation of the
sex difference is that men do not bear as much of the time costs of children as women do. Thus,
the trade-off between parenting and earnings, which rise with education, is less acute for men
(Schultz 1994). According to Table 2, the sex difference is manifest not in additional births
expected but in achieved fertility, which is substantially less influenced by educational
attainment for men than it is for women.
The regressions do not include any adjustment for marital status. We have argued that the
increasing independence and power of women has made marital status less relevant to
childbearing. Nevertheless, the large majority of births continue to occur within marriage and the
ability of women and men to find suitable marriage partners is doubtless a factor in fertility
levels. It is noteworthy in this context that the 2002 coefficients on education are scarcely

11

changed when current marital status is introduced: -0.097 for women remains -0.097 and -0.053
for men becomes -0.059. 5 It is not essential to introduce marital status factors in order to study
the relation between educational attainment and fertility, a finding also reported in Australia (Yu,
2006).
A second major characteristic associated with variation in American fertility is ethnicity.
High levels of immigration in recent years have left their mark on the fertility of a population
already distinguished by longstanding black/white divisions. Table 3 presents the total fertility
rates of major ethnic groups in the recent past. 6 The table shows that the fertility of non-Hispanic
whites has been stable or has risen slightly during the past 16 years. The TFR of non-Hispanic
whites in the United States would rank in a tie for second highest among developed countries,
behind France (see below). So it is not correct to attribute the relatively high level of US fertility
exclusively to high fertility among ethnic minorities -- and many European countries themselves
have sizeable high-fertility ethnic minorities. In fact, the fertility of blacks has fallen sharply and
is now below the national average. Hispanic fertility has been roughly level over this period.
The individual-level data files from NSFG enable us to investigate several additional
questions about the relationship between ethnicity and fertility. Table 4 presents ethnic
differentials in fertility among women aged 30-44, controlling age and years of school
completed, over the period 1973 to 2002. It is clear that ethnic differentials in fertility persist
5

The categories are never married/not cohabiting, married, cohabiting, and widowed/separated/divorced.
Numerators are derived from birth certificates and denominators from census estimates. The ethnic classification is
not strictly comparable in the two sources and the National Center for Health Statistics (2006b) has attempted to
bridge the divide. Furthermore, it is likely that the reporting of births is more complete for Hispanics than the
estimates of populations. A substantial proportion of Hispanics are illegal immigrants and would not want to be
reported to census authorities, whereas they have an incentive to have their births reported. Thus, the figures in
Table 3 may be overestimated for Hispanics. Weak support for this suggestion comes from the 2004 Current
Population Survey, wherein Hispanic women aged 40-44 reported only 2.30 births, on average [US Census Bureau
2005a]. On the other hand, the number of births reported in the CPS are clearly deficient and especially so for outof-wedlock births to Hispanics (www.census.gov/population/socdemo/fertility/ofw-childtx). A third source of data
is the National Survey of Family Growth. Hispanic women aged 40-44 in the 2002 NSFG averaged 2.49 children,
about 0.2 children higher than in the CPS. Hispanic women aged 30-34 expected to bear 2.77 children in NSFG,
implying rising fertility and giving some credibility to the still higher figure of NCHS.

6

12

when education is controlled. Over the 29-year period, the differential between blacks and whites
contracted sharply while the differential between Hispanics and non-Hispanic whites expanded.
In both cases, the trend in the differential is primarily attributable to changes in the number of
births that have already occurred rather than to those that are expected in the future.
The increasing fertility differences between Hispanics and non-Hispanics are primarily a
result of the changing composition of the Hispanic population itself. Cubans and Puerto Ricans,
who made up a larger share of the Hispanic population in the past, have relatively low fertility
levels (TFRs of 1.733 and 2.057, respectively, in 2004). In contrast, Mexican-American women
had a TFR of 3.021 (US National Center for Health Statistics 2006b). Mexican-Americans
contributed 61% of Hispanics births in 1989 and 72% in 2004. The Mexican/non-Mexican
differences reflect fertility differences in country of origin, as well as in length of time spent in
the United States. It is unlikely that a widening of Hispanic/non-Hispanic fertility differences
will continue. Mexican-Americans are already a high percentage of the Hispanic population and
their fertility is declining across generations in the US (Parrado and Morgan 2007). It is worth
remembering that Italian and Polish immigrants to the US had TFRs of 6.94 and 6.97 in 1905-09
when the US value was 3.56 (Morgan et al. 1994).

Spatial Differences in US Fertility
Geographic differences in US fertility have been used in several ways. One is to examine
the impact of interstate differences in laws, programs, and regulations that may be related to
fertility. Moffit’s (1998) review of research on the relationship between welfare payments and
fertility, most of which is based on interstate data, concludes that there are modest positive
effects of benefit levels on fertility, although there are some contrary findings including a

13

subsequent article on the “family cap” (Kearney 2004). As noted below, Klerman (1999) finds
modest effects on fertility of interstate differences in access to abortion and of Medicaid payment
schedules for abortion.
A second effort to use areal data focuses on identifying what may be thought to be
“cultural” differences in attitudes, values and practices related to childbearing. Areal differences
in fertility are substantial. States in New England -- Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode
Island -- have 2004 TFRs in the lowest range of 1.7- 1.8. States with high Mormon
concentrations, Utah and Idaho, have TFRs in the highest range of 2.3-2.5. Lesthaeghe and
Niedert (2006) perform a factor analysis and find that a state’s fertility level is closely related to
its frequency of late marriage and of abortions per live birth. Since these are, in a sense,
components of fertility, the results are not especially surprising.
More surprising is the high correlation that they find, -0.87, between the factor
representing this demographic cluster and the percentage of a state that voted for George Bush in
2004. This correlation suggests to the authors that there may be important variation in the
underlying structure of values and orientations that manifests itself in both family and political
domains. They do not identify the main features of that structure.
A third approach to studying areal variation uses metropolitan areas rather than states as
the units of analysis. Metropolitan areas form more cohesive labor markets than states and are
better suited to testing ideas about the impact of labor market conditions on fertility. We have
supplemented the 2002 NSFG individual-level data on fertility histories and personal
characteristics with data on characteristics of the metropolitan areas in which individuals reside.
We consider four aggregate-level economic indicators: the median earnings of female full-time
full-year workers; the median earnings of male full-time full-year workers; the unemployment

14

rate in the area; and the median value of owner-occupied houses. All data are taken from the US
Census of 2000. We expect, following Becker (1981), that the level of women’s earnings in an
area, an indicator of economic opportunities, will have a negative effect on fertility and that
men’s earnings will have a positive effect. Jones, Schoonbroodt, and Tertilt (forthcoming)
provide a broad review of the assumptions that are required in order to generate such predictions.
We expect that the median value of houses, an indicator of the housing price structure, will be
negatively related to fertility because children are space intensive. We also expect fertility to be
negatively related to an area’s level of unemployment.
The model that we estimate includes individual-level variables whose values were
established in childhood: mother’s educational attainment (that is, the mother of the woman
interviewed in NSFG); the religion in which a woman was raised, if any; and whether or not her
parents’ marriage was intact when she was aged 18. Coefficients of the OLS regression are
presented in Appendix Table 1. Standard errors are not adjusted for clustering. Areal variables
were available for the 280 largest metropolitan areas. 82% of weighted respondents resided in
one of these areas (77 cities total) and were included in the analysis.
Coefficients of female and male earnings levels in a metropolitan area are in the expected
direction, large, and statistically significant. Table 5 summarizes the coefficients in relevant
equations. As before, the coefficients of births achieved and additional births expected sum to the
coefficient of total births expected. Both achieved fertility and the additional number of children
expected are significantly affected by female and male earnings. The coefficient of female
earnings on total births expected of -2.7 implies that a 10% increase in relative women’s earnings
would provoke a reduction of 0.27 children. This very large effect is highly reflective of the
fertility expectations -- rather than achievements -- of younger women. If estimation is confined

15

to women aged 30-44, where expected family sizes have for the most part already been achieved,
the female earnings coefficient for total births expected declines in absolute value to -1.421 and
the male declines to 1.638.
As in the case of a woman’s educational attainment, a woman’s marital and partnership
status is not material to interpreting the coefficients in Table 5. When marital and cohabiting
status is controlled, the values of coefficients on female and male earnings change by less than
10%.
The female and male earnings coefficients are roughly equal in value and opposite in
sign, so that the ratio of female to male earnings in an area is a good predictor of fertility. Among
large cities, the highest ratios of female to male earnings (range of 0.76 to 0.81) are found in San
Diego, Miami, Los Angeles, Tampa, Washington D.C., and New York City. The lowest ratios
(0.62 to 0.70) are found in interior rust-belt cities of Detroit, St. Louis, Pittsburgh, Cleveland,
and Chicago. Among smaller metropolitan areas, the range goes from 0.57 to 0.91.
For purposes of prediction we would like to be able to treat relative earnings levels as
exogenous, but there is no question that selective migration is affecting results. Women with
high tastes for work or low tastes for childbearing would be more likely to move to, or remain in,
an area of relatively high women’s earnings. Likewise, women with high tastes for childbearing
and low tastes for work might be more likely to move to or remain in an area of relatively high
male earnings. It would be a mistake to use the coefficients that we have estimated to make
predictions about the future of fertility since those coefficients include the effects of selective
migration. A second upward bias in the coefficient may result from the effect of fertility patterns
in an area on women’s earnings; e.g., non-market factors inducing low fertility in an area may

16

cause women to accumulate more labor market experience and hence raise their earnings. No
equivalent bias is expected on the coefficient of male earnings.
The relationship between women’s earnings in an area and fertility could be expected to
be stronger for well-educated women than for poorly-educated women because areal variation in
the opportunity cost of children, as well as in the gains from work-related migration, should be
greater for those with higher potential earnings. To test this hypothesis, we created an interactive
variable equal to a woman’s completed years of schooling times the mean earnings for women in
her metropolitan area. When added to the regression model for women aged 15-44 shown in
Appendix Table 1, the coefficient of the interactive variable is positive and significant (p<.00).
The largest (negative) coefficients are for births achieved rather than future births expected. So it
does appear that the fertility of better educated women is more responsive to the level of earnings
in a metropolitan area, although the role of selective migration adds complexity to the
interpretation.
The coefficient of an area’s unemployment level is not significant. The median price of
owner-occupied houses in an area has a significant positive coefficient, an unanticipated result
that may reflect a wealth effect.

International Differences
An international perspective permits the examination of the effects of a broader range of
institutional and cultural settings than is available within any single country. Table 6 shows that
US fertility is higher than that in any other developed country with 5 million or more inhabitants.
Even the lowest-fertility US state, Rhode Island with a TFR of 1.71 in 2004, would rank well

17

above the median of 1.35. As noted above, the period TFR underestimates cohort fertility when
ages of childbearing are rising. Few cohorts who have recently completed childbearing in Europe
have TFRs less than 1.7 (Frejka and Sardon 2004). In terms of parity distributions, the major
difference between Europe and the US is not in the prevalence of childless women but rather of
women with 3+ children (Caldwell and Schindlmyer 2003). The mean “ideal family size” in
Europe remains at two or above except in Germany and Austria. In low-fertility Italy, it is 2.1
(Goldstein et al. 2003).
One prominent explanation of declining fertility in Europe is called “the second
demographic transition”, according to which the emergence of individualism and its emphasis on
self-fulfillment have undercut familistic norms (e.g., Lesthaeghe and Neidert 2006; van de Kaa
1996). However, this explanation does a poor job of accounting for cross-national variation. The
northern European countries where ideational changes have been among the most far-reaching
have the highest fertility levels in Europe (McDonald 2002), whereas many southern and eastern
European countries with low fertility have retained relatively high levels of familism in value
surveys and in many other behaviors such as cohabitation and divorce (Coleman 2004; Kertzer et
al. 2006).
Perhaps the most important observation about cross-national variation in fertility is that
the international correlation between the TFR and women’s labor force participation in western
Europe has become strongly positive at +0.81 (Billari and Kohler 2004). In 1975, the correlation
for these same countries was -0.61. This demonstration has been replicated by several other
analysts using slightly different groupings of OECD countries (e.g., Morgan, 2003). So
countries in which the largest proportion of women work are now countries with the highest
fertility. This relation is also apparent regionally in Italy (Kertzer et al. 2006).

18

It is very likely that, because of industrial and occupational changes, the relative wages
for women have risen in virtually all developed countries. Some countries appear to have been
able to adapt to this change in ways that better accommodate the combination of women’s work
with childbearing. These countries -- e.g., the United States, Sweden, Norway -- exhibit both
high fertility and high female labor force participation. Some of the accommodations have been
in the form of government programs. Hoem (2005) cites a battery of public policies in Sweden
that he believes to be responsible for its relatively high fertility, including parental leave for 13
months at 80% of salary and state-run day care centers. Reviews of the effectiveness of familyfriendly policies on fertility in Europe conclude that there have been several relatively modest
successes (McDonald 2002, 2006; Kohler et al. 2006).
According to independent accounts of close observers in Italy (Kertzer et al. 2006) and
Japan (Retherford and Ogawa, 2006), a major obstacle to higher fertility levels and greater
participation of women in the labor force in these countries is the persistent strength of norms
that idealize the traditional breadwinner/homemaker family. These norms discourage mothers
from working and discourage unmarried women from becoming mothers. Mothers are thought to
be the best guardians of their children, and men participate relatively little in child-rearing.
Policy initiatives may have little impact under these circumstances. Japan has made very costly
efforts to raise its fertility levels. The programs include generous child allowances, heavily
subsidized state child care facilities, changes in educational standards to reduce the costs of child
tutoring, and laws designed to encourage men’s greater participation in child-rearing. But the
Japanese TFR remains in the neighborhood of 1.3.
The institution of marriage appears to be more important in sanctioning childbearing and
sexual behavior in these countries. In Japan, only 2% of births are out of wedlock and in Italy,

19

10% (Kiernan, 2004). To state the obvious: discouraging out-of-wedlock childbearing
discourages childbearing. If the US were to eliminate all out-of-wedlock births and not replace
them with marital births, its TFR would have been only 1.31 in 2004. Countries with higher
proportions of births out of wedlock have higher TFRs: the correlation is +0.65 across 37
European countries in 1999. In 1975, when marriage was a stronger institution, it had been -0.35
(Billari and Kohler, 2004). Ironically, the maintenance of traditional family values, especially in
the form of rigid norms about appropriate sex roles within the family and the sanctity of marriage
as a childrearing institution, may be responsible for very low levels of fertility in many places
(see also McDonald 2000; Caldwell and Shindlmyer 2003).
Strong norms supportive of traditional family relations were also very prominent in the
United States but they have substantially eroded. For example, the General Social Survey asked
whether respondents agreed or disagreed with the statement that “It is more important for a wife
to help her husband’s career than to have one herself.” Only 36% of women disagreed with the
statement in 1977-78 while 80% disagreed in 1996-98 (Thornton and Young-DeMarco 2001).
Perhaps the incentives to abandon the breadwinner/homemaker model were higher in the US or
perhaps, as de Tocqueville (1945) argued 170 years ago, American society is more flexible and
adaptive than European.
Whatever adaptations occurred in the US were not primarily a product of public policy
(Morgan 2003). The US tax code is not unusually friendly to families with children (d’Addio and
d’Ercole 2005) and welfare benefits per child are low relative to child allowances in many
European countries (Blau 1998). Government plays a relatively small role in day care for
children in the US in terms of both finance and management. The adaptations permitting more
mothers to work in the US were primarily a result of private negotiations between women and

20

various childcare providers, including their partners. They were facilitated by institutional
adaptations such as longer store hours, which provided both opportunities for shopping by people
who worked during the day and jobs at an hour when a spouse may be available for child care
(Kohler et al 2006). The labor market in the US may also be more accommodating to young
workers than are European labor markets, which are more rigid on many quantitative indicators
(Nickell, 1997). American businesses, less encumbered by industrial policies, may have been
able to provide more flexible hours and days. The declining coefficient relating fertility to
women’s educational attainment is another indication that the tensions between childbearing and
work are easing in the United States.
Another major theme of de Tocqueville’s is that Americans are unusually prone to form
and gather in private associations. One institution that they join in far greater numbers than
Europeans is the church. 50% of American women report that religion is very important to them,
compared to 16% of European women. 50% of American women aged 18-44 attend church at
least once a month, compared to 26% of European women (European Values Survey data cited
in Frejka and Westoff 2006). The frequency of church attendance is highly positively correlated
with actual and expected fertility both in the US and in Europe (Ibid.; Philipov and Berghammer
2007). For young parents, a church often provides opportunities for interaction with other young
families, childcare services, and moral support for the difficult endeavors of parenthood
(Wuthnow 2005). These features may lift fertility levels among members. Taking literally the
empirical relation between religiosity and fertility, Frejka and Westoff (2006) estimate that the
fertility of American women aged 35-44 would be 6% lower if Americans attended church as
infrequently as Europeans and 18% lower if they perceived the same importance of religion as
Europeans.

21

These estimates represent upper bounds because there is undoubtedly self-selection of
family-oriented people into the community of church-goers, a tendency that would spuriously
elevate the correlation between fertility and religious behavior. Nor does their analysis control
other variables, such as educational attainment, that are correlated with both fertility and church
attendance. To overcome partially these problems, we have used the 2002 NSFG to estimate the
relationship between fertility and the religion of one’s upbringing, controlling a woman’s years
of schooling and ethnicity. Results are shown in Table 7. Fertility differs substantially -- by a
half a child or more -- between those raised with no religion (about 6% of all women) and those
raised with any religion. The additional variance explained by introducing the religious variables
is significant at .001.
Thus, religious differences in fertility are not readily explained by mechanisms of
selection or contamination by third variables. The greater religiosity of the American population
may in fact be contributing to US/European differences in fertility. The fertility differences by
religious affiliation hold out the possibility that fertility will rise as high-fertility groups have
more children who inherit the religion of their parents and maintain their high fertility levels.
This possibility is not entirely theoretical: the growth of fundamentalist Protestant groups in the
past century is attributable primarily to their unusually high fertility combined with a 70-80%
intergenerational retention rate (Hout, et al. 2001). The example illustrates a more general point:
there is upward pressure on fertility each generation by virtue of the fact that each generation is
born disproportionately to the high-fertility members of the previous generation. The upward
bias should be particularly strong when the high fertility example of one’s own parents is
reinforced by pronatalist norms and associations such as those typically found in churches.

22

Why are Americans more likely to attend church and espouse religious beliefs than
Europeans? One prominent explanation is that American religious institutions are more flexible
and entrepreneurial than are European (Finke and Stark 2005). Whereas European countries
often face a virtual monopoly of religious institutions, staffed by clerics determined to maintain
the monopoly, American religious institutions vigorously compete for adherents and use
attendance and participation as principal gauges of success. Churches represent another instance
in which institutional adaptability may help account for high fertility in the United States relative
to Europe.

Implications
What have we learned that bears upon the future of American fertility? Several variables
robustly associated with fertility are changing in predictable ways, as summarized in Table 8.
One of these is ethnicity. The US Census Bureau projects the size and ethnic composition of the
US population using data on fertility achievements and expectations and anticipated
immigration. Its latest projections suggest that the Hispanic population will grow from 12.6% of
the population in 2000 to 20.1% in 2030 (US Census Bureau 2004a). Combined with the large
Hispanic/non-Hispanic fertility differentials shown in Table 3, and assuming that fertility levels
remain constant within ethnic categories, this increase in Hispanic representation would increase
the TFR from 2.046 to 2.113, an increase of .07 children. If Hispanic/non-Hispanic differentials
contract, as has happened with other immigrant groups, the effect would be reduced.
A second variable related to fertility and moving in predictable directions is educational
attainment. The US Census Bureau (2000b) projects educational attainment distributions to
2028. For adult women, their projections imply a gain of approximately 0.7 years of school

23

completed between 2003 and 2028. 7 Combined with the fertility coefficient on years of
schooling of -.097, such changes would produce a reduction in fertility of .07 children. The
effect is not large, and it should be recalled that the coefficient of women’s education has been
declining.
So the two most predictable changes in population composition, educational attainment
and ethnicity, are expected to induce relatively small changes in fertility by 2028-30, and these
changes essentially offset one another. In a multivariate framework, the combined changes in
distributions of education and ethnicity would produce a decline in fertility of 0.02 children. 8
We anticipate that the ratio of female to male earnings will continue to increase as
industrial structures change and as equity norms become more universal. As noted earlier, our
coefficients on female and male earnings represent an upper bound on the sensitivity of fertility
to exogenous variation in these variables. To illustrate the potential impact of changes in the
earnings ratio, we use the fertility equation for 30-44 year old women. The ratio of median
female to male earnings of full-time full-year workers grew from 0.738 in 1995 to 0.788 in 2005
(U.S. Census Bureau 2008). If the same rate of annual increase occurred between 2005 and 2030,
the effect on fertility would be approximately -1.5{0.163} = - 0.24 children, where -1.5 is the
approximate coefficient of the earnings ratio (from Table 5) and 0.163 is the projected change in
the natural log of the earnings ratio over a 25-year period. Thus, a continuing growth of women’s
earnings relative to men’s may put significant downward pressure on fertility. But we reiterate
that ours is an upper bound estimate because of possible upward biases in the coefficient
resulting from selective migration and reverse causation. Moreover, a more egalitarian
7

This is the mean gain for the high and low projections, weighted by ethnicity distributions in 2000 and assigning
10 years of schooling to those who did not complete high school, 12 to those who did, 14 to those who started but
did not finish college, and 17 to those who finished college.
8
The coefficient of educational attainment in a regression controlling age and ethnicity is -.083.
.

24

distribution of childraising responsibilities would be expected to reduce the sensitivity of fertility
to the sex ratio of earnings.
Other factors that may play a role:
- improvements in contraceptive technology should put mild downward pressure on
fertility. But contraceptive improvements have been very slow since the 1960s, especially in the
area of male contraception. And any improvements may be significantly offset by improvements
in proceptive technologies for subfecund individuals. Barring advances in technology,
improvements in contraceptive use could be expected to accompany improvements in
educational attainment and to be captured by the estimated effects thereof.
- a more conservative Supreme Court may result in greater restrictions in access to
abortion. Based on studies of interstate differences in access to abortion and in Medicaid funding
thereof, the estimated effects on fertility would not be large. Klerman (1999) estimates that
eliminating public funding altogether would increase the TFR by 2% and that making all
abortions illegal would increase it by an additional 3%.
- eventually, the rise in ages at childbearing must come to an end. This process has
reduced the period TFR by approximately 0.15 children per woman. When it stops, period rates
(but not necessarily cohort rates) will be pushed upwards. At the rate at which the mean age at
childbearing has been rising in the US, approximately 0.08 years per year, it would take 20 years
before the mean age in the US reached the level of 29.5 years already observed in Sweden (and
longer to reach the mean age currently observed in France, the Netherlands, Ireland and Spain;
compiled from US Census Bureau 2004b.) So the timing-induced depression in US period rates
could last a long time.

25

It is clear that modeling fertility timing is an important element in fertility projections. As
Figure 1 demonstrated, the sharp changes in American fertility over the past 80 years have been
powerfully influenced by timing factors. The baby boom and baby bust could not be predicted or
accounted for by the marginalist approach taken here. It seems likely that elements of social
contagion have operated in the past to add volatility to period measures of fertility. There is no
reason to believe that they cannot reappear in the future.
Fertility in the United States is relatively high, even for its lowest-fertility groups.
Compared to most countries in Europe and East Asia (but not northwestern Europe), fertility is
high even for white non-Hispanics, for states with the lowest fertility, and for college graduates.
One possible explanation of American “exceptionalism” is an unusually flexible and adaptive
society, one in which women were able to react quickly to the rise in their work opportunities
and find ways to combine motherhood and work while many other societies stayed wedded to
more traditional family forms. If American women have simply been quicker to find ways to do
things that women elsewhere also want to do -- have at least two children even when they have
attractive earnings prospects outside of the home -- then fertility elsewhere should rise to
American levels as women and men adapt to new circumstances and abandon older cultural
forms.
A second, related explanation of American exceptionalism is the unusually high degree
of religious belief and participation among Americans. Projecting religiosity into the future is
risky, in part because recent trends are not entirely consistent. The proportion of American adults
identifying their religious affiliation as “no religion” in the General Social Survey rose from 7%
to 14% between 1991 and 2000 (Hout and Fischer, 2002); the rise was especially sharp among
young adults. On the other hand, the proportion of adults who identify as conservative

26

Christians continues to grow, fueled by differential fertility and high rates of intergenerational
retention. And the proportion of American children attending church and participating in youth
groups rose sharply between 1997 and 2003 (Hofferth 2008). The possibility that American
fertility has strong religious underpinnings does not suggest a clear-cut direction for future
fertility trends, but it does add uncertainty to them.

References
Bartels, A.and S. Zeki. 2004. "The neural correlates of maternal and romantic love." NeuroImage
21(3):1155–1166.
Becker, Gary. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge. Harvard University Press.
Bianchi S. 2000. “Maternal Employment and Time with Children: Dramatic Change or
Surprising Continuity?” Demography 37(4): 401-14.
Billari, F.C.and H.-P. Kohler. 2004. "Patterns of low and lowest-low fertility in Europe."
Population Studies 58(2):161-176.
Billari, F.C.and D. Philipov. 2004. "Education and the Transition to Motherhood: a Comparative
Analysis of Western Europe." in European Demographic Research Papers. Vienna: Vienna
Institute of Demography.
Blau, F.D. 1998. "Trends in the Well-Being of American Women, 1970-1995." Journal of
Economic Literature 36:112-165.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2005. “Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior of
Married Women” NBER Working Paper 11230. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Bongaarts, J. 2002. "The End of the Fertility Transition in the Developed World." Population and
Development Review 28(3):419-443.
Buhler, C. 2006. "On the structural value of children and its implication on intended fertility in
Bulgaria." in MPIDR Working Papers. Rostock: Max Planck Institute for Demographic
Research.
Caldwell, J.C.and T. Schindlmayr. 2003. "Explanations of the fertility crisis in modern societies:
A search for commonalities." Population Studies 57(3):241-263.
Carter, C.S. et al. 2005. Attachment and Bonding: A New Synthesis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press
in cooperation with Dahlem University Press.
Chiappori P. and S. Oreffice. 2008 “Birth Control and Female Empowerment: An Equilibrium
Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy 116(1).

27

Coleman, D. 2004. "Why we don't have to believe without doubting in the "Second
Demographic Transition" -- some agnostic comments." Pp. 11-22 in Vienna Yearbook of
Demographic Research, edited by F.C. Billari and A. Liefbroer.
d’Addio, A. and M M. d’Ercole. 2005. Trends and Determinants of Fertility Rates in OECD
Countries: The Role of Policies. OECD Social, Employment, and Migration Working Paper
No.27. Paris. OECD.
de Tocqueville, A. 1945. Democracy in America. Volume 1. New York: Vintage Books.
Erickson, M.F.and E.G. Aird. 2005. "The Motherhood Study: Fresh Insights on Mothers'
Attitudes and Concerns." New York: Institute for American Values.
Fawcett, J.T. 1983. “Perceptions of the value of children: Satisfactions and costs” pp. 429-457 in
R.A. Bulatao and R.D. Lee editors, Determinants of Fertility in Developing Countries:
Supply and Demand for Children New York. Academic Press.
Finke, Roger and Rodney Stark. 2005. The Churching of America, 1776-2005: Winner and
Losers in Our Religious Economy. Rutgers University Press. New Brunswick.
Foster, Caroline. 2000. “The limits to low fertility: A biosocial approach” Population and
Development Review 26(2): 209-234.
Frejka, T. and J. Sardon. 2004. Childbearing Trends and Prospects in Low-Fertility Countries: A
Cohort Analysis. Dordrecht. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Frejka, T.and C.F. Westoff. 2006. "Religion, religiousness and fertility in the US and in Europe."
MPIDR Working Paper 2006-013. Rostock: Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research.
Goldin, C.and L.F. Katz. 2002. "The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s Career
and Marriage Decisions." J. Political Economy 110(4):730-770.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Long-run Changes in the U.S. Wage Structure:
Narrowing, Widening, Polarizing” NBER Working Paper No. 13568. Cambridge, MA:
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goldstein, J., W. Lutz, and M.R. Testa. 2003. "The emergence of Sub-Replacement Family Size
Ideals in Europe." European Demographic Research Paper 2003 No. 2. Vienna Institute of
Demography. Vienna.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Guillaume Vandenbroucke. 2005. “The Baby Boom
and Baby Bust” American Economic Review 44(3): 183-207.
Hagewen, K.J.and S.P. Morgan. 2005. "Intended and ideal family size in the United States,
1970-2002." Population and Development Review 31(3):507-527.
Hoem, J.M. 2005. "Why does Sweden have such high fertility?" MPIDR Working Paper 2005009. Rostock: Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research.
Hofferth, Samdra. 2008. “Changes in Preadolescent and Early Adolescent Children’s Time, 1997
to 2003” Manuscript, Population Research Center, University of Maryland.
Hout, M. and C.S. Fischer. 2002. “Why More Americans Have No Relgious Preference: Politics
and Generations” American Sociological Review 67: 165-190.
Hout, M., A Greeley and M. Wilde. 2001, “The Demographic Imperative in Religious Change in
the United States” American Journal of Sociology 107(2): 468-500.
Isen, Adam and Betsey Stevenson. 2008. “Family Behavior and Women’s Education: Trends in
Marriage, Divorce, and Fertility.” National Bureau of Economic Research. Forthcoming.
Jones, L.E.and M. Tertilt. 2006. "An Economic History of Fertility in the US: 1826-1960."
NBER Working Paper 12796. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

28

Jones L E, A. Schoonbroodt, and M Tertilt. 2008. “Fertility Theories: Can They Explain the
Negative Fertility-Income Relationship?” National Bureau of Economic Research.
Forthcoming.
Kaplan, H. 1994. "Evolutionary and Wealth Flows Theories of Fertility: Empirical Tests and
New Models." Population and Development Review 20(4):753-791.
Kearney, M. S. 2004. “Is There an Effect of Incremental Welfare Benefits on Fertilty Behavior?
A Look a the Family Cap” Journal of Human Resources 39(2): 295-325.
Kertzer, D., M. White, L. Bernardi, and G. Gabrielli. 2006. "Italy’s path to very low fertility: The
adequacy of economic and second demographic transition theories." MPIDR Working Paper
2006-049. Rostock: Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research.
Kiernan, K. 2004. "Unmarried Cohabitation and Parenthood: Here to Stay? European
Perspectives." Pp. 66-95 in The Future of the Family, edited by D.P. Moynihan, T.M.
Smeeding, and L. Rainwater. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Klerman, J.A. 1999. “U.S. Abortion Policy and Fertility” American Economic Review 89(2):
261-64.
Kohler, H-P, J.R. Behrman and A. Skytthe. 2005. “Partner + Children = Happiness? The Effects
of Parnerships and Fertility on Well-Being” Population and Development Review 31(3):
407-445.
Kohler, H.P., F.C. Billari, and J.A. Ortega. 2006. "Low Fertility in Europe: Causes, Implications,
and Policy Options." Pp. 48-109 in The Baby Bust: Who Will Do the Work? Who Will Pay
the Taxes?, edited by F.R. Harris. Lanham, MD: Rowman.
Kohler, H.-P., F.C. Billari, and J.A. Ortega. 2002. "The Emergence of Lowest-Low Fertility in
Europe during the 1990s." Population and Development Review 28(4):641-680.
Lesthaeghe, R.J.and L. Neidert. 2006. "The second demographic transition in the United States:
Exception or textbook example?" Population and Development Review 32(4): 669-698.
Lesthaeghe, R. and P. Willems. 1999. “Is Low Fertility a Temporary Phenomenon in the
European Union?” Population and Development Review 25(2): 211-228.
Lundberg, S. and R.A. Pollak. 2007. "The American Family and Family Economics" NBER
Working Paper 12908. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research
McDonald, P. 2000. "Gender Equity in Theories of Fertility Transition." Population and
Development Review 26(3):427-439.
McDonald, P. 2002. “Sustaining Fertility Through Public Policy: The Range of Options”
Population-E. 57(3): 417-446.
McDonald, P. 2006. "Low fertility and the state: The efficacy of policy." Population and
Development Review 32(3):485-510.
McMahon, M. 1995. Engendering Motherhood. Guilford Press. New York.
Moffit, R. 1998. "The Effects of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility." in Welfare, the Family, and
Reproductive Behavior, edited by R. Moffit. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Morgan, S.P. 2003. "Is low fertility a twenty-first-century demographic crisis?" Demography
40(4):589-603.
Morgan, S.P.and R.B. King. 2001. "Why have children in the 21st century? Biological
predisposition, social coercion, rational choice." European Journal of Population 17(1):3-20.
Morgan, S.P., S.C. Watkins, and D. Ewbank. 1994.”Generating Americans: Ethnic Differences
in Fertility” Pp. 83-124 in After Ellis Island: Newcomers and Natives in the 1910 Census,
edited by S.C. Watkins. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

29

Nickell, Stephen. 1997. “Unemployement and Labor market Rigidities: Europe versus North
America” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(3): 55-74.
Parrado, E.A. and P. Morgan. 2007. "Intergenerational fertility among Hispanic women: new
evidence of immigrant assimilation." (manuscript under review).
Philipov, Dimiter and Caroline Berghammer. 2007. “Religion and fertility ideals, intentions and
behaviour: a comparative study of European countries” Vienna Yearbook of Population
Research 2007: 271-305.
Preston, Samuel H. 1987. “Changing Values and Falling Birth Rates” pp. 176-95 in K.Davis,
M.S. Bernstam, and R. Ricardo-Campbell, eds. Below Replacement Fertility in Industrial
Societies. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.
Quesnel-Vallee, A.and S.P. Morgan. 2003. "Missing the target? Correspondence of fertility
intentions and behavior in the US." Pop.Res.Policy Rev. 22(5-6):497-525.
Retherford, R.D.and N. Ogawa. 2006. "Japan's Baby Bust: Causes, Implications, and Policy
Responses." Pp. 5-47 in The Baby Bust: Who Will Do the Work? Who Will Pay the Taxes?,
edited by F.R. Harris. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefiled.
Rindfuss, R.R., K.B. Guzzo, and S.P. Morgan. 2003. "The Changing Institutional Context of
Low Fertility." Population Research and Policy Review 22(5):411-438.
Sayer, Liana, Nathan Wright and Kathryn Edin. 2005. “Differences in Family Attitudes by
Education” Manuscript submitted to Journal of Marriage and the Family.
Schoen, Robert Y. Kim, C. Nathanson, J. Fields, and N.M Astone. 1997. “Why Do Americans
Want Children?” Population and Development Review 23(2):333-358.
Schoen, R. 2004. “Timing Effects and the Interpretation of Period Fertility” Demography 41(4):
801-819.
Schultz, T.P. 1994. "Marital Status and Fertility in the United States: Welfare and Labor Market
Effects." Journal of Human Resources 29(2):637-669.
Thornton, A, and L. Young-DeMarco. 2001. “Four Decades of Trends in Attitudes Toward
Family Issues in the United States: The 1960s Through the 1990s” Journal of Marriage and
Family 63: 1009-1037.
Trustees, Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust
Funds. 2007. 2007 Annual Report. U.S. Government Printing Office. Washington.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1972. Census of Population: 1970. Marital Status. Final Report
PC(2)-4C. Washington. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1979. Statistical Abstract of the United States 1979. Washington
D.C. U.S. Bureau of the Census.
U.S. Census Bureau 2000a. Methodology and Assumptions for the Population Projections of the
U.S. 1999 to 2100. Population Division Working Paper No 38. Washington D.C. U.S.
Census Bureau.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2000b. Have We Reached the Top? Educational Attainment Projections of
the US Population. Population Division Working Paper No. 43. US Census Bureau website
accessed July 2007.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2004a. U.S. Interim Population Projections by Age, Sex, Race, and
Hispanic Origin. Census Bureau website, accessed July 2007.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2004b. International Data Base. International Program Center. Internet
release date March 22, 2004.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2005a. Fertility of American Women: June 2004. Current Population
Report P20-555. Washington, D.C. US Census Bureau.

30

U.S. Census Bureau. 2005b. Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2004-2005.
Washington, DC: US Dept. of Commerce, U.S. Census Bureau.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2007a. US Census Bureau Website. Current Population Survey, 2006.
Annual Social and Economic Supplement, Table 13.Accessed July, 2007.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2007b. U.S. Census Bureau Website. Historical Income Tables. P38.
Accessed July, 2007.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2008. U.S. Census Bureau Website. Historical Income Tables.
Accessed March, 2008. www.census.gov/hhes/www/income/histinc/incpertoc.html.
U.S. National Center for Health Statistics. 2005a. Fertility, Family Planning, and Reproductive
Health of U.S. Women: Data from the 2002 National Survey of Family Growth. Vital and
Health Statistics Series 23 Number 25. Hyattsville, Md. U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.
U.S. National Center for Health Statistics. 2005b. Births: Final Data for 2003. Vital and Health
Statistics Series 54(2). Hyattsville, Md. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
U.S. National Center for Health Statistics. 2006a. Births: Preliminary Data for 2005. National
Vital Statistics Reports Vol. 55(11). Hyattsville, Md. National Center for Health Statistics.
U.S. National Center for Health Statistics. 2006b. "Births: Final Data for 2004." National Vital
Statistics Reports. Vol 55(1). Hyattsville, MD: Nat. Center for Health Statistics.
van de Kaa, D.J. 1996. "Anchored narratives: The story and findings of half a century of research
into the determinants of fertility." Population Studies 50(3):389-432.
Ventura, S. and C. Bachrach. 2000. Non-Marital Childbearing in the United States, 1940-99.
National Vital Statistics Reports Vol. 48(16). Hyattsville, Md. National Center for Health
Statistics.
Wuthnow, Robert. 2005. “The Family as Contested Terrain”.pp71-93 in Steven Tipton and John
Wittee, eds. Family Transformed: Religion, Values, and Society in American Life.
Georgetown University Press. Washington, D.C.
Yu, P. 2006. "Higher education, the bane of fertility? An investigation with the HILDA Survey."
Discussion Paper No. 512. Centre for Economic Policy Research. The Australian National
University

31

Figure 1. Period and cohort total fertility rates, United States 1928-2005
4
3.5

Period TFR
Cohort TFR*

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
1925

1935

1945

1955

1965

1975

1985

1995

2005

*For cohort born t-26; Note: Last data points for CTFR use imputed data; Sources: Schoen 2004, National Center for
Health Statistics 2005b, 2006a

Figure 2. Distribution of women 40-44 by number of children ever born

40%
4+ children

2 children
3 children

20%

No children
1 child

0%
1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

Source: US Census Bureau 2005a

32

1995

2000

2004

Table 1. Mean number of children ever born by
women's educational attainment, women 40-44
1973

1988

2002

3.86
2.96
3.02
2.86
3.26

2.92
2.17
2.12
1.58
2.15

2.75
2.19
2.00
1.73
2.11

Less than high school
High school graduate/GED
Some college
Bachelor's degree or higher
Total

Note: Educational attainment based on number of years of school
completed; Sources: National Surveys of Family Growth

Table 2. Coefficient of years of schooling completed among
respondents aged 30-44, National Survey of Family Growth 1973,
1988, 2002
Survey year, sex

Dependent Variable
Total births
expected
Current parity

1973 Women
1988 Women
2002 Women
2002 Men

-0.153
-0.126
-0.097
-0.053

*
*
*
*

-0.157
-0.163
-0.150
-0.101

Additional births
expected
*
*
*
*

0.004
0.037 *
0.053 *
0.048 *

*Significant at 0.001 level; Note: Age is controlled via a second-degree polynomial

Table 3. Total fertility rates among major ethnic groups, United States
Total
1989
1996
2004

2.014
1.976
2.046

Non-Hispanic Non-Hispanic
Whites
Blacks
1.770
1.781
1.847

2.424
2.140
2.020

Source: National Center for Health Statistics, 2006b

33

All

Hispanics
Mexicans

2.904
2.772
2.824

2.916
3.052
3.021

Table 4. Coefficients of ethnicity among women aged 30-44,
National Surveys of Family Growth 1973, 1988, 2002
Survey year, race

Dependent Variable
Total births
expected

Non-Hispanic Blacks
1973
1988
2002
Hispanics
1973
1988
2002

Current parity

Additional births
expected

0.688 *
0.236 *
0.233 *

0.634 *
0.204 *
0.215 *

0.054 *
0.032
0.018

0.211
0.352 *
0.426 *

0.062
0.210
0.336 *

0.150 *
0.142 *
0.096 *

*Significant at 0.01 level; Note: Age, age squared, and years of schooling completed are
controlled

Table 5. Coefficients of median female and male earnings in various fertility
regressions
Coefficient of Coefficient of
1
2
Dependent Variable
ln M
ln F
Total births expected
-2.726 **
2.077 **
(.387)
(.353)
Total births achieved
-1.654 **
1.265 **
(.321)
(.265)
Total additional births expected
-1.072 **
0.811 *
(.329)
(.261)
3
-2.492 **
1.955 **
Total births expected, controlling marital status
(.375)
(.354)
-3.591 **
2.219 **
Total births expected, women aged 15-29
(.516)
(.419)
-1.421 *
1.638 *
Total births expected, women aged 30-44
(.529)
(.535)
Note: Control variables listed in Appendix Table 1.
*Significant at .01
**Significant at .001
1
F = Median annual earnings of full-time, full-year female workers in a metropolitan area
2
F = Median annual earnings of full-time, full-year male workers in a metropolitan area
3
Marital status categories are never married/non-cohabiting; currently married; currently
cohabiting; and widowed/divorced/separated

34

Table 6. Total fertility rates in selected developed countries*
Country
United States
France
Sweden
Denmark
Australia
Finland
United Kingdom
Belgium
Netherlands
Canada
Switzerland
Portugal
Bulgaria
Austria
Italy

TFR
2.10
1.98
1.85
1.85
1.81
1.81
1.79
1.72
1.68
1.52
1.43
1.41
1.38
1.38
1.35

(year)
(2006)
(2006)
(2006)
(2006)
(2005)
(2006)
(2005)
(2005)
(2006)
(2005)
(2006)
(2005)
(2006)
(2006)
(2006)

Country
Hungary
Spain
Germany
Greece
Czech Republic
Ukraine
Russia
Romania
Poland
Slovakia
Japan
South Korea
Taiwan
Hong Kong

TFR
1.35
1.34
1.34
1.34
1.33
1.32
1.31
1.31
1.28
1.25
1.25
1.13
1.12
0.99

(year)
(2006)
(2005)
(2005)
(2005)
(2006)
(2006)
(2006)
(2006)
(2006)
(2005)
(2005)
(2006)
(2005)
(2006)

*Countries with populations above 5 million; Source: Population Reference Bureau
http://www.prb.org/pdf07/TFRTable.pdf

Table 7. Coefficients relating the expected number
of births to religious affiliation at age 16, women
aged 30-44, National Survey of Family Growth 2002
No religion
Mainline Protestant
Fundamentalist Protestant
Catholic
Other non-Christian religion

-0.444
0.000
0.194
0.127
0.264

Note: Age, age squared, years of schooling completed, and
race/ethnicity are controlled

Table 8. Summary of positive and negative pressures on TFR
Effect
Projection
on TFR year
Increases in proportion Hispanic
+0.07
2030
Increases in women's education
-0.07
2028
Increases in F/M earnings ratio (upper bound)
-0.24
2030
Possible restrictions on abortion access
+0.10
Stabilization in mean age of childbearing
+0.15

35

Appendix Table 1. Coefficients of regressions of fertility on individual and areal
variables, National Survey of Family Growth 2002
Women 30-44

Women 15-44

Age
2

Age

Religion
Mainline Protestant (Ref)
No religion
Catholic
Fundamentalist Protestant
Non-Christian
Mother's education
Less than high school
High school (Ref)
Some college
Bachelor's degree or higher
Family intact at age 18
Race/Ethnicity
White, Non-Hispanic (Ref)
Hispanic
Black
Other race

Total births
expected
Current parity
0.131
0.318
(0.000)
(0.000)
-0.002
-0.004
(0.000)
(0.000)

Additional
births
expected
-0.187
(0.000)
0.002
(0.000)

Total births
expected
0.071
(0.548)
-0.001
(0.433)

-0.414
(0.000)
0.055
(0.324)
0.101
(0.193)
0.151
(0.175)

-0.162
(0.002)
0.057
(0.236)
0.143
(0.056)
0.205
(0.025)

-0.251
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.96)
-0.042
(0.48)
-0.051
(0.526)

-0.438
(0.000)
0.134
(0.08)
0.153
(0.173)
0.414
(0.013)

0.193
(0.003)

0.157
(0.007)

0.036
(0.335)

0.284
(0.001)

0.079
(0.141)
0.165
(0.005)
0.112
(0.016)

-0.006
(0.895)
0.037
(0.432)
-0.056
(0.166)

0.085
(0.047)
0.129
(0.008)
0.168
(0.000)

0.075
(0.317)
0.237
(0.004)
0.010
(0.89)

0.237
(0.000)
0.143
(0.009)
0.276
(0.024)
-0.064
(0.000)
0.027
(0.092)
2.077
(0.000)
-2.726
(0.000)
0.204
(0.000)

0.214
(0.000)
0.258
(0.000)
-0.037
(0.653)
-0.153
(0.000)
0.009
(0.574)
1.265
(0.000)
-1.654
(0.000)
0.008
(0.853)

0.023
(0.601)
-0.114
(0.002)
0.312
(0.007)
0.088
(0.000)
0.018
(0.062)
0.811
(0.002)
-1.072
(0.001)
0.196
(0.000)

0.326
(0.001)
0.247
(0.003)
0.007
(0.953)
-0.078
(0.000)
0.049
(0.061)
1.638
(0.002)
-1.421
(0.007)
0.004
(0.957)

Highest grade of school
completed
Percent unemployed in
metropolitan area
Log of male income in
metropolitan area
Log of female income in
metropolitan area
Value of owner-occupied
housing in metropolitan area
(per $100,000)
Note: Values in parentheses are p-values

36

