NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EQUILIBRIUM PRICE DYNAMICS IN PERISHABLE GOODS MARKETS:
THE CASE OF SECONDARY MARKETS FOR MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL TICKETS
Andrew Sweeting
Working Paper 14505
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14505

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2008

Stephen Finger provided excellent research assistance. I would like to thank Paul Ellickson, Hanming
Fang, Ian Gale, Brett Gordon, Igal Hendel, Scott Savage, Justin Wolfers and seminar participants at
Duke, London Business School, Wharton, Virginia Tech, the Quantitative Marketing and Economics
Conference (October 2008), the FTC Applied Microeconomics Conference (November 2008) and
the IIOC Conference (May 2008) for many insightful comments. The usual disclaimer applies. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Andrew Sweeting. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Equilibrium Price Dynamics in Perishable Goods Markets: The Case of Secondary Markets
for Major League Baseball Tickets
Andrew Sweeting
NBER Working Paper No. 14505
November 2008
JEL No. L11,L81
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the dynamics of prices in two online secondary markets for Major League Baseball
tickets. Controlling for ticket quality, prices tend to decline significantly as a game approaches. The
paper describes and tests alternative theoretical explanations for why this happens in equilibrium, considering
the problems of both buyers and sellers. It shows that sellers cut prices (either fixed prices or reserve
prices in auctions) because of declining opportunity costs of holding onto tickets as their future selling
opportunities disappear. Even though prices can be expected to fall, the majority of observed early
purchases can be rationalized by plausible ticket valuations and return to market costs given product
differentiation and uncertainties about ticket availability.

Andrew Sweeting
Department of Economics
213 Social Sciences
Box 90097
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
atsweet@duke.edu

1

Introduction

This paper analyzes the dynamics of prices in two online resale markets for Major League Baseball
(MLB) tickets. I show that various types of list and transaction prices all tend to decline as a game
approaches by economically significant amounts (e.g., 25% or more in the last month before the game).
I also explore why declining prices are the equilibrium outcome by examining the behavior of both
buyers and sellers. I show that, consistent with the theoretical literature on the dynamic pricing of
perishable goods, of which event tickets are a classic example, sellers cut prices over time because,
as a game approaches, they become increasingly desperate to sell as their future selling opportunities
disappear. Alternative explanations for why sellers cut prices, such as changing demand and seller
learning, are rejected. I also show that the majority of observed early purchases can be rationalized
despite falling expected prices by uncertain future availability and plausible valuations and costs of
returning to the market at a later date.
The paper makes four contributions. First, it describes a pattern (systematically declining prices)
which many economists, perhaps conditioned by their experience when buying airline tickets, find
surprising.

The pattern is very robust to considering diﬀerent cuts of the data and it is found in

two diﬀerent marketplaces and across diﬀerent types of selling mechanism (fixed price listings and
auctions).1
Second, the paper provides strong empirical support for theoretical models of dynamic pricing of
perishable goods which have appeared in the economics and operations research literatures, motivated
by the pricing problems facing airlines, hotels, sports teams, radio and television stations selling
commercial time to advertisers and sellers of goods with strong seasonal demand. The models which
are most relevant to the current paper are those where the seller freely adjusts prices over time rather
than committing to a price schedule at the beginning (McAfee and te Velde (2006), Gallego and van
1
The pattern that prices for similar or identical items tend to decline when they are sold in sequential auctions has
been noted by Ashenfelter (1989), Ashenfelter and Genesove (1992), McAfee and Vincent (1993), Ginsburgh (1998) and
van den Berg et al. (2001). Most explanations for this “declining price anomaly” have focused on the characteristics
of the particular auction mechanism being used or diﬀerences in the unobserved qualities of the goods being sold. In
contrast, I show that perishability - a shared characteristic of the goods being sold - leads to price declines across several
diﬀerent sales mechanisms, including fixed prices and auctions.

2

Ryzin (1994) and Bitran and Mondschein (1993)).2
A stylized version of these models has a seller with a given inventory which can be sold during
a fixed time interval.

Customers arrive according to an exogenous stochastic process and their

valuations for one unit of the good are drawn from a distribution which is time invariant. Arriving
customers either buy at once or exit the market. The seller’s optimal price at any point in time is
determined by the opportunity cost of a sale which reflects the probability that a current sale prevents
a future sale because of a stock-out. The optimal price decreases with the number of unsold units
and it falls as the end of the interval approaches as there are fewer future opportunities to sell the
remaining units. McAfee and te Velde show that a “robust prediction” of these models is that this
second eﬀect causes the expected price to fall over time.
There has been very little empirical work testing whether these models describe how sellers price
perishable goods.3

McAfee and te Velde examine data from the airline industry but reject the

declining price prediction as prices tend to increase as the day of departure approaches (a pattern also
found by Escobari and Gan (2007) and Puller et al. (2008) using diﬀerent airline datasets). Plausible
explanations for this rejection are that, contrary to the assumptions made in the theory, consumers
arriving close to the departure date tend to have higher valuations (e.g., business travellers) or that
airlines seek to commit to increasing prices in order to aﬀect when potentially strategic customers
purchase.
In my data commitment incentives are unlikely to be important because each seller is small relative
to the market and they are also relatively anonymous.

Each seller is also typically only trying to

sell one set of similar tickets (e.g., same game and section) so that the prediction of declining prices
emerges directly (i.e., there are no inventory eﬀects for most sellers). I show that not only do prices
2

These models are the most relevant to my paper because they assume that sellers adjust prices in response to
realizations of demand. Prescott (1975) and Dana (1999) show that equilibrium price dispersion can be generated in
models where sellers commit to prices or price distributions before demand is realized. In the airline industry, this type
of assumption would be consistent with airlines preallocating groups of seats to diﬀerent pricing buckets. Gale and
Holmes (1992, 1993) and Dana (1998) study the role of another airline industry practice, advance purchase discounting,
at eﬃciently spreading demand across flights.
3
There has been some empirical work on the dynamics of prices in settings without perishability (e.g., Aguirregabiria
(1999)).

3

decline as a game approaches but also that prices fall because of declining opportunity costs just as
the theoretical models predict.
The third contribution relates to my analysis of early purchasing. Declining prices can only be the
equilibrium outcome if some people are willing to purchase early when expected prices are relatively
high.4

The theoretical literature has recently started to examine how the ability of consumers to

strategically time their purchases should aﬀect pricing policies (Aviv and Pazgal (2008), Liu and van
Ryzin (2008), Dasu and Tong (2008), Levin et al. (2008), Zhou et al. (2006)) and it has shown that
early purchases can be rationalized even when expected prices are falling by uncertainty about future
availability and prices, search costs or risk aversion.5

I provide the first empirical analysis of these

ideas by using calibrated models of buyer utility to analyze observed early purchase decisions. I show
that uncertainties about the future availability and prices of particular types of ticket combined with
plausible valuations and return to market (search) costs can rationalize the majority of observed early
purchases. There are also patterns in the data, concerning who tends to purchase early and which
types of ticket tend to purchased early, that are consistent with uncertainty and return to market
costs being important.
The paper’s final contribution is to shed some new light on how secondary event ticket markets
work. Revenues in these markets are projected to grow from $2.6 billion in 2007 to $4.5 billion in
2012 with 70% of revenues coming from sports tickets (Forrester Research (2008)) and they are also
becoming increasingly accepted by primary market sellers. For example, Stubhub.com became the
oﬃcial resale site for MLB in 2008. The existing theoretical (Courty (2000, 2003a,b), Karp and Perloﬀ
(2005)) and empirical (Leslie and Sorensen (2007)) literatures analyze these markets using one-shot
market clearing models. My analysis provides insights into how the price formation and allocation
4

An alternative objection is that declining prices would provide sellers with short-selling opportunities: a seller would
sell a pledge to provide a ticket a long time before the game before buying the ticket closer to the game at a lower price.
This type of strategy is inhibited by the importance of product diﬀerentiation: it is diﬃcult for a seller to know which
sections and rows will be available in advance but buyers value knowing the particular section and row of the tickets
they are purchasing. In my Market 2 data the transaction price is, on average, around 17% lower if row information is
missing than would be expected for a third row listing for the same game and section.
5
Strategic consumer behavior has, of course, played an important role in the durable goods literature (e.g., Coase
(1972), Stokey (1979)).

4

process actually works.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the data and Section 3 establishes that
prices decline controlling for ticket quality. Section 4 outlines three competing theoretical explanations
for why sellers cut prices as a game approaches, and it presents reduced-form evidence which is
inconsistent with one of them, the Lazear learning model. Section 5 estimates structural models of
the price-setting problem. The results support the theory that sellers cut prices because of declining
opportunity costs of sale. Section 6 examines why some buyers choose to purchase early when prices
are expected to decline. Section 7 concludes.

2

Data

2.1

Secondary Market Data

This paper uses new datasets from two large online secondary markets for tickets for regular season
MLB games in 2007.

2.1.1

Stubhub.com

The first dataset contains data on list prices from Stubhub.com, collected using an automated script.6
Stubhub operates as a market for all types of event tickets. From the perspective of a buyer, sellers
are anonymous but Stubhub guarantees to supply tickets at least as good as those purchased if the
seller fails to do so. Tickets to a particular game are listed on a single page and since 2006 Stubhub
has provided a clickable map of each stadium which shows the availability and prices of tickets in each
seating section. I only use listings in Stubhub’s fixed price format which accounted for 99.5% of all
listings in 2007, with auctions accounting for the remainder. Seller can change prices at any time, and
a small number of listings (0.4%) use a format where prices decline linearly as the game approaches.
I also exclude these listings from the analysis of the Stubhub data, although the fact that Stubhub
6

Stubhub was purchased by EBay in January 2007 and from 2008 it is acting as MLB’s oﬃcial “Fan to Fan Marketplace”.

5

chooses to make such an option available is instructive about how sellers may want to price.
Sellers list tickets on Stubhub for free, but pay a 15% commission in the event of a sale. Buyers
pay a 10% commission in the event of sale plus Stubhub-set shipping costs ($11.95 per listing if the
transaction is more than 14 days before the game and $16.95 per listing if the transaction is between
4 and 14 days before the game). Tickets can only be sold within 3 days of the game if hard copies are
supplied to Stubhub which can pass them to buyers, who pay a $15 handling charge, at oﬃces close
to each stadium.
Data was collected from Stubhub.com’s “buy” page for each game on a daily basis from January
6, 2007 to September 30, 2007. For each listing I observe a listing identification number, the game
(e.g., Seattle Mariners at the New York Yankees on May 6), the number of seats available and whether
less than the full number can be bought, the section and row (e.g., Loge Box 512 row D at Yankee
Stadium) and the listed price per seat. The identification number allows only imperfect tracking of
listings across days as it is clear that many sellers enter a new listing when changing the price.7 In
the analysis which follows I only use listings with non-missing section information (over 99.7% of the
sample), six or fewer seats (91%) and tickets with prices less than $1,000 per seat (99.98%). I also
exclude three Tampa Bay games which were played in Orlando and make-up games for rainouts as
these are often scheduled at short notice. I include games which were rained out as I am looking at
price dynamics in the days and weeks leading up to the game rather than on the day itself.
The limitation of the Stubhub data is that it contains data only on posted prices and not on
transactions. While I observe tickets which cease to be listed I do not know whether this is because
they are sold on Stubhub or sold elsewhere, possibly at a diﬀerent price.

On the other hand, the

dataset contains a huge number of observations and allows me to confirm the pricing patterns I find
in my second dataset.
7

To be specific, for roughly two-thirds of the occassions where I see a ticketid exit the data I see a new listing for
seats in the same section and row appearing the next day.

6

2.1.2

“Market 2”

The second dataset comes from a major online market where all types of products, not just event
tickets, are traded. The data license prevents me from disclosing the identity of the market so the
following description is in relatively general terms and I shall refer to it as Market 2. A seller can list
tickets in several diﬀerent sale formats, including auctions of diﬀerent durations, a pure fixed price
format, a fixed price format where buyers can also make oﬀers to the seller and a hybrid auction
format where a customer can buy a ticket at a fixed price if no bids have yet been placed in the
auction. When selling in an auction the buyer sets a start price for the auction and may also choose
to set a secret reserve price.
Sellers pay a small listing fee and a small commission (between 1% and 7%) which varies with the
transaction price and the sale format. Buyers pay no commission but pay shipping costs set by the
seller. Buyers are able to see a seller’s username and current feedback score, and are likely to care
about reputations because the market does not oﬀer a Stubhub-like guarantee.
The full dataset contains information on all event ticket listings from January 1 to September
30, 2007, and I use the subset of observations for single regular season (i.e., no season tickets) MLB
games excluding the Orlando games and make-ups.8 For each listing I observe the game, the identity
number of the seller, the number of seats available, the section and row, the sale format and the
relevant prices (e.g., fixed price, auction start price or both and whether there is a secret reserve), the
start date and duration of the listing, the seller’s revenues from the listing and some of the additional
text from the listing provided by the seller.

I also know if the listing was highlighted on a search

page or contained additional information such as pictures. For every auction bid, oﬀer or fixed price
purchase the data records the identity number of the bidder and the level of the bid together with
an indicator for if the bid was successful. For each transaction, the data records the feedback scores
of the seller and the buyer, the shipping cost and (a relatively novel aspect of the data) the zipcodes
8

Market 2 was unable to supply me with attribute (section, row, number of seats) data for listings which ended on
May 18, 2007, so these listings are excluded in what follows. The full (all event ticket) dataset is useful in filling in
information, such as zipcodes and feedback scores, on sellers who only have a few MLB listings.

7

of the buyer and seller. Section and row information is reported in a less uniform pattern than on
Stubhub, so considerable eﬀort was spent linking tickets to specific sections within each stadium.9
The section could not be identified for 0.5% of listings which were dropped. Dummies are included
for listings with missing row data in all of the analysis which follows. I exclude listings with more
than six seats, prices above $1,000 or shipping costs above $40 (0.7% of the sample).

2.2

Primary Market Data

The secondary market data is complemented by several types of data from the primary market and
on team performance. Game results and attendances for 2000 to 2007 are taken from Retrosheet.org
and are used to model expected attendance as well as to control for the current record (form) of each
team. Stadium capacities are measured using the maximum observed attendance each year as these
exceed recorded capacities for many teams.

The single game price (face value) for each game and

section was collected from team websites. Some teams, such as the Boston Red Sox, charge the same
prices irrespective of the opposition, whereas others, like the New York Mets, have several pricing
tiers which depend on the opposition and the day of the week. Face value information is missing for
some season ticket only sections and for all Colorado Rockies games. No teams practised dynamic
pricing in the primary market.

2.3

Summary Statistics

Table 1 shows how the listings are distributed across MLB teams and, based on transactions observed
on Market 2, some additional measures of pricing, market concentration and the timing of sales. Most
listings are available for more than one day: on Stubhub the average listing lasts 16 days; on Market
2 auction listings last for an average of 4.5 days and non-auction listings for 19 days. Stubhub has
more listings than Market 2 for every team, although the ratio of listings shows some variation across
teams. The teams with the most listings and highest secondary market prices on both sites tend to
9
On Stubhub sellers also have strong incentives to provide the section and row information in a standard format as
otherwise their listing will not appear on the clickable map.

8

be those in the largest cities with the highest realized attendances, which is consistent with secondary
markets existing partly because of excess demand in the primary market.

Secondary markets for

baseball tickets also allow season ticket holders, who may have the right to go to 81 home games, to
sell their seats for games they do not want. This leads to there being many very small sellers: 63% of
sellers on Market 2 have only one or two listings across all games and 90% of sellers have fewer than
15 listings and list tickets for only one team. 139 sellers, who are likely to be professional resellers,
have more than 500 listings each and these account for around 30% of all listings.

However, even

these largest sellers are small relative to the total market.
For all but two teams the average secondary market is above the average primary market price,
even though the reported average primary market price is biased downwards because I cannot identify
face values for some premium season-ticket only sections.

The Boston Red Sox appear to have

underpriced their tickets the most, consistent with Fenway Park having been sold out for all games
since May 2003 as well as the team having a particularly successful 2007 (they won the World Series).10
Most purchases happen in the last three weeks before the game, although the average number of days
before the game is significantly higher. There is a positive correlation between the median distance
buyers live from the ground (based on the shipping zipcode) and the average number of days before
the game when purchases take place. This correlation will play a role in rationalizing buyer behavior.
Table 2 provides some more detailed statistics on listings. Stubhub has many more 4 seat listings
than Market 2, but 93% of these listings allow a pair of seats to be purchased. Single unit (e.g., a
listing for a pair of seats) pure auctions are the most popular sales mechanism on Market 2, followed
by single unit hybrid auctions and fixed price listings.

Multi-unit auctions, where diﬀerent buyers

can buy diﬀerent quantities of similar seats, are relatively rare. More single-unit pure auctions result
in sales than other formats.
The lower part of Table 2 provides further summary statistics on prices. The average face value
of tickets listed on the two sites is similar.

The large diﬀerence between buyer and seller prices

10
Of course, whether teams like the Red Sox are mispricing depends on the dynamics of demand (e.g., fan loyalty, the
value of future TV rights) and the objective function that teams are trying to maximize.

9

on Stubhub reflects the large commissions and shipping costs. Of course, buyers may be willing to
pay a premium for buying on Stubhub if it oﬀers more secure transactions and easier purchasing.
Comparing secondary market prices across the sites is not straightforward because I only observe
listed fixed prices on Stubhub while I observe many diﬀerent types of price, such as auction start
prices, on Market 2. The most direct comparison is between listed seller prices on Stubhub and listed
pure fixed prices on Market 2 from which seller commissions have been deducted (the bottom line in
the table). These prices are very similar as a proportion of ticket face value.
The paper is focused on how prices change as the game approaches. Figure 1 summarizes how
several features of the market evolve. Figure 1(a) shows that the number of listings evolves diﬀerently
on the two sites (I include pure auction listings only on the day the auction ends) with the number of
listings on Market 2 peaking five days before the game. The mix of sales mechanisms on Market 2 also
changes over time with diﬀerent types of auction mechanism becoming more prevalent. Regressions
show that this shift takes place within sellers as well as across sellers, and it is likely to be explained
by sellers placing greater value on the price flexibility provided by auctions when they are very keen to
sell. All types of listing are more likely to result in sales as the game approaches, except for single unit
pure auctions where the probability of sale declines in the last few days. This may be explained by
buyers valuing the certainty oﬀered by fixed price listings when there are fewer buying opportunities
left. Figure 4(d) shows what happens to the observable quality of listed tickets as a game approaches
(higher face values and lower row numbers are better). Changes in quality are relatively small, with
row quality increasingly slightly and face values declining slightly until the last few days. A similar
analysis of transacted tickets (rather than listings) shows slight increases in both average row quality
and face values as the game approaches.

3

Robust Evidence of Price Declines

This section shows that both list and transaction prices tend to fall, controlling for ticket quality, as
a game approaches. This finding is very robust and the declines are large in size.
10

To examine pricing patterns for vertically diﬀerentiated products it is necessary to control for ticket
quality. I control for quality using diﬀerent types of fixed eﬀect and it is useful to take a moment to
understand how these are defined. A game refers to a particular fixture between two teams scheduled
for a particular day (e.g., Seattle Mariners at the New York Yankees on May 6). A game-section fixed
eﬀect is a dummy for those listings for seats in a particular section for a particular game (e.g., Loge
Box 512 for the Seattle Mariners at the New York Yankees on May 6). Many stadia have over two
hundred of these sections and there may be many sections with the same face value (in my example,
odd numbered Loge Boxes 473 to 545 and even numbered Loge Boxes 474 to 548 have a face value
price of $55). A game-section-row fixed eﬀect is even more detailed (e.g., Loge Box 512 Row D for
the Seattle Mariners at the New York Yankees on May 6). When I do not include game-section-row
fixed eﬀects I include five variables (the “row variables”) to control for row quality: dummies for the
first and second rows, a linear count variable for the row number and dummies for the identity of the
row not being available and the row not being relevant (e.g., open seating bleachers). I also include
variables for other listing characteristics such as the seats not being in the same row (e.g., “piggy
back” seats), on an aisle and whether the listing includes parking.11

3.1

Stubhub

Table 3 shows the coeﬃcients from linear fixed eﬀects regression models estimated using list prices
from Stubhub. Prices are defined per seat. The independent variables are a set of dummies measuring
the days to go until the game, measures of form for both teams (only the home team coeﬃcients are
reported), the fixed eﬀects, dummies for the number of seats (interacted with a dummy for whether
fewer seats can be purchased), listing characteristics such as the piggy back variable and, where
relevant, the row variables. The reported coeﬃcients come from regressions using daily observations
from a random 5% sample of sections for each game (e.g., all day-listings observations for Loge Box
512 for the New York Yankees vs. Seattle Mariners on May 6) because there are too many daily
11

Tickets can only be listed on Stubhub if they are directly next to each other (same row or piggy back). I drop listings
from Market 2 if there is any indication that the tickets are not together.

11

listings to use all observations.

The coeﬃcients are almost identical using other sub-samples.

To

allow for correlations across listings available on multiple days, standard errors are correlated on the
listing identification number.
The specification in column (1) includes game-section fixed eﬀects so that the coeﬃcients are
identified from seats in the same section which are listed at diﬀerent prices. The dependent variable
is the log of the revenues received by the seller excluding commissions and shipping costs (the seller
price). The Days to Go coeﬃcients which are precisely estimated indicate that list prices tend decline
before a game. For example, prices are 22% higher 30-32 days before the game than 0-2 days before.12
The estimated decline is quite smooth and it accelerates as the game approaches. The form variables
have plausible signs: prices tend to fall when a team slips back from the top of its division. The row
coeﬃcients show that prices fall by 1% for each row ones moves back within a section, with a 10%
front row premium.
Column (2) includes game-section-row fixed eﬀects to control in a more comprehensive way for
row quality.

The estimated percentage price declines are slightly larger than in column (1) and I

include game-section-row fixed eﬀects in the remaining Stubhub regressions. The dollar value of the
seller price is the dependent variable in column (3), with an estimated price decline in the last month
of $14.66 per seat. Column (4) uses the log of the buyer price, which includes the shipping cost and
the buyer’s commission.

The shipping cost, which increases two weeks prior to the game, creates

a small non-monotonicity in the price decline but otherwise the price declines are similar. Column
(5) uses the seller price divided by the face value of the ticket as the dependent variable, with those
observations for which no face value can be identified being dropped. On average, prices fall from
being 94% above face value 30 days before a game to being 56% above face value 0-2 days before.
One can also examine what happens to the prices of individual listings over time by including listing
id fixed eﬀects (Table 6, column (6)) and, once again, the percentage price declines are similar. In
12
I focus on declines in the last 80 or so days prior to the game as I only have three months of pre-game data for games
at the beginning of the season. The number of observations covered by the 81 plus dummy therefore varies across the
season. All of the estimates are similar using only observations from the last three months prior to a game for all games.

12

addition, 89% of observed price changes for individual listings are price reductions.
The remaining columns of Table 3 show that this pattern is robust for diﬀerent sub-samples of the
data. Columns (6) and (7) show that price declines are quite similar for cheap (face value less than
$20) and expensive (face value more than $45 or season ticket only) sections. The remaining columns
divide the sample based on the game’s expected attendance 90 days before the game is played. This
is predicted using a censored normal regression model estimated using data on all games played from
2000 to 2007. The dependent variable is the proportion of capacity which is filled and the explanatory
variables are the form variables (90 days before the game), home team x year, home team x day of
week, home team x month and away team dummies, plus dummies for the type of game (interleague,
cross-division and within-division).13 The percentage price declines are larger for games with lower
demands.
The regressions show that average prices decline, but this does not rule out the possibility that
the upper percentiles of the price distribution simultaneously increase. This would be important as
it would provide a simple explanation for why risk-averse buyers might want to purchase early. To
examine what happens to the price distribution I regress log prices on the same variables as before
excluding the Days to Go dummies. Figure 2(a) shows how the distribution of the residuals from the
regression using the seller price changes in the two months before the game. The bottom 85% of the
price distribution falls as the game approaches without the higher percentiles increasing.

3.2

Market 2

Table 4 reports the results using transaction data from Market 2.
observation per listing for multi-unit listings.

There may be more than one

The specifications are similar to those for Stubhub,

except that I also include observable seller characteristics (including four dummies for the seller’s
feedback score, less than 10, 11 to 100, 101 to 1000 and greater than 1000) and listing characteristics,
such as whether the listing is highlighted. Additional dummies are included for observations where
13

As I define capacity as the maximum realized attendance and the realized attendance at each game can vary even
when all tickets are sold, I topcode the data at 98% of capacity and use this as the censoring point.

13

shipping costs or feedback scores are missing (1,352 observations).
The column (1) specification uses the log of the buyer price, which includes shipping costs, as the
dependent variable and includes game-section fixed eﬀects. Prices tend to fall as the game approaches,
declining by 25% on average in the last month before the game.
Stubhub results.

There are two diﬀerences to the

First, reflecting the smaller sample size, the decline in prices in the last 45 days

before the game are not perfectly monotonic.

However, most of the deviations from monotonicity

are small and not statistically significant. Second, there is evidence that prices increase by a small
amount prior to 50 days before the game. I return to why this price increase may be happening in a
moment.
The column (2) specification includes game-section-row fixed eﬀects.

The pattern of declining

prices is similar to column (1) but, in the Market 2 data, only 125,848 transactions come from gamesection-rows with more than one observation. For this reason, I use the game-section fixed eﬀects and
row control variables in the remaining regressions. Column (3) uses the log of the seller price, which
takes out the seller’s commission and does not include the shipping cost, as the dependent variable.
The decline in prices is similar to column (1) except that prices appear to increase immediately before
the game.

This reflects a surprising fact about how average shipping costs change.

The average

shipping cost falls from $4.30 per seat 4 days before a game to only $1.49 per seat on the day of the
game itself, as many sellers oﬀer to personally deliver tickets to a local buyer or to meet them at the
stadium.
Columns (1)-(3) pool tickets sold through diﬀerent sales mechanisms. The specification in column
(4) includes dummy variables to control for the type of mechanism used (e.g., a pure single unit auction
sale, a hybrid auction auction sale, a hybrid auction fixed price sale, etc.) to test whether changes in
the mechanism mix explain the price declines. The estimated price declines are essentially unchanged.
However, further analysis reveals that the increase in average transaction prices between 80 and 50
days before the game are generated only from auction sales. In column (5) auction sales are excluded
(fixed price sales in hybrid auctions are included) and there is no evidence of price increases (the

14

diﬀerence between the 81 plus coeﬃcient and the 30-32 day coeﬃcient is not significant at the 1%
level). On the other hand, when the regression is repeated using only auction sales the 30-32, 39-41,
61-70 and 81 plus day coeﬃcients are 0.251 (0.012), 0.276 (0.014), 0.208 (0.012) and 0.132 (0.010)
respectively, and the initial price increase is statistically significant.
The remaining transaction price regressions repeat the column (1) specification for several subsamples of the data.

The number of observations is smaller in these regressions so that the price

declines in the last 40 days are less monotonic, although once again the deviations from monotonicity
are typically not statistically significant. The price declines are smaller in percentage terms for more
expensive tickets. However unlike for Stubhub, there is no clear relationship between the expected
attendance of a game and the size of the price decline.
Figure 2(b) shows how the distribution of the residuals from regressing the log of the buyer
transaction price on the control variable excluding the Days to Go dummies changes as the game
approaches. Once again, the price distribution falls over time below 85th percentile, especially in the
last 40 days before the game, without increasing at higher percentiles.
Table 5 presents regressions using two types of list prices: fixed prices (whether as part of pure
fixed price listings, fixed price listings with oﬀers, or hybrid auctions) and starting prices in auctions
(of all types). There is one observation per listing even if multiple units are available.

4.6% of

auctions also have a separate secret reserve price and I include a dummy for these auctions in the
regressions, as well as dummies for the type of mechanism used.
In columns (1) and (2) the Days to Go dummy variables are calculated based on the start date
of the listing.

On average, fixed prices decline as the game approaches by more than transaction

prices do. Auction start prices decline by very large amounts until about two weeks before the game
and then remain fairly constant. The size of the price declines, particularly for fixed price listings,
are sensitive to how the number of days to go is counted.

Columns (3)-(4) report results using

the number of days from the end of the listing to the game. As listings which are more expensive

15

(conditional on quality) tend to remain unsold, prices fall by less using this definition.14 For auctions,
the price declines continue until about a week before the game, although they increase in the last few
days.

A notable feature of the auction results is that even though auction transaction prices are

increasing more than 50 days before a game, auction start prices are always declining. This suggests
that transaction prices may be increasing because, a long time before the game, people submit low
bids because they know that if they do not win they will have plenty of opportunities to try to buy
tickets later on.15
Columns (5)-(8) report the list price results dividing the data into the ten MLB teams with the
most listings and the rest. The fixed price declines are very similar for the two groups. The declines
are also similar for auction start prices except that prices increase in the last five days before the game
for the teams with the least listings.

4

Theoretical Explanations for Why Sellers Cut Prices

The rest of the paper examines why declining prices are the equilibrium outcome. I split the problem
into two parts: why do sellers tend to cut prices (or accept lower revenues) over time given buyer
demand? and second, why are some buyers willing to purchase early when prices are expected to fall?
This split is appropriate because individual buyers and sellers are small relative to the total size of
the market, so should take the behavior of the other side of the market as given when choosing their
pricing or purchasing strategy. For example, an individual seller is unlikely to believe that she can
shift demand earlier by trying to commit to increasing prices. Sections 4 and 5 analyze the behavior
of sellers while Section 6 examines the early purchase decisions of buyers.
In this section I describe three plausible explanations for why sellers cut prices over time. Some
alternative explanations can be disposed of immediately.

First, in some markets the existence of

14
For fixed prices I have also performed the regression using available listings so the same listing may appear more
than once, as in the Stubhub regressions. In this case the estimated fall in prices in the 30-32 days prior to the game is
23.9%, which is very similar to the estimate in Table 3 column (1) using the Stubhub data.
15
There is also slightly less participation in earlier auctions, so that a greater proportion of auctions result in sales at
close to the start price. In the last 40 days before a game 25% of auctions result in sales within $2.50 of the start price,
whereas 30% do more than 40 days before.

16

a set of impatient consumers may explain why some people purchase early when prices are high.
Impatience is not a viable explanation here as no-one can use their tickets until the day of the game.
Second, while discounting may be important over a time period of several months, it should tend to
lead to increasing prices as buyers would have to be compensated for paying for their tickets ahead
of when they get to consume the product. Third, any uncertainty about the value of the game (for
example, whether it will be important in a playoﬀ race) combined with buyer risk aversion should also
tend to lead to increasing equilibrium prices because more information about the quality of the game
is revealed over time.

4.1

Seller Explanations 1 and 2: Falling Opportunity Costs and Time-Varying
Demand/Revenue Elasticities

The first two explanations can be described in a single framework. Suppose that a risk-neutral seller
i has a single unit to sell and that there are two time periods before the game, t = 1, 2. The seller
gets a payoﬀ of $vi , which could reflect the value of attending the game herself, giving the ticket to a
friend or selling it outside the stadium, if the unit is unsold after period 2. For now I assume that the
seller sets a fixed price pit in each period and that the probability that the ticket sells is Qit (pit ) where
∂Qit (pit )
∂pit

< 0. This probability of sale, or demand, function will reflect the quality of i’s ticket, the

extent of competition from other sellers and the prices that they set, the arrival rate of heterogeneous
buyers and their ability to substitute between periods and between diﬀerentiated tickets. I assume
that seller i knows Qit (pit ) for both periods in advance and that Qi2 does not depend on pi1 .16 i will
therefore set prices pi1 and pi2 by solving

max pi1 Qi1 (pi1 ) + pi2 Qi2 (pi2 )(1 − Qi1 (pi1 )) + vi (1 − Qi2 (pi2 ))(1 − Qi1 (pi1 ))

pi1 ,pi2
16

(1)

Qi2 might depend on pi1 if i’s first period price causes some buyers to wait until the second period for i to lower his
price. My formulation essentially assumes that an individual seller i is too small relative to the market for his own first
period price to have a significant eﬀect on his second period demand.

17

Assuming that the relevant second-order conditions are satisfied, prices will satisfy

p∗i2 = vi −

Qi2 (p∗i2 )

(2)

∂Qi2 (p∗i2 )
∂pi2

p∗i1 = (p∗i2 Qi2 (p∗i2 ) + vi (1 − Qi2 (p∗i2 ))) −

Qi1 (p∗i1 )
∂Qi1 (p∗i1 )
∂pi1

(3)

These conditions show that there are two reasons why prices may fall over time. First, the demand
function may become more elastic causing the optimal price/mark-up to fall. Second, the opportunity
cost of selling tends to fall as future selling opportunities disappear. In the last period, the opportunity
cost of selling is vi whereas in the first period it is (p∗i2 Qi2 (p∗i2 ) + vi (1 − Qi2 (p∗i2 ))) and because p∗i2 > vi
the opportunity cost of sale must be falling. If Qi1 (pi ) ≡ Qi2 (pi ) (i.e., the demand function is the
same in both periods) then the opportunity cost eﬀect will lead to falling optimal prices, just as in
the theoretical literature on the dynamic pricing of perishable goods.17
Similar arguments apply for auction listings.

If Qit (pit ) is the probability of sale given the

it (pit )
start/reserve price pit ( ∂Q∂p
< 0) and Rit (pit ) is the seller’s expected revenue in the event of sale
it

with

∂Rit (pit )
∂pit

> 0 then the optimal start prices will satisfy

∂Ri2 (p∗i2 )
∂Qi2 (p∗i2 )
Qi2 (p∗i2 ) +
[Ri2 (p∗i2 ) − vi ] = 0
∂pi2
∂pi2
∂Ri1 (p∗i1 )
∂Qi1 (p∗i1 )
Qi1 (p∗i1 ) +
[Ri1 (p∗i1 ) − (Ri2 (p∗i2 )Qi2 (p∗i2 ) + vi (1 − Qi2 (p∗i2 )))] = 0
∂pi1
∂pi1

(4)
(5)

If the probability of sale and revenue functions are the same in both periods then declining opportunity
costs will lead to declining prices. On the other hand, changing Q or R functions could also contribute
to the price declines.
17
If the Q function is linear then prices also fall increasingly quickly as the game approaches, which is the pattern that
I observe in the data.

18

4.2

Seller Explanation 3: Learning by Sellers

Lazear’s (1986) model of clearance sales provides an alternative explanation for falling prices. Lazear’s
basic model has a seller trying to sell one unit of an item in two periods. All customers have the same
reservation value for the item, about which the seller has some prior beliefs.

The optimal pricing

strategy involves a high price in the first period. If the good does not sell then the seller infers that
customer valuations are likely to be lower and cuts the price in the second period. By assumption,
customers are unwilling or unable to substitute across periods.

The key diﬀerence to the previous

analysis is that prices change due to seller learning rather than perishability or changes in underlying
demand, and it is useful to rule out this explanation because the rest of the analysis will assume that
sellers know the demand function they are facing.
Lazear describes several observable implications of his model.

First, with multiple periods, he

shows that prices should decline with the time since the seller first tried to sell the good (tenure) and
that prices should fall more slowly over time as tenure increases. On the other hand, if perishability
drives price declines then the price declines should be related to the time until the game rather
than tenure. The first six columns of Table 6 reports regression results where I include a fifth-order
polynomial for tenure and seller-ticket fixed eﬀects to look at how prices change for individual tickets.18
For fixed price listings in both markets, the Days to Go coeﬃcients are similar with and without the
tenure variables and the tenure coeﬃcients imply small eﬀects (e.g., prices fall 1.9% with 10 days of
tenure and 3.4% with 20 days of tenure in Market 2). The tenure eﬀects are larger for auctions in
Market 2 (start prices drop 11.3% with 10 days of tenure and 18.2% with 20 days) but the Days to Go
(perishability) eﬀects are still larger. The coeﬃcients are almost unchanged if one includes additional
polynomials in the number of times that the tickets are relisted (which may also aﬀect learning),
as well as the polynomial for the time since first listing. Second, Lazear’s model predicts that the
18

For the Stubhub data this means ticket id fixed eﬀects and for Market 2 seller-game-section fixed eﬀects. For Market
2 time since listing is calculated as the length of time since the seller first listed tickets for the same game and section,
and for Stubhub it is calculated as the time since the ticket id was listed. As Stubhub id numbers may change when a
seller changes the price, I only include ticket ids which I consider likely to represent initial listings. These are listings
where the appearance of the listing id did not coincide with the disappearance of a listing id for the same game, section
and row.

19

probability of sale in any period should remain unchanged even as prices fall (his p. 22). Figure 1(c)
shows that sale probabilities tend to increase in my data, at least until the last couple of days before
the game, which is consistent with sellers moving down a known demand curve as the opportunity
costs of sale fall.
A possible objection is that these predictions depend on the particular assumptions of Lazear’s
model and that their failure reflects the inaccuracy of the assumptions rather than the absence of
learning. For example, the arrival rate of consumers may increase as the game approaches, making
learning and sale probabilities a function of the time until the game rather than the time since listing.
However, Lazear’s model also makes a cross-seller/ticket prediction which should be more robust:
the tightness of sellers’ priors and their rate of learning should aﬀect observed price declines.

For

example, if markets are thick then there may be less learning and smaller price declines. However, the
regressions in Table 5 show that listed price declines on Market 2 are similar for teams with diﬀerent
amounts of trade.

Regressions using list prices on Stubhub and transaction prices on Market 2

generate similar results.

A perhaps more convincing comparison is between sellers with diﬀerent

amounts of experience of selling MLB tickets.

Columns (7)-(10) of Table 6 show that the sellers

who sell the most MLB tickets on Market 2, and so should tend to have the most information about
demand, tend to cut prices more dramatically than sellers who sell the least, at least up until 3 days
before the game. This is the opposite of what a learning model would predict. On the other hand,
it is consistent with an opportunity cost story if professional sellers have the greatest ability to try to
relist unsold tickets, which should lead them to set high prices early on, and/or the least incentive to
use tickets themselves or give them away, which should cause them to set low prices right before the
game.

20

5

Testing the Opportunity Cost and Demand Elasticity Explanations for Why Sellers Reduce Prices

I estimate the contribution of falling opportunity costs to the observed price declines by estimating
structural models of the price-setting decision. The idea is simple. Suppose that seller i uses a fixed
price listing in period t. He will set price pit to maximize

max pit Qit (pit ) + oit (1 − Qit (pit ))

(6)

pit

where Qit is the probability of sale (or demand) function and oit is the opportunity cost of sale at
time t. As in (3), oit will reflect his ability to try to sell an unsold ticket in future periods, possibly
at diﬀerent prices. Assuming second-order conditions are satisfied, the optimal price will be

p∗it = oit −

Qit (pit )
∂Qit
∂pit

(7)

and given estimates of the Q function, the opportunity cost implied by the observed price can be
calculated
oc
it = pit +

Q\
it (pit )
∂d
Qit

(8)

∂pit

(7) can be used to perform counterfactuals to quantify the role of declining opportunity costs and
changes in demand. Specifically, I calculate what the price of each listing would have been without
any changes in demand and then compare these counterfactual prices with those observed in the data.
Auction listings can be analyzed in a similar way allowing for revenues to exceed the start price in
the event of a sale.
Before getting into the details, a few general comments are in order.

First, unlike most of the

recent structural demand and auction literature, I do not attempt to estimate underlying consumer
preferences (e.g., bidder valuations). As noted by Hendricks and Porter (2007), doing so is diﬃcult in

21

an environment where consumers may searching across multiple listings. Second, modelling a seller as
facing a static pricing problem when he chooses his price is not inconsistent with sellers being able to
relist their tickets in multiple periods: this ability is reflected in the opportunity cost implied by their
choice of price.19

Third, sellers are assumed to be risk-neutral.

I estimate that some sellers have

negative opportunity costs, which is unrealistic given free-disposal.

One interpretation of negative

costs is that risk or loss aversion causes the seller to price below the expected revenue-maximizing
level.

An alternative interpretation is that some sellers may be constrained by state anti-scalping

laws or a sense of fairness from setting prices which are above the cost or face value of the ticket.
Finally, all of the analysis uses data from Market 2 as I need to observe transactions.
The next sub-section details the specifications used.

The following sub-section describes how I

address price endogeneity. I then describe the empirical results, which support the hypothesis that
prices fall because of declining opportunity costs rather than changing elasticities, consistent with
dynamic pricing models.

5.1
5.1.1

Empirical Specifications
Pure Fixed Price Listings

A fixed price listing can either result in a sale at the stated fixed price or no sale. The probability
of sale (demand) function is modeled as a probit function of observed listing characteristics (Xit ), the
listed fixed price (pit , defined per seat including shipping costs) and the characteristics and prices of
competing listings (X−it and p−it )20
Qit (pit ) = Φ(pit , Xit , p−it , X−it , θF P )
19

The structure of a dynamic model could be used to place additional restrictions on how opportunity costs evolve.
Instead I show that one obtains patterns which are consistent with a theoretical dynamic model without imposing these
restrictions.
20
I do not observe shipping costs for listings which do not sell, but these costs may aﬀect demand. I address this
problem by assuming that unsold listings have (i) the average shipping cost of listings by the same seller sold in the same
time period (defined in a moment) before the game and, if this is not available, (ii) the average shipping costs of tickets
sold by sellers living as far from the stadium in which the game was played in the same time period prior to the game.
As shipping costs are generally small I hope that these approximations will not seriously bias the results, especially once
I instrument for a listing’s own price.

22

As fixed price listings which do not sell may remain listed for diﬀerent lengths of time (and I do not
observe how long a sold listing would have remained listed), I define the dependent variable as whether
the ticket sold within ten days of listing.21
As prices can diﬀer substantially across listings because of ticket quality, the base specification
uses relative prices, defined as the listed price divided by the face value of the ticket. The demand
curve is allowed to vary over time by including a set of time dummies similar to those used in Section
3 and by allowing the own price coeﬃcients to vary across four “time periods” (1-10, 11-20, 21-40
and 41 or more days before the game).22 I control for listing quality by including the various ticket
and seller characteristics variables used in Section 3 (e.g., the seller feedback dummies and the row
variables).

As I need to consistently estimate all of the coeﬃcients to estimate option values I do

not include game-section fixed eﬀects, but instead include home team dummies and home team*face
value and home team*expected attendance variables (based on the attendance model used in Section
3).
Competition variables are defined based on listings for the same number of tickets, to the same
game and with the same face value which were available at the time the listing was posted.23 I only
use listings available at the time of posting as I want to estimate the seller’s expected probability
of sale when he chooses the price: the coeﬃcients on these variables and the time dummies should
reflect expectations about how competition will evolve once the listing has been posted. The included
competition variables, defined separately for auction and fixed price listings, are the average relative
price, the minimum relative price, a count of the number of listings available, a dummy for whether
no listings are available and proportion of competing listings with seller feedback scores above 100.
The estimation sample consists of pure fixed price listings made in the last 90 days before the game
with non-missing face value information.24 Experimentation indicated that the price coeﬃcients were
21

The time dummies will control for the fact that a ticket listed in the last few days has less time to sell.
I adjust the days to go dummies slightly so that they coincide with these time periods. For example, instead of 9
to 11 day and 12 to 14 day dummies I use 9 to 10 day and 11 to 14 day dummies.
23
Additional variables based on broader definitions (e.g., all tickets for the same game) and narrower definitions (e.g.,
only same section) were generally insignificant when added to the specification.
24
I include the fixed price with personal oﬀer listings in this specification as all of the sales which I see in this format
22

23

sensitive to some listings with extremely high prices, so I exclude 8,018 listings (6.8% of the fixed
price sample) where the fixed price is more than 5 times above the face value of the ticket.

5.1.2

Pure Auction Listings

Auction listings have the additional feature that a seller’s revenues in the event of sale may be above
the start price.

The probability that the listing results in a sale is modeled using a probit.

The

observed revenue (Rit ) in the event of a sale is modeled as a left-censored normal regression where
∗ below the auction start price result in revenues equal to the start
realizations of the latent variable Rit

price

∗
= f (pit , Xit , p−it , X−it , θR ) + εit εit ∼ N (0, σ 2R )
Rit

(9)

∗
∗
if Rit
≥ pit
Rit = Rit
∗
= pit if Rit
< pit

and f () is a linear function.

I assume that, once I have controlled for the possible endogeneity of

prices, there is no correlation in the residual terms in the probit and censored regression functions
so that these models can consistently be estimated separately. The auction start price and revenues
are both expressed relative to face values on a per seat basis including shipping costs. The control
variables are the same as in the fixed price model.
The estimation sample consists of pure auction listings made in the last 90 days before the game
with non-missing face value information and no secret reserve prices and which the seller did not
stop before the end of the auction. To reduce the sensitivity of the specification to outliers I drop
observations where the auction start price is greater than 4 times the face value of the ticket and
observations where the realized revenue from the auction is more than six times the face value. These
exclusions drop 3.1% of the sample.
are at the fixed price.

24

5.1.3

Hybrid Auction Listings

Hybrid auction listings can result in no sale, an auction sale or a fixed price sale. I therefore model
the probability of each outcome as being determined by a trinomial logit model with the expected
revenue in the event of an auction sale being determined by the same type of left-censored normal
regression model specified above.
The estimation sample consists of hybrid auction listings made in the last 90 days before the
game with non-missing face value information and which the seller did not stop before the end of the
auction, and where the oﬀered fixed price was strictly above the auction start price, a criterion which
drops 36,248 listings.25 I also drop 9.8% of listings where the fixed price was more than 5 times face
value, the start price was more than 4 times face value or realized revenues were more than six times
face value.

5.2

Price Endogeneity and Instruments

Price will be endogenous if there are characteristics which I do not control for which make a listing
more attractive to buyers and so cause the seller to increase the price. I use instruments and a control
function approach to deal with endogeneity in the context of my non-linear models.
Equation (7) implies that variables which aﬀect or reflect a seller’s opportunity cost but which do
not aﬀect a listing’s attractiveness to potential buyers will be valid instruments. I define the following
instruments, interacted with dummies for the time periods of interest (e.g., 1-10 and 21-40 days prior
to the game).26
• three distance bands reflecting the distance of the seller’s zipcode from the stadium of the home
team (less than 40 km, 40-200 km (excluded), more than 200 km). In the cross-section distant
25

Over 99% of sales for these listings are at the fixed price as one would expect. However, there are small number of
auction sales above the start price which are impossible to rationalize.
26
Many of these instruments are based on listings of other tickets made by the same seller. These variables are
obviously not defined for sellers listing only one set of tickets. I therefore also include dummies for listings by these
sellers. As I only know the seller’s zipcode when he makes at least one sale of some type of event ticket I only define
these instruments when the seller makes at least 10 MLB listings (in 99% of these cases I observe a zipcode somewhere
in the data including from non-MLB transactions) and I include a dummy for sellers with less than 10 listings.

25

sellers may tend to have diﬀerent characteristics to ones who are more local (e.g., season ticket
holders are likely to live close by) and these groups may have diﬀerent opportunity costs. My
assumption is that included variables such as feedback scores will control for aspects of seller
quality valued by buyers. Distant sellers are also likely to have fewer oﬄine opportunities to
dispose of tickets close to the time of the game (e.g., to sell the tickets to coworkers or to sell
them outside the stadium) so are likely to cut prices more dramatically right before the game;
• the proportion of the seller’s unsold listings during the same time period (for other tickets) which
are relisted (at a later date) on Market 2. Frequent relisting may reflect either high opportunity
costs of sale (because the costs of relisting are low) or low opportunity costs (because the seller
has few opportunities to sell the tickets oﬄine);27
• the proportion of listings for other tickets by the same seller in the same time period in fixed
price and hybrid auction formats.

Sellers with diﬀerent opportunity costs might tend to use

diﬀerent types of listing, and they may be more willing to maintain listings unsold if they have
lower costs of using that type of listing; and
• for hybrid auction listings, the average fixed price and average auction start price set by the
seller in other hybrid listings during the same time period relative to the face value of the ticket.
Sellers who prefer an auction sale (for example, the convenience of knowing that the auction will
end on a fixed date) may set a lower start price and a higher fixed price. While one may be
concerned about aspects of seller specific quality aﬀecting these prices, these types of instrument
are useful in providing separate variation for the two prices set by the seller.
The non-linearity of the models and the large number of price coeﬃcients and other control
variables require me to use a two-step control function approach (e.g., Rivers and Vuong (1988),
Wooldridge (2002), p. 472ﬀ).28

For the fixed price probit model, the control function approach

27

Relistings are identified by the same seller listing the same or smaller number of tickets for the same game, section
and row on a date after a listing which did not result in a sale;
28
A Full Information Maximum Likelihood (FIML) approach would be more eﬃcient. However this is diﬃcult to

26

assumes that the latent variable (Q∗it , Qit = 1 if Q∗it ≥ 0) determining the probability of sale can be
expressed by
fit θ1 + pit θ2 + uit
Q∗it = X

(10)

fit γ 1 + Zit γ 2 + vit
pit = X

(11)

fit contains all the exogenous variables.
where X

Prices are assumed to be determined by linear

equations of the form

where Zit are the instruments excluded, by assumption, from the Q∗it function. uit and vit are mean
zero bivariate normal, and prices are endogenous if uit and vit are correlated. The two-step procedure
exploits the fact that under joint normality of u and v and the normalization that var(u) = 1

uit = vit θ3 + eit

where θ3 =

Cov(u,v)
Var(v)

(12)

e Z and v. In the first step OLS is used to
and e is normal and independent of X,

estimate (11) yielding estimates of the vs. These vbs are included in the second-step probit equation
to give scaled estimates of the θ parameters.29

The significance of the coeﬃcients on vb provides

a test of whether there is an endogeneity problem.

I calculate standard errors using a bootstrap

procedure to account for the two-step estimation procedure. The bootstrap resamples games to allow
for within-game correlations in the residuals.
A similar control function approach can be used for the probit and censored regression (Wooldridge
(2002), p. 530) models used for pure auction listings, and the censored regression model used for hybrid
auction listings. Addressing endogeneity in the context of the trinomial logit model used to determine
the probability of each outcome in the hybrid auction model is theoretically more diﬃcult because
the unobservables are assumed not to be normally distributed. Following the “practical” approach
suggested by Wooldridge (2007) I specify that the latent utility-like variable associated with outcome
estimate with several endogenous variables (the diﬀerent price-time period interaction coeﬃcients). If I include only the
main price eﬀect the two-step and FIML approaches give very similar coeﬃcients (when they are rescaled appropriately).
29
The probit coeﬃcients have to be scaled because the variance of e is 1−corr(u, v)2 rather than 1.

27

j as
g
uijt = X
ijt θ 1 + pijt θ 2 + vijt θ 3 + eijt

(13)

where eijt is distributed Type I extreme value and the vijt s come from price equations like (11). Given
this ad-hoc assumption we can proceed as before estimating the vbs in a first-step and then including

them in the second stage specification.

Table 7 shows the coeﬃcients on the instruments in the first-stage regressions. The instruments
are jointly significant and most of the coeﬃcients show plausible patterns, while providing some
evidence that diﬀerent types of sellers select into diﬀerent mechanisms. This is not a problem as long
as the selection characteristics are not valued by buyers.

The distance coeﬃcients show that as a

game approaches sellers located more than 200 km from the stadium tend to cut their prices more,
and sellers located within 40 km to cut them slightly less, than those located between 40 and 200
km. This is consistent with distant sellers having fewer oﬄine opportunities to sell tickets at the last
minute. Sellers who tend to use pure fixed price or hybrid auction listings tend to set higher prices
than other sellers when using these listings. This is consistent with these sellers having lower costs of
maintaining these listings. This price premium disappears right before the game, presumably because
at that point the seller’s primary concern is to sell his tickets as soon as possible, and this may be
particularly true for professional sellers, who appear to make more use of fixed price listings, as they
are less likely to attend games themselves.

The proportion resale variables show a less consistent

pattern across sale formats. For hybrid auction listings, frequent relisting is associated with higher
prices a long time before the game with the premium disappearing over time.

This is consistent

with these sellers having low listing costs but being increasingly keen to sell as the game approaches.
For fixed price listings, frequent relisting is associated with lower prices, consistent with these sellers
having more limited outside opportunities than other users of fixed prices.
It is also possible to try to control for the endogeneity of competitor prices. I create instruments
for these prices by taking averages of the first three types of instruments listed above across the

28

competing listings which are used to construct the competition variables. In practice, controlling for
the endogeneity of competitors’ prices has only small eﬀects on the results.

5.3
5.3.1

Second Stage Results, Implied Opportunity Costs and Counterfactuals
Fixed Price Listings

Column (1) in Table 8 shows the price coeﬃcients from the probit specification without controlling for
endogeneity. Demand slopes downwards but the average price elasticities (shown at the bottom of the
table) imply that, on average, sellers are pricing below the revenue-maximizing level. This changes
in column (2) when I use the control function to address price endogeneity, and the (unreported)
coeﬃcients on the vbs are also positive and significant. The coeﬃcients on the interactions between

a listing’s own price and the time period variables are small in magnitude, indicating that the slope
of the demand curve is similar across time periods.

In both specifications, the absolute value of

the elasticities decrease over time, consistent with sellers moving down the demand curve as their
opportunity costs fall.
The specification in column (3) also controls for the endogeneity of competitor prices. Most of the
coeﬃcients are similar to those in column (2). The coeﬃcients on the mean relative price, number
and feedback quality of competing fixed price listings are consistent with substitution across listings.
The competition eﬀects for auction listings are generally smaller in size and less significant. This is
also true for the other models reported below.30
Figure 3(a) how the distribution of opportunity costs evolves over time, based on the Table 8
column (3) coeﬃcients.
pricing models.

Opportunity costs fall as the game approaches consistent with dynamic

To reduce clutter the figure only shows standard errors on the density estimates

for the first time period. The density is estimated precisely and this is also true for the other time
periods and models.
30
Recall that the variables reflect the state of competition at the time the listing is posted (and the price is set) not at
each point in time while the listing is available. The greater significance of the fixed price listing competition variables
may reflect the fact that these listings tend to remain available (often at the same prices) for a greater period of time.

29

Table 9(a) reports the results of the counterfactual experiment.

For each listing I take the

opportunity cost implied by the estimated model and calculate what the optimal price would have
been if the demand curve was the same as the one estimated 11-14 days before the game (this involves
using the slope of the demand curve 11-20 days before the game and the intercept for 11-14 days before
the game).

As the number of competing listings also tends to increase over time and competition

may also depress prices I also assume that, for all listings, the competition variables take the average
of their values 11-20 days before the game. I can then compare the path of the counterfactual prices
to the path of observed prices. If they are very similar, which is the case in Table 9(a), then I can
conclude that changes in demand or competition are not significant causes of declining prices (because
these are held fixed in the counterfactual), which must instead be explained by declining opportunity
costs.
One aspect of the results which may suggest misspecification is that a relatively large proportion
of implied opportunity costs are negative, especially in the period immediately before the game. An
alternative specification which implies few negative opportunity costs is based on log prices because
the probability of sale becomes very sensitive to price when prices are low.

Figure 3(b) shows the

resulting distribution of opportunity costs, and even in the immediately before the game less than 5%
of opportunity costs are negative. Table 9(b) shows that the qualitative results from the counterfactual
are unchanged using the log specification.31

5.3.2

Pure Auction Listings

Column (1) of Table 10 shows the results from the probit model used to model the probability that
the listing results in a sale.

In this case the price and time period interactions are statistically

significant and indicate that the sale probability is less sensitive to price more than 41 days before
31

Given these results one might prefer the log specification to the one based on relative prices. However, when
the auction models are estimated using log prices a significant proportion (as high as 20% in some specifications) of
the observed prices do not satisfy the second-order conditions for payoﬀ-maximization given any opportunity costs. I
therefore prefer to focus on the relative price results throughout. For auction models the qualitative counterfactual
results are similar across the log and relative price specifications if one only uses observations which satisfy the secondorder conditions.

30

the game. However, the average absolute value of the probability of sale elasticities still falls as the
game approaches.32

They are similar in the last two time periods which is consistent with auction

start prices being fairly flat in the last two weeks before the game (Table 5 column (2)).
The revenue function estimates the sensitivity of expected revenues conditional on a sale to the
auction start price and, on average, a $1 increase in the start price raises expected revenues in the event
of a sale by $0.51. The negative price interaction coeﬃcient for the final (1-10) time period implies
that the revenues are less sensitive to the start price immediately before the game. This aﬀects the
estimated opportunity costs and the counterfactual (Table 9(c)): opportunity costs and counterfactual
prices are both estimated to increase in the final time period, having fallen previously. While it is
not obvious why the revenue function should change in the final time period, selection provides a
plausible explanation for why the opportunity costs of sellers using auctions might increase. Suppose
that there is a distribution of opportunity costs across sellers and the opportunity cost of each seller
falls over time. If high opportunity cost sellers initially use fixed price listings, which is consistent
with these listings having a relatively low probability of sale but they later switch to using auctions as
they become keener to sell, while low opportunity cost sellers always use auctions then the average or
median opportunity cost of sellers using auctions might increase. Consistent with this type of shift,
Figure 1(c) shows that the proportion of pure auction listings resulting in sales falls in the last ten
days.

5.3.3

Hybrid Auction Listings

Table 11 shows the estimated coeﬃcients from the estimated trinomial logit and censored normal
models used to model the outcomes of hybrid auction listings.

In both cases the control function

approach is used to control for the possible endogeneity of own and competitor prices. To save space
I do not report the coeﬃcients on the competition variables but they are qualitatively similar to those
32
The absolute value of the sale elasticities can be less than 1 in absolute magnitude without implying that prices
are below the revenue-maximizing level because in auctions expected revenues conditional on sale may not increase
dollar-for-dollar with the start price.

31

for the earlier models.
As expected, higher auction start prices reduce the probability of auction sales, while higher fixed
prices reduce the probability of fixed price sales. The revenue function coeﬃcient on the start price
interaction for the final (1-10) time period is positive, implying that a seller has more incentive to
raise prices immediately before a game. This is, of course, the opposite of the eﬀect found in the pure
auction model. Higher fixed prices increase expected revenues in the event of an auction sale which
is sensible because when the fixed price is higher, potential buyers with higher valuations are more
likely to reject the fixed price and bid in the auction.
The median opportunity costs implied by the auction start price decline monotonically as the
game approaches.

One can also calculate the opportunity costs implied by the chosen fixed price.

Because the estimated elasticities of sale with respect to the fixed price are relatively small and higher
fixed prices increase expected auction sale revenues, observed fixed prices can only be rationalized
by negative opportunity costs.

They are also diﬀerent from those implied by the auction model

which indicates some type of misspecification. However, the implied opportunity costs still show a
monotonic decline as the game approaches (the median opportunity cost relative to face value falls
from -0.18 more than 41 days before the game, to -1.11, -1.92 and -2.26 in following time periods).
Table 9(d) shows the results of performing the counterfactual for auction start prices. In this case
the counterfactual price declines are slightly larger than those observed in the data, which implies
that changes in demand actually tend to lead prices increasing over time, while falling opportunity
costs drive the declining price pattern.

5.3.4

Summary of Results

Overall the results support the hypothesis that prices decline because of falling opportunity costs,
consistent with dynamic pricing models. The only exception arises for the final time period in the
pure auction model, which also happens to be the one case where we do not observe a clear price
decline and the proportion of listings resulting in sales actually tends to fall.

32

This exception may

reflect selection of sellers into diﬀerent mechanisms.
The analysis has treated diﬀerent types of listing separately.

However, one can combine the

opportunity cost estimates from the diﬀerent models to look at what happens to costs for individual
seller-ticket combinations as the game approaches. When one observes a seller listing tickets for the
same game, section and row on diﬀerent days, the implied opportunity cost falls over time in 68%
of cases where the seller is using the same type of mechanism so the estimates come from the same
model, while it falls in 66% of cases where the seller is using diﬀerent mechanisms so that the estimates
come from a diﬀerent model. The fact that opportunity costs tend to fall in both cases is consistent
with the theory and the similarity of these numbers provides some evidence in favor of the assumed
specifications.

6

Why Do Some People Purchase Early if Prices Are Expected to
Fall?

A potential puzzle is why some consumers choose to purchase early if prices are expected to fall.
This issue has been considered in some of the most recent theoretical literature on dynamic pricing of
perishable goods (e.g., Liu and van Ryzin (2008)) - previous models had assumed away the possibility
of strategically timed purchases - where the roles of uncertainty about future availability, buyer risk
aversion and search costs in explaining why some consumers may purchase early at higher prices have
been emphasized.

In this section, I examine this issue by calibrating a particular model of buyer

utility. I show that early purchases can be explained by uncertainty about the future availability of
particular kinds of ticket (e.g., blocks of four seats) combined with plausible valuations and return
to market costs.

I also show that there are some patterns in the data which are consistent with

uncertainty and return to market costs being important. Throughout I assume that buyers are aware
that prices tend to decline - an assessment of whether this is true or not is left to future research.

33

6.1

Models of Buyer Utility with Uncertain Future Availability and Prices, Search
Costs and Risk/Loss Aversion

Suppose that there are two periods and that consumer i’s choice is between buying a ticket which she
values at v1i in period 1 at price p1 (v1i ≥ p1 ) or waiting until period 2. Waiting entails a return to
market cost si and, if she buys a ticket when she returns, she gets net surplus v2i − p2 which (from
her perspective in period 1) has pdf f2i (v2i − p2 ). If she is risk neutral she will purchase in period 1
if and only if

v1i − p1 ≥ −si +

Z

∞

0

(v2i − p2 )f2i (v2i − p2 )d(v2i − p2 )

(14)

where the RHS reflects the fact that the ticket is only purchased in period 2 if v2i − p2 ≥ 0. Higher
search costs, lower expected availability and higher expected future prices and lower period 1 prices
will make her more inclined to purchase early.

Alternatively her preferences may display constant

absolute risk aversion, with CARA coeﬃcient αi > 0, in which case she will purchase early if and only
if

−

⎛

1
1
⎜
exp(−αi (v1i − p1 )) ≥ − exp(αi si ) ⎝
αi
αi

and p2 ≤ vi .

R∞
0

⎞
exp(−αi (v2i − p2 ))f2i (v2i − p2 )d(v2i − p2 ))+ ⎟
⎠ (15)
R0
−∞ f2i (v2i − p2 )d(v2i − p2 )

Greater risk aversion will tend to favor an earlier purchase when future prices and

availability are uncertain.

Modeling consumers as being risk-averse may be unattractive in this

setting because the dollar amounts involved are relatively small compared with lifetime consumption
risks (Rabin and Thaler (2001), Rabin (2000)). An alternative specification therefore assumes riskneutrality but allows for the consumer to suﬀer an additional utility loss li if she delays purchasing
but ends up with a deal which is worse than the one she would have got in the first period (i.e., her

34

preferences show a form of loss aversion)
Z

∞

(v2i − p2 )f2i (v2i − p2 )d(v2i − p2 )
v1i − p1 ≥ −si +
0
Z v1i −p1
li f2i (v2i − p2 )d(v2i − p2 )
−

(16)

−∞

In this section I will assess how many observed early purchase decisions (in the model people who
choose to buy in period 1) can be rationalized for diﬀerent values of si , αi and li , making a variety of
assumptions about consumers’ valuations and their willingness to substitute across diﬀerent types of
listings.

6.2

Defining Consumer Preferences and Evaluating Early Purchases

Calibrating the model entails making several assumptions.

In this sub-section I describe these as-

sumptions and then explain in detail how I evaluate early purchases. All of the analysis uses data
from Market 2, where I can observe actual transactions.

6.2.1

Assumptions on Preferences

When Would the Buyer Return to the Market? It is unreasonable to believe that a consumer
who delays purchasing is able to constantly monitor the set of tickets which are available. I therefore
assume that, if she was to delay purchasing, a buyer would return to Market 2 once five days before
the game which is when availability on Market 2 is at its maximum and prices are close to their lowest
level.

Which Tickets Would be Considered Available Five Days Before the Game? Five days
prior the game, tickets may be available in pure auction, fixed price or hybrid auction listings. To
model a buyer’s beliefs about availability and prices, it is necessary to define which of these listings
would be considered available, given the uncertainties involved in bidding in auctions. I assume that
all fixed price and hybrid auction listings available at midnight five days before the game are available
35

to a returning buyer at the fixed price. I consider two alternative assumptions about auction listings.
The first assumption is that auctions (pure (including multi-unit) or hybrid) which end five days
before the game with no bids and no secret reserve price are available at the auction start price. The
alternative assumption is that the buyer would ignore all auction listings which is plausible because
having waited until five days before the game she may want to guarantee that she actually gets the
tickets without having to return to the market again. In practice, these diﬀerent assumptions have
relatively little eﬀect on whether any tickets are available five days before the game, but they do have
significant eﬀects on prices because auction start prices tend to be low.

Which Tickets Would a Buyer Consider Substituting To? How Would She Value Them?
Tickets to an individual game are diﬀerentiated products, and a person who buys a seat behind
homeplate might not be willing to sit in the bleachers even if the bleacher price was very low. It is
therefore necessary to define the set of tickets which the buyer would consider substituting between
and how she would value them. Throughout I assume that a buyer would only consider going to the
same game and buying at least as many seats as she actually bought.
The first assumption, which I will call the “better ticket” assumption, is that the buyer would only
consider buying tickets at least as good as those she actually bought, where quality is defined along
three dimensions: (i) the tickets must have equal or greater face value; (ii) if the face value is equal
they must be in the same or a lower row; (iii) the seller must have a weakly higher feedback score33 ,
and that these tickets would give her the same utility (v1i ) as the tickets she actually bought. By
ignoring the possibilities that a consumer would substitute to lower quality tickets or that she would
get more utility from better tickets, this assumption will probably err in making it too unattractive
for a buyer to wait.34
The alternative (“any ticket”) assumption is that the buyer would consider any tickets but that
33

I implement this criterion using the four feedback score categories defined in Section 3.
There is some indirect evidence that the better ticket assumptions is not completely unreasonable for many buyers:
when I observe people unsuccessfully bidding in auctions but later buying tickets to the same game (223,503 cases), 74%
of them buy from a sellers with at least as high feedback score and 68% of them buy tickets with at least as high face
value.
34

36

the value she gets from these tickets varies dollar-for-dollar with their face value.

Row and seller

feedback are ignored under this assumption. For example, if I observe a consumer purchasing a seat
with $60 face value for $40 and I assume that she values it at $50 then I would assume that she
would value a seat with a $40 face value at $30.

As buyers are likely to purchase seats which are

particularly good matches for their preferences, this assumption is likely to err on the side of making
it too attractive for a buyer to wait.

How Does A Buyer Value The Tickets She Buys? The final assumption concerns how a buyer
values the tickets she is observed to buy in the first period (i.e., v1i − p1 ). When tickets are valued
more highly, a buyer will be more inclined to purchase early if future availability is uncertain. I allow
v1i − p1 to take on values of $10, $25, $50 and $75 per seat.
6.2.2

Evaluating Early Purchases

I now explain the steps involved in evaluating early purchases under the “better ticket” assumption.
Rv
In the case of risk-neutrality it is useful to express the right-hand side of (14) as −si + qi 0 1i (v1i −

p2 )g2pi (p2 )dp2 , where qi is the consumer’s belief that a better ticket will be available and g2pi (p2 ) is

the density of the price of the cheapest available better ticket. Utilities under risk aversion and loss
aversion can be expressed in similar ways.

Step 1: Estimating a Consumer’s Expectations About Ticket Availability (qi ) I estimate
a consumer’s expectation of whether a better ticket will be available using a probit model, where the
explanatory variables are game, ticket and listing characteristics of the tickets which the consumer
actually purchased.

The sample consists of all 289,784 sets of tickets with non-missing face value

information which I observe ever being purchased in the Market 2 data. The dependent variable is
whether a better ticket is available five days before the game.

37

Step 2: Estimating a Consumer’s Expectations About Future Ticket Prices Under the
assumption that a consumer receives utility v1i from any better ticket, she will purchase the cheapest
better ticket available. I model the price of the cheapest better ticket (conditional on a better ticket
being available) as being drawn from a two-parameter gamma distribution where the parameters are
linear functions of observed ticket, listing and game characteristics

p2 ∼ Γ(k, θ) where k = exp(X0 β 0 ), θ = exp(X1 β 1 )
I estimate the parameters using the 255,885 observations on ever purchased tickets with non-missing
face value information where a better ticket was available five days before the game.

The price is

defined per seat purchased so that if two seats were bought but the only available better tickets are
in a three seat listing for $180 then the price per seat purchased would be $90.
Table 12 shows some of the coeﬃcients from the estimated probit and gamma models, assuming
that both fixed price and auction listings (with no bidders) are available. On average, better tickets
are available for 88% of listings (this high availability reflects the fact that most purchased tickets are
for popular games which have a lot of listings), and the average price of the cheapest available better
ticket is $42.59 per seat. The coeﬃcients themselves show a sensible pattern with, for example, less
availability and higher prices for purchased listings with more seats, higher face values (at least for
face values covered by almost all of the data) and better rows. Interestingly, availability is higher for
games with higher expected attendance indicating that the supply curve in the secondary market is
upward sloping, although conditional on expected attendance, it is lower on weekends than during the
week (which is consistent with season ticket holders having more time to go to games on weekends).

Step 3: Evaluating Observed Early Purchases The predicted availability of better tickets from
the estimated probit model and the estimated price distribution are used to evaluate the inequalities
(14), (15) and (16) using assumed values for v1i − p1 , si , αi and li for each observed early purchase.
I define early purchases as those being made more than ten days before the game is played. If the
38

inequality holds then the early purchase is said to be rationalized.

6.2.3

Results Under the Better Ticket Assumption

The top section of Table 13 presents the results of the analysis assuming that a waiting buyer would
consider auction listings with no bidders to be available. The first line shows the proportion of early
purchases which can be rationalized with no search costs, risk neutrality and no loss aversion for
diﬀerent buyer valuations.

If a buyer gets a surplus of $25 per seat from the tickets she actually

buys then 41% of observed early purchase decisions are rationalized.

These are a combination of

buyers who purchase early but happen to find relatively low prices and buyers who purchase tickets
for which substitutes are relatively unlikely to be available at a later date. For example, 79% of early
purchases of three or more seats are rationalized if surplus is $25 per seat, compared with only 35%
of purchases of pairs. As surplus increases, buyers stand to lose more if tickets are not available so a
greater proportion of purchases are rationalized.
The next three lines show how the results change as return to market costs are increased, with risk
neutrality and no loss aversion. When return to market costs are above $25 the vast majority of early
purchases can be rationalized even without needing to assume that consumers get high surplus. This
reflects the fact that the expected price gain to delaying until five days before the game is generally
less than $25.

The final four lines show the eﬀects of introducing risk or loss aversion without

return to market costs and then combining $25 per seat return to market costs with some risk or
loss aversion.

With a coeﬃcient of absolute risk aversion of 0.05 a person would be indiﬀerent to

accepting a gamble with a 0.62 probability of winning $10 and a 0.38 probability of losing $10. Risk
aversion has a particularly large eﬀect on the desire to purchase early when buyers are assumed to get
a lot of surplus. On the other hand, when combined with return to market costs, both risk and loss
aversion can rationalize almost all observed early purchasing even when surplus is lower (e.g., $25 or
$50 per ticket).
The next section of the table shows the eﬀects of assuming that only fixed price listings are

39

available. Making this assumption actually only has a small average eﬀect on predicted availability
(the average qbi falls by around one percentage point) but it has a large eﬀect on expected prices

because fixed prices are generally higher than the start prices of auctions (even those with no bidders)
so the cheapest better ticket price tends to increase. As a result the majority of observed purchases
are rationalized for lower return to market costs or risk/loss aversion parameters.

6.2.4

Results Under the Any Ticket Assumption

The last two sections of Table 13 present the results under the assumption that consumers would
consider purchasing any ticket to the same game with the same number of seats, and that their
valuations of tickets would vary one-for-one with face values. As a result, a waiting consumer would
2 −pF ACE ).
buy the ticket with the lowest price relative to the ticket’s face value (i.e., the lowest pMKT
2
2

This relative price can be negative so I model the lowest price as being drawn from a normal rather
than a gamma distribution. As before, ticket availability is modeled using a probit although under
the any ticket assumption average availability is very high (the average qbi is 0.98 even when only

tickets at fixed prices are considered to be available).

The result of allowing consumers to substitute to a wider variety of tickets is that fewer early
purchases are rationalized for any value of the return to market, risk or loss aversion parameters.
The main insight is that plausible values of risk or loss aversion alone cannot rationalize the majority
of purchases for plausible values of buyer surplus. This is especially true for two seat purchases which
make up the vast majority of the sample (for 4 or more seats 40% of purchases are still justified with
$25 surplus and no return to market costs or risk or loss aversion).

On the other hand, once one

allows for $50 return to market costs or $25 return to market costs combined with some risk aversion
around two-thirds of early purchases can be rationalized.

40

6.3

Supporting Evidence: Who Buys Early?

The calibration exercise showed that early purchasing can be rationalized by return to market costs of
$25-$50 per seat or high valuations for tickets where there is a reasonable probability that substitute
tickets may not be available close to the game (e.g., people buying four or more seats). This leads to
testable implications about which types of buyers should buy tickets early (those likely to have high
return to market costs) and the types of tickets which should be purchased earlier (those which are
likely to have fewer substitutes for some subset of consumers).
For online markets the time costs involved in returning to the market at a later date are likely
to be relatively small.

However, there may be significant other costs involved in waiting to buy.

For example, “complementary investments” (booking hotels or plane tickets, finding baby-sitters,
coordinating with friends) which must be made to attend the game may be more significantly expensive
(or diﬃcult) if they are made at the last minute and when ticket availability is not certain people
will be unwilling to make these investments before buying game tickets.

A plausible assumption

is that people who live further away from the stadium tend to have to make larger complementary
investments, on average, to attend a game. Consistent with this story, early purchasers tend to live
further away from the stadium where the game is played. Table 14(a) shows the results of regressing
the log of the distance that buyers live from the stadium on the same variables that were used in the
price regressions in Section 3 including game-section fixed eﬀects.
295 (59) km.35

The mean (median) distance is

On average, buyers who buy 30-32 days before a game live 73% further away from

the stadium than people who buy 0-2 days before the game. The proportional eﬀect is similar using
diﬀerent fixed eﬀects, a least absolute deviations estimator to look at median distances and when
controlling for buyer experience. An interesting finding which suggests that early purchasing is not
driven purely by ignorance of observed price declines, is that controlling for distance, more experienced
buyers are not significantly more likely to buy closer to the game.
35

The regression excludes 3,821 observations where I was unable to calculate the distance either because the buyer
zipcode was missing or I was unable to calculate the distance (e.g., Canadian buyers).

41

Table 14(b) reports the results of regressing the number of days to go when the transaction takes
place on ticket and game characteristics (controlling for buyer distance eﬀects using a third-order
polynomial in distance and a dummy for buyers living within 40 km of the stadium). Four and six
seat listings are less likely to be available than pairs and consistent with the model these listings tend
to be purchased earlier. Three and five seat listings show the opposite eﬀect, but this may be due to
people who want smaller listings (two or four seats) buying these listings close to the game when they
fear that suitable listings for their ideal number of seats will not become available. Better rows (first
or second row, or lower row number) also tend to be purchased earlier (even though Figure 1(d) shows
that the average row quality of available listings tends to increase as the game approaches) consistent
with some consumers having strong preferences to sit at the front of a section. One surprising feature
is that higher face value tickets tend to be purchased closer to the game.
Controlling for team eﬀects, tickets to games with higher expected attendance tend to be purchased
earlier.

This is consistent with buyers perceiving that there is more competition for these tickets,

combining the primary and secondary markets, even though these games have more secondary market
listings. There may also be more consumers with very high valuations for these games which would
also rationalize earlier purchasing.

7

Conclusion

This paper has examined a striking feature of prices in online resale markets for MLB tickets: they
tend to fall significantly as a game approaches. The falling price pattern exists for both posted and
transaction prices and it is similar across teams, demand conditions and cheap and expensive seats
and across diﬀerent trading mechanisms. Consistent with theoretical models of dynamic pricing for
perishable goods, sellers cut prices as a game approaches because their future selling opportunities
disappear. My finding that these theoretical models accurately describe the behavior of sellers who
do not typically employ complex revenue management systems, contrasts with the results of previous
attempts to test these models using data from the airline industry.
42

The paper also examines why some buyers purchase a long time before the game when prices are
expected to fall.

Until very recently, this question has been ignored by the theoretical literature

which assumed that buyers could not time their purchases strategically. Under the assumption that
consumers are aware of the expected price declines, I show that the majority of observed early purchase
decisions can be justified by plausible ticket valuations and return to market costs, possibly combined
with some degree of risk- or loss-aversion.
Two questions seem ripe for further analysis.

First, why are pricing patterns in this market

diﬀerent from those observed in airline markets and possibly markets for other perishable goods such
as hotel rooms and spots on radio and television stations?

A possible demand-side explanation is

that, compared with resale markets for MLB tickets, it may be much more likely that a customer
arriving close to the end will have high a valuation. This seems particularly plausible for airlines and
hotels. An alternative supply-side explanation is that market concentration and repeated interaction
between the same buyers and sellers provides incentives for sellers to commit or build reputations for
not reducing their prices, and I have heard this type of argument made for the sale of spots by radio
stations.
The second question concerns what aﬀects sellers’ choices over which market and which trading
mechanism to use. A nice feature of my data is that I observe sellers switching from one mechanism
to another as the game approaches, presumably because some mechanism characteristics, such as the
price flexibility oﬀered by auctions, are more valuable when sellers are really keen to sell.

On the

other hand, buyers may prefer the certainty oﬀered by fixed price purchases when there is little time
remaining. Understanding how diﬀerent trading mechanisms are valued by both buyers and sellers
potentially has implications far beyond the type of online resale market considered here.

43

References
[1] Ackerberg, Daniel, Keisuke Hirano and Quazi Shahriar (2006), “The Buy-It-Now Option, Risk
Aversion and Impatience in an Empirical Model of EBay Bidding”, mimeo, UCLA
[2] Aguirregabiria, Victor (1999), “The Dynamics of Markups and Inventories in Retailing Firms”,
Review of Economic Studies, 66(2), 275-308
[3] Ashenfelter, Orley (1989), “How Auctions Work for Wine and Art”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 3(3), 23-36
[4] Aviv, Yossi and Amit Pazgal (2008), “Optimal Pricing of Seasonal Products in the Presence of
Forward-Looking Consumers”, Manufacturing Service Operations Management, forthcoming
[5] Beggs, Alan and Kathryn and Graddy (1997), “Declining Values and the Afternoon Eﬀect: Evidence from Art Auctions”, RAND Journal of Economics, 28(3), 544-565
[6] Bitran, Gabriel R. and Susana V. Mondschein (1993), “Pricing Perishable Products: An Application to the Retail Industry”, mimeo, MIT Sloan
[7] Black, Jane and David De Meza (1993), “Systematic Price Diﬀerences Between Successive Auctions are No Anomaly”, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 1(4), 607-628
[8] Cachon, Gerard P. and Robert Swinney (2007), “Purchasing, Pricing and Quick Response in the
Presence of Strategic Consumers”, mimeo, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
[9] Coase, Ronald H. (1972), “Durability and Monopoly”, Journal of Law and Economics, 15(1),143149
[10] Courty, Pascal (2000), “An Economic Guide to Ticket Pricing in the Entertainment Industry”,
Louvain Economic Review, 66(2), 167-192
[11] Courty, Pascal (2003a), “Some Economics of Ticket Resale”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
17(2), 85-97
44

[12] Courty, Pascal (2003b), “Ticket Pricing Under Demand Uncertainty”, Journal of Law and Economics, XLVI, 627-652
[13] Dana, James D. (1998), “Advance-Purchase Discounts and Price Discrimination in Competitive
Markets”, Journal of Political Economy, 106(2), 395-422
[14] Dana, James D. (1999), “Equilibrium Price Dispersion under Demand Uncertainty: The Roles
of Costly Capacity and Market Structure”, RAND Journal of Economics, 30(4), 632-660
[15] Dasu, Sriram and Chuyang Tong (2008), “Dynamic Pricing When Consumers are Strategic:
Analysis of a Posted Price Scheme”, Operations Research, forthcoming
[16] Engelbrecht-Wiggans, Richard (1994), “Sequential Auctions of Stochastically Equivalent Objects”, Economics Letters, 44, 87-90
[17] Escobari, Diego and Li Gan (2007), “Price Dispersion under Costly Capacity and Demand Uncertainty”, NBER working paper no. 13075
[18] Forrester Research (2008), “The Future of Online Secondary Ticket Markets”, February 6 2008,
Cambridge, MA
[19] Gale, Ian L. and Donald B. Hausch (1994), “Bottom-Fishing and Declining Prices in Sequential
Auctions”, Games and Economic Behavior, 7, 318-331
[20] Gale, Ian L. and Thomas J. Holmes (1992), “The Eﬃciency of Advance-Purchase Discounts in the
Presence of Aggregate Demand Uncertainty”, International Journal of Industrial Organization,
10(3), 413-437
[21] Gale, Ian L. and Thomas J. Holmes (1993), “Advance-Purchase Discounts and Monopoly Allocation of Capacity”, American Economic Review, 83(1), 135-146
[22] Gallego, Guillermo and Garrett van Ryzin (1994), “Optimal Dynamic Pricing of Inventories with
Stochastic Demand over Finite Horizons”, Management Science, 40(8), 999-1020
45

[23] Ginsburgh, Victor (1998), “Absentee Bidders and the Declining Price Anomaly in Wine Auctions”, Journal of Political Economy, 106(6), 1302-1319
[24] Gowrisankaran, Gautam and Marc Rysman (2007), “Dynamics of Consumer Demand for New
Durable Goods”, mimeo, Boston University
[25] Hendricks, Ken and Robert H. Porter (2007), “An Empirical Perspective on Auctions” in Handbook of Industrial Organization, volume 3, edited by M. Armstrong and R. Porter, Elsevier
[26] Herrin, William E., John R. Knight, C.F. Sirmans (2004), “Price Cutting Behavior in Residential
Markets”, Journal of Housing Economics, 13(3), 195-207
[27] Karp, Larry and Jeﬀrey M. Perloﬀ (2005), “When Promoters Like Scalpers”, Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 14(2), 477-508
[28] Levin, Yuri, Jeﬀ McGill and Mikhail Nediak (2008), “Optimal Dynamic Pricing of Perishable
Items By a Monopolist Facing Strategic Consumers”, mimeo, Queen’s University
[29] Lazear, Edward P. (1986), “Retail Pricing and Clearance Sales”, American Economic Review,
76(1), 14-32
[30] Leslie, Phillip and Alan Sorensen (2007), “The Welfare Eﬀects of Ticket Resale”, mimeo, Stanford
University
[31] Liu, Qian and Garrett van Ryzin (2008), “Strategic Capacity Rationing to Induce Early Purchases”, Management Science, forthcoming
[32] McAfee, R. Preston and Daniel Vincent (1993), “The Declining Price Anomaly”, Journal of
Economic Theory, 60, 191-212
[33] McAfee, R. Preston and Vera te Velde (2006), “Dynamic Pricing in the Airline Industry” in
Handbook on Economics and Information Systems, volume 1, edited by T.J. Hendershott, Elsevier

46

[34] Puller, Steven L., Anirban Sengupta and Steven N. Wiggins (2008), “Testing Theories of Scarcity
Pricing and Price Dispersion in the Airline Industry”, mimeo, Texas A&M
[35] Rabin, Matthew (2000), “Risk Aversion and Expected-Utility Theory: A Calibration Theorem”,
Econometrica, 68(5), 1281-1292
[36] Rabin, Matthew and Richard H. Thaler (2001), “Anomalies: Risk Aversion”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 15(1), 219-232
[37] Rivers, Douglas and Quang Vuong (1988), “Limited Information Estimators and Exogeneity Tests
for Simultaneous Probit Models”, Journal of Econometrics, 39, 347-366
[38] Sass, Tim R. (1988), “A Note on Optimal Price Cutting Behavior under Demand Uncertainty”,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 336-339
[39] Sorensen, Alan (2000), “Equilibrium Price Dispersion in Retail Markets for Prescription Drugs”,
Journal of Political Economy, 108(4), 833-850
[40] Stigler, George (1961), “The Economics of Information”, Journal of Political Economy, 69(3),
213-225
[41] Stokey, Nancy (1979), “Intertemporal Price Discrimination”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
93(3), 355-371
[42] van den Berg, Gerard, Jan C. van Ours and Menno P. Pradhan (2001), “The Declining Price
Anomaly in Dutch Rose Auctions”, American Economic Review, 91(4), 1055-1062
[43] Wooldridge, Jeﬀrey M. (2002), The Econometric Analysis of Panel Data, Cambrdige, MA: MIT
Press
[44] Wooldridge, Jeﬀrey M. (2007), “Control Functions and Related Methods”, lecture as part of
NBER series “What’s New in Econometrics?”

47

[45] Zeithammer, Robert (2006), “Forward-Looking Bidding in Online Auctions”, Journal of Marketing Research, XLIII, 462-476
[46] Zhou, Yong-Pin, Ming Fan and Minho Cho (2006), “Strategic Consumer Response to Dynamic
Pricing of Perishable Products”, mimeo, University of Washington Business School

48

Table 1: Summary Statistics By Team
Average
Stubhub
Attendance As % of # listings
Max Attendance
Arizona Diamondbacks
Atlanta Braves
Baltimore Orioles
Boston Red Sox
Chicago White Sox
Chicago Cubs
Cincinnatti Reds
Cleveland Indians
Colorado Rockies
Detroit Tigers
Florida Marlins
Houston Astros
Kansas City Royals
Los Angeles Angels
Los Angeles Dodgers
Milwaukee Brewers
Minnesota Twins
New York Mets
New York Yankees
Oakland Athletics
Philadelphia Phillies
Pittsburgh Pirates
San Diego Padres
San Francisco Giants
Seattle Mariners
St Louis Cardinals
Tampa Bay Devil Rays
Texas Rangers
Toronto Blue Jays
Washington Nationals

0.57
0.63
0.55
0.99
0.85
0.96
0.59
0.68
0.59
0.85
0.40
0.85
0.48
0.94
0.85
0.78
0.59
0.84
0.96
0.68
0.85
0.58
0.77
0.91
0.71
0.95
0.45
0.58
0.58
0.60

91,758
150,956
146,770
342,658
257,272
485,003
32,426
57,438
33,714
227,020
8,134
100,240
19,928
238,824
216,623
27,650
23,173
201,669
579,124
37,773
92,735
20,992
82,755
334,489
62,792
260,886
14,445
47,675
19,606
117,399

Market 2
Market 2
Market 2 Market 2 Mean $ Market 2 Mean $ Market 2 Mean, Median Median Distance
# listings # transactions HHI*10,000 Transaction Price Face Value of
of Buyer from
# of Days Purchase
Per Seat
Purchased Tickets
Stadium (Miles)
Prior to Game
4,883
15,913
17,159
65,016
33,701
52,508
16,882
15,306
3,484
36,595
1,673
10,225
4,702
34,485
43,382
14,743
3,170
30,964
103,569
4,343
11,323
2,871
11,399
28,349
5,423
42,521
2,518
12,035
2,161
5,914

2,246
8,124
6,889
35,907
15,440
25,755
7,968
7,879
1,815
17,276
859
5,650
2,237
16,605
21,730
8,845
1,523
13,051
41,192
1,845
5,993
1,972
5,078
12,744
2,883
19,418
1,245
5,261
698
2,251

186
260
83
39
150
13
151
218
226
97
666
82
223
54
121
202
297
52
26
109
66
286
166
45
156
48
298
227
862
204

42.01
41.80
62.73
106.38
42.33
67.52
40.63
40.34
45.38
41.10
36.01
48.02
41.57
38.39
38.24
34.36
36.65
52.11
54.19
46.59
60.23
30.69
55.37
46.04
51.82
50.33
50.88
34.45
44.91
34.55

39.97
35.34
37.20
38.25
34.57
29.45
27.73
29.06
N/A
23.16
33.74
31.32
22.89
24.50
45.33
26.40
32.32
34.27
56.63
33.71
33.43
22.79
35.34
34.05
37.39
35.51
39.53
33.35
44.07
44.20

15.5
18.3
32.3
37.8
34.5
24.1
22.7
19.1
21.8
23.6
7.9
14.1
18.1
16.9
17.2
17.9
11.6
18.2
28.4
15.5
21.0
23.5
19.3
21.9
15.3
27.6
18.6
13.6
24.1
17.6

6
9
14
18
12
11
10
9
11
9
5
6
8
6
6
8
6
8
12
8
10
12
6
8
9
12
8
6
11
7

20.6
103.3
70.4
56.1
24.9
42.9
67.4
46.8
53.1
36.5
22.3
27.2
54.8
19.5
19.7
51.7
27.7
24.4
44.6
42.6
28.7
39.7
31.3
45.9
42.8
91.4
63.0
28.8
196.3
24.7

Totals
4,331,927 637,217
298,128
Notes: HHI is calculated based on the number of transactions. Mean face value is calculated based on seating sections for which single-game prices can be identified. Transaction price
is the price paid by buyers including shipping.

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Number of Seats Per Listing
No. of Seats Stubhub
Market 2
Market 2
in Listing
# listings
# listings # transactions
1
50,490
5,314
2,576
2
1,708,002
554,038
260,216
3
231,889
10,908
4,928
4
1,863,810
56,794
29,443
5
88,985
3,077
1,245
6
388,751
3,907
1,971

Stubhub Listings
Buyer Price
Seller Price
Market 2 Transactions
Buyer Price
Seller Price

No. of Obs.
67,517,910
67,517,910

300,379
300,379

Secondary Market Prices, $ per seat
Mean
Std Dev
Min
102.17
87.8
3.05
75.47
67.83
0.0085

54.94
49.46

53.75
51.38

0.0025
0.0023

Sales Mechanism on Market 2
No. of
No. of
Listings Transactions
Single-Unit Auction
Auction no BIN option
235,075
146,122
Auction with BIN option
207,221
sold by BIN option
51,711
sold by auction
48,878

Max
999.75
769.25

959.5
918.39

Multi-Unit Auction

8,129

1,541

Personal Offer
(all sold at fixed price)
Fixed Price Format
Store Fixed Price
Non-Store Fixed Price

7,926

1,525

46,864
128,823

7,861
42,741

Primary Market (Face Value) Prices, $ per seat
No. of Obs.
Mean
Std Dev
Min
Max
66,236,993
38.96
26.87
5
312
66,236,993
38.96
26.87
5
312

290,360
290,360

36.48
36.48

32.8
32.8

5
5

312
312

Secondary/Primary Price
Mean
Std Dev
2.74
1.89
1.99
1.45

1.77
1.57

1.64
1.56

Market 2 Listing Prices
Auction Start Price
450,425
34.93
50.94
0.0017
1000
432,661
36.67
33.7
5
312
1.04
1.39
Fixed Price
390,834
69.88
71.28
0.005
1000
376,325
39.64
39.98
5
312
2.13
1.99
excluding seller commission
390,834
67.13
68.82
0.0045
967.38
376,325
39.64
39.98
5
312
2.04
1.92
Notes: seller prices exclude commissions. Buyer prices include commissions paid by buyer and shipping costs. Primary market prices are calculted based on sections for which single-game prices
can be identified.

Table 3: Stubhub List Prices
(1)
(2)
Sample
All
All
Dep. Var Log(Seller Price) Log(Seller Price)
Day to Go Dummies (0-2 excluded)
3 to 5 days
0.0727***
(0.0046)
6 to 8 days
0.113***
(0.0052)
9 to 11 days
0.142***
(0.0053)
12 to 14 days
0.162***
(0.0054)
15 to 17 days
0.175***
(0.0054)
18 to 20 days
0.187***
(0.0054)
21 to 23 days
0.197***
(0.0055)
24 to 26 days
0.204***
(0.0055)
27 to 29 days
0.211***
(0.0055)
30 to 32 days
0.217***
(0.0055)
33 to 35 days
0.222***
(0.0055)
36 to 38 days
0.229***
(0.0055)
39 to 41 days
0.234***
(0.0056)
42 to 44 days
0.237***
(0.0056)
45 to 47 days
0.243***
(0.0056)
48 to 50 days
0.245***
(0.0056)
51 to 55 days
0.248***
(0.0057)
56 to 60 days
0.251***
(0.0057)
61 to 70 days
0.256***
(0.0058)
71 to 80 days
0.260***
(0.0059)
81 plus
0.276***
(0.0061)

Average Seller
Price $
Within R2

(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
All
Face not missing Face <= $20
Face >=$45
Exp Att > 95% Exp Att 85-95% Exp Att 75-85% Exp Att <75%
Log(Buyer Price) Seller/Face
Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price)

0.0954***
(0.0042)
0.146***
(0.0048)
0.181***
(0.0050)
0.205***
(0.0050)
0.223***
(0.0051)
0.237***
(0.0051)
0.249***
(0.0052)
0.260***
(0.0052)
0.269***
(0.0052)
0.276***
(0.0052)
0.283***
(0.0052)
0.291***
(0.0052)
0.297***
(0.0053)
0.302***
(0.0053)
0.308***
(0.0053)
0.312***
(0.0053)
0.317***
(0.0054)
0.322***
(0.0054)
0.330***
(0.0055)
0.339***
(0.0056)
0.363***
(0.0058)

4.558***
(0.3100)
7.407***
(0.3600)
9.317***
(0.3700)
10.69***
(0.3800)
11.54***
(0.3800)
12.33***
(0.3800)
13.10***
(0.3800)
13.70***
(0.3800)
14.20***
(0.3800)
14.66***
(0.3800)
15.15***
(0.3800)
15.65***
(0.3900)
16.07***
(0.3900)
16.39***
(0.3900)
16.79***
(0.3900)
17.05***
(0.3900)
17.35***
(0.3900)
17.73***
(0.4000)
18.30***
(0.4000)
18.95***
(0.4100)
20.70***
(0.4200)

0.0954***
(0.0036)
0.144***
(0.0041)
0.173***
(0.0042)
0.193***
(0.0043)
0.171***
(0.0044)
0.184***
(0.0044)
0.194***
(0.0044)
0.204***
(0.0044)
0.212***
(0.0044)
0.219***
(0.0045)
0.225***
(0.0045)
0.233***
(0.0045)
0.238***
(0.0045)
0.242***
(0.0045)
0.248***
(0.0046)
0.252***
(0.0046)
0.257***
(0.0046)
0.262***
(0.0046)
0.269***
(0.0047)
0.278***
(0.0048)
0.301***
(0.0050)

0.114***
(0.0092)
0.186***
(0.0110)
0.239***
(0.0110)
0.273***
(0.0110)
0.296***
(0.0110)
0.318***
(0.0120)
0.337***
(0.0120)
0.357***
(0.0120)
0.372***
(0.0120)
0.384***
(0.0120)
0.396***
(0.0120)
0.411***
(0.0120)
0.423***
(0.0120)
0.432***
(0.0120)
0.445***
(0.0120)
0.452***
(0.0120)
0.462***
(0.0120)
0.474***
(0.0120)
0.490***
(0.0130)
0.509***
(0.0130)
0.559***
(0.0130)

0.104***
(0.0110)
0.159***
(0.0130)
0.196***
(0.0130)
0.221***
(0.0140)
0.240***
(0.0140)
0.256***
(0.0140)
0.265***
(0.0140)
0.278***
(0.0140)
0.292***
(0.0140)
0.301***
(0.0140)
0.309***
(0.0140)
0.316***
(0.0140)
0.323***
(0.0150)
0.328***
(0.0150)
0.337***
(0.0150)
0.343***
(0.0150)
0.351***
(0.0150)
0.358***
(0.0150)
0.365***
(0.0150)
0.378***
(0.0150)
0.413***
(0.0160)

0.0956***
(0.0055)
0.148***
(0.0062)
0.182***
(0.0064)
0.206***
(0.0065)
0.224***
(0.0065)
0.237***
(0.0065)
0.249***
(0.0065)
0.256***
(0.0065)
0.265***
(0.0066)
0.273***
(0.0066)
0.281***
(0.0066)
0.286***
(0.0066)
0.292***
(0.0067)
0.296***
(0.0067)
0.301***
(0.0067)
0.304***
(0.0068)
0.309***
(0.0068)
0.313***
(0.0068)
0.319***
(0.0069)
0.326***
(0.0070)
0.349***
(0.0073)

0.0538***
(0.0088)
0.0916***
(0.0097)
0.117***
(0.0099)
0.136***
(0.0099)
0.140***
(0.0099)
0.149***
(0.0100)
0.153***
(0.0100)
0.158***
(0.0100)
0.164***
(0.0100)
0.170***
(0.0100)
0.173***
(0.0100)
0.175***
(0.0100)
0.177***
(0.0100)
0.182***
(0.0100)
0.188***
(0.0100)
0.191***
(0.0100)
0.197***
(0.0100)
0.201***
(0.0110)
0.209***
(0.0110)
0.213***
(0.0110)
0.226***
(0.0110)

0.0891***
(0.0073)
0.144***
(0.0084)
0.179***
(0.0088)
0.203***
(0.0088)
0.218***
(0.0089)
0.231***
(0.0090)
0.244***
(0.0090)
0.256***
(0.0091)
0.263***
(0.0091)
0.270***
(0.0091)
0.278***
(0.0091)
0.287***
(0.0092)
0.291***
(0.0092)
0.296***
(0.0092)
0.302***
(0.0093)
0.307***
(0.0094)
0.312***
(0.0094)
0.318***
(0.0095)
0.323***
(0.0096)
0.333***
(0.0098)
0.355***
(0.0100)

0.104***
(0.0100)
0.163***
(0.0120)
0.204***
(0.0130)
0.226***
(0.0130)
0.245***
(0.0130)
0.260***
(0.0130)
0.271***
(0.0130)
0.281***
(0.0130)
0.293***
(0.0130)
0.302***
(0.0130)
0.314***
(0.0130)
0.325***
(0.0130)
0.331***
(0.0130)
0.337***
(0.0140)
0.345***
(0.0140)
0.350***
(0.0140)
0.354***
(0.0140)
0.359***
(0.0140)
0.370***
(0.0140)
0.380***
(0.0140)
0.412***
(0.0150)

0.120***
(0.0074)
0.178***
(0.0086)
0.215***
(0.0089)
0.242***
(0.0090)
0.269***
(0.0090)
0.289***
(0.0091)
0.306***
(0.0092)
0.320***
(0.0093)
0.329***
(0.0093)
0.340***
(0.0094)
0.348***
(0.0094)
0.358***
(0.0095)
0.368***
(0.0095)
0.371***
(0.0096)
0.376***
(0.0096)
0.380***
(0.0097)
0.385***
(0.0097)
0.390***
(0.0098)
0.400***
(0.0099)
0.412***
(0.0100)
0.436***
(0.0100)

0.00102
(0.0018)
-0.0185***
(0.0008)
-0.0000174
(0.0000)
0.0000970***
(0.0000)

0.589***
(0.1700)
-0.792***
(0.0520)
-0.00642***
(0.0016)
0.00259***
(0.0005)

0.000673
(0.0016)
-0.0161***
(0.0007)
-0.0000157
(0.0000)
0.0000814***
(0.0000)

0.00933*
(0.0056)
-0.0264***
(0.0020)
-0.0000939*
(0.0000)
0.000108***
(0.0000)

-0.0240***
(0.0070)
-0.0235***
(0.0021)
0.000183***
(0.0001)
0.000166***
(0.0000)

0.00846***
(0.0021)
-0.0138***
(0.0009)
-0.0000889***
(0.0000)
0.0000662***
(0.0000)

-0.00454**
(0.0023)
-0.0157***
(0.0023)
0.0000205
(0.0000)
0.0000653***
(0.0000)

-0.00444
(0.0050)
-0.0124***
(0.0014)
-0.0000116
(0.0000)
0.0000302**
(0.0000)

-0.0290***
(0.0064)
-0.0215***
(0.0018)
0.000191***
(0.0001)
0.000119***
(0.0000)

-0.00831
(0.0053)
-0.0156***
(0.0013)
0.0000657
(0.0000)
0.0000980***
(0.0000)

Game-Section

Game-Section
-Row

Game-Section
-Row

Game-Section
-Row

Game-Section
-Row

Game-Section
-Row

Game-Section
-Row

Game-Section
-Row

Game-Section
-Row

Game-Section
-Row

Game-Section
-Row

74.48

74.48

74.48

74.48

73.5

31.35

119.32

95.93

73.71

61.83

64.44

0.12

0.10

0.05

0.08

0.04

0.09

0.14

0.06

0.11

0.12

0.15

Home Team Form Variables
Games Ahead
0.00987***
(0.0021)
Games Back
-0.0195***
(0.0009)
Games Ahead * -0.0000741***
Games to Go
(0.0000)
Games Back *
0.000102***
Games to Go
(0.0000)
Fixed Effects

(3)
All
Seller Price $

3,361,062
3,361,062
3,361,062
3,299,714
845,651
1,107,116
828,083
1,012,336
657,482
863,161
Observations
3,361,062
Notes: all specifications include dummies for the number of seats in the listing (1-6), dummies for ticket characteristics (e.g., piggy back seats), away team form variables. Specifications with game-section
fixed effects include row quality control variables. Standard errors in parentheses clustered on the listing id number. ***,** and * denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels. Within R2 does not include
fixed effects. Buyer prices include shipping costs and commissions. Seller prices exclude commissions.

Table 4: Market 2 Transactions
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
Sample
All
All
All
All
Fixed Price Sales
Face <= $20
Face >=$45
Exp Att > 95%
Exp Att 85-95% Exp Att 75-85%
Exp Att <75%
Dep. Var Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price) Log(Seller Price) Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price) Log(Buyer Price)
Day to Go Dummies (0-2 excluded)
3 to 5 days
0.0526***
(0.0042)
6 to 8 days
0.0484***
(0.0046)
9 to 11 days
0.117***
(0.0051)
12 to 14 days
0.136***
(0.0057)
15 to 17 days
0.169***
(0.0062)
18 to 20 days
0.189***
(0.0067)
21 to 23 days
0.203***
(0.0073)
24 to 26 days
0.228***
(0.0077)
27 to 29 days
0.224***
(0.0082)
30 to 32 days
0.249***
(0.0087)
33 to 35 days
0.247***
(0.0091)
36 to 38 days
0.243***
(0.0099)
39 to 41 days
0.264***
(0.0100)
42 to 44 days
0.255***
(0.0110)
45 to 47 days
0.242***
(0.0110)
48 to 50 days
0.235***
(0.0120)
51 to 55 days
0.228***
(0.0100)
56 to 60 days
0.230***
(0.0110)
61 to 70 days
0.225***
(0.0087)
71 to 80 days
0.209***
(0.0092)
81 plus
0.147***
(0.0071)

0.0469***
(0.0065)
0.0618***
(0.0070)
0.122***
(0.0077)
0.145***
(0.0084)
0.175***
(0.0089)
0.204***
(0.0093)
0.226***
(0.0100)
0.219***
(0.0110)
0.221***
(0.0110)
0.236***
(0.0110)
0.250***
(0.0120)
0.242***
(0.0130)
0.262***
(0.0130)
0.266***
(0.0140)
0.245***
(0.0140)
0.225***
(0.0150)
0.223***
(0.0130)
0.236***
(0.0140)
0.216***
(0.0120)
0.208***
(0.0120)
0.155***
(0.0110)

-0.0147***
(0.0057)
-0.00814
(0.0062)
0.0904***
(0.0070)
0.114***
(0.0077)
0.162***
(0.0084)
0.187***
(0.0091)
0.199***
(0.0099)
0.224***
(0.0100)
0.224***
(0.0110)
0.250***
(0.0120)
0.257***
(0.0120)
0.249***
(0.0130)
0.269***
(0.0140)
0.266***
(0.0150)
0.247***
(0.0150)
0.244***
(0.0160)
0.229***
(0.0140)
0.241***
(0.0140)
0.222***
(0.0120)
0.195***
(0.0120)
0.122***
(0.0096)

0.0746***
(0.0041)
0.0768***
(0.0045)
0.133***
(0.0050)
0.153***
(0.0055)
0.181***
(0.0060)
0.200***
(0.0065)
0.212***
(0.0071)
0.230***
(0.0075)
0.222***
(0.0080)
0.245***
(0.0084)
0.240***
(0.0089)
0.241***
(0.0096)
0.252***
(0.0100)
0.246***
(0.0100)
0.234***
(0.0110)
0.232***
(0.0110)
0.214***
(0.0097)
0.221***
(0.0100)
0.225***
(0.0084)
0.206***
(0.0089)
0.150***
(0.0069)

0.118***
(0.0074)
0.161***
(0.0086)
0.192***
(0.0091)
0.208***
(0.0100)
0.239***
(0.0110)
0.243***
(0.0110)
0.270***
(0.0120)
0.287***
(0.0120)
0.280***
(0.0130)
0.269***
(0.0140)
0.249***
(0.0140)
0.285***
(0.0160)
0.278***
(0.0160)
0.269***
(0.0160)
0.259***
(0.0170)
0.270***
(0.0180)
0.254***
(0.0150)
0.258***
(0.0170)
0.286***
(0.0140)
0.272***
(0.0140)
0.233***
(0.0120)

0.0297***
(0.0079)
0.0151*
(0.0086)
0.110***
(0.0096)
0.124***
(0.0110)
0.168***
(0.0120)
0.203***
(0.0130)
0.216***
(0.0140)
0.247***
(0.0150)
0.237***
(0.0160)
0.283***
(0.0170)
0.283***
(0.0170)
0.250***
(0.0190)
0.300***
(0.0190)
0.267***
(0.0210)
0.255***
(0.0210)
0.288***
(0.0230)
0.264***
(0.0190)
0.235***
(0.0210)
0.258***
(0.0170)
0.224***
(0.0180)
0.184***
(0.0140)

0.0345***
(0.0097)
0.0559***
(0.0110)
0.119***
(0.0120)
0.119***
(0.0130)
0.122***
(0.0140)
0.119***
(0.0150)
0.158***
(0.0170)
0.183***
(0.0180)
0.197***
(0.0190)
0.169***
(0.0200)
0.190***
(0.0200)
0.189***
(0.0240)
0.211***
(0.0240)
0.171***
(0.0240)
0.195***
(0.0260)
0.142***
(0.0280)
0.153***
(0.0230)
0.224***
(0.0240)
0.193***
(0.0200)
0.229***
(0.0210)
0.168***
(0.0170)

0.0551***
(0.0070)
0.0699***
(0.0077)
0.153***
(0.0084)
0.149***
(0.0092)
0.183***
(0.0099)
0.180***
(0.0100)
0.192***
(0.0110)
0.224***
(0.0120)
0.190***
(0.0130)
0.219***
(0.0140)
0.220***
(0.0140)
0.213***
(0.0150)
0.225***
(0.0150)
0.206***
(0.0160)
0.218***
(0.0160)
0.217***
(0.0180)
0.189***
(0.0150)
0.198***
(0.0150)
0.202***
(0.0120)
0.170***
(0.0130)
0.115***
(0.0100)

0.0311***
(0.0080)
0.0216**
(0.0089)
0.103***
(0.0100)
0.125***
(0.0110)
0.173***
(0.0120)
0.168***
(0.0130)
0.197***
(0.0150)
0.222***
(0.0150)
0.242***
(0.0160)
0.262***
(0.0180)
0.241***
(0.0190)
0.274***
(0.0200)
0.288***
(0.0210)
0.271***
(0.0210)
0.274***
(0.0230)
0.236***
(0.0240)
0.243***
(0.0200)
0.249***
(0.0210)
0.235***
(0.0180)
0.241***
(0.0190)
0.161***
(0.0150)

0.0490***
(0.0120)
0.0162
(0.0120)
0.0656***
(0.0140)
0.0846***
(0.0160)
0.105***
(0.0170)
0.171***
(0.0200)
0.187***
(0.0210)
0.157***
(0.0220)
0.186***
(0.0240)
0.238***
(0.0240)
0.250***
(0.0270)
0.204***
(0.0290)
0.250***
(0.0290)
0.249***
(0.0300)
0.189***
(0.0310)
0.171***
(0.0340)
0.184***
(0.0300)
0.168***
(0.0330)
0.171***
(0.0270)
0.241***
(0.0300)
0.124***
(0.0220)

0.0858***
(0.0086)
0.0788***
(0.0091)
0.117***
(0.0100)
0.168***
(0.0110)
0.191***
(0.0120)
0.242***
(0.0140)
0.238***
(0.0150)
0.283***
(0.0160)
0.269***
(0.0160)
0.277***
(0.0180)
0.293***
(0.0190)
0.268***
(0.0200)
0.310***
(0.0230)
0.317***
(0.0240)
0.263***
(0.0250)
0.297***
(0.0250)
0.299***
(0.0230)
0.289***
(0.0250)
0.268***
(0.0210)
0.204***
(0.0220)
0.195***
(0.0190)

0.0067
(0.0041)
-0.0258***
(0.0018)
-0.0000227
(0.0000)
0.00000926
(0.0000)

0.00730**
(0.0035)
-0.0326***
(0.0015)
-0.0000282
(0.0000)
-0.0000117
(0.0000)

0.0120***
(0.0025)
-0.0268***
(0.0011)
-0.0000559**
(0.0000)
-0.0000115
(0.0000)

0.0132***
(0.0040)
-0.0161***
(0.0020)
-0.0000847**
(0.0000)
-0.0000329
(0.0000)

0.00952
(0.0065)
-0.0187***
(0.0026)
0.0000207
(0.0001)
-0.0000805***
(0.0000)

0.0173***
(0.0052)
-0.0167***
(0.0024)
-0.000201***
(0.0000)
-0.0000856***
(0.0000)

0.00781***
(0.0030)
-0.0416***
(0.0032)
-0.0000803***
(0.0000)
0.0000862***
(0.0000)

0.0039
(0.0097)
-0.0329***
(0.0024)
-0.0000166
(0.0001)
0.0000416
(0.0000)

-0.0288**
(0.0140)
-0.0282***
(0.0026)
0.000319**
(0.0001)
-0.00000963
(0.0000)

0.0258***
(0.0080)
-0.0157***
(0.0020)
-0.00000522
(0.0001)
-0.0000242
(0.0000)

Game-Section

Game-Section
-Row

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

54.94

54.94

54.94

54.94

65.06

29.82

89.53

80.31

48.71

40.46

39.81

0.08

0.05

0.0475

0.06

0.09

0.09

0.05

0.07

0.08

0.07

0.11

Home Team Form Variables
Games Ahead
0.00769***
(0.0026)
Games Back
-0.0269***
(0.0011)
Games Ahead *
-0.0000308
Games to Go
(0.0000)
Games Back *
-0.00000882
Games to Go
(0.0000)
Fixed Effects
Sale Format
Dummies
Average Buyer
Price $
Within R 2

Observations
300,379
300,379
300,379
300,379
103,838
89,308
74,140
92,520
86,208
48,071
73,580
Notes: all specifications include dummies for the number of seats in the listing (1-6), the feedback score of the seller (4 dummies), dummies for ticket and listing characteristics (e.g., piggy back seats), away team form
variables and dummies for if feedback or shipping cost information is missing (1,352 observations). Specifications with game-section fixed effects also include row quality control variables. Standard errors in
parentheses. ***,** and * denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels. Within R2 does not include fixed effects. Buyer prices include shipping costs. Seller prices exclude commissions.

Table 5: Market 2 Listings
Sample
Teams
Dep. Var
Date Used

(1)
Fixed Prices
All
Log(Fixed Price)
Listing Start Date

Day to Go Dummies (0-2 excluded)
3 to 5 days
0.134***
(0.007)
6 to 8 days
0.200***
(0.007)
9 to 11 days
0.264***
(0.007)
12 to 14 days
0.302***
(0.007)
15 to 17 days
0.327***
(0.007)
18 to 20 days
0.365***
(0.007)
21 to 23 days
0.382***
(0.008)
24 to 26 days
0.386***
(0.008)
27 to 29 days
0.405***
(0.008)
30 to 32 days
0.413***
(0.009)
33 to 35 days
0.416***
(0.009)
36 to 38 days
0.422***
(0.009)
39 to 41 days
0.440***
(0.010)
42 to 44 days
0.440***
(0.010)
45 to 47 days
0.440***
(0.009)
48 to 50 days
0.434***
(0.010)
51 to 55 days
0.430***
(0.009)
56 to 60 days
0.447***
(0.009)
61 to 70 days
0.464***
(0.008)
71 to 80 days
0.479***
(0.009)
81 plus
0.521***
(0.008)
Home Team Form Variables
Games Ahead
0.0109***
(0.003)
Games Back
-0.0208***
(0.001)
Games Ahead *
-0.000036
Games to Go
(0.000)
Games Back *
0.0000734***
Games to Go
(0.000)

(2)
Auctions
All
Log(Auction Start)
Listing Start Date

(3)
Fixed Prices
All
Log(Fixed Price)
Listing End Date

(4)
Auctions
All
Log(Auction Start)
Listing End Date

(5)
Fixed Prices
Most Listed
Log(Fixed Price)
Listing Start Date

(6)
Auctions
Most Listed
Log(Auction Start)
Listing Start Date

(7)
Fixed Prices
Less Listed
Log(Fixed Price)
Listing Start Date

(8)
Auctions
Less Listed
Log(Auction Start)
Listing Start Date

0.0228
(0.018)
-0.0356*
(0.019)
0.00351
(0.020)
-0.0153
(0.021)
0.107***
(0.023)
0.242***
(0.024)
0.344***
(0.025)
0.371***
(0.028)
0.366***
(0.030)
0.388***
(0.031)
0.411***
(0.033)
0.462***
(0.033)
0.552***
(0.034)
0.601***
(0.035)
0.587***
(0.038)
0.659***
(0.040)
0.625***
(0.034)
0.710***
(0.035)
0.741***
(0.030)
0.806***
(0.033)
0.907***
(0.029)

0.114***
(0.005)
0.165***
(0.005)
0.205***
(0.006)
0.233***
(0.006)
0.256***
(0.006)
0.267***
(0.007)
0.288***
(0.007)
0.287***
(0.007)
0.297***
(0.008)
0.302***
(0.008)
0.323***
(0.008)
0.318***
(0.008)
0.303***
(0.008)
0.313***
(0.009)
0.307***
(0.010)
0.320***
(0.009)
0.305***
(0.008)
0.321***
(0.008)
0.341***
(0.007)
0.357***
(0.008)
0.385***
(0.008)

-0.0409***
(0.014)
-0.0663***
(0.017)
0.0900***
(0.019)
0.204***
(0.020)
0.319***
(0.022)
0.326***
(0.025)
0.346***
(0.028)
0.351***
(0.028)
0.380***
(0.030)
0.518***
(0.030)
0.537***
(0.031)
0.567***
(0.034)
0.642***
(0.036)
0.551***
(0.037)
0.621***
(0.038)
0.611***
(0.039)
0.706***
(0.033)
0.694***
(0.035)
0.752***
(0.030)
0.761***
(0.032)
0.892***
(0.028)

0.142***
(0.007)
0.206***
(0.008)
0.271***
(0.008)
0.306***
(0.008)
0.331***
(0.009)
0.364***
(0.009)
0.385***
(0.009)
0.384***
(0.009)
0.410***
(0.010)
0.417***
(0.010)
0.418***
(0.010)
0.425***
(0.010)
0.440***
(0.011)
0.437***
(0.012)
0.436***
(0.011)
0.433***
(0.011)
0.431***
(0.010)
0.446***
(0.010)
0.462***
(0.009)
0.482***
(0.009)
0.528***
(0.009)

0.0382*
(0.020)
-0.00264
(0.022)
0.0443*
(0.023)
0.0122
(0.024)
0.167***
(0.026)
0.264***
(0.028)
0.385***
(0.028)
0.412***
(0.032)
0.394***
(0.034)
0.388***
(0.036)
0.430***
(0.038)
0.494***
(0.038)
0.584***
(0.039)
0.665***
(0.040)
0.610***
(0.043)
0.716***
(0.045)
0.652***
(0.038)
0.718***
(0.040)
0.751***
(0.035)
0.814***
(0.037)
0.897***
(0.032)

0.103***
(0.013)
0.173***
(0.013)
0.237***
(0.014)
0.281***
(0.014)
0.308***
(0.014)
0.357***
(0.014)
0.365***
(0.015)
0.383***
(0.017)
0.385***
(0.016)
0.394***
(0.017)
0.405***
(0.018)
0.406***
(0.020)
0.431***
(0.021)
0.449***
(0.019)
0.451***
(0.019)
0.432***
(0.023)
0.418***
(0.020)
0.445***
(0.019)
0.460***
(0.018)
0.458***
(0.020)
0.483***
(0.017)

-0.0494
(0.037)
-0.178***
(0.040)
-0.172***
(0.043)
-0.144***
(0.043)
-0.121**
(0.048)
0.125**
(0.050)
0.164***
(0.055)
0.188***
(0.060)
0.233***
(0.059)
0.357***
(0.062)
0.308***
(0.062)
0.309***
(0.065)
0.403***
(0.070)
0.321***
(0.070)
0.493***
(0.077)
0.412***
(0.077)
0.511***
(0.069)
0.664***
(0.065)
0.698***
(0.059)
0.780***
(0.064)
0.952***
(0.060)

-0.0374***
(0.013)
-0.0222***
(0.004)
0.000393***
(0.000)
0.000285***
(0.000)

0.00814***
(0.003)
-0.0199***
(0.001)
-0.0000221
(0.000)
0.0000658***
(0.000)

-0.0374***
(0.013)
-0.0221***
(0.004)
0.000393***
(0.000)
0.000290***
(0.000)

0.00961***
(0.003)
-0.0288***
(0.002)
-0.0000209
(0.000)
0.000129***
(0.000)

-0.0431***
(0.013)
-0.0354***
(0.005)
0.000422***
(0.000)
0.000375***
(0.000)

0.00162
(0.011)
-0.00874***
(0.002)
0.0000501
(0.000)
0.0000221
(0.000)

-0.0509
(0.032)
-0.000856
(0.008)
0.000552*
(0.000)
0.000137
(0.000)

Fixed Effects

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Sale Format
Dummies
Average Dep
Var $
2
Within R

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

69.88

34.94

69.88

34.94

73.22

36.19

60.61

31.29

0.12

0.16

0.10

0.16

0.12

0.16

0.12

0.17

Observations
390,834
450,425
390,834
450,425
287,067
335,020
103,767
115,405
Notes: see Table 4. Fixed price sample includes pure fixed price, personal offer and hybrid auction listings. Auction sample includes pure single unit auctions, hybrid auctions and multiple unit auctions. Prices do not
include shipping costs.

Table 6: Testing the Lazear (1986) Explanation for Falling Prices
Sample

(1)
Market 2
Fixed Prices

Dep. Var Log(Fixed Price)
Day to Go Dummies (0-2 excluded)
3 to 5 days
0.197***
(0.004)
6 to 8 days
0.323***
(0.005)
9 to 11 days
0.408***
(0.005)
12 to 14 days
0.468***
(0.005)
15 to 17 days
0.521***
(0.005)
18 to 20 days
0.564***
(0.005)
21 to 23 days
0.586***
(0.006)
24 to 26 days
0.605***
(0.006)
27 to 29 days
0.620***
(0.006)
30 to 32 days
0.641***
(0.006)
33 to 35 days
0.655***
(0.006)
36 to 38 days
0.669***
(0.007)
39 to 41 days
0.676***
(0.007)
42 to 44 days
0.679***
(0.007)
45 to 47 days
0.699***
(0.007)
48 to 50 days
0.700***
(0.007)
51 to 55 days
0.707***
(0.006)
56 to 60 days
0.730***
(0.007)
61 to 70 days
0.738***
(0.006)
71 to 80 days
0.747***
(0.006)
81 plus
0.781***
(0.005)
Days Since First Listing
Tenure

-

Tenure^2/100

-

Tenure^3/(10^4)

-

Tenure^4/(10^6)

-

Tenure^5/(10^8)

-

Fixed Effects
Sale Format
Dummies

(2)
Market 2
Fixed Prices

(3)
Market 2
Auctions

(4)
Market 2
Auctions

(5)
Stubhub
Likely First
Listing

Log(Fixed Price) Log(Auction Start) Log(Auction Start) Log(Fixed Price)

(6)
Stubhub
Likely First
Listing
Log(Fixed Price)

(7)
Market 2
Fixed Prices
Experienced

(8)
Market 2
Auctions
Experienced

(9)
Market 2
Fixed Prices
Inexperienced

(10)
Market 2
Auctions
Inexperienced

Log(Fixed Price) Log(Auction Start) Log(Fixed Price) Log(Auction Start)

0.194***
(0.004)
0.316***
(0.005)
0.398***
(0.005)
0.455***
(0.005)
0.505***
(0.005)
0.545***
(0.006)
0.565***
(0.006)
0.581***
(0.006)
0.594***
(0.006)
0.612***
(0.006)
0.624***
(0.007)
0.636***
(0.007)
0.641***
(0.007)
0.642***
(0.007)
0.662***
(0.007)
0.661***
(0.008)
0.666***
(0.007)
0.686***
(0.007)
0.692***
(0.007)
0.697***
(0.007)
0.719***
(0.007)

0.165***
(0.013)
0.296***
(0.014)
0.470***
(0.015)
0.614***
(0.015)
0.706***
(0.016)
0.832***
(0.017)
0.923***
(0.017)
0.976***
(0.018)
1.027***
(0.019)
1.053***
(0.020)
1.116***
(0.020)
1.135***
(0.022)
1.219***
(0.022)
1.223***
(0.023)
1.230***
(0.024)
1.275***
(0.024)
1.303***
(0.022)
1.350***
(0.023)
1.373***
(0.021)
1.457***
(0.022)
1.635***
(0.021)

0.142***
(0.013)
0.251***
(0.014)
0.401***
(0.015)
0.524***
(0.016)
0.596***
(0.017)
0.703***
(0.018)
0.777***
(0.019)
0.814***
(0.020)
0.848***
(0.021)
0.857***
(0.022)
0.906***
(0.022)
0.912***
(0.024)
0.982***
(0.025)
0.972***
(0.025)
0.962***
(0.027)
0.995***
(0.027)
0.999***
(0.026)
1.025***
(0.027)
1.011***
(0.026)
1.047***
(0.029)
1.069***
(0.033)

0.0990***
(0.003)
0.138***
(0.003)
0.168***
(0.003)
0.193***
(0.003)
0.214***
(0.003)
0.232***
(0.003)
0.247***
(0.003)
0.263***
(0.003)
0.273***
(0.003)
0.282***
(0.003)
0.290***
(0.003)
0.298***
(0.003)
0.305***
(0.003)
0.310***
(0.003)
0.315***
(0.003)
0.320***
(0.003)
0.325***
(0.003)
0.330***
(0.003)
0.338***
(0.003)
0.344***
(0.003)
0.364***
(0.003)

0.0979***
(0.003)
0.136***
(0.003)
0.166***
(0.003)
0.189***
(0.003)
0.209***
(0.003)
0.225***
(0.003)
0.239***
(0.003)
0.253***
(0.003)
0.262***
(0.003)
0.270***
(0.003)
0.276***
(0.003)
0.282***
(0.003)
0.287***
(0.003)
0.291***
(0.003)
0.294***
(0.003)
0.297***
(0.003)
0.300***
(0.003)
0.302***
(0.003)
0.305***
(0.003)
0.306***
(0.003)
0.307***
(0.003)

0.235***
(0.019)
0.370***
(0.019)
0.468***
(0.019)
0.516***
(0.019)
0.568***
(0.020)
0.618***
(0.020)
0.620***
(0.020)
0.625***
(0.019)
0.647***
(0.020)
0.663***
(0.021)
0.666***
(0.021)
0.671***
(0.021)
0.675***
(0.022)
0.692***
(0.022)
0.712***
(0.021)
0.689***
(0.022)
0.710***
(0.022)
0.723***
(0.021)
0.753***
(0.021)
0.781***
(0.021)
0.838***
(0.021)

-0.310***
(0.063)
-0.191***
(0.065)
0.167**
(0.071)
0.207***
(0.066)
0.363***
(0.068)
0.580***
(0.068)
0.541***
(0.068)
0.590***
(0.081)
0.517***
(0.076)
0.579***
(0.077)
0.627***
(0.083)
0.585***
(0.076)
0.673***
(0.082)
0.729***
(0.082)
0.810***
(0.097)
0.739***
(0.095)
0.793***
(0.080)
0.729***
(0.081)
0.803***
(0.077)
0.983***
(0.081)
1.294***
(0.082)

0.0912***
(0.014)
0.158***
(0.016)
0.230***
(0.017)
0.268***
(0.018)
0.299***
(0.019)
0.313***
(0.019)
0.344***
(0.021)
0.359***
(0.027)
0.342***
(0.026)
0.354***
(0.024)
0.381***
(0.026)
0.387***
(0.027)
0.384***
(0.028)
0.406***
(0.030)
0.437***
(0.033)
0.404***
(0.034)
0.388***
(0.031)
0.381***
(0.030)
0.329***
(0.028)
0.353***
(0.031)
0.342***
(0.026)

0.0632
(0.041)
0.0720*
(0.043)
0.0824*
(0.046)
0.0714
(0.048)
0.130**
(0.054)
0.222***
(0.056)
0.324***
(0.059)
0.338***
(0.066)
0.369***
(0.069)
0.299***
(0.072)
0.475***
(0.078)
0.424***
(0.083)
0.433***
(0.084)
0.515***
(0.091)
0.495***
(0.100)
0.443***
(0.110)
0.458***
(0.097)
0.562***
(0.097)
0.529***
(0.086)
0.385***
(0.098)
0.432***
(0.078)

-0.00229***
(0.000)
0.00313***
(0.000)
-0.00160***
(0.000)
0.000274
(0.000)
-0.00000859
(0.000)

-

-0.0142***
(0.001)
0.0325***
(0.003)
-0.0396***
(0.004)
0.0191***
(0.002)
-0.00323***
(0.000)

-

-0.0000950**
(0.000)
-0.00194***
(0.000)
0.00224***
(0.000)
-0.00109***
(0.000)
0.000182***
(0.000)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

Game-Section

-

-

SellerGame-Section

SellerGame-Section

SellerGame-Section

SellerGame-Section

Ticket Id

Ticket Id

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No (one format)

No (one format)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

1,965,659

1,965,659

118,187

74,454

76,887

139,974

Observations
390,834
390,834
450,425
450,425
Notes: see Tables 4 and 5. Specifications also include home team form variables.

Table 7: Regressions of Market 2 Prices on Instruments
Listing Sample
Price (relative to face value)
Seller Within 40 km
* 1-10 Days Prior to Game
* 11-20 Days Prior to Game
* 21-40 Days Prior to Game

Seller More than 200 km
* 1-10 Days Prior to Game
* 11-20 Days Prior to Game
* 21-40 Days Prior to Game

Proportion of Seller's Unsold Listings
During Time Period Relisted on Market 2
* 1-10 Days Prior to Game
* 11-20 Days Prior to Game
* 21-40 Days Prior to Game

Proportion of Seller's Other Listings
in Hybrid Auction Format
* 1-10 Days Prior to Game
* 11-20 Days Prior to Game
* 21-40 Days Prior to Game

Proportion of Seller's Other Listings
in Pure Fixed Price Formats
* 1-10 Days Prior to Game
* 11-20 Days Prior to Game
* 21-40 Days Prior to Game

Pure Fixed Price
Fixed Price

Pure Auction
Auction Start

-0.0218
(0.024)
0.0482
(0.030)
0.0223
(0.028)
-0.0224
(0.028)

0.018
(0.028)
0.023
(0.029)
-0.016
(0.028)
-0.019
(0.028)

-0.0329*
(0.020)
0.0291
(0.021)
0.0357***
(0.023)
0.00393
(0.022)

-0.0375*
(0.023)
0.0298
(0.025)
0.0349*
(0.029)
0.0384**
(0.028)

0.163***
(0.023)
-0.229***
(0.029)
-0.133***
(0.026)
-0.0566**
(0.027)

-0.0493**
(0.022)
-0.0477**
(0.023)
-0.038
(0.024)
0.007
(0.023)

-0.0366*
(0.020)
-0.00819
(0.021)
-0.015
(0.021)
-0.0368*
(0.021)

-0.0294
(0.023)
-0.0304
(0.025)
0.0102
(0.026)
-0.0283
(0.025)

-0.118***
(0.033)
-0.0901*
(0.050)
-0.131**
(0.063)
-0.424***
(0.050)

-0.0538*
(0.030)
0.284***
(0.033)
0.146***
(0.035)
0.256***
(0.038)

0.137***
(0.025)
-0.173***
(0.029)
-0.119***
(0.031)
-0.0354
(0.034)

0.0700***
(0.031)
-0.172***
(0.037)
-0.137***
(0.042)
-0.0648**
(0.042)

-0.101*
(0.056)
0.162**
(0.067)
0.270***
(0.072)
0.0918*
(0.071)

0.232***
(0.052)
-0.045
(0.056)
-0.007
(0.055)
-0.046
(0.056)

0.149***
(0.034)
-0.0470
(0.035)
-0.0426*
(0.038)
-0.00315
(0.040)

0.153***
(0.039)
-0.116***
(0.042)
-0.0293
(0.043)
-0.0511
(0.048)

0.138***
(0.040)
-0.226***
(0.047)
0.0388
(0.052)
0.016
(0.054)

0.476***
(0.049)
-0.602***
(0.054)
-0.476***
(0.055)
-0.351***
(0.061)
-

0.119***
(0.043)
-0.0927*
(0.048)
-0.119**
(0.055)
-0.0117
(0.053)

0.218***
(0.052)
-0.234***
(0.060)
-0.172**
(0.068)
-0.0334
(0.062)

-0.202***
(0.012)
0.0678***
(0.013)
0.0904***
(0.021)
0.0701***
(0.016)

0.391***
(0.014)
0.0453***
(0.017)
0.0207**
(0.023)
-0.0644*
(0.035)

0.599***
(0.014)
0.0530***
(0.019)
0.00197
(0.023)
-0.0430**
(0.022)

-0.128***
(0.016)
0.0793***
(0.021)
0.0429*
(0.025)
0.0845**
(0.036)

Average Relative Fixed Price in
other Hybrid Auction Listings
* 1-10 Days Prior to Game

-

* 11-20 Days Prior to Game

-

* 21-40 Days Prior to Game

-

-

Hybrid Auction
Auction Start
Fixed Price

Average Relative Start Price
in other Hybrid Auction Listings
* 1-10 Days Prior to Game

-

* 11-20 Days Prior to Game

-

* 21-40 Days Prior to Game

-

-

Observations
109,296
182,302
115,406
115,406
F-statistic on the instruments
15.71
47.75
231.84
76.43
Notes: Specifications also include competition variables, dummies for number of seats, seller feedback scores, ticket and listing characteristics,
row quality controls, home team dummies, home team*face value interactions, home team*game expected attendance interactions and
dummies for sellers with 1 and less than 10 listings. Standard errors in parentheses clustered on the game. ***,** and * denote significance
at the 1, 5 and 10% levels

Table 8: Fixed Price Probability of Sale Model
(1)
Probit Model

(2)
Probit Model
With Control Function
to Address Own Price
Endogeneity

(3)
Probit Model
With Control Function
to Address Own and
Competitor Price
Endogeneity

-0.200***
(0.014)
0.072***
(0.016)
0.066***
(0.016)
0.0351**
(0.018)

-0.895***
(0.045)
0.007
(0.020)
0.012
(0.022)
-0.019
(0.020)

-0.805***
(0.049)
-0.018
(0.022)
-0.003
(0.024)
-0.051**
(0.025)

0.092***
(0.012)
0.028**
(0.014)
0.000
(0.011)
-0.041**
(0.015)
0.275***
(0.029)
-0.091***
(0.023)
-0.007***
(0.002)
-0.053
(0.040)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.018
(0.023)

0.258***
(0.021)
0.080***
(0.017)
0.049***
(0.016)
-0.080***
(0.017)
0.689***
(0.043)
-0.146***
(0.023)
-0.012***
(0.002)
0.035
(0.041)
0.004*
(0.002)
-0.078***
(0.022)

0.398***
(0.086)
0.070
(0.064)
-0.247**
(0.107)
-0.146**
(0.073)
0.344***
(0.124)
-0.142***
(0.036)
-0.020***
(0.004)
-0.190**
(0.087)
0.002
(0.003)
-0.031
(0.028)

-0.190
-0.280
-0.460
-0.750

-1.660
-2.350
-3.270
-4.300

-1.482
-2.075
-2.949
-3.735

Own Price Coefficients
Relative Fixed Price
1-10 Days Prior to Game*Relative Price
11-20 Days Prior to Game*Relative Price
21-40 Days Prior to Game*Relative Price
Competition Coefficients
Mean Relative Price for Fixed Price Listings
Mean Relative Start Price for Auction Listings
Minimum Relative Price for Fixed Price Listings
Minimum Relative Price for Auction Listings
Dummy Variable for No Competing
Fixed Price Listings
Dummy Variable for No Competing
Auction Listings
Number of Competing Fixed Price Listings
Proportion of Competing Fixed Price Listings with
Seller Feedback Scores Above 100
Number of Competing Auction Listings
Proportion of Competing Auction Listings with
Seller Feedback Scores Above 100

Mean Probability of Sale Elasticities at Observed Prices
1-10 Days Prior to Game
11-20 Days Prior to Game
21-40 Days Prior to Game
More than 41 Days Prior to Game

Number of observations
109,296
109,296
109,296
Notes: Specifications also include dummies for number of seats, seller feedback scores, ticket and listing characteristics,
row quality controls, home team dummies, home team*face value interactions, home team*game expected attendance
interactions and dummies for sellers with 1 and less than 10 listings. Standard errors in parentheses clustered on the
game (for control function models they are estimated using a bootstrap with 200 repetitions). ***,** and * denote
significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels. Coefficients in columns (2) and (3) have been rescaled to be comparable with
those in column (1).

Table 9: Counterfactuals Using Estimated Pricing Models
(a) Counterfactuals for Fixed Price Model
Relative Price Specification
Days Prior to Game
1-10
11-20
21-40
Observed
Mean Price $
Median Price $

53.58
40.63

60.93
49.50

65.81
54.20

Counterfactual: demand parameters same as 11-14 days prior to game
competition variables same as average 11-20 days before game
Mean Price $
50.26
59.41
65.66
Median Price $
39.78
49.35
55.13
(b) Counterfactuals for Fixed Price Model
Log Price Specification
Days Prior to Game
1-10
11-20
21-40
Observed
Mean Price $
Median Price $

53.58
40.63

60.93
49.50

65.81
54.20

Counterfactual: demand parameters same as 11-14 days prior to game
competition variables same as average 11-20 days before game
Mean Price $
50.58
58.39
64.33
Median Price $
40.95
49.38
54.95
(c) Counterfactual for Single Unit Pure Auction Model
Relative Price Specification
Days Prior to Game
1-10
11-20
21-40
Observed
Mean Price $
Median Price $

20.95
11.50

21.59
11.95

25.91
14.87

Counterfactual: demand/revenue parameters same as 11-14 days prior to game
competition variables same as average 11-20 days before game
Mean Price $
24.60
21.68
25.15
Median Price $
15.96
11.70
13.78

41 plus
69.44
58.50

68.99
59.40

41 plus
69.44
58.50

69.40
59.89

41 plus
31.14
23.32

28.85
20.47

(d) Counterfactual for Auction Start Prices in Hybrid Auction Model
Relative Price Specification
Days Prior to Game
1-10
11-20
21-40
41 plus
Observed
Mean Price $
Median Price $

31.21
23.76

34.39
27.00

41.92
33.99

Counterfactual: demand/revenue parameters same as 11-14 days prior to game
competition variables same as average 11-20 days before game
Mean Price $
36.34
39.65
49.16
Median Price $
27.63
30.60
39.60

52.25
44.78

61.79
50.60

Table 10: Single Unit Auction Listing Models

Own Price Coefficients
Relative Fixed Price
1-10 Days Prior to Game*Relative Price
11-20 Days Prior to Game*Relative Price
21-40 Days Prior to Game*Relative Price
Competition Coefficients
Mean Relative Price for Fixed Price Listings
Mean Relative Start Price for Auction Listings
Minimum Relative Price for Fixed Price Listings
Minimum Relative Price for Auction Listings
Dummy Variable for No Competing
Fixed Price Listings
Dummy Variable for No Competing
Auction Listings
Number of Competing Fixed Price Listings
Proportion of Competing Fixed Price Listings with
Seller Feedback Scores Above 100
Number of Competing Auction Listings
Proportion of Competing Auction Listings with
Seller Feedback Scores Above 100
Standard Deviation
Mean Probability of Sale Elasticities at Observed Prices
1-10 Days Prior to Game
11-20 Days Prior to Game
21-40 Days Prior to Game
More than 41 Days Prior to Game
Median Opportunity Costs Relative to Ticket Face Values
1-10 Days Prior to Game
11-20 Days Prior to Game
21-40 Days Prior to Game
More than 41 Days Prior to Game

(1)
Probability of Sale
With Control Function
to Address Own and
Competitor Price
Endogeneity
(Probit)

(2)
Revenue Function
With Control Function
to Address Own and
Competitor Price
Endogeneity
(Censored Normal)

-1.177***
(0.068)
-0.247***
(0.056)
-0.251***
(0.055)
-0.266***
(0.050)

0.300***
(0.086)
-0.172***
(0.061)
-0.021
(0.055)
0.001
(0.058)

0.272***
(0.096)
0.012
(0.078)
0.102
(0.138)
-0.029
(0.106)
0.718***
(0.076)
-0.027
(0.033)
-0.050
(0.066)
-0.004
(0.027)
0.015
(0.024)
-0.020
(0.074)

0.526***
(0.171)
0.310**
(0.139)
-0.37*
(0.211)
-0.445**
(0.182)
0.642***
(0.154)
-0.182**
(0.071)
-0.337***
(0.129)
0.056
(0.057)
0.076
(0.082)
-0.371***
(0.127)
0.852***
(0.017)

-0.86
-0.84
-1.13
-1.37

0.50
0.20
0.41
0.59

Number of observations
182,302
122,609
Notes: Specifications also include dummies for number of seats, seller feedback scores, ticket and listing characteristics,
row quality controls, home team dummies, home team*face value interactions, home team*game expected attendance
interactions and dummies for sellers with 1 and less than 10 listings. Standard errors in parentheses clustered on the
game estimated using a bootstrap with 200 repetitions. ***,** and * denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.

Table 11: Hybrid Auction Listing Models
(1)
Probability of Sale
With Control Function
to Address Own and
Competitor Price
Endogeneity
(Trinomial Logit)

(2)
Revenue Function
With Control Function
to Address Own and
Competitor Price
Endogeneity
(Censored Normal)

-2.291***
(0.096)
0.061***
(0.098)
-0.177***
(0.121)
-0.040
(0.093)

0.005
(0.028)
0.213***
(0.028)
0.180***
(0.031)
0.125***
(0.040)

-1.124***
(0.123)
0.296***
(0.089)
0.167*
(0.097)
0.090
(0.077)

0.677***
(0.033)
-0.155***
(0.027)
-0.140***
(0.027)
-0.060***
(0.032)

-

0.535***
(0.008)

Own Price Coefficients
Relative Auction Start
1-10 Days Prior to Game*Relative Start Price
11-20 Days Prior to Game*Relative Start Price
21-40 Days Prior to Game*Relative Start Price

Relative Fixed Price
1-10 Days Prior to Game*Relative Fixed Price
11-20 Days Prior to Game*Relative Fixed Price
21-40 Days Prior to Game*Relative Fixed Price

Standard Deviation

Mean Probability of Sale Elasticities wrt Auction Start Price at Observed Prices
1-10 Days Prior to Game
-0.46
11-20 Days Prior to Game
-0.57
21-40 Days Prior to Game
-0.76
More than 41 Days Prior to Game
-1.00
Mean Probability of Sale Elasticities wrt Fixed Price at Observed Prices
1-10 Days Prior to Game
11-20 Days Prior to Game
21-40 Days Prior to Game
More than 41 Days Prior to Game

-0.26
-0.30
-0.39
-0.50

Median Opportunity Costs Relative to Ticket Face Values Implied by Auction Start Prices
1-10 Days Prior to Game
0.004
11-20 Days Prior to Game
0.116
21-40 Days Prior to Game
0.516
More than 41 Days Prior to Game
0.809
Number of observations
115,406
37,567
Notes: Specifications also include competition variables, number of seat and feedback dummies, ticket and listing characteristics,
row quality controls, home team dummies, home team*face value interactions, home team*game expected attendance
interactions and dummies for sellers with 1 and less than 10 listings. Standard errors in parentheses clustered on the
game estimated using a bootstrap with 200 repetitions. ***,** and * denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.

Table 12: Models for Ticket Availability and Expected Prices Five Days Prior to Game
under assumption that buyer only considers tickets wihch are better than those she bought and that she considers auction listings which close 5 days before the game with no bidders to be available
Probit Model
for Ticket Availability
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday

Feedback 10-100
Feedback 100-1000
Feedback Greater Than 1000

Two Seats
Three Seats
Four Seats
Five Seats
Six Seats

Front Row
Second Row
Row Number
Row N/A
No Row Listed

Gamma Model for Prices of Available Tickets
Shape Parameters
Scale Parameters

0.110***
(0.017)
0.246***
(0.017)
0.304***
(0.017)
-0.139***
(0.017)
-0.0797***
(0.014)
-0.204***
(0.014)

0.1179***
(0.006)
0.088***
(0.006)
0.1378***
(0.006)
0.1876***
(0.007)
0.1205***
(0.005)
0.1173***
(0.005)

-

-0.0616**
(0.028)
-0.278***
(0.027)
-1.016***
(0.027)

0.0484***
(0.009)
0.1365***
(0.008)
0.4668***
(0.008)

0.0273
(0.049)
-1.561***
(0.054)
-1.675***
(0.050)
-2.594***
(0.067)
-2.832***
(0.061)

0.1265***
(0.026)
0.677***
(0.035)
0.7307***
(0.028)
1.0927***
(0.069)
0.8063***
(0.065)

-0.8503***
(0.034)
-0.7061***
(0.044)
-0.9805***
(0.036)
-1.2669***
(0.081)
-1.1756***
(0.077)

-0.106***
(0.014)
-0.0950***
(0.015)
0.0224***
(0.001)
0.860***
(0.064)
0.766***
(0.020)

0.0016
(0.009)
-0.0037***
(0.010)
-0.0064***
(0.001)
0.1774***
(0.022)
-0.2904***
(0.011)

0.0225
(0.011)
0.0191***
(0.012)
-0.0004***
(0.001)
-0.5532***
(0.025)
0.0253***
(0.013)

Probit Model
for Ticket Availability
Main Effects (Arizona Diamondbacks)
Constant

Log(Face Value)
Log(Face Value)^2
Expected Attendance
-

-

-4.346***
(0.920)
2.311***
(0.510)
-0.469***
(0.074)
5.157***
(0.360)

Gamma Model for Prices of Available Tickets
Shape Parameters
Scale Parameters

-1.5174***
(0.436)
0.3982
(0.260)
-0.0124
(0.039)
0.3841***
(0.148)

0.8612***
(0.075)
0.9191***
(0.039)
-0.071***
(0.006)
1.5181***
(0.014)

Interaction Effects for Selected Teams (not reported for other teams)
Boston Red Sox Interactions
Constant
0.839
6.9176***
(1.020)
(0.463)
Log(Face Value)
0.607
-2.8615***
(0.560)
(0.272)
Log(Face Value)^2
-0.066
0.4391***
(0.079)
(0.041)
Expected Attendance
-3.184***
-2.6557***
(0.390)
(0.156)
Chicago Cubs Interactions
Constant
Log(Face Value)
Log(Face Value)^2
Expected Attendance

Average Availiability
Data, Predicted

-7.267***
(1.210)
3.160***
(0.700)
-0.576***
(0.100)
2.269***
(0.450)

-

0.1359
(0.522)
-0.7041**
(0.314)
0.1888***
(0.047)
-0.4126***
(0.166)

-

0.88, 0.88

Average Prices
Data, Predicted

42.59, 42.17

Std Deviation Prices
Data, Predicted

58.78, 58.20

Log-Likelihood

-58,168.2

Number of Observations
289,784
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. ***,** and * denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels. Specification also includes month of game dummies.

-1,120,320.5
255,885

Table 13: Rationalizing Observed Early Purchase Decisions
table shows the proportion of purchases taking place more than 10 days prior to the game which can be
rationalized for different values of the parameters
Search/Return to
Market Cost

CARA Coefficient

Loss Aversion Cost

Valuation of Tickets Above Price Paid
$10
$25
$50
$75

Assumption 1: Substitution Only to Better Tickets, Valued Same as Purchased, Auction Listings Available
$0
Risk Neutral
$0
29%
41%
49%
52%
$10
$25
$50

Risk Neutral
Risk Neutral
Risk Neutral

$0
$0
$0

52%
71%
86%

58%
73%
86%

62%
75%
87%

65%
77%
87%

$0
$0

0.05
Risk Neutral

$0
$25

42%
61%

66%
64%

84%
66%

92%
68%

$25
$25

0.05
Risk Neutral

$0
$25

87%
76%

92%
77%

96%
78%

98%
79%

Assumption 2: Substitution Only to Better Tickets, Valued Same as Purchased, Only Fixed Price Available
$0
Risk Neutral
$0
46%
57%
62%
65%
$10
$25
$50

Risk Neutral
Risk Neutral
Risk Neutral

$0
$0
$0

66%
80%
90%

70%
81%
91%

73%
83%
91%

74%
83%
91%

$0
$0

0.05
Risk Neutral

$0
$25

58%
72%

74%
74%

84%
75%

89%
76%

$25
$25

0.05
Risk Neutral

$0
$25

90%
83%

92%
84%

95%
84%

97%
85%

Assumption 3: Substitution Only to All Tickets, Value Varies with Face Value, Auction Listings Available
$0
Risk Neutral
$0
2%
6%
10%

12%

$10
$25
$50

Risk Neutral
Risk Neutral
Risk Neutral

$0
$0
$0

7%
24%
58%

12%
31%
59%

17%
35%
59%

19%
36%
59%

$0
$0

0.05
Risk Neutral

$0
$25

11%
17%

24%
21%

34%
24%

38%
25%

$25
$25

0.05
Risk Neutral

$0
$25

56%
34%

59%
38%

61%
41%

62%
41%

Assumption 4: Substitution Only to All Tickets, Value Varies with Face Value, Only Fixed Price Available
$0
Risk Neutral
$0
3%
8%
15%

18%

$10
$25
$50

Risk Neutral
Risk Neutral
Risk Neutral

$0
$0
$0

9%
35%
66%

18%
43%
67%

26%
47%
67%

29%
48%
67%

$0
$0

0.05
Risk Neutral

$0
$25

17%
26%

36%
31%

47%
36%

51%
37%

$25
$25

0.05
Risk Neutral

$0
$25

64%
46%

67%
50%

69%
52%

70%
53%

Table 14(a): Timing of Purchases
Dep. Var
Day to Go Dummies (0-2 excluded)
3 to 5 days
6 to 8 days
9 to 11 days
12 to 14 days
15 to 17 days
18 to 20 days
21 to 23 days
24 to 26 days
27 to 29 days
30 to 32 days
33 to 35 days
36 to 38 days
39 to 41 days
42 to 44 days
45 to 47 days
48 to 50 days
51 to 55 days
56 to 60 days
61 to 70 days
71 to 80 days
81 plus

Fixed Effects

Log(Buyer Distance)

0.0808***
(0.013)
0.248***
(0.014)
0.374***
(0.016)
0.439***
(0.017)
0.533***
(0.019)
0.612***
(0.020)
0.607***
(0.022)
0.636***
(0.023)
0.695***
(0.025)
0.734***
(0.026)
0.709***
(0.028)
0.763***
(0.030)
0.842***
(0.031)
0.760***
(0.033)
0.802***
(0.034)
0.744***
(0.036)
0.755***
(0.030)
0.743***
(0.033)
0.815***
(0.027)
0.815***
(0.028)
0.849***
(0.022)
Game-Section

Average Buyer Distance (km)

295

Within R 2

0.03

Observations
296,558
Notes: 3,821 observations with non-US buyers or missing zip code information are
excluded. Specification also includes the same controls as specifications in Table 4.
Standard errors in parentheses. ***,** and * denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels.

Table 14(b): Ticket Characteristics and the
Timing of Purchases
Dep. Var
Number of Seats (one seat excluded)
Two Seats
Four Seats
Six Seats
Three Seats
Five Seats
Face Value
Face Value ($)

Row Variables
First Row Dummy
Second Row Dummy
Number of Row

Number of Days Prior to Game
Ticket Purchased
1.346
(0.840)
2.557***
(0.900)
17.10***
(1.730)
-3.753***
(0.920)
-2.858***
1.1
-0.042***
(0.003)

1.627***
(0.340)
1.647***
(0.340)
-0.048***
(0.014)

Game Variables
Expected Attendance as Propn of Capacity
(function of team form)

27.57***
(1.080)

Observations

286,656

R2

0.06
Notes: specification also includes third-order polynomial in the distance the buyer
lives from the stadium of the home team, a dummy for buyers within 40 km and
home team fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses clustered on the game.
***,** and * denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.

Figure 1: Evolution of Listings, Sales Mechanisms, Sale Probabilities and Ticket Quality As Game Approaches
(a) Average Number of Listings Available

(b) Choice of Sales Mechanism on Market 2 By Days Prior to Game
35

250

100%
90%

30
80%

150

20
15

100

10

Mechanism Used

Stubhub Listings

25

Marketplace 2 Listings

200

70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%

50

10%

5

0%
0

0

0
10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

10

Marketplace 2

40

50

60

70

80

0.8

Face Value ($) and Average Row
Number (1=Front)

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Single Unit Auction

Hybrid Single Unit Auction

Multi-Unit Auction

Store Fixed Price

Personal Offer

Non-Store Fixed Price

50

0.2

45

0.18

40

0.16

35

0.14

30

0.12

25

0.1

20

0.08

15

0.06

10

0.04

5

0.02

0
0

0
0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

10

20

90

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Days to Prior to Game

Days Prior to Game When Listing Created
Single Unit Auction

Personal Fixed Price

Hybrid Auction

Other Mechanisms

90

(d) Available Ticket Quality Measured by Face Value and Row Number

(c) Proportion of Listings on Market 2 Resulting in Sales

Proportion of Listings Resulting in Sale

30

Days Prior to Game

Days Prior to Game
Stubhub

20

90

All Mechanisms

Face Value

Average Row Number

Propn Listings for Front Row Seats

Propn Listings for Second Row Seats

100

Propn of Listings Which Are First or
Second Row in Section

0

Figure 2(a): CDFs of Residuals from Regression of Log(Seller Price) on Ticket Characteristics and
Game-Section Fixed Effects Using Stubhub Data
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

CDF

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Residual
1-10 Days

11-20 Days

21-40 Days

41-60 Days

(b) CDF of Residuals from Regression of Log(Seller Transaction Price) on Ticket Characteristics and
Game-Section Fixed Effects Using Market 2 Data
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

CDF

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-1.5

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

Residual
1-10 Days

11-20 Days

21-40 Days

41-60 Days

1

1.5

Figure 3
Opportunity Costs Implied by Fixed Price Listing Models Using Control Function to Address the Endogeneity of
Own and Competitor Prices
(a) Relative Price Model
0.6

0.5

0.4

Density

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

-0.1
Opportunity Cost/Face Value
1-10 Days

11-20 Days

21-40 Days

41 Plus Days

41 Plus + 1 SE

41 Plus - 1 SE

(b) Log Price Model
1.2

1

0.8

Density

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

-0.2
Opportunity Cost/Face Value
1-10 Days

11-20 Days

21-40 Days

41 Plus Days

5

6

7

