                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          CONTRACTS AS REFERENCE POINTS - EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE

                                             Ernst Fehr
                                           Oliver D. Hart
                                          Christian Zehnder

                                        Working Paper 14501
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14501


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2008




We would like to thank Philippe Aghion, Bjorn Bartling, Tore Ellingsen, Ray Fisman, Bob Gibbons,
Steve Leider, Bentley MacLeod, Al Roth, Klaus Schmidt, and Birger Wernerfelt for helpful comments.
We would like to acknowledge financial support from the U.S. National Science Foundation through
the National Bureau for Economic Research and the Research Priority Program of the University of
Zurich on the "Foundations of Human Social Behavior." The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Ernst Fehr, Oliver D. Hart, and Christian Zehnder. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Contracts as Reference Points - Experimental Evidence
Ernst Fehr, Oliver D. Hart, and Christian Zehnder
NBER Working Paper No. 14501
November 2008
JEL No. D0,K0,C9

                                             ABSTRACT

In a recent paper, Hart and Moore (2008) introduce new behavioral assumptions that can explain long-term
contracts and important aspects of the employment relation. However, so far there exists no direct
evidence that supports these assumptions and, in particular, Hart and Moore's notion that contracts
provide reference points. In this paper, we examine experimentally the behavioral forces stipulated
in their theory. The evidence confirms the model's prediction that there is a tradeoff between rigidity
and flexibility in a trading environment with incomplete contracts and ex ante uncertainty about the
state of nature. Flexible contracts - which would dominate rigid contracts under standard assumptions
- cause a significant amount of shading on ex post performance, while under rigid contracts, much
less shading occurs. Thus, although rigid contracts rule out trading in some states of the world, parties
frequently implement them. While our results are broadly consistent with established behavioral concepts,
they cannot easily be explained by existing theories. The experiment appears to reveal a new behavioral
force: ex ante competition legitimizes the terms of a contract, and aggrievement and shading occur
mainly about outcomes within the contract.


Ernst Fehr                                          Christian Zehnder
Institute for Empirical Economics Research          Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Zurich                                University of Lausanne
Blumlisalpstrasse 10                                Quartier UNIL-Dorigny
8006 Zurich                                         Internef 612
Switzerland                                         CH-1015 Lausanne
efehr@iew.unizh.ch                                  Switzerland
                                                    zehnder@iew.uzh.ch
Oliver D. Hart
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 220
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ohart@harvard.edu
I.   Introduction

In a recent paper Hart and Moore (2008) develop a theory which provides a basis for long-
term contracts in the absence of noncontractible investments. The theory is also capable of
rationalizing the employment contract, which fixes wages in advance and leaves discretion to
the employer. The theory rests, however, on strong behavioral assumptions that lack direct
empirical support and deviate in important ways from the assumptions made in standard
contract theory. For this reason, and because of the potentially far-reaching implications of
the new theory, it seems particularly important to provide empirical support for the theory. In
this paper, we provide an experimental test of some of the key predictions of the theory of
Hart and Moore (2008). In doing so, we identify new behavioral forces that can neither be
explained by traditional contract theory nor by currently existing behavioral models. These
forces are, however, predicted by the Hart-Moore notion that competitively determined
contracts perform the function of reference points.

       It is useful to start with some background and motivation. According to the standard
incomplete contracts literature, trading parties find it difficult to write a long-term contract
because the future is hard to foresee. As time passes and uncertainty is resolved, the parties
can complete their contract through renegotiation. The typical model supposes symmetric
information and no wealth constraints, so that Coasian bargaining ensures ex post efficiency.
However, there is a hold-up problem: as a consequence of renegotiation, each party shares
some of the fruits of prior (non-contractible) investments with the other party. Anticipating
this, each party under-invests.

       While this approach has been useful for studying asset ownership (see Grossman and
Hart (1986), Hart and Moore (1990)), it has been less useful for studying the employment
relationship and the internal organization of large firms. In order to broaden the approach,
Hart and Moore (2008) develop a theory based on the idea that an ex ante contract, negotiated
under competitive conditions, shapes parties’ entitlements regarding ex post outcomes. A
party compares the ex post outcome to other outcomes permitted by the contract, and if he
does not get what he feels entitled to he is aggrieved and shades on non-contractible aspects
of performance. This yields a tradeoff between contractual rigidity and flexibility. A flexible
contract is good in that parties can adjust to the state of nature, but bad in that there is a lot of
shading. In contrast, a rigid contract is good in that there is little shading, but bad in that
parties cannot adjust to the state of nature.



                                                –1–
       Although some of the assumptions underlying the model are broadly consistent with
well-established behavioral concepts such as reference-dependent preferences (e.g.,
Kahnemann and Tversky (1979), Köszegi and Rabin (2006)), self-serving biases (e.g.,
Babcock and Loewenstein (1997)), and social preferences (e.g., Rabin (1993), Fehr and
Schmidt (1999)), there is not yet any empirical evidence that directly supports the idea that
contracts are reference points for trading relationships. It is the aim of this study to close this
gap with evidence from a controlled laboratory experiment.

       Our experiment is based on the payoff uncertainty model in Hart and Moore (2008). In
this model, a buyer and a seller trade one unit of a standard good, but there is uncertainty ex
ante about the buyer’s value and the seller’s cost. This uncertainty is resolved ex post, and
there is symmetric information throughout. However, value and cost are not verifiable, and so
state-contingent contracts cannot be written. The model assumes that ex post trade is
voluntary. Given that value and cost are uncertain, there may be no single price such that both
parties gain from trade at this price whenever value exceeds cost. Thus, to ensure trade, a
range of possible prices may be required in the ex ante contract. However, under the
assumptions of the model, this leads to ex post aggrievement and shading.

       In Hart and Moore (2008), the first best can be achieved if either value or cost is
certain, given that lump sum transfers are possible. In the experiment, we rule out lump-sum
transfers. A consequence is that the first-best result does not apply, and we can simplify
matters by assuming that only the seller’s cost is uncertain. We also make the simplifying
assumption that only the seller can shade.

       In the experiment buyers and sellers meet and contract at date 0. Trade of zero or one
unit of a good occurs at date 1. There are two states of nature: a good state, in which a seller’s
cost is low, and a bad state, in which cost is high. At date 0, the state of nature is uncertain.
Contracting involves two steps. In the first step, a buyer determines what type of contract he
wants: a flexible contract or a rigid contract. In a rigid contract, the price is fixed; a flexible
contract defines a price range out of which the buyer will pick the price after the state of
nature has been realized. In the second step, the contract is auctioned off to sellers. The
auction not only determines which of the sellers gets the contract but also defines the contract
terms (i.e., the fixed price in rigid contracts and the lower bound of the price range in flexible
contracts). The buyer and seller then move to date 1. They are now in a situation of bilateral
monopoly, and the state of nature is determined. Trade takes place only if the date 0 contract
allows for a mutually beneficial outcome in the realized state. Competition ensures that the


                                              –2–
price in the rigid contract is sufficiently low that trade is possible only in the good state, while
trade is always possible in the flexible contract. In the flexible contract, the buyer picks a
price above the seller’s cost from the price range. In the rigid contract, only the fixed price is
available. After trade occurs (if it is possible), the seller decides whether to shade. Shading
takes the form of costly sabotage: the seller spends resources to lower her quality from normal
to low. Shading has a small cost for the seller but greatly reduces the buyer’s value.

       Under the assumptions of the standard economic model (rationality, selfishness and
sub-game perfection), the prediction for this experiment is straightforward. Since shading is
costly, sellers should always provide normal quality, irrespective of the contract type and the
price. Buyers should anticipate the sellers’ behavior and therefore always choose the lowest
price permitted by their contract. The competitive auction used to assign contracts to sellers
should ensure that the fixed price in rigid contracts and the lower bound of the price range in
flexible contracts is at the competitive level. Accordingly, both contract types yield the same
outcome in the good state of nature, while only the flexible contract allows for trade in the
bad state. This implies that buyers should always choose the more profitable flexible contract.

       However, if the behavioral assumptions of Hart and Moore (2008) apply, the
prediction is different. The assumption that contracts are reference points does not affect the
prediction concerning the competitive auction outcomes. But if contracts define reference
points, the contract type may affect the sellers’ quality choice. Since rigid contracts pin down
outcomes, sellers get what they expect and should not be aggrieved. Accordingly, shading
should not occur in rigid contracts. In flexible contracts, in contrast, sellers may be aggrieved
if they get a lower price than they had hoped for. This may trigger shading. In response,
buyers may either increase the price in flexible contracts to avoid shading or accept the
possibility of getting low quality. Either way, the reference dependent behavior of sellers has
a negative impact on the buyers’ profit in flexible contracts. Thus, if the willingness to engage
in shading is strong enough, buyers may find switching to rigid contracts profitable.

       What are the results of the experiment? They are largely in line with Hart and Moore
(2008). The auction process indeed induces strong competition for contracts. Both the fixed
price in rigid contracts and the lower bound of the price range in flexible contracts converge
to the competitive level over time. However, despite the fact that, in principle, buyers have
the possibility to pay the same prices in both types of contracts when the good state is
realized, we observe that buyers pay significantly higher prices in flexible contracts.
Moreover, depending on the price paid, there is considerable seller shading in flexible


                                               –3–
contracts in the good state. In contrast, there is almost no shading in rigid contracts. Under the
parameter values of the experiment, the rigid contract is more profitable than the flexible
contract even though it precludes trade in the bad state. Furthermore, a substantial fraction of
buyers choose the rigid contract.

       It is worth noting that these results not only provide empirical support for the model of
Hart and Moore but they also constitute new insights into the behavioral economics of
fairness. To see this in more detail it is important to note that rigid contracts typically lead to
very low earnings for the seller and a very uneven distribution of the gains from trade. Thus,
by proposing a rigid contract, a buyer makes an unfair proposal so that one would expect the
sellers to shade a lot under rigid contracts. In fact, theories of inequity aversion (Fehr and
Schmidt 1999, Bolton and Ockenfels 2000) suggest that there should be considerable shading
in the rigid contract since the surplus is very unevenly distributed. Likewise intention-based
fairness theories (Rabin 1993, Charness and Rabin 2002, Dufwenberg and Kirchsteiger 2004,
Falk and Fischbacher 2006) also suggest that there should be shading in the rigid contract
since the choice of the rigid contract signals rather ungenerous intentions (the rigid contract
lowers the seller’s payoff in the good state and prevents trade in the bad state, and so it would
be generous of the buyer to choose the flexible contract). However, despite the very uneven
distribution of the gains from trade the sellers rarely shade in rigid contracts.

       Our evidence becomes even more puzzling – when viewed through the lens of
traditional theories of fairness – if we compare the low frequency of shading in rigid contracts
with what happens under flexible contracts. In the latter we observe a lot of shading even
though the sellers receive a higher share of the gains from trade than under rigid contracts.
This pattern of shading across contract types makes perfect sense, however, if competitively
determined contracts provide reference points which demand special normative status. We
thus believe that our experiment reveals a new behavioral force: ex ante competition
legitimizes the terms of the contract, and aggrievement occurs mainly about outcomes within
the contract and not about the contract itself.

       The paper is structured as follows: In section II, we describe the design of our
experiment and provide details on procedures. Section III contains the behavioral predictions.
We present our results in section IV and discuss them in section V. Section VI concludes.




                                                  –4–
II. Experimental Design

In this section we present our experimental design. Section II.A roughly summarizes the main
features of the implemented market. We then specify the details of the experimental game in
Section II.B, followed by a description of the experimental procedures in Section II.C.


II.A.   Overview

We implement an experimental market where buyers and sellers meet to trade. Each
transaction involves two dates. At date 0 the trading parties meet and conclude a contract. At
date 1 they trade zero or one unit of a product. Traders do not yet know the state of nature at
date 0. Accordingly, a flexible contract that allows adjustments to the realized state of nature
may be desirable. The market setup implies that supply exceeds demand. Accordingly, sellers
compete for contracts with buyers at date 0. The allocation of contracts takes place in two
steps: First, each buyer determines whether he wants to conclude a flexible or a rigid contract.
Then a competitive auction determines which seller gets the contract. All contracts are
incomplete, because quality cannot be perfectly specified, i.e. a contract cannot prevent a
seller from choosing low quality instead of normal quality. The uncertainty about the state of
nature is resolved at date 1. However, while the state of nature is observable to the trading
parties, it is not verifiable. This implies that state contingent contracts are infeasible. Trade
occurs only if the contract terms are such that both parties can benefit from trading in the
realized state of nature. Otherwise the parties walk away and realize an outside option. In case
of trade the buyer refines the terms within the limits of the contract and the seller determines
the quality.


II.B.   Experimental Game and Parameters

There are 28 market participants in each experimental session, 14 in the role of buyers and 14
in the role of sellers. In each of the 15 periods of the experiment sellers and buyers interact in
groups of two buyers and two sellers. To minimize the role of reputational considerations,
these interaction groups are randomly reconstituted in every period.

        In each period buyers and sellers have the possibility to trade a product. While every
buyer can buy at most one unit of the product per period, each seller can sell up to two units.
Since there is an equal number of buyers and sellers, this implies that the supply of the
product is twice as large as the demand. Thus, sellers face competition for buyers. When a
buyer purchases a unit of the product from a seller his payoff is given by his valuation for the
product v minus the price p. The payoff of the seller is calculated as the difference between
                                              –5–
the price p and the production cost c. While the buyer’s valuation for the product depends
only on the seller’s ex-post quality choice q, the seller’s production cost also depends on the
realized state of nature s. There are two states of the world: a good state (s = g), in which the
seller’s production costs are low and a bad state (s = b), in which the production costs are
high. The good state occurs with probability wg = 0.8.

The payoffs of buyers and sellers can be summarized as follows:

Buyer’s payoff:            πB = v(q) – p.

Seller’s payoff:           πS = p – c(q, s).

When trade takes place sellers can choose between two quality levels: normal quality (q = qn)
or low quality (q = ql). The production costs for low quality are slightly higher than the
production costs for normal quality: c(ql, s) > c(qn, s). The idea is that it is most convenient
for sellers if they simply do their job. They can, however, sabotage output (at the expense of a
small cost) if they want to.4 For each unit of the product which a seller cannot sell – either
because he lost the contract to the other seller in his trading group at date 0 or because his
contract does not allow for a mutually beneficial trade at date 1 – he realizes an outside option
of xS = 10. When a buyer is unable to trade a unit of the product at date 1, he also realizes an
outside option of xB = 10.

         Table I summarizes the cost and value parameters of the experiment:

                                                   Insert Table I here

Each period of the experiment is structured as follows:

Date 0: Contracting

    Step 1: Random formation of interaction groups

    At the beginning of every period the interaction groups consisting of two buyers and two
    sellers are randomly determined. The rematching of participants at the beginning of every
    period makes sure that reputation effects cannot play a substantial role in our experiment.

    Step 2: The buyer’s contract choice

    Before buyers’ contracts are auctioned off to sellers, each buyer has to decide which
    contract type t he wants to offer in this period. It is important to note that the buyer can
    choose only the type of the contract, while the actual terms of the contract are defined by

4
  An alternative interpretation is that there is a black-boxed incentive technology for good quality (e.g., the seller
is punished in case of shading).

                                                       –6–
    the sellers in a competitive auction process later on. Specifically, the buyer can choose
    between two types of contracts: rigid contracts (t = r) and flexible contracts (t = f). A rigid
    contract fixes the price at date 0. The level of the fixed price pr is endogenously
    determined in the subsequent contract auction. The auction is set up in such a way that the
    fixed price lies always in the following interval: pr ∈ [c(ql,g) + xs, m] = [35, 75], where m
    is the exogenously set maximum for the fixed price.5 A flexible contract, in contrast,
    specifies a price range [pl, ph] at date 0 out of which the buyer can choose the actual price
    at date 1. The upper bound of the price range is exogenously fixed and identical to the
    buyer’s valuation of the product when the seller provides normal quality: ph = v(qh) = 140.
    The lower bound of the price range is endogenously determined in the subsequent contract
    auction. The interval of potential lower price bounds is identical to the one for fixed prices
    in rigid contracts: pl ∈ [35, 75].

    Step 3: The sellers’ contract auction

    When both buyers in an interaction group have chosen their contract type, the two
    contracts are auctioned off to the sellers. The sequence of the auctions is randomly
    determined within each group. In case of a rigid contract, the auction directly determines
    the fixed price pr. In case of a flexible contract, the auction determines the lower bound of
    the price range pl. In both cases the auction starts off at 35 and then increases by one unit
    every half second. Each of the two sellers has a button that allows him to accept the
    contract at any time during the auction. Thus, the first seller who is willing to accept the
    displayed fixed price or the displayed lower price bound respectively gets the contract.
    The seller who loses the auction and does not get the contract realizes the outside option
    xS.

Date 1: Trade

    Step 4: Determination of the state of nature

    After the contracts have been auctioned off to the sellers, a computerized random device
    determines the state of nature for each contract independently. Both sellers and buyers
    observe the realized state for their contracts and are informed whether a mutually
    beneficial transaction can take place or not. Trade can always take place when the buyer

5
  The minimum of 35 for the fixed price ensures that the seller cannot make losses relative to his outside option
in the good state even if he provides low quality. This feature ensures that sellers do not refrain from choosing
low quality, just because they want to avoid losses (loss aversion). The maximum of 75 for the fixed price makes
sure that the price is always below the seller’s cost in the bad state of nature. This guarantees that trade cannot
occur if the bad state is realized. However, as we will see later on, in the experiment the upper bound was never
binding.

                                                      –7–
    has chosen a flexible contract, because the price range allows the buyer to choose prices
    that cover the seller’s cost in both states of nature. In the case of a rigid contract, in
    contrast, trade occurs only in the good state. In the bad state the fixed price is always
    lower than the seller’s cost, such that mutually beneficial transactions are not feasible. If
    trade does not occur, the buyer and the seller realize their outside options (xB and xS).

    Step 5: The buyer’s price choice

    Once the state has been revealed, the buyer can choose the actual trading price. In a rigid
    contract the buyer does not have a choice, since the price has already been fixed at date 0
    and cannot be changed. In a flexible contract, however, the buyer can determine his price.
    If the good state has been realized the buyer can choose any price p ∈ [pl, ph]. In the bad
    state the buyer has to make sure that the price is such that the seller cannot make losses,
    i.e., he must choose a price that satisfies p ∈ [c(ql,b) + xS, v(qh)] = [95, 140].6

    Step 6: The seller’s quality choice

    Sellers observe the price choice of their buyer and then determine their quality. In both
    types of contracts the sellers have the choice between normal (qn) and low (ql) quality.
    Remember choosing low instead of normal quality increases the seller’s cost by 5 units
    irrespective of the contract type and realized state of nature (see Table I).

    Step 7: Profit calculations

    After the quality choice of sellers all decisions have been made. Profits are calculated and
    displayed on subjects’ screens.

    Step 8: Market information for the buyers

    Subsequent to viewing the profit screen buyers also get some aggregated information
    about the market outcome. Specifically, they are informed about profits of buyers in both
    contract types averaged over all past periods. Furthermore, they learn how many buyers
    have chosen the rigid contract and the flexible contract in the current period.7

The screen with the market information for buyers ends the period. After this a new period
begins and the participants are randomly reassigned to a new interaction group.



6
  Again we do not allow prices to be such that the seller can make losses by choosing low quality, because we
want to avoid the possibility that people refrain from shading due to loss aversion (see also Footnote 5).
7
  The aim of the provision of this information was to make learning easier for buyers. Since our setup allows for
many possible constellations (two contract types, two states of nature, two quality levels, many prices), learning
from individual experience is rather difficult.

                                                     –8–
II.C.   Subjects, Payments and Procedures

All subjects were students of the University of Zurich or the Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology Zurich (ETH). Economists and psychologists were excluded from the subject
pool. We used the recruitment system ORSEE (Greiner 2004). Each subject participated in
only one session. Subjects were randomly subdivided into two groups before the start of the
experiment; some were assigned the role of buyers and others the role of sellers. The subjects’
roles remained fixed for the whole session. All interactions were anonymous, i.e., the subjects
did not know the personal identities of their trading partners.

        To make sure that subjects fully understood the procedures and the payoff
consequences of the available actions, each subject had to read a detailed set of instructions
before the session started. Participants then had to answer several questions about the feasible
actions and the payoff consequences of different actions. We started a session only after all
subjects had correctly answered all questions. The exchange rate between experimental
currency units (“points”) and real money was 15 Points = 1 Swiss Franc (~US $ 0.83, in
summer 2007).

        In order to make the sellers familiar with the auction procedure we implemented two
trial auctions – one with a rigid contract and one with a flexible contract – before we started
the actual experiment. In the trial phase each seller had his own auction, i.e., they did not
compete with another seller and no money could be earned.

        The experiment was programmed and conducted with z-Tree (Fischbacher 2007). We
had 28 subjects (14 buyers and 14 sellers) in four of our five sessions and – due to no-shows –
24 subjects (12 buyers and 12 sellers) in the remaining session. This yields a total number of
136 participants in the experiment. A session lasted approximately two hours and subjects
earned on average 49 Swiss Francs (CHF 49 ~ US $ 41, in summer 2007).


III. Behavioral Predictions

In this section we derive the predictions for our experiment and discuss some design features.

III.A. Predictions under Pure Self-Interest

If we assume common knowledge of rationality and money-maximizing behavior, the
predictions for this experiment are straightforward. Since shading on performance is costly,
purely selfish sellers provide normal quality irrespective of the realized price in both types of
contracts. Buyers anticipate sellers’ behavior and choose the lowest price allowed by the


                                              –9–
contract. In the contract auctions trade rivalry between sellers implies that the fixed price in
rigid contracts, respectively the lower price bound in flexible contracts, ends up at the
competitive level, i.e. pr = 35 and pl = 35.8 Accordingly, when buyers choose their contract
types they anticipate the following outcomes: in the good state of nature both contract types
deliver the same outcome (πB = v(qn) – p = 140 – 35 = 105), but in the bad state of nature the
flexible contract is more attractive, because it allows for trade (πB = v(qn) – p = 140 – 95 =
45), while the rigid contract leads to the realization of the outside-option (πB = xB = 10). This
implies that buyers always choose the flexible contract. We summarize the prediction of the
standard economic model as the

Standard Hypothesis:

a) Market forces imply that the fixed price in rigid contracts and the lower bound of the price
    range in flexible contracts end up at the competitive level, i.e., pr = pl =35.
b) Sellers never choose low quality irrespective of the contract type and price level. Buyers
    always choose the lowest price available in flexible contracts.
c) Buyer’s profits are higher in flexible contracts than in rigid contracts. Therefore, buyers
    prefer flexible contracts.


III.B. Predictions if Contracts are Reference Points

According to Hart and Moore (2008), an ex ante contract, negotiated under competitive
conditions, shapes parties’ entitlements regarding ex post outcomes. In Hart and Moore
(2008), a party compares the ex post outcome to the best outcome permitted by the contract,
and if he does not get what he feels entitled to he is aggrieved and shades on non-contractible
aspects of performance. In the Appendix we extend Hart and Moore (2008) to allow for the
case where parties may feel entitled to an outcome other than the best outcome. The model’s
predictions are broadly similar to Hart and Moore (2008). Rigid contracts pin down outcomes,
sellers get what they expect, and so sellers are not aggrieved. Accordingly, shading should not
occur in rigid contracts. However, in a flexible contract, the seller may be aggrieved and
shade if he gets a lower price than he had hoped for. We show that the heterogeneity in seller
entitlements implies that the frequency of shading is decreasing in price. Given this the buyer
will either increase the price in flexible contracts to avoid shading or accept the possibility of
getting low quality. Thus, although the flexible contract guarantees trade in both states, the

8
  Remember: Since p = 35 corresponds to p = c(ql,g) + xS and the seller must offer at least p = c(ql,b) + xS = 95 in
the bad state of nature, a seller can never be worse off if he accepts a contract than if he accepts his outside
option.

                                                      – 10 –
reference dependent behavior of sellers has a negative impact on the buyers’ profit. Hence
flexible contracts may be less profitable than rigid contracts. Reference dependent behavior
does not, however, change the auction outcome: rivalry between sellers still ensures that the
lower bound of the price range in flexible contracts, and the fixed price in rigid contracts, is
35. (Recall that we do not allow the price to fall below 35.)

These considerations lead to the

Reference Point Hypothesis:

a) Market forces imply that the fixed price in rigid contracts and the lower bound of the price
    range in flexible contracts end up at the competitive level, i.e., pr = pl =35.
b) In rigid contracts sellers never choose low quality irrespective of the price level. In
    flexible contracts sellers’ quality provision is price dependent. Heterogeneity in seller
    entitlements implies that the frequency of shading is decreasing in the price. Given the
    price dependence of quality, buyers may not choose the lowest price available in flexible
    contracts.
c) Buyer’s profits in flexible contracts are lower than predicted by the standard model. If the
    impact of the reference dependent preferences is strong, buyers may even make higher
    profits in rigid contracts than in flexible contracts.


III. C. Discussion of Design Features

It is important to emphasize that the aim of this paper in not to determine whether people
succeed in choosing the optimal contract structure. We are interested rather in the more
fundamental question of whether the underlying behavioral assumptions of the Hart-Moore
model turn out to be of empirical relevance. To study this question in a clean and controlled
way, we have intentionally abstracted from many theoretically relevant features of the model.
In this section we discuss to what extent the simplifications and specific decision structures in
our experimental setup affect our predictions.

        While Hart and Moore (2008) assume that shading opportunities of buyers and seller
are symmetric, we simplify matters by restricting shading to sellers. For the theoretical
investigation of optimal contracts this simplification would have serious consequences,
because it implies that a flexible contract can always achieve the first best if the seller is given
the right to choose price.9 In other words, the trade-off between contractual flexibility and

9
 In equilibrium buyers would choose the flexible contract, sellers would accept the competitive lower price
bound at date 0, choose a price ex post equal to the buyers’ valuation (p = v(qn)), and provide normal quality (q =

                                                     – 11 –
rigidity would be destroyed.10 However, since optimality of contracts is not the focus of this
study, we avoid this problem by restricting the set of feasible contracts. Specifically, we
exclude side payments and consider only structures in which the buyer decides about the
contract type and chooses the ex-post price. Furthermore, since we aim at examining whether
and how the contract type affects the sellers’ performance choice, we maximize the contrast
between contractual rigidity and flexibility by implementing extreme forms of contracts. In
the rigid contract the price is entirely fixed. The flexible contract, in contrast, determines only
the lower bound of the price range and allows for any reasonable price above this limit (i.e.,
the upper bound is exogenously fixed at the buyers’ maximal willingness to pay: ph = v(qn)).11
Studying these extreme cases gives us the best chance to illustrate the trade-off between
rigidity and flexibility in contracts.

         Another important simplification and limitation is that we have not allowed the parties
to write informal state-contingent contracts. For example, the buyer and seller could agree
that price will depend on the seller’s realized cost, which is observed by both parties. Hart and
Moore (2008) discuss informal contracts of this kind. They argue that such contracts may be
problematic in situations where there is a little bit of asymmetric information and the parties
exhibit self-serving biases. Under these conditions, each party may be able to convince
himself that the state is favorable to him. This is likely to lead to aggrievement and shading,
as in the flexible contracts studied in this paper. Obviously, a considerably more complicated
experiment would be required to test the role of informal state-contingent contracts in the
presence of asymmetric information and self-serving biases. We leave this for future work.

         Hart and Moore (2008) assume that trading parties can choose the amount of shading
in a continuous way and that there is no upper bound on shading. For the sake of simplicity
we implement shading as a binary choice. While a more continuous action space would
change details of our predictions, it would not affect our main hypothesis that price dependent
shading should occur only in flexible contracts. In addition, Hart and Moore (2008) assume
that trading parties are indifferent between perfunctory and consummate performance, i.e.,
shading is neither costly nor beneficial. However, they emphasize that assuming indifference


qn). Redistribution of surplus from sellers to buyers (because of competition) could be achieved through lump
sum payments conditional on winning the contract auction.
10
   Hart and Moore (2008, p. 34/35) discuss how the predictions of the model can be rescued even if buyers
cannot engage in shading.
11
   Hart and Moore (2008) predict that buyers would prefer the flexible contract to be less extreme. Given the
decision structure and the restriction on price setting in our environment, the optimal flexible contract would set
the upper bound at c(ql, b) + xs. This would still allow for trade in the bad state of nature, but it would eliminate
the room for aggrievement and shading in the bad state of nature.

                                                      – 12 –
is just a technically convenient way to capture the idea that the cost of providing low quality
is not substantially higher or lower than the cost of providing normal quality. With regard to
the aim of our paper, implementing strict indifference between shading and normal
performance in the experiment would have been problematic. The reason is that indifference
would not rule out equilibrium shading under standard economic assumptions in our setup. In
order to make sure that shading cannot be explained if people are motivated by pure self-
interest, we implemented costly shading. However, since the increase in the sellers’ costs is
low (c(ql, s) – v(qn ,s) = 5) relative to the damage which shading imposes on the buyer (v(qn) –
v(ql) = 40), our setup is still in line with the spirit of the model.12

         It is obvious that the probabilities with which the two states of nature occur are
decisive for the relative attractiveness of rigid and flexible contracts. Since we intend to study
the impact of contract types on behavior, we need a sufficient number of observations for
flexible and rigid contracts. The rigid contract is interesting only if the disadvantage due to
the non-existence of trade in the bad state of nature is not too large. We therefore decided that
the good state of nature should occur with a high probability (wg = 0.8).13


IV. Results

In this section we present and discuss our results. The analysis of our data at the aggregate
level in Section IV.A reveals that the outcomes of our experiment largely confirm the
reference point hypothesis and contradict the predictions of the standard economic theory. We
observe that there are significant differences in average prices and quality levels between rigid
and flexible contracts in the good state of nature. In Section IV.B we demonstrate how these
findings can be explained in light of the different price dependence of sellers’ performance
choices across the two contract types. Sections IV.C and IV.D illustrate that the predictions of
the reference point theory are also relevant for individual behavior of sellers and buyer.



12
   Alternatively we could also have chosen to make the provision of low quality slightly less costly than the
provision of normal quality. However, the case of costly shading probably leads to stronger effects. It seems
more likely that aggrievement triggers costly shading than that the absence of aggrievement causes people to
engage in costly voluntary cooperation. The reason is that aggrievement certainly causes a negative sentiment,
while the absence of aggrievement may be completely neutral and may not imply the positive sentiment
necessary to induce costly cooperation. Of course, this remains an empirical question that should be addressed in
future work.
13
   Another way to make sure that we have a sufficient number of observations in both contract types would have
been to assign contract types exogenously. However, this would have changed the spirit of the experiment in a
fundamental way. From the perspective of the seller, it certainly makes a big difference whether the buyer
himself chooses to limit his ability to adjust the price ex-post or whether this is imposed by the experimenter (see
the discussion in Section V).

                                                      – 13 –
IV.A. Aggregate Findings

We find that our data are largely in line with all three parts of the reference point hypothesis
stated at the end of Section III. Table II and Figure I summarize our main results. Table II
presents averages of prices, quality choices, auction outcomes, profits and contract choices for
rigid and flexible contracts in the good and bad state of nature. Figure I displays the
development of prices and quality choices over time.

                                           Insert Table II here


IV.A.1. Auction Outcomes in Rigid and Flexible Contracts

We start with the competition part of the reference point hypothesis. Figure I illustrates the
power of competition in the auction phase of our experiment. The fixed price in rigid
contracts and the lower price bound in flexible contracts converge to the competitive price of
35 over time. In the final period the auctions deliver an average fixed price of 35.7 and an
average lower bound of 35.2. Because auction outcomes are somewhat higher in the early
period of the experiment the overall averages of both the fixed price in rigid contracts and the
lower bound of the price range in flexible contracts are slightly above the predicted level of
35. Both averages turn out to be about 40 (see Table II). As expected a non-parametric
signed-rank test using session averages as observations confirms that the auction outcomes for
rigid contracts and flexible contracts are not significantly different.14

                                           Insert Figure I here


IV.A.2. Prices and Quality in Rigid and Flexible Contracts

The fact that auction outcomes do not differ across contract types implies that, in principle,
the buyers would have the possibility to pay the same prices in both types of contracts when
the good state of nature is realized. However, if the reference point hypothesis is correct,
buyers in flexible contracts may have incentives to increase their prices above the lower price
bound, because low prices may aggrieve sellers and lead to shading. This is in fact what we
observe. In 75 percent of the flexible contracts in which the good state has been realized,
buyers pay a price which is strictly above the lower bound of the price range determined in
the auction. Although the lower price bound is only about 40 on average, the average price
level is 51 (see Table II). This difference between the actual price paid by the buyer and the
lower bound of the price range is very stable and does not disappear over time (see Figure I).
14
  The session averages for the fixed price in rigid contracts are: 37.3, 40.7, 40.5, 41.2 and 43.3. The session
averages for the lower bound of the price range in flexible contracts are: 37.5, 41.6, 40.5, 38.7 and 43.4.

                                                   – 14 –
In rigid contracts, in contrast, the final price at date 1 is equal to the fixed price which has
been determined in the auction at date 0. We have already shown above that these prices are
around 40 on average and converge to the competitive level of 35 over time.15 This implies
that in the good state buyers pay on average substantially higher prices in flexible contracts
than in rigid contracts. A non-parametric signed rank test confirms that the price difference
between rigid and flexible contracts is statistically significant (p-value = 0.031 (one-sided)).16

         Although prices are close to the competitive level, shading is almost absent in rigid
contracts. Sellers provide normal quality in 94 percent of the cases in which the good state is
realized. In flexible contracts, however, the higher prices are not always sufficient to prohibit
sellers from shading. In the good state sellers provide normal quality in only 75 percent of the
cases (see Table II). The difference in the frequency of shading between the two contract
types is statistically significant (non-parametric signed rank test, p-value = 0.031 (one-sided))
and very stable over time (see Figure I).17


IV.A.3. Payoffs and Contract Choice

The differences in price and quality levels have important implications for payoffs of buyers
and sellers in the good state of nature. Since prices are higher and quality is lower in flexible
contracts, buyers earn, on average, considerably lower payoffs in flexible contracts (78.9)
than in rigid contracts (96.8). The opposite is true for sellers. Although the higher frequency
of shading increases sellers’ costs in flexible contracts, the price difference is large enough to
offset this. While the average payoff of sellers in flexible contracts is 29.8, their payoff in
rigid contracts is 20.4 (see Table II). Both payoff differences are highly significant according
to non-parametric signed rank tests (Sellers: p-value = 0.031 (one-sided), Buyers: p-value =
0.031 (one-sided)).

         In the bad state of nature rigid contracts do not allow for trade. Accordingly, buyers
and sellers realize their outside-option. In flexible contracts trade takes place and buyers must
offer them at least a price of 95. We observe that buyers pay on average a price of 98.4 (see
Table II). Thus, while average prices are substantially higher than the lower price bound in
the good state, prices in the bad state are very close to the minimal price buyers can offer. In

15
   The “auction outcome” in Table II is the average of the fixed prices in all rigid contracts . The “price” in Table
II and Figure I, in contrast, is the average of the fixed prices in all rigid contracts in which trade occurred.
However, since the state of nature is randomly determined, this does not cause a systematic difference.
16
   The session averages for the price in rigid contracts are: 37.3, 40.8, 40.8, 41.0 and 43.4. The session averages
for the price in flexible contracts are: 51.7, 49.7, 49.0, 50.2 and 54.0.
17
   In the good state the session level frequencies of high quality in rigid contracts are 89%, 97%, 95%, 91% and
96%. The corresponding numbers for flexible contracts are 78%, 76%, 79%, 67% and 75%.

                                                      – 15 –
response shading is slightly more frequent in the bad state than in the good state. However, a
non-parametric signed rank test shows that this difference is not statistically significant.18 We
will later investigate whether the price setting strategies of buyers in flexible contracts reflect
profit-maximizing behavior. Since outside options generate only a payoff of 10, sellers and
buyers are better off with a flexible contract in the bad state of nature. Average payoffs are
29.7 for buyers and 16.9 for sellers, respectively.

         We have established that buyers indeed face a trade-off between rigidity and
flexibility. Given the stronger tendency for shading in flexible contracts, rigid contracts are
more attractive in the good state of nature. However, since fixed prices prohibit trade when
costs are high, having a flexible contract is of advantage in the bad state of nature. But which
contract is more profitable in total? It turns out that overall the need to pay higher prices and
the higher frequency of shading are strong enough to render flexible contracts less profitable
for buyers than rigid contracts. While the average buyer payoff is 77.9 in rigid contracts, it is
only 68.9 in flexible contracts. This difference is statistically significant (non-parametric
signed rank, p-value = 0.031 (one-sided)).19 Sellers, in contrast, are better off in flexible
contracts. Average seller payoffs in rigid contracts are 18.1, compared to 27.9 in flexible
contracts. Also this difference is statistically significant (non-parametric signed rank, p-value
= 0.031 (one-sided)).20 The finding that rigid contracts yield higher profits for buyers than
flexible contracts is, of course, highly dependent on the choice of parameters. It is certainly
easy to find other parameter constellations which yield the opposite results (e.g., higher
probability for bad state, weaker impact of shading on buyer’s value, etc.). However, our
findings not only illustrates that a trade-off between contractual flexibility and rigidity exists,
but also that there are parameters under which this trade-off has strong consequences for
economic outcomes.

         In contrast to the standard prediction buyers have chosen rigid contracts in 50 percent
of the cases (see Table II). If we look at the development over time, we observe that the share
of rigid contracts has an upward tendency. It starts off at 38 percent in period 1 and ends up at




18
   In the bad state of nature the session level frequencies of high quality in flexible contracts are 70%, 46%, 83%,
58% and 83%.
19
   The session averages for buyer payoffs in rigid contracts are: 80.0, 80.1, 78.8, 75.0 and 75.3. The session
averages for buyer payoffs in flexible contracts are: 71.0, 69.9, 71.4, 65.3 and 67.2.
20
   The session averages for buyer payoffs in rigid contracts are: 15.4, 18.4, 18.3, 18.1 and 20.1. The session
averages for buyer payoffs in flexible contracts are: 28.1, 25.8, 25.7, 25.8 and 29.8.

                                                      – 16 –
55 percent in period 15. An OLS regression of the fraction of rigid contracts on periods
indicates that this positive time trend is statistically significant.21


IV.B. Sellers’ Quality Choice: Contract-Dependent Price-Quality Relationships

The discussion of Table II and Figure I has shown that in the aggregate our findings are
supportive for the reference point hypothesis. Next, we analyze whether the underlying
behavioral patterns are also in line with the assumption that contracts provide reference points
for trading relationships. We start with sellers’ performance choices. Figure II displays the
relative frequency of normal quality conditional on the price paid by the buyer for each
contract type and both states of nature. In addition, the figure also shows the relative
frequency with which each price level is chosen by buyers. Notice that prices on the
horizontal axis are rounded to the nearest multiple of ten. The figure provides strong support
for the seller behavior predicted by the reference point hypothesis. In rigid contracts sellers
almost always choose normal quality even if prices are very close to the competitive level.
There is no noteworthy correlation between prices and the frequency of normal quality.22 For
flexible contracts, in contrast, the figure suggests a strong positive correlation between prices
and the willingness to provide normal quality in both states of the world. If prices are close to
the competitive level in the good state of nature, normal quality is chosen in less than 60
percent of the contracts. The frequency of normal quality is clearly increasing in price, but in
order to reach the same average quality as observed in rigid contracts, buyers must raise their
price to a level of at least 75. In the bad state of nature prices close to the lowest possible level
also trigger a lot of shading. At prices between 95 and 104 sellers provide normal quality in
less than 70 percent of the contracts. Also in the bad state substantial price increases are
necessary to reach a high quality level on average.

                                                Insert Figure II here

        We provide statistical backup for our observations on price dependence of quality with
a regression analysis in Table III. In the first column of the table we investigate the good state
of nature. We regress an indicator variable for choosing normal quality on price increments,
an indicator variable for flexible contracts, and the interaction term of the two. We define
price increments as the difference between the actual price and the competitive price of 35.

21
   The regression uses one observation per period and session. The dependent variable is the fraction of rigid
contracts, the explanatory variable is period. The estimated coefficients are as follows: Constant = 0.42, p-value
< 0.001; Period = 0.010, p-value = 0.002 (p-values are based on robust standard errors).
22
   The low frequency of normal quality when prices are around 60 should be ignored, because it is based on very
small number of outliers (see price distribution in Figure II).

                                                     – 17 –
Using price increments instead of prices allows us to interpret the constant as the frequency
with which sellers provide high quality when buyers offers the competitive price of 35 in rigid
contracts. The constant of 0.94 therefore reflects that prices close to the competitive level do
not trigger much shading in rigid contracts. Furthermore, the coefficient of price increments is
close to zero and insignificant indicating that sellers’ quality choices in rigid contracts do not
depend on prices in a statistically significant way. The situation is very different in flexible
contracts. The significantly negative coefficient of the dummy for flexible contracts shows
that if prices are at the competitive level sellers are much more likely to choose low quality in
flexible contracts than in rigid contracts (–0.34, p-value < 0.01). The regression also confirms
the statistical significance of the positive impact of higher price increments on sellers’ quality
choices in flexible contracts (F-Test: price increment + price incr. x flex. Contr. = 0, p-value <
0.01).23 In column (2) we show that a probit estimation (marginal effects reported) using the
same set of variables yields results similar to the ones of the linear probability model used in
column (1). Column (3) investigates the bad state of nature. We regress the indicator variable
for choosing normal quality on price increments (now defined as the difference between price
and the lowest possible price of 95). The constant indicates that the frequency of normal
quality is only 0.66 when buyers pay the lowest possible price in the bad state of nature. In
addition, the significant coefficient confirms that there is also a significant impact of price
increments on quality in the bad state of nature. Column (4) documents that a probit
estimation yields similar results (marginal effects reported).

                                                Insert Table III here


IV.C. Individual Seller Behavior: Quality Choice Within and Across Contracts

The analysis of sellers’ behavior in Figure II and Table III is based on pooled data from all
sellers in the experiment. However, the reference point hypothesis relies on behavioral
assumptions about preferences and makes specific predictions regarding individual behavior
of sellers in rigid and flexible contracts. Since contract assignment is endogenous in the
experiment, our analysis hitherto does not provide evidence that our aggregate findings are
the consequence of different behavior of the same sellers in different types of contracts. It
could also be that the aggregate effects are the consequence of self-selection of distinct seller


23
   Since the lower bound of the price range is not always equal to the competitive price, one might suspect that
the realized lower bound could be relevant for the seller’s quality choice. For example, the seller could evaluate
the generosity of the price paid by the buyer relative to the lower bound of the available price range. However, a
regression of quality on price increments and the lower bound of the price range reveals that this does not seem
to be the case. The coefficient for the lower bound of the price range is close to zero and not significant.

                                                     – 18 –
groups into different contract types. For example, the result that shading is more frequent in
flexible contracts than in rigid contracts would also be observed if those sellers who self-
select into flexible contracts are systematically more likely to provide low quality than those
sellers who self-select into rigid contracts. In the following we dig deeper and examine
whether sellers accept both types of contracts, and if so, how their behavior differs across
contract types.

       In Figure III we show the distribution of rigid and flexible contracts over individual
sellers in the experiment. We observe that most sellers do not self-select into a specific type
of contract, i.e., most sellers conclude several rigid as well as several flexible contracts.
Specifically, the figure reveals that every seller has experienced each contract type at least
once and for most sellers there are multiple observations for each contract type (84 percent of
sellers have experienced at least four contracts of each type). Furthermore, even if we
consider only contracts in which trade actually occurred, we still have at least one observation
for each seller and contract type. This implies that each seller has made at least one quality
decision in each type of contract, such that we can compare sellers’ performance choices
across contract types.

                                        Insert Figure III here

       In Table IV we analyze individual behavior in detail. According to the reference point
hypothesis sellers may shade on performance in flexible contracts, but never in rigid
contracts. We find that 51 of the 68 sellers in our experiment exhibit a behavioral pattern
which is consistent with this prediction. 27 of these 51 sellers do not provide low quality in
either contract type (first column), while the other 24 sellers provide low quality in some of
their flexible contracts (second column). Notice: while the behavior of sellers who do not
shade on performance at all can also be explained by standard economic theory (see the
standard prediction in section III.A), this behavior does not contradict the reference point
hypothesis. If a seller happens to receive offers above his threshold price whenever he
concludes a flexible contract, it is plausible that he never shades on performance. Since sellers
do not indicate their threshold price in our experiment, we cannot compare the threshold
prices of sellers across differently behaving groups. However, Table IV shows that sellers
who never provide low quality have concluded a lower number of flexible contracts and
receive, on average, higher price offers in these contracts (especially in the good state of
nature). These two factors make it less likely that a seller with a given intensity of reference
dependence engages in shading.


                                             – 19 –
           The remaining 17 sellers in our experiment exhibit behavior which is not consistent
with the reference point hypothesis, i.e., they provide at least once low quality in a rigid
contract (see third and fourth column in Table IV). A closer look reveals that 7 of these sellers
show behavioral patterns which are “almost in line” with the prediction of the reference point
hypothesis: They provide exactly once low quality in a rigid contract and they shade more
often in flexible contracts than in rigid contracts, both in absolute and relative terms. Only 10
of our 68 sellers make decisions which are clearly not in line with the reference point
hypothesis.

           In addition, the reference point hypothesis also suggest a positive (or zero) correlation
of prices and quality in flexible contracts for each individual seller. However, the limited
number of observations per individual combined with the fact that average prices (and
therewith possibly also threshold prices) change over time make this a rather tough test.
Nevertheless, for the good state of nature we observe positive correlations of prices and
quality for 18 of the 24 subjects who exclusively shade in flexible contracts (column 2 of
Table IV). In 7 of these 18 cases the correlation is statistically significant at the 10% level.
The remaining 6 sellers have either never provided low quality in the good state (2 cases) or
the correlation is insignificantly negative. If we do the same analysis for the 7 sellers whose
quality choices are “almost in line” with the reference point hypothesis (column 3 of Table
IV) we find a positive correlation of prices and quality for each individual. In 5 cases the
correlation is significant at the 10% level.24

                                                   Insert Table IV here


IV.D. Individual Buyer Behavior: Price Setting and Contract Choice

Our analysis has shown that seller behavior is by and large in line with the reference point
hypothesis. It is interesting to examine how buyers react to the behavioral patterns of sellers
when they choose a contract type and set prices in flexible contracts. From Table II we know
that overall buyers choose the rigid contract in 50 percent of the cases. Although we have
shown that there is a positive time trend (see the regression results in Footnote 21), it may
appear rather astonishing that the significantly higher average payoffs have not motivated
more buyers to choose the rigid contract. However, since the higher average payoff in rigid
contracts comes with a higher variance (see the payoffs per state in Table II) buyers’ risk
aversion (or loss aversion) may play an important role for this finding. The buyers may


24
     Given the even smaller number of observations, a similar analysis is not feasible for the bad state of nature.

                                                        – 20 –
perceive the possibility to end-up with the no-trade outcome of rigid contracts as too risky.
Our post-experimental questionnaires confirm this presumption. About 50 percent of buyers
indicate that they didn’t want to take the chance of getting only the outside option of 10 in
case of the realization of the bad state and therefore went for flexible contracts.

       A second important issue regarding the buyers’ behavior is their response to the price
dependence of quality in flexible contracts. Are buyers able to figure out the profit-
maximizing price or do they lose money in flexible contracts, because they fail to adopt the
price properly? Figure IV displays average buyer profits conditional on the realized price for
both contract types and both states of nature. Notice that prices are rounded to the nearest
multiple of ten. In addition, the figure also displays the relative frequency with which each
price has been realized. In flexible contracts in which the good state has been realized, it
makes apparently most sense to set a price between 35 and 54. These prices yield average
payoffs between 83 and 84 to buyers. These most profitable prices are chosen in 68 percent of
the contracts. Buyers who set prices between 55 and 64 still get an average payoff of 77. This
happened in 16 percent of the contracts. Increasing prices above 65 has strongly negative
consequences for average payoffs. However, buyers picked such high prices in only 16
percent of the contracts, implying that buyers are rather successful in finding the most
profitable price range. The same is true for flexible contracts in which the bad state of nature
has been realized. In this case Figure IV shows that the most profitable prices are between 95
and 104. These prices result in average payoffs of about 30. Buyers choose prices in this
range in 90 percent of the cases. In another 7 percent of contracts buyers pick prices in the
range from 105 to 115. These prices yield only slightly lower average payoffs of 28. Higher
prices, which yield much lower payoffs, are chosen only in 3 percent of the contracts. In rigid
contracts buyers cannot influence the price. Since quality is not price dependent in rigid
contracts, average profits of buyers are highest when prices are low.

                                         Insert Figure IV here

       While we find that the majority of buyers choose prices close to the profit-maximizing
level, there is still some room for improvement. However, even if buyers had chosen optimal
prices in every flexible contract average payoffs would still be below average payoffs of rigid
contracts: 0.8 x 84 + 0.2 x 30 = 73.2 < 77.9 (see Table II). This illustrates that in our setup the
impact of sellers’ reference dependence is strong enough to change the optimal structure of
the contract relative to the standard economic model.




                                              – 21 –
V. Discussion

Part of our interpretation of the data relies on the observation that many people seem to be
willing to punish their trading partners for inappropriate behavior (in our case the payment of
low prices in flexible contracts), even if this is costly for them and yields no material gain.
Since such behavior has been extensively studied in theoretical and empirical work on social
preferences, it is important to understand how our study relates to this literature.

       Theories of social preferences assume that people are not solely motivated by their
material self-interest but also take social considerations, especially fairness concerns, into
account. There are two main classes of fairness theories: theories based on inequity aversion
and reciprocity models. Models of inequity aversion (Fehr and Schmidt 1999, Bolton and
Ockenfels 2000) suppose that people dislike inequitable outcomes and are therefore willing to
forgo material payoff in order to prevent these outcomes from occurring. Despite their
simplicity models of inequity aversion can explain many experimental results which seem
puzzling from the perspective of the standard self-interest model (see e.g., Fehr and Schmidt
2002). Most important for our purpose is the evidence from the ultimatum game. In the
ultimatum game the first mover (proposer) has to decide how to divide a certain amount of
money between himself and the second mover (responder). The responder can either accept or
reject the suggested division of pie. In case of acceptance each party receives the share
suggested by the proposer, in case of rejection both parties get zero. The typical result in this
experiment is that proposers offer a considerable share of the pie because they rightly fear that
responders reject low amounts (see, e.g., Güth et al. 1982, Camerer and Thaler 1995). These
findings are relevant for our study because they are similar to what we observe in flexible
contracts, where buyers have to offer a high price in order to deter sellers from shading on
performance. Since paying low prices generates unequal payoffs of buyers and sellers in our
setup, inequity aversion implies that sellers should shade on performance when buyers pay
low prices, because the provision of low quality reduces the payoff inequality. However,
while inequity aversion is in line with the rejection of low offers in ultimatum games and the
price dependent shading in flexible contracts, it cannot explain why sellers almost never
provide low quality in rigid contracts. The reason is that in models of inequity aversion the
allocation of final payoffs alone determines the perceived unfairness of an outcome.
Accordingly, these models predict the same price dependency of quality in both types of




                                              – 22 –
contracts. As prices are close to the competitive level in rigid contracts, these models predict a
high frequency of shading.25

        The more sophisticated reciprocity models take into account that the same outcome
may trigger different fairness perceptions depending on how the outcome came about.
Specifically, these models assume that the evaluation of an outcome depends not only on the
realized allocation of payoffs but also on people’s belief about the intentions of their trading
partner (Rabin 1993, Dufwenberg and Kirchsteiger 2004, Charness and Rabin 2004, Falk and
Fischbacher 2006). The intuition is that people perceive an unfavorable outcome as more
unfair if another player intentionally chooses the outcome than if the payoff distribution is
beyond the other player’s control. The main difference between the two contract types in our
experiment is that rigid contracts restrict the buyer’s choice set to one predetermined outcome
which is usually not very favorable to the seller, while flexible contracts enable the buyer to
choose between many possible outcomes, including ones which are very attractive to the
seller. If we translate this into the framework of the ultimatum game, the relevant comparison
would be between one setup where the proposer is forced to offer a small fraction of the pie
and a setup where the proposer can choose between offering small and large fractions of the
pie. Falk et al. (2003) implement two treatments in an ultimatum game experiment which
make such a comparison possible. In one of their treatments the proposer, who is endowed
with 10 points, can choose between the equal split (5 points to each player) and an unequal
allocation in which the proposer gets 8 points while the responder is left with 2 points. In
another treatment the proposer has no choice but to offer the unequal allocation (8 for himself
and 2 for the responder). The evidence shows that the rejection rate for the unequal allocation
strongly depends on whether the equal split is available or not. When the proposer could have
chosen the equal split, the unequal offer is rejected in roughly 44 percent of the cases. When
the unequal allocation was the only alternative available to the proposer, the rejection
frequency was only 18 percent.26 While these findings are not in line with inequity aversion,
they can be explained by reciprocity. If the proposer chooses the unequal allocation when the
equal split would have been available, it is clear that the proposer intentionally created an

25
   Using the models of inequity aversion to derive full-fledged predictions for our experiment is not trivial. One
problem is that the models do not specify precisely how the reference group relative to which individuals
evaluate their payoffs is determined (e.g., sellers could compare their payoff to the (expected) payoff of both
buyers and the other seller in their group or only to the buyer and the other seller involved in the trade or even
only to their direct trading partner). However, while different assumptions with respect to the reference group
may influence the predicted behavior in auctions and contracts, they do not affect the prediction that the price-
quality relation should be independent of the contract type.
26
   Charness and Rabin (2002) report evidence from similar games (see Berk23and Berk27, page 844). Their
results show the same pattern, although both rejection rates are much smaller (9 percent if the equal split was
available and 0% otherwise).

                                                     – 23 –
“unfair” outcome. As this is perceived as an unkind action, it is likely to trigger an unkind
response by a reciprocally motivated responder. If the unequal allocation is realized when the
proposer did not have a choice, responders may still not like it, but they do not blame the
proposer and are therefore less likely to retaliate.

       However, there is a fundamental difference between the experiment of Falk et al.
(2003) and our experiment. In the ultimatum games of Falk et al. (2003) the proposer’s
strategy space is chosen by the experimenter, i.e., the proposers is assigned to either a game
with only one option or a game with two options. In our experiment, in contrast, the contract
types are endogenously determined within the experiment, i.e., the buyers themselves choose
whether they want to interact within a rigid or a flexible contract. This difference is important,
because it is likely to change how outcomes are attributed to intentions. If the proposers in
Falk et al. (2003) had had the choice between the two games, reciprocity theories would no
longer predict a difference in rejection rates for the unequal allocation across games. The
reason is that choosing the game with the restricted choice set would be perceived as an
intentionally unfair action which calls for punishment. Similarly, in the context of our
experiment intention based reciprocity models would predict that sellers punish buyers who
choose the rigid contract. Under the assumption that the buyer anticipates the competitive
outcomes of the contract auctions, choosing the rigid contract means that the buyer
intentionally chooses a low payoff for the seller in both states of the world. In the good state
trade will take place at the competitive price and in the bad state the seller is forced to take his
unattractive outside option. Thus, a generous buyer would rather choose the flexible contract
and pay a high price in both states of the world.

       A crucial difference between the fairness models discussed above and Hart and Moore
(2008) is that the latter explicitly assume that people perceive outcomes of a competitive
bargaining process as acceptable or fair. The idea is that competition adds an objective
dimension to the bargaining process which provides the outcome with a certain justification.
This assumption is important in our experiment. In contrast to the experiments in Falk et al.
(2003) where the payoff structure of the ultimatum game is exogenously given, the contract
terms in our experiment are endogenously determined in competitive auctions. The low
frequency of shading in rigid contracts suggests that sellers do indeed not blame the buyer for
the unequal outcome in a rigid contract, but rather view it as the natural and justified outcome
of a competitive market. This implies that buyers can circumvent the punishment for unequal




                                              – 24 –
outcomes by delegating the determination of the outcome to the forces of a competitive
market.27

        The result that sellers earn higher average payoffs in flexible contracts than in rigid
contracts is to a certain extent an artifact of our simplified design. In the more general
theoretical setting of Hart and Moore (2008) the availability of ex-ante side payments would
imply that the differences in seller payoffs across contracts should disappear. However, the
fact that sellers shade significantly less in rigid contracts although they get substantially lower
profits than in flexible contracts makes our results only stronger. The reason is that people’s
fairness consideration work against the reference point hypothesis. Reciprocity suggests that
sellers may want to punish buyers for choosing the contract which gives them lower payoffs.
Since the introduction of side payments would equalize sellers’ payoffs across contracts, such
fairness concerns would become less relevant and there would probably be even less shading
in rigid contracts.


VI. Conclusions

In this paper we provide empirical support for the behavioral assumptions underlying the
theory of Hart and Moore (2008). Our experimental evidence is in line with the idea that
competitively determined contract terms constitute a reference point for a trading relationship.
When buyers implement flexible contracts, which allow for many different outcomes, sellers
seem to be disappointed if the buyer chooses an outcome which is not attractive to them. In
response to an unfavorable outcome sellers are willing to engage in costly shading activities
which reduce buyers’ payoffs. However, when the buyers implement a contract with very
rigid terms such that outcomes are pinned down from the outset and sellers know exactly
what to expect, the same unfavorable outcomes do not trigger shading. Given uncertainty
about the state of nature, these behavioral regularities imply a trade-off between contractual
rigidity and flexibility. While flexible contracts are desirable because they allow the buyer to
adjust the contract to the state of nature, rigid contracts have the advantage that they avoid
inefficient shading activities.



27
   Recent experimental work shows that people can also avoid punishment for unequal outcomes by shifting the
relevant decision to another person (see Bartling and Fischbacher 2008 and Coffman 2008). In Coffman (2008)
player A has two options. He can either play a dictator game with player C or he can sell the dictator game to
player B, who then plays the game with player C. If player A decides to sell the game, the price is determined in
a competitive double auction. In both cases player C observes the outcome and has the possibility to attribute
punishment points to player A. It turns out that player A is less punished for the same final outcome if he sells
the game to player B than if he plays the dictator game himself. In future work it would be interesting to look
more closely at how these findings are related to our work.

                                                    – 25 –
       There are several ways in which our work could be extended. First, it would be
interesting to know how important the assumption of ex ante perfect competition is. Suppose
that there is a single seller from the start and the buyer picks the price at date 0 in the fixed
price contract. At date 1, the seller may well regard the price as unfair since it was not
negotiated competitively, i.e., the contract no longer serves as a reference point. One might
therefore now expect shading in the fixed price contract. Preliminary results of an experiment
that we have carried out suggest that this is indeed the case (see Fehr et al. (2008)). Second,
we have tested a simplified version of Hart-Moore (2008) in which, although contract choice
is endogenous, the structure of contracts and the degree of flexibility are predetermined. In
future experiments it would be desirable to investigate truly endogenous contract structures,
including the possibility of lump sum transfers.

       Finally, we have ignored renegotiation. Suppose that a fixed price contract is written at
date 0 and the bad state occurs. Assume that the parties have the chance to renegotiate to
enjoy the gains from trade. Will they do so? Will such a mutually beneficial renegotiation
create bad feeling, given that the price was already fixed, and hence lead to shading? Does the
possibility of renegotiation open the door to hold-up; that is, will the seller try to force a
renegotiation in order to grab more of the surplus, even if trade would occur in the absence of
renegotiation? Experiments can clarify the answers to these important questions, and thereby
provide new understanding of the foundations of long-term trading agreements.



Appendix

In this Appendix we formally derive the reference point hypothesis described in section III.B.
In order to formalize the role of aggrievement we define the reference price pR(t, s) as the
price the seller feels entitled to, given the contract type t and the realized state of nature s.
While Hart and Moore (2008) assume that the seller always feels entitled to the best outcome
admitted by the contract, we make a more general and less extreme assumption. We suppose
that the seller’s reference price pR can be any price permitted by the terms of the contract. In
addition, we also allow for the possibility that the reference price depends on the realized
state. In a flexible contract the reference price therefore satisfies pR(f, s) ∈ [pl, pu]. In a rigid
contract, in contrast, the reference price of the seller must be equal to the fixed price: pR(r, s)
= pr. Loosely following the formulation in Hart and Moore (2008) we assume that the seller’s
utility can be written as follows:

uS = πS – θ max[(pR(t, s) – p), 0] I(q),

                                               – 26 –
where θ ≥ 0 and I(q) is an indicator function, which is unity if q = qn and zero otherwise. The
second term captures the psychic costs of aggrievement, which become relevant if the realized
price p is smaller than the seller’s reference price pR. The parameter θ measures the intensity
of the seller’s aggrievement if he feels shortchanged. The indicator function I(q) implies that a
seller can completely offset his aggrievement if he shades on performance and thereby hurts
the buyer by lowering his valuation for the delivered product.28

         Rigid contracts never lead to aggrievement. The buyer has no other possibility than to
pay the fixed price which has been determined in the competitive auction. Since the fixed
price is also the seller’s reference price, the seller gets exactly what he feels entitled to. Thus,
whenever the good state is realized, there is trade and the seller delivers the normal quality. If
the bad state is realized, trade does not take place and the buyer realizes his outside option.
Accordingly the buyer’s expected payoff from choosing the rigid contract can be expressed as
follows:

EπBr = wg[v(qn) – pr] + (1 – wg)xB.

In flexible contracts, in contrast, realized prices can be different from reference prices and
aggrievement may play a role. This implies that the seller’s performance is no longer
independent of the price. Specifically, if the buyer offers a low price, the seller may be willing
to bear the cost of shading in order to avoid the psychic cost of aggrievement. Formally, we

28
   The assumption that shading completely offsets aggrievement may seem strong. In the original model of Hart
and Moore (2008) the reference dependent disutility of traders consists of the difference between the money
equivalent of aggrievement and the monetary loss which shading imposes on the other party. Since shading is
continuous and unbounded, traders can always avoid this disutility. As long as the reference dependent part of
sellers’ utility function is not too important, our formulation is in line with the original model. Specifically, it
needs to be true that θ(pR(t, s) – p) ≤ v(qn) – v(ql) = 40. This is not extremely restrictive. For example, even if the
reference dependent part of utility and the monetary part are equally important (i.e., θ =1), the seller can still
have a reference price of 75 in the good state and 135 in the bad state. An alternative way to formalize the impact
of shading on aggrievement would be to write the intensity of aggrievement as a function of quality: θ(q), where
θ(qn) > θ(ql). If θ(ql) > 0, this implies that shading only partly offsets aggrievement. While this formulation leads
to identical results concerning the quality choice in flexible contracts (the threshold price would be defined as: pT
= pR – [c(ql, s) – c(qn, s) / θ(qn) – θ(ql)]), it changes the prediction for the acceptance choices of sellers in
auctions of flexible contracts. As long as shading completely offsets aggrievement, sellers are always willing to
accept the contract at any available price in the auction (see also Footnote 8). This is no longer true if shading
only partly offsets aggrievement. Since sellers cannot completely avoid suffering from aggrievement, it may now
be the case that some sellers prefer to realize the outside option if they anticipate that the buyer will set a low
price in a flexible contract. This implies that the lower price bound of flexible contracts would no longer
converge to the competitive level, but would depend on the intensity of the reference dependent preferences of
the two sellers involved in the auction. As a consequence the auction outcome would provide the buyer with
information about the preferences of the winning seller. This information would influence the optimal price in
both states of nature. Since sellers anticipate that buyers use information conveyed by the auction outcome to
adjust their price, some types of sellers may have strategic incentives to hide their true preferences and signaling
may become an issue. In section IV we illustrate that both the fixed price in rigid contracts and the lower price
bound in flexible contracts converge to the competitive level and there is no statistically significant difference
between the auction outcomes in the two contract types. Therefore we do not further pursue the implications of
this alternative model.

                                                       – 27 –
can define a threshold price pT which the buyer needs to pay in order to motivate the seller to
provide normal quality in a flexible contract:

pT(s) = pR(f, s) – [c(ql, s) – c(qn, s) / θ].

Sellers may be heterogeneous with regard to both the reference prices pR and the intensity of
aggrievement θ. This implies that different sellers may have different threshold prices pT. Let
Fs(·) be the distribution function of threshold prices in the state s. After observing the
realization of the state at date 1 a buyer who has concluded a flexible contract chooses his
price as follows:

pfs = arg max v(qn)Fs(p) + v(ql)[1 – Fs(p)] – p.

This shows that in flexible contracts the optimal price in each state of nature depends on the
characteristics of the distribution function of threshold prices in this state. For example, if
many sellers have rather low reference prices and moderate price increases substantially lower
the frequency of shading, buyers have strong incentives to increase the price above the lower
price bound. On the other hand, if most reference prices are high and only large price
increases help to prevent shading, the buyers may prefer to pay a low price and accept the
consequences of a high frequency of shading. In any case, however, the fact that the sellers’
quality choices depend on the price offered by the buyer has a negative impact on buyers’
profits in flexible contracts relative to the standard prediction. The buyer’s expected payoff if
he chooses a flexible contract is:

EπBf = wg[v(qn)Fs(pfg) + v(ql)(1–Fs(pfg)) – pfg] + (1 – wg)[v(qn)Fs(pfb) + v(ql)(1–Fs(pfb)) – pfb].

This establishes the trade-off between contractual flexibility and rigidity described in the
reference point hypothesis in section III.B: i) Our assumption that sellers can completely
offset aggrievement by shading implies that they are willing to accept a contract at any
available price (see Footnote 28 for details). Accordingly, the competitive auctions will drive
the fixed price in rigid contracts and the lower bound of the price range in flexible contracts
down to the competitive level (pr = pl =35). ii) Rigid contracts have the advantage that buyers
can pay low prices and do not suffer from shading in the good state. The downside of rigid
contracts is that there is no trade in the bad state. iii) Flexible contracts guarantee trade in both
states of nature. However, buyers have to increase the price above the competitive level
and/or bear the consequences of shading in both states of nature. This reduces buyers’
payoffs.




                                                – 28 –
References:

Babcock, L., and Loewenstein, G., (1997): “Explaining Bargaining Impasse: The Role of
    Self-Serving Biases”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(1), 109-126.
Bartling, B., and Fischbacher, U. (2008): “Shifting the Blame: On Delegation and
      Responsibility”, mimeo, University of Zurich.
Bolton, G., and Ockenfels A. (2000): “ERC - A Theory of Equity, Reciprocity and
     Competition”, American Economic Review, 90, 166-193.
Camerer, C., and Thaler, R. H. (1995): “Anomalies: Ultimatums, dictators and manners”, The
    Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(2), 209–219.
Charness, G. and Rabin, M. (2002): “Understanding Social Preferences with Simple Tests”,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(3), 817–869.
Coffman, L. (2008): “Ethics and Strategic Intermediation”, mimeo, Harvard Business School.
Dufwenberg, M., and Kirchsteiger, G. (2004): “A Theory of Sequential Reciprocity”, Games
    and Economic Behavior 47, 268-98.
Falk, A., Fehr, E., and Fischbacher, U. (2003): “On the Nature of Fair Behavior”, Economic
      Inquiry 41(1), 20-26.
Falk, A., and Fischbacher, U. (2006): “A Theory of Reciprocity”, Games and Economic
     Behavior 54(2), 293-315.
Fehr, E., Hart, O. and Zehnder, C. (2008): “Contracts, Reference Points, and Competition”,
      Mimeo, University of Lausanne.
Fehr, E., and Schmidt, K. (1999): “A Theory of Fairness, Competition and Cooperation”,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 817-68.
Fehr, E., and Schmidt, K. (2002): “Theories of Fairness and Reciprocity - Evidence and
     Economic Applications”, in Dewatripont, L. Hansen and St. Turnovsky (Eds.),
     Advances in Economics and Econometrics - 8th World Congress, Econometric Society
     Monographs, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Fischbacher U. (2007): “z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic Experiments”,
     Experimental Economics 10(2), 171-178.
Greiner, B. (2004): “An Online Recruiting System for Economic Experiments”, in Kurt
     Kremer, Volker Macho (Eds.): Forschung und wissenschaftliches Rechnen 2003.
     GWDG Bericht 63, Göttingen: Ges. für Wiss. Datenverarbeitung, 79-93.
Grossman, S., and Hart, O. (1986), “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
     Vertical and Lateral Integration”, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691-719.
Güth, W., Schmittberger, R., and Schwarze, B. (1982): “An experimental analysis of
     ultimatum bargaining”, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 3(4), 367–388.
Hart, O., and Moore J. (1990): “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm”, Journal of
      Political Economy 98, 1119-58.
Hart, O., and Moore, J. (2008): “Contracts as Reference Points”, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 123(1), 1-48.
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1979): “Prospect theory: An analysis of decisions under
    risk”, Econometrica 47(2), 263–291.



                                          – 29 –
Köszegi, B., and Rabin, M. (2006): “A model of reference-dependent preferences”, Quarterly
    Journal of Economics 121(4), 1133–1166.
Rabin, M. (1993): “Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics”, American
     Economic Review 83, 1281-1302.




                                         – 30 –
                                 Table I: Experimental Parameters

State of nature               Good [Prob(s = g) = 0.8]                  Bad [Prob(s = b) = 0.2]
                                         n                  l                     n                  l
Seller's quality         normal (q = q )        low (q = q )      normal (q = q )        low (q = q )

Seller's costs                  20                   25                   80                  85

Buyer's valuation               140                 100                  140                  100

Notes: The table summarizes the main parameters of the experiment. Buyers’ valuation for the product and
sellers’ production costs are displayed for both states of nature and both quality levels available to the
seller.




                                                 – 31 –
               Table II: Summary of Outcomes in Rigid and Flexible Contracts

Contract Type                                          Rigid Contract                Flexible Contract
State of Nature                                      Good           Bad             Good            Bad

Average Price                                         40.7            -              51.1           98.4
Rel. Freq. of Normal Quality                          0.94            -              0.75           0.70

Average Auction Outcome                                      40.7                           40.2

Average Profit Buyer (per state)                      96.8           10              78.9           29.7
Average Profit Seller (per state)                     20.4           10              29.8           16.9

Average Profit Buyer (over both states)                      77.9                           68.9
Average Profit Seller (over both states)                     18.1                           27.2

Rel. Freq. of Contract                                       0.50                           0.50

Notes: The table summarizes the outcomes for rigid and flexible contracts in both states of nature. All
numbers are based on the data of all 5 sessions. Average Price is the average of the trading price and Relative
Frequency of Normal Quality measures how often the seller has chosen the normal quality. For rigid contracts
this information is only available for the good state, because trade does not occur in the bad state. Average
Auction Outcome is the average of the fixed price in case of rigid contracts and the lower bound of the price
range in case of flexible contracts. Average Profit Buyer (Seller) (per state) measures the average payoff of
buyers (sellers) for each state and contract. In rigid contracts the payoffs in the bad state of nature are the
outside options of the market participants. Average Profit Buyer (over both states) is the overall average
payoff of buyers (sellers) for each contract type. Relative Frequency of Contract is the share of the total
number of contracts that corresponds to each contract type.




                                                   – 32 –
               Table III: Price Dependence of Quality Across Contract Types

Dependent Variable                     Quality [s=g]                             Quality [s=b]
                                    OLS        Probit [ME]                     OLS       Probit [ME]
                                     (1)           (2)                         (3)           (4)

Price increment                    0.000            0.000                    0.013*           0.023***
                                 [0.002]           [0.004]                   [0.005]           [0.009]
Flexible contract               -0.335***         -0.298***
                                 [0.060]           [0.060]
Price inc. x Flex                 0.009*            0.009*
                                 [0.004]           [0.005]
Constant                        0.936***                                      0.657
                                 [0.025]                                     [0.075]
Observation                         805               805                      104
  2
R                                   0.13                                       0.03

Notes: Price increment is defined as price minus 35 in columns (1) and (2) and as price minus 95 in
columns (3) and (4). Flexible contract is an indicator variable which is unity if the contract is of the
flexible type and zero otherwise. Price inc. x Flex is the interaction term of price increment and flexible
contract. Columns (1) and (3) report coefficients of OLS estimations. Columns (2) and (4) report
marginal effects based on probit estimations. Since observations within sessions may be dependent all
reported standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the session level. *** indicates significance at the 1
percent level, ** indicates significance at the 5 percent level and * indicates significance at the 10
percent level.




                                                  – 33 –
                    Table IV: Sellers’ Quality Choices at the Individual Level

                                 Consistent with RPH             Inconsistent with RPH             Total
Shading                            No          Flex. only      Mostly flex. Flex.&Rigid

Number of sellers                  27              24                7              10              68
Population fraction               0.40            0.35             0.10            0.15              1

Rigid contracts
Average price [s=g]               40.6            41.3             41.6            39.8            40.8
                n
Rel. freq. of q [s=g]             1.00            1.00             0.83            0.67            0.93
Av. number of contracts            8.2            6.5               8.1            7.3              7.5

Flexible contracts
Average price [s=g]               54.2            49.4              50             53.4            51.9
                n
Rel. freq. of q [s=g]             1.00            0.67             0.47            0.70            0.78
Average price [s=b]               98.7            97.7             98.5            99.6            98.4
                n
Rel. freq. of q [s=b]             1.00            0.61             0.58            0.56            0.77
Av. number of contracts            6.3            8.5               9.3            7.1              7.5

Notes: The shading categories are defined as follows: “No” stands for sellers who always provide normal
quality irrespective of the contract type. “Flex. only” are sellers who never provide low quality in rigid
contracts, but provide low quality in flexible contracts at least once. “Mostly flex.” are sellers who provide
low quality exactly once in rigid contracts and at least once in flexible contracts. “Flex. & Rigid” are all
sellers who do not fit into one of the other categories. Numbers in the last column (“Total”) slightly differ
from the numbers in Table II, because numbers reported in this table are averages over individual
averages, while Table II directly averages over all contracts.




                                                   – 34 –
Figure I: Development of Quality and Prices over Time




                       – 35 –
Figure II: Price Distribution and Frequency of Normal Quality Conditional on Price




                                     – 36 –
Figure III: Accepted Number of Rigid and Flexible Contracts per Individual Seller




                                     – 37 –
Figure IV: Price Distribution and Average Profit of Buyers Conditional on Price




                                    – 38 –
