NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIFE SATISFACTION AND QUALITY OF DEVELOPMENT
John F. Helliwell
Working Paper 14507
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14507

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2008

Canadian Institute for Advanced Research and Department of Economics, University of British Columbia.
An earlier version of this paper was presented as a Plenary Lecture at the International Conference
on Comparative Development in Honour of the Platinum Jubilee of the Indian Statistical Institute.
Delhi, December 19, 2007. The underlying research is part of the ‘Social Interactions, Identity and
Well-Being’ research program of the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, and is also supported
by grants from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The paper builds
on collaborative research with Haifang Huang, Chris Barrington-Leigh and Anthony Harris. We are
grateful to the Gallup Organization for access to data from the Gallup World Poll. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by John F. Helliwell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Life Satisfaction and Quality of Development
John F. Helliwell
NBER Working Paper No. 14507
November 2008
JEL No. D6,I3,J1,O0,O10,P51
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that measures of life satisfaction, now being collected annually by the Gallup World
Poll in more than 130 countries, permit a much broader view of the quality and consequences of development
than other common measures. While these data show the importance of conventionally measured economic
development, they also show the importance of many other elements of life that are also affected, whether
deliberately or not, by community, national, and international institutions and policies. In estimating
the importance of these other factors, this paper pays special attention to the social context of well-being:
the norms, networks and relationships within which lives are lived.

John F. Helliwell
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
and Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver B.C. V6T 1Z1 CANADA
and NBER
john.helliwell@ubc.ca

1. Setting the Stage
This paper proposes and applies a fairly simple method for measuring life satisfaction
and for using these data to assess the quality of development. The idea, taken straight
from Aristotle, is to ask people to evaluate the quality of their lives as a whole. Aristotle
hypothesized that these evaluations would show satisfaction with life to be highest among
those who found the golden mean between pleasures of the moment (the epicureans) and
meaningful working towards building a better life for others (the stoics). In my first
attempts to use World Values Survey data from more than 70 countries to test Aristotle’s
propositions (Helliwell 2003) I was struck by the extent to which his hypotheses seemed
to stand the test of exposure to the facts of the world. Only later did I attempt to see how
Aristotle’s method fitted with other comparative approaches to measuring well-being in
development. Before proceeding to a review of the latest results, including a comparison
of the earlier World Values Survey results with those from the new and larger Gallup
World Poll (Gallup 2007), I shall mention a few issues that might have an important
bearing on the measurement and interpretation of life satisfaction.
Amartya Sen’s capabilities approach (1990) gives primary importance to capabilities
enabling people to achieve their individual and collective ends. This in turn gives a
primary importance to freedoms (Sen 1999, 2002). Having these capabilities, and the
freedom to exercise them, has for him an importance beyond whatever material resources
or outcomes, perhaps including happiness, the person might experience. The Aristotelian
view would be that the importance of capabilities would indeed be revealed by the life
satisfaction evaluations of reflective individuals.
Within psychology there are two strands of theory and evidence that are potentially
threatening to the use of subjective assessments of life satisfaction to measure systematic
differences in the quality of lives among individuals or societies. These relate to
adaptation and to peer-group effects. The extreme version of adaptation is embodied in
the ‘set point’ view (Brickman and Campbell 1971) wherein each individual has a
genetically established personality with given set points for, inter alia, happiness, or
perhaps even satisfaction with life. Changes in circumstances might lead to temporary
gains or losses of happiness, with subsequent adaptation eventually forcing life
assessments back to each individual’s baseline set point. The primary empirical reference
is often to a study showing substantial adaptation among lottery winners and accident
victims (Brickman, Coates and Janoff-Bullman 1978), although even in those cases
adaptation was not complete. Recent evidence with larger samples of longitudinal data
shows large and significant continuing effects of disability on subjective well-being
(Lucas 2007). Lucas and Diener, perhaps the most influential proponents of the set point
theory, while collaborating on a paper using German panel data to show adaptation to
marriage (Lucas et al 2003), have both concluded that adaptation is in general
incomplete, and that individual assessments of life satisfaction can differ in the long run
because of different life circumstances (Diener, Lucas and Scollon 2006). Indeed, both
are now advocating collection of measures of life satisfaction to augment conventional
national income and expenditure accounts as measures of individual and national wellbeing.

As for the effects of relativities, while there is considerable evidence that much of the life
satisfaction gained from income is in relative terms, thus leading to negative externalities
from higher incomes (Easterlin 1974, Luttmer 2005, Helliwell and Huang 2005,
Barrington-Leigh and Helliwell 2007), the evidence of such contextual effects differs
considerably from one aspect of life to another, and perhaps from one society to another.
Thus it is important in empirical work to look for possible contextual effects. It must be
recognized at the outset that it is very difficult to assess international differences in
national contextual effects, since any estimates of such contextual effects rely on the
assumption that there are groups of countries for which these effects are of similar size.
Repeated national surveys, such as are planned for the Gallup World Poll, will help to
ease this problem.
Daniel Kahneman and colleagues have found that there are systematic differences
between evaluated (remembered) and experienced (momentary) well-being, such that
memories of past experiences, and hence evaluations of life satisfaction, differ from
evaluations or scores based on the integration of moment-by-moment assessments of the
pleasure or pain of a film (Fredrickson and Kahneman 1993) or colonoscopy (Redelmeier
and Kahneman 1996). The more global evaluations based on memory are sometimes
described as ‘decision utility’, since when decisions are made about future actions, they
depend upon remembered assessments rather than the sum of momentary pleasure or
pain. Thus recalled enjoyment rather than the sum of moment-by-moment enjoyment
predicted the desire to repeat a holiday (Wirtz et al. 2003). Measures of satisfaction with
life as a whole, of the sort used in the research reported in this paper, fall into the
category of remembered assessments, and hence differ from integrals of moment-bymoment pleasure.
Kahneman describes the retrospective judgments as mistaken: “The choice to repeat the
inferior experience (as measured by the sum moment-by-moment experiences) reflects
the misguided preferences of the remembering self.” (Kahneman and Riis 2005, p. 286).
Whenever the two assessments might differ, he interprets the sum of moment-by-moment
experiences as the more valid. He refers to it as ‘objective happiness’ (Kahneman 1999)
because it is constructed according to an objective rule, albeit one that aggregates
subjective assessments. Kahneman also notes that his preferred method is much in the
tradition of Jeremy Bentham, who advocated a very similar integration of moment-bymoment pleasure and pain in his utilitarian calculus (Kahneman, Wakker and Sarin
1997).
While I would agree with Kahneman that both momentary and remembered selfassessments of well-being are worth collecting, in order to better understand their
relationships with each other, and with other measures of well-being, I am inclined to
give priority to the more reflective remembered assessments. This preference is based on
a mix of practical, theoretical and empirical reasons. From a practical point of view, selfassessments of life satisfaction are easy to collect as low-cost add-on questions in surveys
conducted for a variety of purposes. By contrast, moment-by-moment assessments are
difficult and costly to collect. On theoretical grounds, Aristotle counseled that reflective

2

answers to broad questions about life satisfaction would provide a better measure of a life
well-lived than would momentary accounts of pleasure and pain. On empirical grounds,
as will be shown later in the paper, there is evidence that interpersonal and international
differences in important life circumstances are more likely to show up in answers to
general questions about life satisfaction than in measures of recent pleasure and pain.
Finally, the established fact that remembered assessments are the ones that determine
subsequent decisions gives them additional importance for researchers interested in
predicting individual and policy choices.
There is a related distinction in psychology between hedonic and eudaimonic well-being
(Ryan and Deci 2001), with the former referring to the current balance of pleasure and
pain, and the latter giving greater weight to reflective considerations of a meaningful life.
The latter is more closely related to the Aristotelian idea of a good life, as measured by
reflective assessments of life satisfaction, while the former is more closely linked to
moment-by-moment hedonic assessments.
One of the principal results of the research reported in this paper is that life satisfaction is
driven to a very substantial extent by the perceived quality of social relationships, and
especially of the social and institutional context in which people relate to each other. The
term ‘social capital’, which in the past 15 years has owed its currency mainly to the work
of Robert Putnam (1993, 2000), has been defined as “networks together with shared
norms, values and understandings that facilitate co-operation within and among groups”
(OECD 2001). What constitutes effective, and hence well-being-increasing, norms and
networks might be expected to be culture-specific. Indeed, McGregor (2007,327) defines
culture in very similar terms as “dynamic systems of norms, values and rules that are
developed by particular communities, founded in their relationships to particular natural
and social environments.” This in turn might cause skeptics, especially social
anthropologists of a relativist persuasion, to question whether cross-cultural, and
especially international, comparison of social capital is possible 1 . One of the purposes of
this paper is to see whether there are definitions of social norms and networks that are
widely enough shared across cultures that they help to explain differences in life
satisfaction within and among communities and nations.
2. Using Multi-Level Analysis to Investigate Life Satisfaction
The basic observations are at the individual level, and we are interested in estimating the
extent to which individual life satisfaction depends on circumstances and events at the
individual, household, community and national levels. We have developed three interrelated ways of unravelling the data. One is to use the individual-level data in equations
that are separate for each country. A second is to measure and account for international
differences in life satisfaction using national average data, and a third is to use multi-level
analysis to explore individual-level and higher-level correlates simultaneously. The
advantage of the third approach, which will be the main focus of attention in this paper, is
that it permits individual and contextual effects to be separated. Although many
1

For a review of these issues in the context of cross-cultural comparisons of subjective measures of
health-related well-being, see Schmidt and Bullinger (2007, 220-3).

3

interesting contextual effects are at the local level (e.g. Luttmer 2005, Barrington-Leigh
and Helliwell 2007), the nature of the World Values Survey and Gallup data limits us to
two-level analysis, with contextual effects appearing only at the national level. To
achieve a more complete multi-level analysis would require some geo-coding of
respondents to permit the survey data to be combined with census or other data about the
structure of local communities. When attention is focussed on comparative development,
and where we wish to cover as many countries as possible, as in the current paper, then it
is unrealistic to expect widespread availability of community-level data on a comparable
basis.
We shall therefore start with two-level analysis of individual life satisfaction responses
for large global samples drawn from the most recent available World Values Survey data
(generally from 1999-2000) and the first complete round of the Gallup World Poll,
covering up to 130 countries, with data collected mainly during 2006.
The basic estimation form for two-level analysis of the ordered life satisfaction responses
is:
(1) LSij = α + δln (yij) + μXij + γ Zj + εi
where LSi is life satisfaction for respondent i, measured on a scale of 1 to 10 for the
World Values Survey, and 0 to 10 for the Gallup World Poll, yij is the level of income of
household i in country j, the Xij are other individual or household-level variables, and the
Zj are national-level variables, with the same value being used for all individual
observations in country j. We use the log form for both household and national average
income, to reflect standard economic assumptions and many empirical results suggesting
that less affluent agents derive greater utility from extra income. In general, we employ
national-level variables for which we also have household-level observations, in which
case the γ coefficients represent contextual effects, or, in other terms, the extent of
positive or negative externalities. In those cases where we have national level variables
that do not have individual-level counterparts, then the γ coefficients will capture the
sum of the individual-level and contextual effects. Our estimations are sometimes by
probit and sometimes linear regression, but in either case robust standard errors are
estimated assuming errors to be clustered by country.
When we calculate compensating differentials for non-financial determinants of life
satisfaction, we take into account the functional form of equation (1). Thus in our
theoretically and empirically preferred case where income is in log form and X is in
linear form, β= μ/ δ will be the log change in income that has for the average respondent
the same life satisfaction effect as a change in the non-financial life characteristic X.
3. Two-Level Results from the World Values Survey
Table 1 shows two-level estimation results based on a sample of roughly 100,000
observations from 75 countries in the 1999-2000 wave of the World Values Survey 2 .
2

The results differ somewhat from those in Helliwell and Putnam (2004), which were based on
waves 1 to 3 of the WVS, and also from those in electronic appendix Table 1 of Helliwell and Huang

4

Several of the key results reported in Helliwell and Putnam (2004) are repeated in the
Table 1 analysis of more recent data, but we now have the full equations estimated
separately for the 28 OECD and 46 non-OECD countries in the sample. The general Ushape in age is strong in the OECD sample, with life satisfaction lowest in the 45-54 age
group, while for the non-OECD countries the partial negative effect of age reaches -0.36
(on a 10-point scale) in the 45-55 age group and remains at that level thereafter.
The positive effects of marriage are much greater in the OECD sample, while the
negative effects of both divorce and widowhood are larger and more significant in the
non-OECD countries, in both cases relative to being single. Being unemployed is
negative and highly significant in both samples (-0.71 in the non-OECD sample). Having
education attainment beyond the high school level is associated with higher life
satisfaction in the overall sample, although the split regressions show that the effect flows
entirely from the non-OECD countries. Results from earlier WVS waves, which had a
smaller number of respondents from non-OECD countries, showed a positive and
significant simple correlation between education level and life satisfaction. This effect
gradually disappeared when other variables were included that are themselves affected by
education levels, with the most important of these being income, health, social trust and
community involvement (Helliwell 2003, Tables 4 and 5).
Individual assessments of general social trust 3 and of confidence in police are both
strongly correlated with positive life assessments, to a slightly greater extent in the
OECD sample. Those for whom religion is very important report significantly higher life
satisfaction, especially if social trust is also included in the equation. While religion and
social trust are both important to life satisfaction, there is a pattern linking the two
variables, across individuals within a country as well as across country averages, with
those reporting high values for trust in others tending to report low values for importance
of religion, and vice versa. There will be more evidence on this issue in Section 5.
The effects of household income are measured in relative terms in the WVS, and these
relative income effects are strongly significant in both sets of countries. There is some
evidence that life satisfaction rises less with relative income in the OECD than the nonOECD countries, but the difference is less than was the case for WVS waves 1 to 3, as
shown in Figure 17.2 of Helliwell and Putnam (2005).
The contextual effects estimated are relatively weak in both samples of countries. This is
at least in part because per capita income and the quality of government are quite highly
correlated. In the 4th wave of the WVS, national income tends to have less explanatory
(2007), which are based on 160,000 observation from waves 1 to 4 of the WVS, and divide the countries
into two groups by level of income rather than by membership in the OECD. Both the earlier and the larger
WVS samples show larger and more significant effects of the quality of government (especially relative to
the effects of national income) than are apparent in Table 1. We prefer to use just wave 4 for comparison
with the Gallup results, since this gives closer comparability for survey timing and country coverage.
3
“In general, do you think that most people can be trusted or, alternatively, that you can’t be too
careful when dealing with people.” Those who choose the first answer to this classic question are coded
1.0, while the alternative is coded as 0.0. Those few respondents who choose ‘don’t know’ are coded as
0.5.

5

power than governmental quality, but to a lesser extent than was the case in waves 1 to 3.
I shall return to discuss aggregate income effects in section 5, where the WVS and Gallup
results are compared at the aggregate level.
4. Two-Level Results from the Gallup World Poll
Table 2 shows life satisfaction equations using individual-level data from about 70,000
respondents in 105 countries, and for respondents in OECD and non-OECD countries
treated separately. Table 3 shows the same equation estimated separately for respondents
in each of six geographic, mainly continental, country groupings. Females are more
satisfied with their lives than males, just as in the WVS, but in the Gallup data the effect
is more precisely estimated, and in both surveys the female advantage is larger in the
OECD countries. Table 3 estimated by regions shows that the effect is largest in the two
mainly OECD regions: Western Europe and the combined US/Canada/Australia/New
Zealand grouping, and in Latin America, while being zero on average in Africa. Country
differences will be considered in more detail in section 6.
In the Gallup tables age effects are estimated by a quadratic form in age; in all cases there
is a general U-shape, with some variation among country groupings, averaging 51 years
in the OECD countries and 60 years in the non-OECD countries. In general the turning
point is at younger ages in countries with longer life expectancies 4
For the Gallup equations, marital status is divided into three categories: married or
equivalent, single, and a combination of divorced, separated and widowed, with single
being treated as the base case in estimation. For all country groups shown in Tables 2 and
3 life satisfaction is higher among those in the married group, with the effect being
largest and most significant in the OECD countries, and least so in the Former Soviet
Union and Africa.
In the Gallup sample, the estimated equation shows that those with university-level
education are significantly more satisfied with their lives, with the effect being largest in
Africa, Asia, the transition countries (Russia and Eastern Europe) and Latin America, and
smallest in Western Europe and the English-language foursome of the United States,
Canada, Australia and New Zealand. One reason why tertiary education may show a
stronger effect in the Gallup equations than in the WVS data is the absence of social trust
variables in Gallup, since social trust and education are positively correlated across
individuals, communities and countries.
The log of household income is a very strong correlate of individual life satisfaction in
the Gallup equations, even where the equations include, as here, responses to other lifecircumstance questions determined at least partly by income: higher education, running

4

Age squared is divided by 100, so that the values of the age and age-squared coefficients can be
more easily shown and compared. The ratio of the age to the age-squared coefficients indicates the age of
the lower turning point for life satisfaction, as a fraction of 50 years. Country-by-country age effects in the
Gallup data are reported by Deaton (2007).

6

water in the home, and having enough money for adequate food 5 . The coefficient is if
anything higher in the richer countries (as previously noted by Deaton 2007) and shows
no obvious tendency to drop as individual income rises, beyond the non-linearity implied
by the logarithmic form for income. More research is required to explain the difference
between the WVS and Gallup results for income. It is possible that the Gallup life
satisfaction question, taking the form of a Cantril ladder, whereby the respondent is asked
to think of life as a ladder, invites respondents to think in relative terms more than when
they are simply asked, as in the World Values Survey, to assess their life satisfaction on a
scale running from 1 to 10. The current version of the Gallup survey is asking the
question in both forms, to help answer this question. Attempts are also being made to
expand the number of income categories, and thereby to give more income variation in
the group of higher income earners. The WVS gets this already, by choosing income
categories to match income deciles, and the next rounds of the Gallup survey should be
able to provide at least this amount of income detail. In general the Gallup data appear to
be of high and comparable quality among countries, as will be suggested in the analysis
in the next section of the national-level data.
Even using the current data, the income effects are tightly enough estimated to permit the
results to be used to calculate some rough income-equivalent values for other aspects of
life. This will be done later. First, we consider two other standard-of-living variables that
appear strongly in the Gallup data. These are the presence of running water in the home
(wp33), and whether there had been “times in the last twelve months when you did not
have enough money to buy food that you or your family needed” (wp40). While both
running water and lack of enough money for food attract roughly similar coefficients in
the separate equations for respondents in OECD and non-OECD countries, the actual
prevalence of these measures of poverty is far higher in the non-OECD countries,
although perceived food poverty is much more evenly distributed among countries. For
example, running water is found in the homes of 99% of the OECD sample, and 67% of
the non-OECD sample. By comparison, lack of enough money for food at some time in
the last twelve months was reported more generally -- by 12% of the OECD respondents
and 33% of those in the rest of the world.
Turning to measures of the institutional and social context, Tables 2 and 3 show first the
extent to which individual life satisfaction is correlated with perceived levels of
corruption in business and government (an average of the answers to separate questions).
For the global sample on average, an individual who thinks that corruption is widespread
in business and government has life satisfaction that is lower by more than .2 on the tenpoint scale. Table 3 shows that the estimated effects are largest for those living in the
transition (Russia and Eastern Europe) and OECD countries, and lower in Latin America,
Asia and Africa. The perceived prevalence of corruption is highest in the transition
countries and lowest in the OECD regions. There is a large variation among countries,
both within and across regions, with Russia at .94, New Zealand at .22 and Singapore at
.20. Regional averages for Asia, Latin America and Africa range from .77 to .79.
5

Sequentially dropping the water, food and education variables (both individual and contextual)
from the global equation raises the coefficient on the log of household income by .017, .076 and .024,
respectively. This gives an income coefficient, with all those variables eliminated, of .525 (t=19.4).

7

At the personal level, having someone to count on is even more important in every
region, with a global average of .67. Some other variables indicative of personal or
community-level social capital are available for only a subset of the Gallup respondents.
But they all show the high values attached to mutually supportive social connections.
Those who think that their lost wallets would be retuned by a neighbour or the police are
more satisfied with their lives (by .15 and .22 points), as are those who express
confidence in the police (.22). Respondents appear to value not only the support they get
from others, but their own support for others. For instance, those who in the last month
had donated money or time to an organization, or aided a stranger needing help were
systematically more satisfied with their lives, especially for donations (.30) and helping a
stranger (.16), as shown by the second equation in Table 4a.
We turn now to consider contextual effects, as measured by the national averages of
variables also included at the individual level. One of the more striking results in the
Gallup data is a dog that does not bark- the fact that average per capita income has no
significant effect. Earlier research using more local data has tended to find significant
relative income effects, and this seemed to be confirmed by the earlier WVS results. In
Tables 2 and 3, household incomes are measured as log levels, converted into common
units by the use of purchasing power parities used in the preparation of the Penn World
Tables estimates of average GDP per capita 6 . Thus if there are any significant relative
income effects at the national level we would expect to find the contextual national GDP
per capita entering with a negative sign. It does not, which suggests that in the Gallup
ladder data any relative income effects at the national level are being offset by the effects
of other excluded variables that support life satisfaction in the richer countries. In
particular, the national average should reflect all the tax-funded public good consumption
/ support that is largely missing from measured variables... To see a negative coefficient
would mean that the contextual effects dominate these.
The estimation of contextual effects at the national level is limited by small sample sizes
and a large number of possible hypotheses. It is especially hard to estimate these effects
separately by regional groupings, as the number of countries is limited in each region,
and inter-country variations smaller than in the global sample. One contextual variable
that does appear significantly relates to food, where people are less satisfied with their
own lives if others are going hungry in their country. This effect is significant for the
OECD countries as a whole, in Latin America, and in the group of four North American
and Australasian countries. This can be interpreted as some form of inequality aversion,
although one might not expect it to be significantly identified across countries (e.g. the
6

More precisely, the individual household incomes in the Gallup data are divided by their country
means to get relative incomes within each country. These figures are then converted into common level
form by using the Penn World Table data for average GDP per capita in 2003 measured at Purchasing
Power Parity. The contextual variable is the same Penn World Table series. Thus if there are significant
relative income effects at the national level the contextual variable should attract a negative coefficient. Our
equations also eliminate about 2000 observations where the reported family income is below 2% of the
national average. Almost all of these observations report zero income. This adjustment raises and tightens
the estimate of the coefficient on log income, as does the use of the Penn World Tables to convert national
data to internationally comparable levels.

8

Nordic countries) where absence of sufficient food is rare and not subject to much
variation across countries.
The most important contextual effect shown in Tables 2 and 3 relates to living in a
country where most people feel they have someone they can count on. This appears in the
global sample, as well as among the OECD and non-OECD countries treated as subgroups. Because the comparable individual-level variable is already in the equation, the
effect being estimated relates to the extent to which others in the community have people
they can rely on. The significant positive coefficient suggests positive spillovers from this
type of social connection. People want to have someone to rely on, and they wish the
same for others. The estimated effect is quite large- living in a country where 10% more
people have someone to rely on is associated with 0.2 higher life satisfaction.
To convert any of these effects into an income equivalent value requires division by the
estimated income coefficient. The smallest compensating differentials for non-financial
aspects of life are obtained by using the income coefficient obtained if the other incomerelated variables (food, water, and higher education) are removed from the equation. This
gives an income coefficient of just over .5, slightly smaller than the coefficient on having
someone to rely on, as estimated in that same equation. Thus having someone to rely on
has a life satisfaction effect roughly ten times larger than a 5% change in income (i.e.
10<=~.54/.05). On top of that, the contextual effect suggests that to live in a country
where an additional one-tenth of the population has someone to count on has more than
five times the life satisfaction equivalence as the presumed 5% change in income. There
is a possibility that allowing for individual personality differences would lower these
estimates, but they are indicative of other survey and experimental evidence showing the
importance of a supportive social context. Measures of social trust (which have been
validated across countries by correlations with actual returns of experimentally dropped
wallets, Knack 2001) show compensating differentials, as do measures of trust in police
and trust in management (Helliwell and Huang 2005).
5. Comparison of National-Level World Values and Gallup Results
The basic estimation form for analysis of the national average life satisfaction responses
is:
(2) LSj = α + δln (yj) + γ Zj + εj
where LSi is average life satisfaction for country j, measured on a scale of 1 to 10 for the
World Values Survey, and 0 to 10 for the Gallup World Poll, yj is average per capita real
GDP in country j, and the Zj are other national-level variables. The national level results
estimated in equation (2) combine the individual-level and contextual effects separately
estimated in equation (1). The basic explanatory power of equation (1) comes from
individual-level variance, some of which is mainly within-country, while some is mainly
among countries. Variables that mainly capture individual personality or experience, in
an institution-free way, will have most of their variance within countries, while those
variables that either measure or are strongly influenced by institutional or social
characteristics of the nation will have much more of their variance between nations.

9

In the introduction of the paper it was alleged, in accordance with Aristotle, that life
satisfaction compared to positive affect (e.g. joy) or negative affect (e.g. despair). If this
is true, we would expect to find a larger fraction of the global individual variance of life
satisfaction determined by national-level life circumstances. The two parts of Table 4,
which still make use of individual-level data, and hence equation (1), provide some
support for this in two ways. The first equation in Table 4a adds individual-level
measures of positive and negative affect to the basic global equation from Table 2.
Although both are strongly correlated with life satisfaction, the pattern and power of the
main structural and circumstantial variables remains intact. This confirms that while
shorter-term emotions play significantly into life satisfaction, they do so in a way that is
largely independent of the effects of deeper and more enduring circumstances and
institutions. Table 4b confirms the same interpretation in a different way, by showing that
life satisfaction differs significantly from region to region around the globe, while there is
almost no region-to-region variance in average values for positive and negative affect.
While the regional dummy variables account for only 1% and 4% of the total individuallevel variance of negative and positive affect, they account for 15% of total individuallevel variance in life satisfaction.
In this section the national-level equation (2) is used to unravel some of the international
differences in the quality of life, and in particular to do so in a way that helps to show the
similarities and differences between the WVS and the Gallup data. This analysis can only
be done at the national level, since the individual-level responses are from different
households at different times, using questionnaires with different orders, contents and
delivery methods. This makes comparison challenging but possibly very powerful.
Results that are common to both bodies of data thereby acquire more credibility, while
differences suggest new avenues for research. It is even possible, as we show, to use
national averages of responses to one survey as independent variables in the other,
thereby providing a strong set of instruments that are free of individual-level causal
complexity.
Table 5 first shows the strength of the association between national average per capita
income, in log form, and life satisfaction as measured by wave 4 of the WVS and Gallup
World Poll questions. This is done for a common set of 75 countries and then for the full
set of 129 Gallup World Poll countries. Log income is very important in both surveys,
but is larger and more significant when explaining the Gallup data. It explains 42% of the
WVS compared to 66% of the Gallup variance for the common set of 75 countries, rising
to 71% of the Gallup variance for 129 countries. Does this cross-country correlation
between average incomes and life satisfaction confirm the previous conclusion, based on
individual data, that life satisfaction captures more enduring aspects of life circumstance?
That this is so is suggested even by the simple correlations, which are far higher between
average per capita incomes and WVS and Gallup life satisfaction (.62 and .82,
respectively, for the 75 overlapping countries) than between income and positive affect
(+.44) and negative affect (-.47) for the same 75 countries.
This high degree of cross-country correlation between average incomes and life
satisfaction has convinced some previous sceptics to take the life satisfaction data more

10

seriously as genuine measures of well-being. However, that same high correlation might
tempt others to ask what would be the point in measuring life satisfaction if it can be
shown to move closely with income, since income is already being tracked. One way of
addressing the latter point is to ask whether there are important aspects of life satisfaction
that are tapped into by both surveys (and hence not just artefacts of a particular set of
questions) but not captured by average per capita incomes. This can be done, for the
sample of 75 countries, by regressing the WVS and Gallup measures of life satisfaction
on income alone, and then adding the residuals, which are taken to represent those
features of life satisfaction that are not correlated with average national income, to the
income-based equation explaining the other survey’s measure of life satisfaction.
Because income alone explains a higher fraction of the variance of the Gallup measure,
there is less explanatory power added from the non-income variance from the other
survey. Nonetheless, the explained variance rises from .66 to .77. For the WVS equation,
the explained variance rises from .41 to .60. Thus we have strong evidence that the WVS
and Gallup surveys are exposing some important sustained factors in life satisfaction
going well beyond their mutual links to per capita incomes.
Now that we have seen important common content in the WVS and Gallup measures that
goes well beyond their dependence on income, it is time to consider some of their
differences. First, Table 5 shows, for the 75 countries in common, regressions for crosscountry differences in life satisfaction by per capita incomes and the quality of delivery
of government services, as measured by the same average of four World Bank indices
found most important in explaining earlier waves of WVS data. The value for the year
2000 is used, since it matches the timing of the 4th wave of the WVS and has more
explanatory power for the Gallup variable than do measures of the same variable for
more recent years. Although government service quality and per capita incomes are
highly correlated across countries (+.85), it is nonetheless possible to estimate significant
effects for both income and the quality of government services in equations for both
measures of life satisfaction. The WVS equation explains 50% of the variance, and the
quality of government is more important than income (betas of .58 and .16 respectively).
The Gallup equation is tighter-fitting, explaining 69% of the variance, and income is
more important than the quality of government (betas of .51 and .36 respectively).
There is another respect in which the two surveys appear to tap into life in different ways,
possibly because, as suggested earlier, the use of the Cantril ladder causes people to think
more in terms of pecking order. When the Gallup average measures of positive and
negative affect are added to income-based equations using the 68 countries for which the
affect measures and the WVS data are available, it can be seen, as shown in Table 5, that
the WVS life satisfaction is closely correlated with positive affect, but not with negative
affect, while the Gallup ladder measure of life satisfaction is less than half as much
related to positive affect, and has an equally large coefficient on negative affect. The
greater importance of income to the Gallup than to the WVS measure remains in these
equations adding affect.
Whether these differences between the Gallup and WVS measures are enduring features
of framing of the responses, to other survey differences, or to random factors, remains

11

unknown for now. When fresh Gallup data become available from alternative versions of
the life satisfaction question, it should be possible to find some answers. There is a
pattern of results in psychology suggesting that positive and negative affect have
differing implications for health outcomes (Cohen and Pressman 2006), much in the way
suggested by the WVS results for life satisfaction. For example, when volunteers were
dosed with cold virus, they were less likely to develop symptoms, and the symptoms
were likely to be less severe, the higher was their initial measure of positive affect. The
link with negative affect had the expected sign, but was insignificant. Similarly, nuns in
their twenties who used positive expressions in their autobiographical summaries lived
significantly longer than their peers, while there was no corresponding link to the absence
of negative expressions. There have as yet been no corresponding experiments testing for
the prophylactic power of life satisfaction.
In the meantime, we can in a preliminary way use the larger Gallup sample to dig further
into what factors are most likely to explain why the quality of development, as measured
by life satisfaction, differs among countries at similar levels of income per capita. We
start with our previous result that the quality of government services and the average
level of income per capita together explain 72% of the cross-country variance in life
satisfaction among 129 countries in the Gallup sample, with income being the more
important variable. When some of the possible intermediating variables are added, the
overall power of the equation is increased, while the remaining importance attached to
income and quality of government is reduced. Both simple correlations and regression
analysis suggest that perceived corruption is more closely related to quality of
government than to the level of income, while the reverse is the case for the availability
of running water, food adequacy, and having someone to rely on. The equation with all of
these variables explains 81% of the adjusted cross-country variation of life satisfaction
for the 120 countries with the necessary data, and both income and governmental quality
are left with equal and modestly significant residual roles. The beta coefficients suggest
food and water (.32) and having someone to rely on (.22) as the most important
contributors, followed by absence of corruption (.19) and quality of government (.17).
When international differences in positive and negative affect are added to the equation,
they increase the effect of adequate food and water, leave the income effect unchanged,
lower the corruption effect slightly, with larger reductions for the quality of government
and having someone to rely on. The close connection between affect and having someone
to rely on is already expected from the micro analysis, and for both variables most of the
variance is within rather than between countries.
Finally, we tested the addition of a measure of health satisfaction. While it attracted a
large and significant positive coefficient (even when used to explain WVS life
satisfaction), its interpretation is problematic. First, as already noted by Angus Deaton
(2007), its cross-country variance is not closely linked to that of World Health
Organization measures of life expectancy and healthy life expectancy (+.31 and +.33). It
may be less descriptive of objective health status than are other subjective measures of
health status, since it is only binary, and asks not about the state of health but about
whether the respondent is satisfied with their state of health. This should lead respondents

12

to allow for what they feel they have a right to expect. For example, Canadian and WVS
answers to 5-point subjective assessments respondents’ state of physical health show a
strong downward trend with age. But when Canadian respondents in another survey were
asked to rate the state of their physical health using other people of their age as the point
of comparison, their assessments showed no downward trend with age. This in turn
suggests that measures of health satisfaction are less likely to reflect objective health than
are subjective assessments of health status. And we might also expect that international
differences in health satisfaction might in turn be associated with international
differences in positive affect, as indeed they are (r=+.60).
Adding health satisfaction, as shown in the last equation of Table 5, explains an adjusted
85% of the cross-country variance, leaving significant remaining roles for all other
variables except the quality of government. This is consistent with earlier WVS findings
(Helliwell and Huang 2008) suggesting that a substantial part of the life satisfaction
effects of the quality of government services are mediated by international differences in
subjective and objective measures of health status.
We turn in Table 6 to consider the role of religion in explaining international differences
in life satisfaction. Both the WVS and the Gallup World Poll asked separate questions
about the importance of religion in the respondent’s lives, and about the frequency of
church attendance. Across countries, there is a remarkable consistency between the two
surveys in their assessments of national religiosity and church attendance. For both
importance of religion (r=+.92 between the two surveys, for the 73 overlapping
countries) and frequency of attendance at religious services (r=+.87) the correlations are
even higher than the within-survey correlations between religion and church attendance,
which are r=+.80 (WVS) and r= +.86 (Gallup). In both surveys, the cross-country
correlations between either measure of religion and life satisfaction were negative, and
more strongly so between the measures of religion and any of the direct or proxy
measures of trust. The cross-country correlation between trust and church-going,
although negative, was less so than that between trust and the importance of religion.
When added to a more fully specified equation, however, either religious importance or
church attendance added somewhat to life satisfaction, as shown by the first two
equations in Table 5. If both measures are included, they are too correlated to achieve
significance. An equation that uses the average of the two measures is slightly better then
either alone. The next equation repeats the same equation for the smaller sample of WVS
countries, while the following one adds the WVS measure of social trust. This last
equation replicates a standard finding from the earlier WVS waves, that the negative
correlation between social trust and importance of religion leads to stronger effects for
both when either is added to an equation containing the other. One possible reason for
this might be some form of substitution of two quite different types of trust, that in other
people and that in religion, as means of supporting life satisfaction.
6. Country-by-Country Analysis of Individual Data
Finally, we turn to a third way of using the Gallup data to measure the quality of
development. Previous estimation at the individual and national levels generally assumed

13

that preference differences among individuals could be treated as random variables, so
that it was appropriate to estimate common parameters. This assumption was relaxed to
some extent in Tables 2 and 3, where coefficients were allowed to be different by groups
of country. In this section we carry that strategy further, estimating life satisfaction
equations separately for each country, and then looking for commonalities and interesting
patterns in the resulting cross-country differences in parameter estimates. The national
samples are fairly small, averaging 1000 in the first place, but rendered smaller by lack of
data on key variables, especially household income. As further annual waves of the
Gallup World Poll are undertaken, it should be able to identify more precisely any
resulting cross-country or cross-cultural differences in the correlates of life satisfaction.
Preliminary assessment of the cross-country distributions of coefficients seem consistent
with the view that most of the variables found to be important at the individual level in
the global sample are also significant in most of the individual countries. For example,
the coefficients on the food variable, which has substantial variance within each country,
has significant (as measured by an absolute t-value>2) negative coefficients in 81 of the
105 individual country regressions, while the running water variable, which has much
more of its variance between countries, has significant positive coefficients in only 26 of
the 105 regressions. The social support variable ‘has someone to rely on’ has significant
positive coefficients in 69 of the regressions, and the corruption variable in 35.
The quadratic pattern of age effects is almost universal, with 89 countries having
coefficients that are negative on age and positive on age squared. The gender effect for
males is negative in 78 of the 105 countries, although significantly so in only 23. The
other demographic variables are also fairly weakly defined in the national samples,
reflecting the small sample sizes and the variety of individual experiences. The
coefficient on the marriage variable is positive in 74 of the 105 regressions, although
significantly so in only 16, relative in all cases to the unmarried alternative.
The log of household income is positive in 103 of the 105 country regressions, and
significantly so in 91 cases. This is so even though the equations contain two other
income-dependent variables: adequacy of money for food, and running water in the
home. For all variables the means of the country coefficients are very close to the values
estimated in Table 2, as would be expected if the national samples were drawn from a
global population with broadly similar responses to these variables. As further rounds of
the Gallup World Poll become available it should be possible to investigate more finely
the nature of possible differences in life satisfaction coefficients, and by inference the
structure of preferences, in different countries and country-groupings. For the moment,
the similarity of the country regressions, when combined with the high explanatory
power of the cross-country regressions, tends to support the view that international
differences in average life satisfaction are in fact largely due to systematic differences in
the quality of life in different countries.
7. Conclusion
The three ways of analyzing the global samples of life satisfaction data all tend to support
the view that these assessments tap into the quality of life in meaningful ways. While the
new Gallup results confirm the continuing importance of economic development, they

14

also suggest important ways in which the quality of development could and should be
improved. Continuing availability of life satisfaction data on an internationally
comparable basis, as promised by the Gallup World Poll, provides the possibility for
corresponding increases in the breadth and richness of the assessment of development
performance and objectives. In particular, if the social context of well-being is to be
better understood and improved, better data will need to be collected in large, geo-coded
samples, permitting a better understanding of the nature and sources of high quality
community and national development. In particular, while the role of trust in
communities, workplaces and nations has been shown to be closely linked to life
satisfaction in several studies, it is not yet regularly monitored sufficiently in global and
national surveys.
To those responsible for the design and application of development strategies within and
among nations, a strong case can be made for collecting baseline and regular reassessments of life satisfaction to allow the monitoring of the quality of life in a much
finer-grained way. I have attempted in this paper to show how life satisfaction data
provide a fairly easily collected basis for judgements of the quality of development. The
results reported here relate mainly to cross-national comparisons. However, one of the
strengths of life satisfaction assessments is that they can relatively easily provide the
capacity to assess the quality of life on a much finer geographic and institutional scale.
As national and international policy-makers move toward more evidence-based choices
among alternative institutional arrangements and policy-delivery mechanisms, there is a
natural role for assessments of life satisfaction to become a standard part of the
information collected as part of assessment exercises. Where experimental design is used
explicitly, then life satisfaction assessments are necessary for the control groups as well
as the treatment groups, both before and after the policy changes.
The case I am making is that when people evaluate their life satisfaction they mean what
they say, and their answers are meaningfully comparable across communities, nations
and cultures, and through time. The success of the cross-national explanations of life
satisfaction, and their consistency with within-country estimation, suggests that
international differences in life satisfaction reflect international differences in the quality
of life, and deserve to be taken seriously. In broad terms, people in different nations tend
to value different aspects of their lives in similar terms. Finer grained analysis, which will
require much larger and longer panels of data, will no doubt reveal many fine-grained
differences in what people want. But such analysis is more likely to qualify than to
overturn the main commonalities that appear in the existing global samples.
How much could it matter to focus on life satisfaction as a measure of the quality of
development? There is a growing amount of survey and experimental research showing
that the ways in which people relate to each other, and the extent to which they are
effectively engaged in helping themselves, and especially each other, are strongly related
to their satisfaction with life. Various measurable features of the social context, such as
the extent to which people trust their neighbours, the police, and their colleagues and
employers, have such large values, measured in terms of their income-equivalence, to

15

demand much more attention than they have received from individuals, business,
communities, governments and development agencies.

References
Barrington-Leigh, C.P., and J.F. Helliwell (2007) “Empathy and Emulation: Subjective
Well-Being and the Geography of Comparison Groups.” Paper presented at the
Annual Meetings of the Canadian Economics Association, Halifax, June 2007.
Brickman, P. and D.T. Campbell (1971) “Hedonic Relativism and Planning the Good
Society.” In M.H. Appley, ed., Adaptation Level Theory: A Symposium. (New
York: Academic Press) 287-302.
Brickman, P., D. Coates and R. Janoff-Bullman (1978) “Lottery Winners and Accident
Victims: Is Happiness Relative?” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
36: 917-27.
Cohen, Sheldon and Sarah D. Pressman (2006) “Positive Affect and Health.” Current
Directions in Psychological Science 15(3): 122-5.
Deaton, Angus (2007) “Income, Aging, Health and Well-Being around the World:
Evidence from the Gallup World Poll.” NBER Working Paper No. 13317.
(Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research)
Diener, E., R.E. Lucas and C.N. Scollon (2006) “Beyond the Hedonic Treadmill:
Revising the Adaptation Theory of Well-Being.” American Psychologist 61(4):
305-14
Easterlin, Richard (1974) “Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot? Some
Empirical Evidence” In P.A. David and M. Reder, eds., Nations and Households
in Economic Growth (New York: Academic Press), 89-125.
Frederickson, B.L. and D. Kahneman (2003) “Duration Neglect in Retrospective
Evaluations of Affective Episodes.” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 65: 45-55.
Gallup Organization (2007) The State of Global Well-Being (New York: Gallup Press)
Gough, Ian, and J. A. McGregor, eds (2007) Well-Being in Developing Countries:
from Theory to Research. (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
Halpern, David (2005) Social Capital (Cambridge: Polity Press)
Helliwell, John F. (2003) “How’s Life: Combining Individual and National Variables to
Explain Subjective Well-Being.” Economic Modelling 20: 331-60.

16

Helliwell, John F., and Haifang Huang (2005) “How’s the Job? Well-Being and Social
Capital in the Workplace.” NBER Working Paper No. 11759. (Cambridge:
National Bureau of Economic Research).
Helliwell, John F., and Haifang Huang (2008) “How’s your Government? International
Evidence Linking Good Government and Well-Being.” British Journal of
Political Science 38(4): 595-619. An earlier version is available as NBER
Working Paper No. 11988, January 2006. (Cambridge: National Bureau of
Economic Research).
Helliwell, John F. and Robert D. Putnam (2004) “The social context of well-being” Phil
Trans R. Soc Lon. B 359: 1435-46. Reprinted in F.A. Huppert, B. Kaverne and
N. Baylis, eds., The Science of Well-Being. (London: Oxford University Press,
2005, 435-59).
Helliwell, John F. (2006) “Well-Being, Social Capital and Public Policy: What’s New?”
Economic Journal 116: C34-45.
Kahneman, D. (1999) “Objective Happiness.” In E. Diener, N. Schwarz and D.
Kahneman, eds., Well-Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology (New
York: Russell Sage).
Kahneman, D. and Jason Riis (2005) “Living, and Thinking About it: Two Perspectives
on Life”. In F.A. Huppert, N. Baylis and B. Keverne, eds., The Science of WellBeing. (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
Kahneman, D., P.P. Wakker, and R. Sarin (1997) “Back to Bentham? Exploration of
Experienced Utility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 375-405.
Knack, S. (2001) “Trust, Associational Life and Economic Performance.” In J.F.
Helliwell and A. Bonikowska, eds. The Contribution of Human and Social
Capital to Sustained Economic Growth and Well-Being: International
Symposium Report (Ottawa: Human Resources Development Canada and
OECD) 172-202.
Layard, Richard (2005) Happiness: Lessons from a New Science. (London and New
York: Penguin).
Lucas, Richard E. (2007) “Long-Term Disability is Associated with Lasting Changes in
Subjective Well-Being: Evidence from Two Nationally Representative
Longitudinal Studies.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92(4):
717-30.

17

Lucas, R.E., A.E. Clark, Y. Georgellis and E. Diener (2003) “Re-examining Adaptation
and the Set Point Model of Happiness: Reactions to Changes in Marital Status.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 84(3): 527-39.
Luttmer, Erzo F.P. (2005) “Neighbours as Negatives: Relative Earnings and WellBeing.” Quarterly Journal of Economics (January): 963-1002.
McGregor, J.A. (2007) “Researching Well-Being: From Concepts to Methodology.” In
Gough and McGregor, eds. Well-Being in Developing Countries: from Theory
to Research. (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press) 316-50.
Møller, V. (2007) Researching Quality of Life in a Developing Country: Lessons from
the South African Case”. In Gough and McGregor, eds. Well-Being in
Developing Countries: from Theory to Research. (Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press) 242-58.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2001) “The Well-Being of
Nations: The Role of Human and Social Capital. (Paris: OECD)
Putnam, Robert D. (1993) Making Democracy Work (Princeton: Princeton University
Press).
Putnam, Robert D. (2000) Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
Community (New York: Simon and Schuster).
Redelmeier, D. and D. Kahneman (1996) “Patients’ Memories of Painful Medical
Treatments: Real-Time and Retrospective Evaluations of Two Minimally Invasive
Procedures.” Pain 116: 3-8.
Ryan, R. and E.L. Deci (2001) “On Happiness and Human Potentials: A Review of
Research on Hedonic and Eudaimonic Well-Being.” Annual Review of
Psychology 52: 141-66.
Sen, A. (1990) “Development as Capability Expansion.” In K. Griffin and J. Knight, eds.,
Human Development and the International Development Strategy for the
1990s. (London: Macmillan)
Sen, A. (1999) Development as Freedom. (New York: Knopf Press)
Sen, A. (2002) Rationality and Freedom. (Cambridge MA: Belknap Press)
Schmidt, S., and M. Bullinger (2007) “Cross-cultural Quality of Life Assessment
Approaches and Experiences from the Health Care Field.” In Gough and
McGregor, eds. Well-Being in Developing Countries: from Theory to
Research. (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press) 219-41.

18

Soroka, Stuart, John F. Helliwell and Richard Johnston (2006) “Measuring and
Modelling Interpersonal Trust.” In Fiona Kay and Richard Johnston, eds.,
Diversity, Social Capital and the Welfare State (Vancouver: UBC Press, 2006,
95-132).
Wirtz, D., J. Kruger, C.N. Scollon, and E. Diener (2003) “What to Do on Spring Break?
The Role of Predicted, On-Line and Remembered Experience in Future Choice.”
Psychological Science 14(5): 520-4.

19

Table 1: Results of two-level equation using WVS 4
Dependent Variable: Life Satisfaction
Number of Countries:
75
29
Full WVS Sample
OECD
-0.081
-0.102
Male
Age group: 25 - 34
Age group: 35 - 44
Age group: 45 - 54
Age group: 55 - 64
Age group: 65 and up
Marital status: married
Marital status: as married
Marital status: divorced
Marital status: separated
Marital status: widowed
Education: H.S. equivl.
Education: in between
Education: Univ. equivl.
LFS, unemployed
Income decile, 2nd
Income decile, 3rd
Income decile, 4th
Income decile, 5th

46

Non-OECD
-0.064

[0.049]

[0.084]

[0.049]

-0.236

-0.257

-0.218

[0.048]**

[0.062]**

[0.065]**

-0.388

-0.508

-0.314

[0.074]**

[0.069]**

[0.094]**

-0.449

-0.597

-0.36

[0.072]**

[0.060]**

[0.096]**

-0.344

-0.357

-0.367

[0.074]**

[0.070]**

[0.098]**

-0.194

-0.17

-0.345

[0.098]

[0.104]

[0.143]*

0.129

0.375

0.015

[0.080]

[0.058]**

[0.103]

0.571

0.278

0.548

[0.201]**

[0.098]**

[0.209]*

-0.351

-0.022

-0.685

[0.104]**

[0.071]

[0.169]**

-0.163

-0.407

-0.045

[0.141]

[0.148]*

[0.156]

-0.391

-0.139

-0.502

[0.091]**

[0.052]*

[0.126]**

0.111

0.018

0.137

[0.058]

[0.061]

[0.089]

0.253

-0.018

0.385

[0.093]**

[0.099]

[0.119]**

0.282

-0.033

0.411

[0.095]**

[0.105]

[0.132]**

-0.751

-0.916

-0.708

[0.081]**

[0.099]**

[0.093]**

0.284

0.232

0.29

[0.146]

[0.068]**

[0.210]

0.284

0.488

0.164

[0.125]*

[0.106]**

[0.164]

0.843

0.661

0.898

[0.241]**

[0.120]**

[0.318]**

0.846

0.851

0.852

[0.138]**

[0.178]**

[0.186]**

Table 1: Results of two-level equation using WVS 4
Dependent Variable: Life Satisfaction
Number of Countries:
75
29
Full WVS Sample
OECD
Income decile, 6th
Income decile, 7th
Income decile, 8th
Income decile, 9th
Income decile, 10th
Missing income
information
Log of GDP per capita
in year 2000
Trust in police, 0~1
General Trust, 0~1
Importance of god, 0~1
Frequency of going to chur
to church, 0~1
National Average for
general trust
National average for
importance of god
Governance Quality:
aggregate
Constant

46

Non-OECD

1.157

0.961

1.257

[0.193]**

[0.194]**

[0.247]**

1.173

1.135

1.189

[0.174]**

[0.194]**

[0.236]**

1.352

1.107

1.497

[0.193]**

[0.200]**

[0.254]**

1.328

1.168

1.473

[0.198]**

[0.197]**

[0.291]**

1.584

1.334

1.774

[0.194]**

[0.200]**

[0.257]**

0.899

0.851

0.872

[0.148]**

[0.188]**

[0.202]**

0.531

0.574

0.533

[0.284]

[0.291]

[0.314]

0.533

0.603

0.472

[0.146]**

[0.233]*

[0.187]*

0.223

0.31

0.198

[0.035]**

[0.039]**

[0.052]**

0.33

0.34

0.316

[0.041]**

[0.041]**

[0.061]**

0.226

0.096

0.267

[0.095]*

[0.094]

[0.130]*

-0.492

0.625

-1.361

[0.664]

[0.770]

[1.048]

0.608

0.599

0.673

[0.393]

[0.730]

[0.452]

0.51

0.455

0.333

[0.234]*

[0.311]

[0.313]

5.7

5.483

5.81

[0.512]**

[0.483]**

[0.634]**

41096

61617

0.16

0.11

102713
Observations
R-squared
0.17
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Table 2: Results of two-level equation using Gallup World Poll
Dependent Variable: Life Satisfaction
Number of Countries:
105
27
All Countries
OECD
-0.086
-0.204
Male
Age
Age squared/100
Married or as if married
Separated or divorced
Attained tertiary
education
Log of hshld. income
Home has running water
Not enough money for
food in last 12 months
Perception of corruption
Has someone to count on
Percentage with tertiary
education
Log of GDP per capita
in year 2003
Average: Running water
Average: Not enough
money for food
Average: Perception
of corruption
Average: Has someone
to count on
Constant

[0.025]**
-0.043
[0.006]**
0.038
[0.005]**
0.229
[0.037]**
-0.107
[0.052]*
0.296
[0.036]**
0.408
[0.027]**
0.196
[0.057]**
-0.596
[0.036]**
-0.228
[0.042]**
0.541
[0.034]**
-0.043
[0.470]
-0.036
[0.106]
0.305
[0.318]
-0.053
[0.394]
-1.398
[0.314]**
2.011
[0.659]**
6.044
[0.774]**
69806

[0.040]**
-0.065
[0.010]**
0.062
[0.009]**
0.326
[0.044]**
0.006
[0.058]
0.222
[0.050]**
0.504
[0.047]**
-0.27
[0.309]
-0.735
[0.076]**
-0.291
[0.053]**
0.858
[0.081]**
-0.463
[0.578]
0.612
[0.359]
-0.976
[8.077]
2.521
[1.224]*
-1.388
[0.383]**
2.977
[1.438]*
7.301
[7.512]
17002

Observations
R-squared
0.32
0.24
Standard errors in brackets; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

78
Non-OECD
-0.051
[0.028]
-0.035
[0.006]**
0.029
[0.006]**
0.177
[0.049]**
-0.117
[0.070]
0.342
[0.044]**
0.378
[0.028]**
0.226
[0.056]**
-0.572
[0.038]**
-0.19
[0.053]**
0.495
[0.035]**
-0.071
[1.048]
-0.108
[0.118]
0.399
[0.329]
-0.132
[0.439]
-0.691
[0.363]
1.877
[0.671]**
5.168
[0.774]**
52804
0.22

Table 3: Gallup results by region
Dependent Variable: Life Satisfaction
Number of Countries:
20
E. Europe and
FSU
-0.038
Male
Age
Age squared/100
Married or as if married
Separated or divorced
Attained tertiary
education
Log of hshld. income
Home has running water
Not enough money for
food in last 12 months
Perception of corruption
Has someone to count on
Percentage with tertiary
education
Log of GDP per capita
in year 2003
Average: Running water
Average: Not enough
money for food
Average: Perception
of corruption
Average: Has someone
to count on
Constant

[0.029]
-0.068
[0.010]**
0.058
[0.010]**
0.131
[0.055]*
0.033
[0.077]
0.34
[0.068]**
0.486
[0.058]**
0.168
[0.084]
-0.733
[0.062]**
-0.398
[0.102]**
0.657
[0.066]**
0.047
[0.821]
-0.246
[0.165]
-0.954
[0.857]
-0.71
[1.180]
0.675
[0.787]
1.944
[1.388]
5.684
[2.008]*
13617

17

4

22

W. Europe

USA, CAN,
AUS, NZ

L. America and
Caribbean

-0.181
[0.039]**
-0.045
[0.012]**
0.045
[0.010]**
0.222
[0.057]**
0.01
[0.064]
0.14
[0.046]**
0.613
[0.070]**
0.027
[0.334]
-0.69
[0.138]**
-0.278
[0.067]**
0.925
[0.118]**
-1.186
[0.804]
0.557
[0.716]
14.573
[14.177]
2.952
[1.446]
-1.002
[0.403]*
7.867
[3.033]*
-13.611
[14.217]
10087

-0.26
[0.099]
-0.052
[0.011]*
0.062
[0.012]*
0.41
[0.066]**
-0.102
[0.014]**
0.125
[0.072]
0.426
[0.051]**
1.001
[0.348]
-0.571
[0.174]*
-0.382
[0.110]*
0.818
[0.159]*
-0.102
[0.063]
-0.357
[0.150]
0
[0.000]
-1.7
[0.226]**
0
[0.000]
0
[0.000]
6.923
[0.339]**
3459

Observations
R-squared
0.19
0.20
0.14
Standard errors in brackets; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

-0.196
[0.054]**
-0.065
[0.009]**
0.053
[0.009]**
0.217
[0.093]*
-0.047
[0.119]
0.277
[0.049]**
0.472
[0.047]**
0.271
[0.115]*
-0.603
[0.078]**
-0.188
[0.091]
0.629
[0.092]**
2.484
[1.474]
-0.54
[0.226]*
0.541
[1.117]
-3.516
[1.174]**
0.173
[1.232]
3.756
[2.110]
3.855
[2.421]
12082
0.16

Table 3: Gallup results by region
Dependent Variable: Life Satisfaction
Number of Countries:
15
Asia
Male
Age
Age squared/100
Married or as if married
Separated or divorced
Attained tertiary
education
Log of hshld. income
Home has running water
Not enough money for
food in last 12 months
Perception of corruption
Has someone to count on
Percentage with tertiary
education
Log of GDP per capita
in year 2003
Average: Running water
Average: Not enough
money for food
Average: Perception
of corruption
Average: Has someone
to count on
Constant

-0.117
[0.082]
-0.043
[0.009]**
0.046
[0.009]**
0.268
[0.096]*
-0.148
[0.103]
0.424
[0.118]**
0.38
[0.038]**
0.211
[0.123]
-0.737
[0.039]**
-0.068
[0.086]
0.434
[0.081]**
-0.555
[1.571]
0.127
[0.201]
0.201
[0.776]
0.094
[1.161]
0.417
[1.016]
-0.299
[1.587]
6.683
[1.638]**
11499

26

Africa
-0.007
[0.041]
-0.003
[0.010]
0.001
[0.011]
0.101
[0.063]
-0.126
[0.110]
0.449
[0.171]*
0.271
[0.037]**
0.265
[0.090]**
-0.405
[0.056]**
-0.123
[0.106]
0.432
[0.048]**
-6.235
[3.820]
-0.115
[0.122]
0.433
[0.522]
-0.736
[0.767]
-0.882
[0.614]
1.845
[0.616]**
4.58
[0.826]**
18502

21

64

W. Europe, US, All Other Regions
NZ, CAN, AUS
-0.203
[0.037]**
-0.045
[0.009]**
0.048
[0.009]**
0.291
[0.052]**
-0.045
[0.052]
0.147
[0.042]**
0.545
[0.055]**
0.199
[0.312]
-0.661
[0.103]**
-0.304
[0.054]**
0.924
[0.098]**
-0.767
[0.652]
0.43
[0.489]
15.284
[12.778]
1.698
[0.975]
-0.98
[0.402]*
6.019
[2.785]*
-12.874
[12.488]
13546

Observations
R-squared
0.24
0.12
0.19
Standard errors in brackets; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

-0.082
[0.036]*
-0.033
[0.007]**
0.029
[0.007]**
0.154
[0.060]*
-0.059
[0.081]
0.39
[0.059]**
0.352
[0.028]**
0.223
[0.068]**
-0.533
[0.042]**
-0.135
[0.057]*
0.462
[0.038]**
0.03
[0.886]
-0.122
[0.126]
0.886
[0.351]*
-0.095
[0.508]
-0.418
[0.387]
1.261
[0.764]
5.047
[0.804]**
42643
0.25

Table 4a: Adding positive and negative affect, social capital to two-level Gallup equation
Dependent Variable: Life Satisfaction
Number of Countries:
101
83
Adding positive and
Moving closer to
negative affect
social capital
Positive affect

0.877
[0.064]**

Negative affect

-0.69
[0.092]**
0.301

Donated money

[0.044]**
0.089

Volunteered time

[0.040]*
0.162

Helped a stranger

[0.038]**

Male
Age
Age squared/100
Married or as if married
Separated or divorced
Attained tertiary
education
Log of hshld. income
Home has running water

-0.097

-0.089

[0.029]**

[0.026]**

-0.037

-0.038

[0.006]**

[0.006]**

0.034

0.033

[0.006]**

[0.006]**

0.193

0.146

[0.039]**

[0.037]**

-0.091

-0.111

[0.047]

[0.058]

0.269

0.298

[0.038]**

[0.043]**

0.364

0.385

[0.024]**

[0.027]**

0.187

0.162

[0.065]**

[0.049]**

Not enough money for
food in last 12 months

-0.484

-0.566

[0.035]**

[0.037]**

Perception of corruption

-0.158

-0.222

[0.044]**

[0.049]**

0.415

0.468

[0.032]**

[0.034]**

Has someone to count on

Table 4a: Adding positive and negative affect, social capital to two-level Gallup equation
Dependent Variable: Life Satisfaction
Number of Countries:
101
83
Adding positive and
Moving closer to
negative affect
social capital
Percentage with tertiary
education
Log of GDP per capita
in year 2003
Average: Running water
Average: Not enough
money for food
Average: Perception
of corruption
Average: Has someone
to count on
Constant
Observations
R-squared
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

0.015

0.427

[0.465]

[0.599]

-0.056

-0.149

[0.096]

[0.098]

0.528

0.417

[0.296]

[0.258]

-0.336

-0.053

[0.362]

[0.353]

-1.328

-1.383

[0.288]**

[0.318]**

1.399

2.339

[0.599]*

[0.536]**

5.754

5.1

[0.712]**

[0.619]**

62075

54745

0.35

0.3

Table 4b: Comparing life satisfaction and positive, negative affect in Gallup
Dependent Variable:
Positive Affect
Negative Affect
Life Satisfaction Today
Number of Countries:
128
116
129
Equation 1
Equation 2
Equation 3
Eastern Europe and
Former Soviet Union
Western Europe
US, Canada, Australia,
New Zealand
Latin America and
Caribbean
Asia
Africa
Constant

-0.056

0.017

1.199

[0.020]**

[0.016]

[0.166]**

0.054

-0.022

2.888

[0.022]*

[0.017]

[0.258]**

0.16

-0.016

3.445

[0.018]**

[0.015]

[0.142]**

0.115

0.025

1.895

[0.020]**

[0.016]

[0.209]**

-0.028

0.005

1.28

[0.025]

[0.018]

[0.220]**

0.001

0.02

0.255

[0.005]

[0.006]**

[0.057]**

0.645

0.159

3.867

[0.016]**

[0.012]**

[0.128]**

117992

136955

0.01

0.15

123429
Observations
R-squared
0.04
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Gallup
0.619
[0.148]**
0.403

68

[0.076]**

0.647

0.326

[0.166]

0.201

WVS with pos.
and neg. affect

0.285

[0.164]

Beta Full Gallup Sample
0.509
0.360

[0.091]**

Beta
0.157
0.276

68

-0.156

0.270

0.105

0.538

Gallup with pos. Beta
and neg. affect

0.659

[0.134]**

0.119

[0.132]

3.025

[1.291]*

[0.136]**

0.528

[0.808]**
[1.605]

5.153

0.58

0.16

Beta

Table 5: Comparison of national-level World Values and Gallup results
Dependent Variable: Life Satisfaction
75
75
129
Number of Countries:
WVS-4

[0.196]

0.199

Log of GDP per capita
in year 2003
[0.180]**

6.187
[1.003]**

2.584

-2.864

6.589

-0.011

6.492

-0.214

6.494

0.67

Governance quality:
Delivery, 2000
Positive Affect
Negative Affect
Average: Perception
of corruption
Adequate Food and Water
Average: Has someone
to count on
Average: Satisfied with
personal health
Constant

[0.645]**

68

[0.801]**
68

0.768

[0.154]**
129

0.679

[0.255]**

0.724

[0.338]**

75
75
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
0.496
0.691
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Note: Beta values represent the standardized regression coefficients

Table 5: Comparison of National-Level World Values and Gallup Results
Dependent Variable: Life Satisfaction
116
120
Number of Countries:
111

0.646
[0.104]*

0.214

0.069
[0.083]

-0.948
[0.284]**
2.078

0.006

0.454

-0.146

-0.128

0.201

0.057

0.241

120

1.586

[0.325]**

0.989

[0.260]**

-1.134

[0.080]**

0.435

0.236

0.146

0.218

-0.176

0.428

More fully specified Beta More fully specified Beta More fully specified Beta
equation using gallup
equation adding affect
equation using health

[0.069]**
0.2

Full gallup sample
with affect

0.143
[0.092]*

0.243

[0.085]

2.527

0.211

Log of GDP per capita
in year 2003

2.911

[0.582]**

[0.098]*

Governance quality:
Delivery, 2000
[0.575]**

-2.658

0.166

Positive Affect
-2.29

[0.894]**
-0.188
0.324

[0.362]**
0.064

3.156

0.224

[0.600]**

4.915

[0.685]

3.023
4.346

[0.528]**
5.057

[0.643]**

2.431

[0.354]**

1.467

[0.318]**

-1.21

[0.909]*

Negative Affect
Average: Perception
of corruption
Adequate Food and Water
Average: Has someone
to count on
Average: Satisfied with
personal health
Constant

[0.636]**

120

[0.677]**
111

0.848

[0.662]**

0.864

[0.474]**

116
120
Observations
Adjusted R-Squared
0.806
0.812
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Note: Beta values represent the standardized regression coefficients

Table 6: Role of religion in explaining international differences in life satisfaction
Dependent Variable: Life Satisfaction
Number of Countries:
120
120
73
73
Equation 1 Beta Equation 2 Beta Equation 3 Equation 4
Log of GDP per capita
in year 2003
Average: Perception
of corruption
Adequate Food and Water

0.41

0.403

[0.093]**
-1.713

-0.27

National average for
importance of religion

2.559

0.326

-0.25

1.542

0.34

[0.354]**
0.235

[0.640]**
0.655

-1.596
[0.276]**

[0.354]**

Average: Has someone
to count on

0.379

[0.089]**

[0.287]**
1.478

0.385

2.712

0.249

[0.637]**
0.134

[0.294]*
0.783

National average for
attended place of worship

0.503

0.415

[0.152]**

[0.145]**

-1.751

-1.168

[0.371]**

[0.390]**

1.365

1.42

[0.634]*

[0.593]*

2.992

4.074

[1.179]*

[1.150]**

0.832

1.247

[0.379]*

[0.376]**

0.137

[0.301]*
1.888

National average for
general trust
Constant

[0.576]**
4.537

4.372

4.254

1.969

[0.643]**

[0.647]**

[1.230]**

[1.344]

120
120
73
Observations
0.812
0.815
0.757
Adjusted R-Squared
Standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Note: Beta values represent the standardized regression coefficients

73
0.788

