NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A DEPRESSING SCENARIO:
MORTGAGE DEBT BECOMES UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE
Casey B. Mulligan
Working Paper 14514
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14514

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2008

I appreciate the comments and patience of many University of Chicago students who experienced
an even more burdensome exposition of these ideas. I will provide updates on this matter on my blog
www.panic2008.net. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

A Depressing Scenario: Mortgage Debt Becomes Unemployment Insurance
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 14514
November 2008
JEL No. E24,H21,J22
ABSTRACT
When asset values fall, the owners of collateralized loans are not in an enviable position. Nonetheless,
they possess a kind of monopoly power over their borrowers that they do not possess when borrowers
are solvent. Lenders maximize profits by price discriminating, but create deadweight costs in the process.
From the perspective of the aggregate labor market, it is as if lenders were levying their own labor
income tax, on top of the taxes already levied by public treasuries. Governments have an incentive
to regulate this price discrimination, repudiate part of the private debts, cut their own tax rates, or acquire
the debt themselves. These conditions may describe both the 1930s and economic events today.

Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu

By some measures, housing prices have fallen by a third since 2006 and are
forecast to fall further. As a result, many home mortgage amounts significantly exceed
the value of the collateral – perhaps by an aggregate amount as much as $1 trillion. The
housing turmoil has wealth effects and the price crash curtails residential construction
while reducing investment goods prices and encouraging nonresidential investment
(Mulligan and Threinen, 2008). But the settlement of the mortgage claims themselves
may have further effects on the economy; investigating that settlement is the purpose of
this paper.
Debt obligations can sometimes exceed a borrower’s capacity to pay, in which
case he may not have an incentive to produce income that can be seized by the lender.
Debt forgiveness can make both borrower and lender better off. This problem of debt
overhang has been widely recognized in the context of sovereign debt (Sachs, 1990), and
has been applied to consumer debt as well. I extend the standard collateralized debt
overhang model to include multiple and heterogeneous borrowers, and then work out
some aggregate implications for the labor market.
Debt overhang has something like a social multiplier.

When collateral is

valuable, only a few borrowers will not pay their loans in full. Lenders can restructure
debt for those few without much consequence for its other borrowers. As collateral
values fall, the worst-off borrowers cannot be forgiven as easily, because that forgiveness
provides bad incentives for the others. As collateral values fall in the wider economy, the
worst off borrowers have increasingly bad incentives to earn income. Sachs (1990, p. 22)
discusses a related problem of “precedent” in the country context – that a bank may
negotiate with a country with an eye toward future negotiations with other countries. In
my model, a bank negotiates with an individual borrower with an eye toward its effect on

negotiations with other borrowers, but the connections among borrowers are merely the
incentive compatibility constraints that are like those faced by public treasuries.
From an aggregate point of view, low collateral values create high tax rates on
labor income, but these taxes do not go to the Treasury – they go to the lenders. Indeed,
the Treasury loses tax revenue from lender efforts to recoup some of their principal. That
is, lender and Treasury taxation interact with each other – lenders’ incentive to tax rises
with the Treasury’s tax rate.
Fisher (1933), Mishkin (1978), and Bernanke and Gertler (1983), Kroszner (1999)
and others have noted that household balance sheets seem to be correlated with the
business cycle and have offered theoretical interpretations of this correlation. However,
their models operate on an investment or intertemporal margin, whereas my model
operates on the consumption-leisure margin. In my approach, credit markets could be
functioning well in that new loans permit intertemporal margin rates of substitution to
equal the marginal product of capital; employment suffers merely because current income
is a criterion for the forgiveness of prior debts. The problem is the settlement of old
loans, not the intermediation of new ones.
Section I begins with a simple model of debt overhang and lender profit
maximizing debt forgiveness, in which borrowers differ in their willingness to repay and
that willingness is only imperfectly observed by the lender. As collateral values fall, a
larger fraction of borrowers consider paying less than the full amount and the lender
optimally discriminates among them according to income, employment status, and other
indicators of the willingness to pay.

This discriminating debt forgiveness distorts

borrower behavior much like a labor income tax or an unemployment insurance program
would.
Section II shows that prior business cycles – especially the Great Depression –
have exhibited labor supply distortions that have usually been interpreted as “mysterious”
in the sense that they look like they could have been created by counter-cyclical taxes,
except that actual taxes paid to the public treasury were not so counter-cyclical. I offer a
new interpretation of those mysterious distortions – some of them may be the distortions
created by private debt collection.

2

Section III considers the interactions of the mortgage debt forgiveness with labor
income taxes paid to the public treasury. Even a tax (to the public treasury) paid by a
minority of persons can distort the labor supply of persons not paying the tax because of
its impact on lenders’ debt collection strategies. Section IV concludes.

I. A Simple Model of Debt Forgiveness and Labor Market Distortions
I.A. Debt Forgiveness as Mechanism Design
Each individual of a group of ex ante identical borrowers obtains a collateralized
loan. Initially, the value of the collateral exceeds the amount lent. Some time after the
beginning of the loan, but before its final payment, the borrowers experience a common
change in their collateral value. Of particular interest is the case in which collateral
values fall: the each loan now has par value that exceeds the value of collateral by b. In
addition, each borrower has a received an idiosyncratic shock to his privately observed
labor productivity: half have productivity wL and the other half have productivity wH >
wL. nL and nH denote the work effort by the low and high types, respectively. Each
individual produces the product of his effort and his productivity. Each individual has a
utility function u(c,n) defined over consumption c and work effort n. Consumption and
leisure are assumed to be normal goods in the sense that c rises and n falls when utility
rises for a fixed marginal rate of substitution.
Borrowers have the option of declaring bankruptcy or inviting foreclosure. After
a borrower has exercised this option, he works the efficient amount and looses a lump
sum T ( w) that increases with his true productivity.

The lump sum loss can be

interpreted as time and resources spent on bankruptcy proceedings, psychic costs, or lost
access to credit.
There is a positive repayment amount, but less than b and T ( w) that is mutually
preferred to foreclosure by both the borrower and the lender. If the lender knew the
borrower’s type, he could insist on a payment just a penny less than T ( w) – backed up
with the threat of foreclosure. The borrower would make the payment because it is less
than foreclosure costs him. However, I assume that borrower type w is not observed by
the creditor.
3

I assume that borrowers’ various creditors have a clear seniority, so that creditors
do not compete with each other to obtain repayment. Thus, once the collateral value has
fallen below loan par, the senior creditor has a kind of monopoly power vis-à-vis his
borrowers. The creditor may not succeed in obtaining full payment for the loan, but he
still seeks to maximize the total repayments received.

Denoting as TL and TH the

repayments by the low and high types, respectively, that maximum can be described by:
max
TL + TH
TL , TH , nL , nH

s.t.

u ( wH nH − TH , nH ) ≥ max {u ( wL nL − TL , wL nL / wH ), uH }
u ( wL nL − TL , nL ) ≥ max {u ( wH nH − TH , wH nH / wL ), uL }
TL , TH ≤ b
ui ≡ max u ( wi ni − Ti , ni ) given Ti
ni
Ti ≡ α + β wi , i = L, H
where α and β are constants.
Ignoring for the moment the second term in each of the braces {}, the first
constraint requires that the high type prefer the repayment offered to, and income
required by, self-declared high types to those offered to self-declared low types.

The

second constraint requires that the low type prefer what is offered low types. These two
incentive compatibility constraints are just as those specified in the Mirrlees (1971)
optimal tax problem. As in that case, weak conditions on the utility function ensure that
the second incentive compatibility constraint does not bind.
The second term in each of the braces {} creates a “participation constraint.”
That is, the creditor must offer to forgive enough of the debt that the borrower prefers to
repay the rest rather than declaring bankruptcy or inviting foreclosure. As indicated, the
outside option depends on the cost of foreclosure T ( w) . The last pair of constraints says
that the lender cannot collect more than the par value of the loan.
The full information solution (that is, the solution without incentive constraints)
has both types working the efficient amount and paying the minimum of b and the

4

foreclosure cost. If that cost did not vary by type, then the efficient solution would be
incentive compatible because the payment is independent of the labor supply decision.
However, unemployed or otherwise unproductive persons may have less to lose
from bankruptcy, in which case the efficient solution may not be incentive compatible.
That is, a productive person may benefit by reducing his income and receiving the more
generous loan forgiveness given to unproductive persons. In terms of the parameters of
the model above, this means that β > 0. In order to characterize solutions to this version
of the problem, and to apply it to recent events, it is helpful to consider comparative
statics with respect to the parameter b – the amount by which the loan’s par value
exceeds the value of collateral – ranging from 0 to values large enough that both types
consider foreclosure.

I.B. Zone I: Full Repayment
If b is less than T ( wL ) , then the creditor can obtain full repayment from both
types by insisting on it, with the threat of foreclosing if a borrower fails to pay. All
borrowers will repay because their foreclosure cost is greater than the amount owed.
Borrowers cannot affect the amount of their payment by adjusting their work effort, so
they work the efficient amount. The lender is unaffected by a marginal change in
collateral.
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate some of the results. Each Figure has b on the horizontal

axis. Figure 1’s vertical axis measures outcomes for the low type: implicit marginal tax
rate (that is, the percentage difference between marginal rate of substitution and
productivity), labor supply, repayment, and write-offs. Figure 2 displays the outcomes
for the high type. Both types have a zero marginal tax in Zone I; they work the efficient
amount. For the purposes of illustration, leisure is assumed to be a normal good so that
work effort rises with b in Zone I.2

2

The wealth effects are best interpreted in relative terms (high type versus low type), because T may be
offset by other items on borrowers’ balance sheets. For example, borrowers may also be bank shareholders
or anticipate purchasing additional collateral in the future (see Buiter, 2008, and Mulligan, 2008, for more
on this issue).

5

I.C. Zone II: Efficient Means-Tested Forgiveness
For b slightly larger than T ( wL ) , the creditor does not ask for full repayment
from the low type, because otherwise the low type would choose foreclosure. The low
type just pays T ( wL ) . The high type still repays in full, because from his perspective it is
not worth cutting labor supply so much as to earn wLnL, merely in order to be granted the
forgiveness b - T ( wL ) . The forgiveness b - T ( wL ) is small by definition of the Zone II,
but the required change in labor supply to obtain the forgiveness is discrete. In this Zone,
the low type is unaffected by b. The high type’s repayment continues to be b.
Outcomes in this zone can be implemented with a means test. Namely debt is
forgiven in the amount b - T ( wL ) for anyone who earns less than or equal to wLnL, where
nL is the efficient labor for a low type making a repayment in the amount T ( wL ) . High
types do not ask for the forgiveness because they prefer not to pass the means test. The
low type does not have to change his behavior in order to pass the means test.3
Low type forgiveness increases one-for-one with b in Zone II. A reduction in the
aggregate value of collateral does not affect the low type, but is rather split between the
lender (who pays for the low type’s loss) and the high type (who pays his own). One
empirical test of whether the economy is in Zone I or some other Zone is whether lenders
loan value depends on the value of collateral. Given the massive loan write offs by
lenders in 2007 and 2008, Zone I will not be an adequate description of today’s
conditions.

I.D. Zone III: Rising Tax Distortion
Suppose for the moment that T ( wH ) were enough greater than T ( wL ) that the
high type is willing to cut his labor supply to earn wLnL in order to be forgiven
T ( wH ) − T ( wL ) .

Then there is some bˆ ∈ (T ( wL ), T ( wH ) ) that makes the high type

(

)

indifferent between passing the means test and repaying b̂ in full.4 For b ∈ bˆ, T ( wH ) ,
3

For more exposition of the implementation of Mirrlees-optimal taxes with means tests, see Salanie (2003).

4

b̂ is defined implicitly by u ( wH nH − bˆ, nH ) ≡ u ( wL nL − T ( wL ), wL nL / wH ) , where nL and nH

denote the efficient labor for the low and high type, respectively.

6

the lender has to decide whether he wants to also forgive the high type some amount or
strengthen the means test (that is, reduce the income threshold beyond which full
payment is demanded) so that the high type can still be induced to pay in full. I refer to

(

)

b ∈ bˆ, T ( wH ) as Zone III.

In Zone III, the three potentially binding constraints are (i) the high type’s
incentive constraint, (ii) the low type’s participation constraint, and (iii) the constraint
that the high type cannot be forced to pay more than he owes.

In this case, the

Lagrangian for the debt collection problem is:

L = TL + TH

+ λH [u ( wH nH − TH , nH ) − u ( wL nL − TL , wL nL / wH ) ]
+ λL [u ( wL nL − TL , nL ) − uL ] + λb [b − TH ]
where λH, λL, and λb are Lagrange multipliers. Under the usual assumption that the high
type’s marginal utility of consumption is lower when he earns wHnH rather than wLnL, a
revenue neutral reduction in the high type’s payment will tighten the incentive constraint
and is therefore not optimal; TH = b.
Clearly, the first order condition for high type effort equates the high type’s
marginal rate of substitution to his productivity; optimal tax rate is zero at the top as in
Mirrlees (1971). Thus, in order to make the high type willing to work the efficient
amount, the creditor optimally strengthens the means test by reducing nL below his
efficient amount.5 Because the low type has the option to pay nothing and pay the
foreclosure cost, strengthening the means test requires reducing the payment owed by the
low type.
One measure of the strength of the means test is the “marginal tax rate” or the
percentage by which the low type’s marginal rate of substitution is below his
productivity. In Zone II, the low type’s marginal tax rate is zero. In Zone III, the low
type’s marginal tax rate is positive and, assuming that the wealth effect of b on the high
type is not too strong, increases with b. Labor supply falls with b because utility is
5

In terms of the lagrangian, low type effort enters both low type utility and the incentive constraint. If low
type utility were the only consideration, low type effort would be efficient. Because low type effort also
tightens the incentive constraint, optimal low type effort is less than the efficient amount.

7

constant (recall the participation constraint) and the marginal rate of substitution is
falling.
Low type debt forgiveness increases even faster than b. One empirical test of
whether the economy is in Zone III (or IV) rather than Zone II is the degree to which
reductions in collateral value affect the market value of loans. If the market value of
loans falls by more than the value of collateral (or more than the value of collateral times
the fraction of loans made to persons not paying in full), then Zone III (or IV) better
describes the situation. This is a basic implication of the model: the amount of departure
between combined borrower-lender value and the value of collateral indicates the amount
of inefficiency.

I.E. Zone IV: Lenders Own All of the Collateral at the Margin
The lender cannot ask the high type to pay back more than T ( wH ) , so b greater
than this amount is written off for both low and high types. Borrower behavior and
marginal tax rates are the same throughout Zone IV as at the border with Zone III. The
lender owns all of the collateral at the margin; aggregate loan value varies one-for-one
with aggregate collateral value. With a caveat mentioned below. Zone IV has a labor
supply distortion for the low type, but does not grow with b as it did in Zone III.
Zone III might not exist if T ( wH ) is too close to T ( wL ) . If so, there is no labor
supply distortion for any b, and only a small range of b in which the low type is forgiven
but the high type is not.

I.F. Expectations-Augmented Philips Curve and the Consumption-Leisure Ratio
Obviously, lenders consider the expected future value of collateral when they
make a loan and intend the amount loaned would, with significant probability, be less
than the value of collateral. If collateral values are expected to rise, more can be lent. In
other words, the gap between loan amount and collateral values b is positive only
sometimes – when collateral values are significantly less than expected. Let μ denote the
amount by which the collateral value is expected to exceed the amount lent. At the time
of the initial loan, the expected b is -μ. The shock -μ-b is the “unexpected collateral
value inflation:” the amount by which collateral values are surprisingly high. Because
8

the marginal tax rate is a function of b, the marginal tax rate is a function of the shock
-μ-b to collateral values. Figure 3 graphs the marginal tax rate as a function unexpected
collateral inflation. The marginal tax rate is zero over a wide range of shocks, and is
positive for the most negative shocks.
Figure 3 is a kind of expectations-augmented Philips curve. It has unexpected
collateral value inflation on one axis.

For fixed w and c, the vertical axis is

monotonically increasing in leisure. Interestingly, this expectations-augmented Philips
curve says that, for most outcomes, unexpected inflation does not affect leisure.
Moreover, even for the more negative shocks, it is not money growth or consumer price
inflation per se that reduces leisure, but rather collateral value inflation.
Since Barro and King (1984), much of macroeconomics research has used
something like the consumption-leisure ratio to study business cycles in the labor market,
rather than a Philips curve. My empirical work follows the Barro and King tradition. Let
MRS(c,n) denote the marginal rate of substitution function implied by the utility function
u(c,n). Because consumption and leisure are normal goods, MRS rises with c and n. It
follows that c and n move in the same direction when the marginal tax rate changes for a
given productivity w (Barro and King, 1984). Moreover, with a particular functional
form for MRS, the effect of the marginal tax rate on the relationship between c, n, and w
can be quantified. For the purposes of illustration, I use the marginal rate of substitution
function γc/(1-n), where c is aggregate real consumption expenditure per adult, n is total
work hours per adult per 16 hour day,6 and γ > 0 is a constant. With this function, the
ratio c/[w(1-n)] of aggregate consumption expenditure to leisure expenditure is
proportional to one minus the marginal tax rate, where the constant of proportionality is γ
(the budget share from the utility function).
When collateral values fall enough, b exceeds b̂ and the marginal tax rate for the
low type becomes positive and rising with b. The marginal tax rate for the high type is
zero, so the average marginal tax rate becomes positive and rises with b when b exceeds
b̂ . That is, when collateral values fall enough, they will reduce the ratio c/[w(1-n)] of

aggregate consumption expenditure to leisure expenditure.
6

For sensitivity analysis with respect to the functional form and measurement of the aggregate time series,
see Mulligan (2002).

9

II. Aggregate Evidence on Labor Market Distortions over Time

It is well known that the ratio of aggregate consumption expenditure to leisure
expenditure is pro-cyclical.

Hall (1997) describes the fluctuations in the ratio as

preference shifts.7 Gali, Gertler, and Lopez-Salido (2003) interpret the fluctuations as
evidence of imperfections in the labor market such as nominal rigidities. Mulligan (2002,
2005) attempts, with only a little success, to attribute the fluctuations to labor union
distortions and public policy distortions such as taxes and regulation.

II.A. Labor Market Distortions during the Great Depression
The Great Depression and World War II are two of the most dramatic instances of
changes in the consumption-leisure expenditure ratio, and the difficulty with explaining
those changes. In order to consider changes in the ratio in units of marginal tax rates,
Figure 4’s solid series graphs one minus γ (the budget share from the utility function)
times the consumption-leisure expenditure ratio, with some adjustments made during the
war years to reflect output mis-measurement and the involuntary nature of wartime
military labor supply (see Mulligan, 2005, p. 910). The solid series was high during the
Depression and low during World War II.
If preferences were stable and labor income taxes were the only distortion on the
consumption-leisure margin, Figure 4’s series would follow the marginal labor income
tax rate. However, in fact labor income taxes levied by the U.S. Treasury actually
changed in the other direction, as shown by Figure 4’s dashed series. For example, there
was no payroll tax for much of the 1930s and hardly anyone paid federal individual
income tax until World War II. The largest increases in the marginal individual income
tax rate in U.S. history occurred at the beginning of World War II, and some of the
largest cuts occurred at the end of the war.

7

Hall’s characterization is not always taken literally – rather, that the lesson from Hall is that MRS =
productivity does not adequately model the business cycle.

10

II.B. Household Debt during the Great Depression
So far no one has explained why the consumption-leisure ratio – an aggregate
indicator of the marginal rate of substitution – would depart from the productivity of
labor so much in the 1930s, and then depart again in the other direction in the 1940s.
Cole and Ohanian (2004) attribute some of the persistence of the Great Depression’s low
consumption-leisure expenditure ratio to an increase in union power and labor market
regulation.8 Based the weak assumption that Cole and Ohanian’s story only explains part
of what happened during the Great Depression, my purpose here is to suggest the
possibility that debt forgiveness may explain another part.
Bernanke (1983, p. 260) describes some of the key debt market events in the
1930s:
“Given that debt contracts were written in nominal terms, the protracted fall in
prices and money incomes greatly increased debt burdens. According to Evans Clark
(1933), the ratio of debt service to national income went from 9 percent in 1939 to 19.8
percent in 1932-33. … about half of all residential properties were mortgaged at the
beginning of the Great Depression …. At the beginning of 1933, owners of 45 percent of
all U.S. farms, holding 52 percent of the value of farm mortgage debt, were delinquent in
payments.”
Thus, in the 1930s many borrowers owed more on their loans than their collateral was
worth. More research is needed to determine how often 1930s creditors means-tested
their debt forgiveness. To the degree that it occurred, work incentives were diluted.

III. Trickle Down and Up: Interactions Between Public and Private Taxation

The highest marginal income tax rate increased dramatically in 1932.
Depression-era policies, such as the creation of the National Labor Relations Board,
strengthened unions (Cole and Ohanian, 2007) and resulted in quite a large “union wage
effect” (Lewis, 1963).

Although income taxes and monopoly unionism can create

distortions on the consumption-leisure margin, some economists have been skeptical of
8

This may be part of the story, although Mulligan (2005) points out that the vast majority of 1930s workers
were not union members and not covered by the suspect regulations. Moreover, union density (the fraction
of workers who are union members) increased dramatically during World War II, which in theory would
exacerbate the Great Depression ratio or at least allow it to be constant in the face of a reduced distortion
per union member.

11

the quantitative importance of these particular examples because most people paid no
income tax during the 1930s (Mulligan, 1998; also notice the dashed line in Figure 4
above is near zero during those years) and most workers were not union members during
the 1930s (Mulligan, 2005).

However, the debt overhang model implies that the

consumption-leisure distortions created by debt collection depend on outside conditions,
and therefore on the amount and type of redistribution done by the public sector.
To see this, consider Zones III and IV in which the equilibrium is defined by the
incentive constraint for the high type and the participation constraint for the low type:
vH (b) = u (cL , wL nL / wH )
u (cL , nL ) ≥ uL

where vH(b) is the high type utility when he pays back b. cL denotes consumption for the
low type. Zone IV is defined by b = T ( wH ) .
Now consider a redistributive public policy that raises uL and lowers vH, but does
not change the ratio wL/wH (equivalently, would not affect the proportional change in
work effort required for the high type to mimic the low type’s labor product). This
comparative static can represent, for example, a flat-rate labor income tax used to finance
a lump sum transfer. Because the high type earns more than average, this tax and transfer
would lower vH, even though it might also reduce the amount of resources the high type
might expect to loose if he invited foreclosure.
Under weak conditions on the utility function, both the increase in uL and the
reduction in vH serve to raise the marginal tax rate on the low type. Debt collectors must
respond to public sector redistribution from high type to low type by strengthening the
means test, because the high types are more tempted to pass a given means test when the
public sector is redistributing.

12

IV. Conclusions

When asset values fall, the owners of collateralized loans are not in an enviable
position. Nonetheless, they possess a kind of monopoly power over their borrowers that
they do not possess when borrowers are solvent. Lenders maximize profits by price
discriminating, but create deadweight costs in the process. One way debt collectors
discriminate is to ask borrowers with more income to pay more.

This creates an

expectations-augmented Philips curve: over a wide range, surprises to collateral value
have no effect (via mortgage forgiveness) on work incentives, but surprises that are bad
enough reduce the equilibrium incentive to work and thereby increase the amount of
nonemployment.
Although there are many differences between today and the 1930s, one common
element is the pervasiveness of mortgage obligations that exceed the value of collateral. I
am not aware of market-wide measures of either modern or 1930s bank policies for
forgiving loans. However, during the time of writing this paper, Citigroup announced a
plan for reducing borrower payment obligations:
“[Citigroup] added that it recently streamlined its loan modification program to rework
delinquent loans. This revamped program uses a simplified formula to figure out an
affordable payment as a percentage of the borrower's gross income. It then reduces the
monthly payment to that amount by either reducing interest rates on the loan, extending
the loan's term or forgiveness of principal.” (Mamudi 2008, emphasis added).
I am not aware of the percentage used by Citigroup, or the frequency over which
it measures borrower’s gross income for this purpose. For the sake of illustration,
suppose that the percentage were 25.9 An action taken by a borrower to increase his
income would increase his payment obligation by 25 percent of the income increment.10
If an affordable payment were reevaluated monthly, this would amount to a 25 percent

9

As a benchmark, note that FHA guidelines recommend that monthly housing payments (mortgage plus
taxes and related payments) be less than 29% of monthly gross income and that total housing payments
plus total debt payments be less than 41% of gross income
(http://www.fha.com/debt_to_income_ratios.cfm).
10
Colleges and universities also ask their customers (i.e., students) to pay tuition according to their family
income. It is well known that the process of collecting college tuition according to willingness to pay
creates work disincentives. Dick and Edlin (1997) estimated that college tuitions with annual list prices in
the range $5,000 - $10,000 created marginal income tax rates in the range of 2 – 16 percent. As ratios to
potential income, these amounts seem small compared to the amounts mortgage lenders had to collect in
the 1930s and have to collect today. Thus, it seems quite possible that, in unusual circumstances like those,
debt collection could create marginal tax rates in the tens of percentage points.

13

marginal tax rate over the life of the loan. If, say, 2009 income were used to calculate an
affordable payment for the years 2010-14 and the interest rate were 6 percent per year,
then the marginal tax rate would be 108 percent for 2009 (4.3 times the percentage from
the formula) and zero thereafter.
In order to calculate an economy-wide average marginal tax rate at a point in time
from mortgage forgiveness, the marginal tax rate for those being forgiven would have to
be multiplied by the fraction of persons who are currently earning income to be used in
the forgiveness formula. I do not have the data to make such a calculation, but it seems
that the fractions could be large enough to produce average marginal tax rates on the
order of those shown in Figure 4 for the Great Depression.
My model features labor income as the only variable indicating willingness to
repay a mortgage whose amount exceeds the value of collateral. It is straightforward to
modify the model include other such variables, such as asset holdings or family structure.
Obviously, when asset holdings or family structure enter the creditor’s forgiveness
formula, borrowers will have an incentive to seek the levels of assets and to seek the
family structures that offer more forgiveness rather than less. Moreover, given the long
time dimension of loan terms and the possibility that mortgage loan forgiveness will not
be assumable (does not stay with a home when the borrower changes residence),
mortgage debt forgiveness may cause people to remain at a given residence longer than is
efficient. Yet another extension of this analysis is to property tax forgiveness.
Federal and state treasuries tax labor income and subsidize unemployment. Thus,
while forgiveness helps borrowers, creditors’ decisions to link forgiveness to borrower
income and employment status harm those treasuries. Governments have an incentive to
alleviate this practice, perhaps by regulating it (governments sometimes prohibit forms of
price discrimination), repudiating some of the debt, cutting their own taxes, or acquiring
the debt in the marketplace and administering forgiveness themselves in a way that
accounts for the spillovers onto public budgets.

14

Figure 1. Outcomes for the Low Type
The Figure displays low type work effort (nL), repayment (TL), debt forgiveness (b-TL), and marginal
tax rate (MTRL) as a function of the amount owed (b) in excess of collateral value

TL , nL

b − TL

Zone I:
Full
Repayment

Zone III:
Rising Tax
Distortion

Zone II:
Efficient
Forgiveness

nL
MTRL ≡ 1 − ( MRS L / wL )

T ( wL )

TL
45°

0

b
T ( wL )

b̂

T ( wH )

Figure 2. Outcomes for the High Type
The Figure displays high type work effort (nH), repayment (TH), debt forgiveness (b-TH), and
marginal tax rate (MTRH) as a function of the amount owed (b) in excess of collateral value

TH , nH
TH
nH

b − TH

45°

0

MTRH = 0

b
T ( wH )

Figure 3. An Expectations-Augmented Philips Curve
The Figure displays the marginal tax rate (MTRL) as a function of
the unanticipated change in the value of collateral (-μ-b)

MTRL

−μ − b =

0

− μ − b̂

0

unexpected collateral
value inflation

Figure 4. MRS and Marginal Productivity do not Move Together, 1929-50
0.4

0.3

tax rate

0.2

MRS-productivity gap

0.1

avg marginal tax rate,
federal income and SS tax

0
1930

1935

1940

-0.1
year

1945

1950

V. References

Barro, Robert J. and Robert G. King. “Time Separable Preferences and Intertemporal
Substitution Models of Business Cycles.”

Quarterly Journal of Economics.

99(4), November 1984: 817-39.
Bernanke, Ben S.

“Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of

the Great Depression.” American Economic Review. 73(3), June 1983: 257-276.
Buiter, Willem H. “Housing Wealth Isn’t Wealth.” NBER working paper no. 14204,
July 2008.
Cole, Harold L. and Lee E. Ohanian. “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the
Great Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis.”

Journal of Political

Economy. 112(4), August 2004: 779-816.
Edlin, Aaron S. “Is College Financial Aid Equitable and Efficient?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives. 7(2), December 1993: 143-158.
Dick, Andrew W. and Aaron S. Edlin. “The Implicit Taxes from College Financial Aid.”
Journal of Public Economics. 65(3), September 1997: 295-322.
Federal

Housing

Administration.

“FHA

Loan

Debt

to

Income

Ratios.”

http://www.fha.com/debt_to_income_ratios.cfm
Fisher, Irving. “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions.” Econometrica. 1(4),
October 1933: 337-357.
Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and J. David Lopez-Salido. “Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare
Costs of Business Fluctuations.” manuscript, CREI, October 2003.
Hall, Robert E. “Macroeconomic Fluctuations and the Allocation of Time.” Journal of
Labor Economics. 15(1), Part 2 January 1997: S223-50.
Lewis, H. Gregg.

Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States.

Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 1963.
Kroszner, Randall S. “Is it Better to Forgive than to Receive. Repudiation of the Gold
Indexation Clause in Long-Term Debt During the Great Depression.” University of
Chicago CRSP working paper 481, April 1999.

15

Mamudi, Sam. “Citi Unveils Housing Relief Plan.” www.marketwatch.com. November 11,
2008.
Mirrlees, James A. “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation.” Review of
Economic Studies. 38(114), April 1971: 175-208.
Mishkin, Frederic S. “The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depression.” Journal of
Economic History. 38(4), December 1978: 918-937.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Pecuniary Incentives to Work in the United States during World
War II.” Journal of Political Economy. 106(5), October 1998: 1033-77.
Mulligan, Casey B. “A Century of Labor-Leisure Distortions.” NBER working paper no.
8774, February 2002.
Mulligan, Casey B. “Public Policies as Specification Errors.” Review of Economic Dynamics.
8(4), October 2005: 902-926.
Mulligan, Casey B.

“Housing Wealth and Aggregate Wealth Effects.”

Manuscript,

University of Chicago, November 2008.
Mulligan, Casey B. and Luke Threinen. “Market Responses to the Panic of 2008.” NBER
working paper no. 14446, October 2008.
Sachs, Jeffrey D.

“A Strategy for Efficient Debt Reduction.”

Journal of Economic

Perspectives. 4(1), December 1990: 19-29.
Salanie, Bernard. The Economics of Taxation. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 2003.

16

