                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      PHYSICAL CAPITAL, KNOWLEDGE CAPITAL AND THE CHOICE BETWEEN
                          FDI AND OUTSOURCING

                                          Yongmin Chen
                                       Ignatius J. Horstmann
                                        James R. Markusen

                                       Working Paper 14515
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14515


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008




The authors thank the participants and discussants at a number of seminars and conferences for helpful
comments and suggestions. Presentations were at the NBER ITO Working Group Meeting in Cambridge,
the ERWIT conference in Appenzell, Switzerland, the ETSG conference in Warsaw, and the Norface
conference in Munich, all held in 2008. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Yongmin Chen, Ignatius J. Horstmann, and James R. Markusen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Physical Capital, Knowledge Capital and the Choice Between FDI and Outsourcing
Yongmin Chen, Ignatius J. Horstmann, and James R. Markusen
NBER Working Paper No. 14515
December 2008
JEL No. F2,F23,L2,L22,L24

                                              ABSTRACT

There exist two approaches in the literature concerning the multinational firm's mode choice for foreign
production between an owned subsidiary and a licensing contract. One approach considers environments
where the firm is transferring primarily knowledge-based assets. An important assumption there is
that the relevant knowledge is absorbed by the local manager or licensee over the course of time: knowledge
is non-excludable. More recently, a number of influential papers have adopted a property-right view
of the firm, assuming the application abroad of physical capital, the owner of which retains full and
exclusive rights to the capital should a relationship break down. In this paper we combine both forms
of capital assets in a single model. The model predicts that foreign direct investment (owned subsidiaries)
is more likely than licensing when the ratio of knowledge capital to physical capital is high, or when
market value is high relative to the book value of capital (high Tobin's-Q).


Yongmin Chen                                         James R. Markusen
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of Colorado                               University of Colorado
Boulder, CO 80309                                    Boulder, CO 80309-0256
Yongmin.chen@colorado.edu                            and NBER
                                                     james.markusen@colorado.edu
Ignatius J. Horstmann
University of Toronto
Rotman School of Management
105 St. George St.
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
Canada
ihorstmann@rotman.utoronto.ca
                              1. INTRODUCTION


       Foreign direct investment (FDI) has grown at rates greatly outpacing the
growth in world trade over the last several decades. This has naturally led to in-
creased interest in FDI by academic researchers and policy makers. Part of that
interest has been directed to the determinants of the choice of mode by which …rms
service foreign markets, including options such as exporting, owned foreign a¢ liates
(FDI), licensing and subcontracting, and joint ventures. This in turn relates to more
general discussion in microeconomics about the “boundaries of the …rm”: decisions as
to which activities should be undertaken within the ownership structure of the …rm,
and which activities should be contracted or outsourced to arm’s-length …rms.
       There is a rich and extensive literature on the boundaries of the …rm, and we
can make no attempt to survey it here. Instead, we will direct our e¤orts along lines
which have been productive in the …eld of international trade, where researchers have
attempted to model a multinational’s decision as to whether to establish a foreign
subsidiary or contract with a foreign supplier to produce a good for local sales or
for export back to the parent …rm. These questions used to be referred to as the
“internalization” problem, but more recently are being referred to by the converse
label, “outsourcing”. But they are really the same thing: whether or not to internalize
an activity inside the …rm, or to outsource it to an arm’s-length …rm.
       Much of the more recent literature under the name outsourcing has drawn
from an approach which, we assert, focuses on properties of physical capital such as
plant and equipment. On the other hand, the empirical literature and other recent
theoretical literature has emphasized the importance of knowledge-based assets in ex-
plaining the decision to become a multinational …rm. An earlier theoretical literature


                                          1
under the internalization label also took the latter approach.
       The purpose of this paper is to inquire whether or not the nature of the capital
required by a subsidiary makes an important di¤erence to the choice of mode, either
subsidiary or licensee. Speci…cally, we wish to di¤erentiate between physical capital
and knowledge-based capital assets, and ask whether a more physical capital-intensive
…rm will be more or less likely to chose internalization via a subsidiary rather than
outsource compared to a knowledge-capital-intensive …rm.
       As just alluded to, the somewhat older literature assumed knowledge-based
assets and in particular assumed that the multinational …rm (the principal) cannot
prevent a licensee (the agent) from absorbing or learning the relevant knowledge
over time. Even though the multinational “owns” the knowledge-based asset, it
gets transferred to a licensee. This literature emphasizes the jointness property of
knowledge capital, the ability to use it fully in multiple locations at the same time
(Markusen’s (2002) knowledge-capital model), which leads to multi-plant production
in the …rst place. It suggests that the jointness properly also leads to the problem
of asset dissipation: knowledge-assets are easily transferred but also easily absorbed
by the licensee. Formal models include Horstmann and Markusen (1987), Ethier and
Markusen (1996), Markusen (2001), Fosfuri, Motta and Rønde (2001) and Glass and
Saggi (2002).
       By contrast, more recent literature is focused around the Grossman-Hart-
Moore property-right approach (Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore
(1990)), which seems (implicitly) more appropriate for physical capital in that the
relevant asset has no jointness property and that the owner of the residual rights has
full control of the asset if a relationship or negotiation breaks down. Important papers



                                           2
include Grossman and Helpman (2002, 2004), Antrás (2003, 2005), and Feenstra and
Hanson (2005).
       Our model combines the two approaches in a simple two-period incomplete-
contracting model. A …rm requires both physical and knowledge capital for a foreign
subsidiary, along with non-contractible e¤ort by a foreign licensee or manager. E¤ort
is relatively more important as a complement to physical capital than knowledge capi-
tal, creating the well-understood advantage for using a licensee who owns the physical
capital and thus captures the full bene…t of his or her e¤ort. However, knowledge
capital transferred by the multinational is absorbed by the licensee during the …rst
period regardless of who “owns” it. We assume that the value of this knowledge to
a manager or licensee outside the relationship depends on working with the physical
capital, the two assets being complements. Thus the advantage to the multinational
in owning the physical capital is that it reduces the incentives or ability of the licensee
to use the knowledge for private or outside uses in period 2.
       This tension, ownership by the multinational reduces agent’s e¤ort while pre-
serving the value of the knowledge capital, is the fundamental di¤erence between
the present paper and previous ones. Our result is that …rms that are more physical-
capital intensive will tend to license (outsource), while …rms that are more knowledge-
capital intensive will tend to establish subsidiaries (internalize). We believe that this
is consistent with all available empirical evidence.
       We are of course aware that some existing literature emphasizes that capital-
intensive …rms are more like to establish subsidiaries (Antrás 2003), but this refers to
capital use relative to labor and materials, not to physical versus knowledge-capital
intensity. Our model does not o¤er cross-section predictions about mode choice as



                                            3
a function of industry or …rm capital-labor ratios. Rather, our predictions would
more appropriately be examined by using a type of Tobin’s q; speci…cally, the ratio of
a …rm’s market value (re‡ecting knowledge-based assets as well as physical capital)
to its book value of capital (largely re‡ecting physical capital only). Our prediction
would be that …rms/industries with higher q’s would be more likely to establish foreign
subsidiaries. Existing evidence, reviewed in Markusen (1995, 2002) and Caves (2007)
does indeed suggest that this is the case.1 Another implication of our theory is that
when there is stronger protection for knowledge capital, the incentive for licensing
tends to be higher relative to the incentive for FDI.2


                                      2. THE MODEL


  A multinational …rm (MNE) in the North, denoted as M , plans to produce a prod-
uct (either intermediate or …nal) in the South due to cost advantages of manufacturing
there. There are two periods of production, t = 1; 2, and there is no discounting. Pro-
duction in the South requires the services of a local agent/manager, denoted as A,
and two types of asset services: physical capital and knowledge capital or intellectual
property. There is an exogenous and …xed amount of physical capital, K, that can
   1
    See Morck and Yeung (1991, 1992) for evidence on the importance of information-related intan-
gible assets in the FDI decision. For events in which …rms do transfer technology abroad, articles
by Davidson and McFetridge (1984), Mans…eld and Romeo (1980), Teece (1986), and Wilson (1977)
show technology is more likely to be transferred internally within the …rm by R&D intensive …rms
producing new and technically complex products.

   2
     Smith (2001) …nds that stronger foreign patent rights increase US …rms transfers of knowledge
more by licensing than by a¢ liate sales. Yang and Maskus (2001) …nd that countries with stronger
patent rights attract larger arm’s-length volumes of licensed technology, although licensing is not
compared to FDI. Maskus, Saggi and Puttitanum (2005) …nd that stronger patent protection in-
creases the probability of inward FDI and has very little e¤ect on licensing; but they note that
this overall …nding is driven by high technology sectors, and that lower technology sectors have the
opposite result (stronger protection increases licensing more than FDI).



                                                 4
only be acquired in the beginning of t = 1 and that is required for production in both
periods. Either M or A can own the physical capital K; whereas only M initially
owns the knowledge capital, with a …xed and exogenous amount equal to S.
  At the beginning of t = 1, M makes a once-for-all choice between two possible
organizational forms: foreign direct investment (FDI) or outsourcing. With FDI, M
acquires (and owns) the physical capital used for production in the South and em-
ploys A under a sequence of one-period employment contract to manage a production
process utilizing M ’s capital. A’s hiring occurs at the beginning of t = 1 and A’s
employment contract is re-negotiated at the beginning of t = 2. M also decides each
period how much knowledge capital to transfer to A to be utilized in production.
  With outsourcing, A acquires (and owns) the physical capital, with capital acqui-
sition again occurring at the beginning of t = 1. M signs a one-period licensing
contract with A that licenses an amount s1 of M ’s knowledge capital to A for use in
production at t = 1. This licensing agreement is re-negotiated at the beginning of
t = 2, with an amount s2 transferred at t = 2.
  The cost of physical capital is rK: As in Grossman and Hart (1989), ownership
of physical capital bestows control rights on the owner. Speci…cally, the owner can
decide the uses to which the capital can be put and can exclude access to the capital
for any other uses at any time. That having been said, e¤ort from the agent is often
required to improve or maintain the e¢ ciency (usefulness) of the physical capital.
We shall make these points clear shortly when we specify the payo¤ functions of the
players.
  Knowledge (or intellectual ) capital, by contrast, does not have the same exclud-
ability properties. The owner of knowledge capital may not be able to control to the



                                          5
same extent the uses to which the capital is put and to capture the returns that the
Knowledge capital generates. In essence, property rights to Knowledge capital are
harder to de…ne and protect than is the case for physical capital. We capture these
features of Knowledge capital in the following way. We assume that, at t = 1, there
exists a fraction    < 1 of S that is “explicit knowledge”in the sense that the uses of
this part of M ’s Knowledge capital can be de…ned in a t = 1 licensing agreement, they
can be measured and the returns appropriated by M . In this sense, the fraction               of
M ’s Knowledge capital can be “owned”in the same way as physical capital is owned.
A fraction 1        of S is “tacit knowledge” and is not contractible at t = 1 in the
sense that its current and future uses cannot be controlled by M in a t = 1 licensing
agreement and any returns that it generates cannot be speci…cally appropriated by
M in the agreement. The value of          is assumed to be exogenous to the …rm and can
be thought of as capturing either characteristics of the Knowledge capital utilized by
M or a characteristic of the legal regime of the country in which M is contracting.
For simplicity, we assume that all Knowledge capital is contractible at t = 2.3
  Note that this set of assumptions allows a simple characterization of the environ-
ment in which M and A operate. Speci…cally, the values of K, S and                  completely
de…ne the environment – characteristics of the relevant industry/product – under
consideration. The values of K and S give the physical relative to knowledge capital
intensity of the industry while     gives features of the appropriabilty of M ’s knowledge
asset. Subsequent analysis will consider how variation in the economic environment
–variation in (K; S; ) –a¤ects the observed pattern of outsourcing and FDI.
  For any given K and knowledge asset si for i = 1; 2; the maximum gross surpluses
   3
    As it shall be clear later, M does bene…t from withholding S in the equilibrium of t = 2; and
hence our results are still valid without this assumption.



                                               6
that accrue to M and A from utilizing K and si at t = 1 and at t = 2 are U1 (K; s1 )
and U2 (K; s2 ) + V (ej K) ; respectively, where Ui (K; 0)               0; e is A0 s e¤ort during
t = 1 that a¤ects the return in t = 2; and V (ej K) is a concave function of e for any
given value of K:4 We allow the possibility that Ui (K; 0) > 0; in which case agent
A can have alternative uses for K even if si = 0. That is, we allow the possibility
that K can either be used for producing M 0 s product or for some alternative purpose
bene…ting A (e.g., K can be used for A0 s private bene…ts). We assume that producing
M 0 s product always yields higher payo¤s than any alternative use when si                      S; but
the alternative payo¤ could be higher if s < S:
  There is a perfectly elastic supply of agents with opportunity cost W                     0 in each
period. However, the agent not owning capital at t = 1 (M in the case of outsourcing
and A in the case of FDI) is not able to raise the amount K su¢ ciently quickly to be
able to produce alone at t = 2. This fact produces a (potential) speci…c relationship
between M and A at t = 2:5 In this case, the t = 2 surplus is allocated based on
the Nash bargaining solution. Both A and M are risk neutral and make choices to
maximize expected income.
  We also assume that, at t = 1, M has access to perfect capital markets while A has
only limited ability to borrow against future income. Speci…cally, under outsourcing
A is only able to cover a fraction           2 (0; 1] of t = 1 costs via the capital markets.
The remainder must be covered out of t = 1 revenues. As will be seen later, this
inability on A’s part to borrow against future income limits M ’s ability to extract
t = 2 surplus from A via the initial licensing agreement. It also forces M to bear
   4
      We emphsize that K is a …xed parameter for our model, and we include it in the payo¤ functions
so that we can see the e¤ects of this parameter; on the other hand, both s1 and s2 are choice varialbes.
    5
      This is relevant in the case of oursourcing, where the agent, who owns K; can demand the
sharing of returns from using S in t = 2:



                                                   7
some of the costs of A’s capital investment.
  Throughout our analysis, we shall maintain:

Assumption 1. (i) Ui (K; si ) increases in both K and si for all si                 S. (ii) V (ej K)
increases in e: (iii) U2 (K; 0) + V ( 0j K)        (1 + ) W: (iv) V (0j K)          W:

  Part (i) of Assumption 1 is quite natural and simply states that returns are higher
with a higher amount of K or S. Part (ii) says that A0 s e¤ort during t = 1 would
improve (maintain) the e¢ ciency of physical capital K. Part (iii) ensures that A0 s
payo¤ in t = 2 from production is high enough relative to its opportunity cost (i.e.,
(iii) will be required as a sort of participation constraint): (iv) says that there cannot
be too much improvement in the value of physical asset if A exerts no e¤ort during
t = 1:
  Notice that we allow V (ej K) to be either positive or negative:6 For instance,
V (ej K) could be the depreciation (repair) cost of K in t = 2; as, for example,
V (ej K) =        rK (1     e)2 < 0; and e simply reduces this cost. Or e could be A0 s
e¤ort to …nd additional use for K that adds value in t = 2: For instance, a by-product
may be produced with K; in addition to the product already being produced using
K; in which case V (ej K) > 0:7 We shall later present examples where Assumption
1 is satis…ed.
  To summarize, the timing of the game is as follows:
  At the beginning of t = 1, M chooses between FDI and outsourcing. If M chooses
   6
    However, if V ( ej K) < 0; U2 (K; 0) will need to be high enough to satisfy (iii).
   7
    This positive V is to be distinguished from A0 s using K for private bene…ts that reduce the
return of K to M: For convenience and to capture the idea that e¤ort is more important to improve
or maintain the usefulness of physical capital, we assume V does not depend on s: This is certainly
the case, for instance, if V represents the depreciation of K: This assumption is not essential for the
main insights of our analysis.



                                                  8
FDI, then M o¤ers A an employment contract involving payment to A of w1 ; if
M chooses outsourcing, M and A negotiate a contract involving a transfer to A of
knowledge capital, s1 , and a licensing payment from A to M of l1 . In either case,
should A accept the contract, A chooses an e¤ort level e and M chooses the level
of knowledge capital to use (this level is determined by the licensing contract under
outsourcing). Finally, the gross surplus U1 (K; s1 ) is realized and payments are made.
  At the beginning of t = 2, M o¤ers A a second employment contract involving a
payment w2 under FDI. If A accepts, M again chooses a level of knowledge capital
utilization for A. Surplus U2 (K; s2 )+V (ej K) is realized. The employment contract in
both t = 1 and t = 2 can also specify the uses to which A can put M ’s physical capital.
Under outsourcing, M and A negotiate a second contract involving a transfer to A of
intellectual capital, s2 , and a licensing payment from A to M of l2 . If the contract is
agreed to, M transfers intellectual capital s2 to A, and surplus U2 (K; s2 ) + V (ej K)
is realized: Transfers at t = 2 are determined via the Nash bargaining solution.
  In all cases, the equilibrium levels of e; s1 ; s2 are the result of Subgame Perfect Nash
equilibrium strategy choices by A and M ; and Ui is su¢ ciently large relative to K and
W so that in equilibrium it is pro…table for M to choose either FDI or outsourcing.


                                    3. ANALYSIS


  We begin by analyzing the complete contracting case where contracting on e and
si 2 [0; S] are feasible, so as to provide a benchmark for the subsequent analysis of
the incomplete contracting situation. For the incomplete contracting case, we analyze
…rst the FDI contract equilibrium and then the outsourcing equilibrium. Finally, we
compare equilibrium payo¤s for M and determine the situations in which M prefers


                                            9
FDI to outsourcing.


3.1 The complete contracting case


  The complete contracting solution is given as the solution to the problem


                      max U1 (K; s1 ) + U2 (K; s2 ) + V (ej K)      e               (1)
                      e;s1 ;s2



Since both U1 (K; s1 ) and U2 (K; s2 ) are increasing in s and M can control the use of
S with complete contracting, M chooses s1 = s2 = S: The level of e¤ort for A is given
by e , de…ned by the condition


                                          Ve (e j K) = 1:                           (2)


3.2 Equilibrium under FDI


  We begin by analyzing the equilibrium contract at t = 2. Since M owns the physical
asset under FDI, M can control the use of K at t = 2. Thus, M can prevent A from
using S for purposes other than M 0 s project in t = 2: Consequently, A’s outside option
is simply W; and, since U2 (K; s2 ) is increasing in s2 , M chooses knowledge capital
transfer of sF2 = S: As a result, the contract that M o¤ers A involves a payment
w2F = W . M ’s payo¤ at t = 2 is, therefore,


                                 F
                                 M2   = U2 (K; S) + V (ej K)   W:


  At t = 1; M will optimally choose sF1 = S, since U1 (K; s1 ) is increasing in s1 and
the payo¤ at t = 2 is independent of the value of s1 . Further, since e¤ort is costly

                                                10
for A and A’s compensation at t = 2 is independent of e, A will choose eF = 0.
M , recognizing this fact, o¤ers a payment of w1F = W . M ’s two period payo¤ from
choosing FDI is thus


                    F
                    M   = U1 (K; S) + U2 (K; S) + V ( 0j K)     2W     rK:                (3)


We summarize this discussion below:

Lemma 1 Under the FDI option, the unique equilibrium contract pair involves: i)
transfers of knowledge capital of sF1 = sF2 = S, and ii) wage payments to A of w1F =
w2F = W . Under this contract, A chooses e¤ort level eF = 0 and M ’s equilibrium
            F
payo¤ is    M   given in equation (3).

  Note that, under FDI, the equilibrium contract is a standard wage-employment
contract. The contract allows M , via control of physical capital, to control the use
of M ’s knowledge capital.8 The agent employee exerts no (extra) e¤ort in improving
(maintaining) physical capital and undertakes no tasks other than those involved in
working directly for M . The ine¢ cient choice of e by A obtains because M cannot
commit to compensating A for its investment in e: As such, the contract exhibits
the oft discussed features of an insourced activity: low-powered incentives (and so
problems of lower e¤ort) but control over asset use.


3.3 Equilibrium under outsourcing


  Unlike the case of FDI, under outsourcing A now owns the physical capital while M
still owns the knowledge capital. This ownership di¤erence impacts both the ability
   8
     M will also require A to use K only for M 0 s project. Otherwise, A may use K for its own
alternative purpose, given that he receives a …xed wage payment.

                                             11
of M to control the use of knowledge capital and the incentives that A has to invest in
improving (maintaining) physical capital. To see the overall e¤ect of this ownership
di¤erence, …rst consider the equilibrium contract at t = 2. Since A owns the physical
capital, A can control the use of K and so can credibly threaten to use K for own
purposes. Indeed, A will choose this option unless the contract at t = 2 provides A
with su¢ cient inducement not to do so. Thus, the Nash bargaining solution at t = 2
must account for A’s alternative uses of K –these uses form A’s threat point in the
bargaining –and compensate A appropriately.
  To see how the bargaining solution is obtained, note …rst that, if M and A fail to
reach an agreement at t = 2 and s1      S, then A can use the intellectual capital not
controlled by M under the initial licensing agreement and A’s own physical capital for
other uses. Speci…cally, A can use K and s1        S to generate return U2 (K; s1   S)+
V (ej K) ; through either producing an imitation of M ’s product, or putting the assets
for some alternative purpose, or both. Of course, A can also choose not to produce
and obtain its option value W: Thus A0 s disagreement payo¤ at t = 2 is


                       max fU2 (K; s1       S) + V (ej K) ; W g ;


whereas M earns zero in t = 2 if no agreement is reached. From part (iii) of Assump-
tion 1, we have


               U2 (K; s1    S) + V (ej K)        U2 (K; 0) + V (0j K) > W:

On the other hand, the maximum joint surplus for M and A if they reach agreement
is U2 (K; S) + V (ej K) :



                                            12
  Therefore, at t = 2; according to the Nash bargaining solution, which splits the
surplus equally between the two parties, M 0 s and A0 s payo¤s are, respectively:


                O         U2 (K; S) + V (ej K)U2 (K; s1             S) + V (ej K)
                M2   =                                                              ;       (4)
                                               2
                O      U2 (K; S) + V (ej K) + U2 (K; s1             S) + V (ej K)
                A2   =                                                              :       (5)
                                               2

Anticipating this, during t = 1 agent A will choose e to maximize


                         O         U2 (K; S) + U2 (K; 0)
                         A2   e=                         + V (ej K)       e;
                                             2

and the equilibrium e under outsourcing is eO = e ; the e¢ cient e as de…ned in
equation (2):
  Turning next to the t = 1 contract, since there is a perfectly elastic supply of
agents at t = 1 and knowledge capital is fully contractible for s1              S, M captures
all incremental returns to the use of knowledge capital for s1             S: for s1    S, M ’s
licensing revenues at t = 1 are U1 (K; s1 )          (1   )(rK + W ) (recall that A can only
borrow enough against future income to cover a fraction               of …rst-period costs. The
rest must be covered out of …rst-period revenues). Since U1 ( ) is increasing in s1 , M
will choose to license at least S units of knowledge capital. Since M cannot commit
to transferring any s1 > S (s1 > S is not contractible) nor capture returns at t = 1
                                                          O
from doing so, and since M ’s return at t = 2 (           M 2)   is decreasing for s1 > S, the
equilibrium licensing contract at t = 1 has sO
                                             1 = S. The licensing payment by A to

M is
                              l1O = U1 (K; S)    (1       )(rK + W ):                       (6)




                                                13
  From (5) and (6), and recalling that in t = 1 agent A receives U1 (K; S) but has
capital cost rK and e¤ort cost e ; we conclude that, under the equilibrium pair of
outsourcing contracts, A’s payo¤ is


       O            O
       A    =       A2 e=e     e + U1 (K; S)                 rK   l1O
                U2 (K; S) + U2 (K; 0)
            =                         + V (e j K)                  e + U1 (K; S)     rK
                          2
                    [U1 (K; S)          (1       )(rK + W )]
                U2 (K; S) + U2 (K; 0)
            =                         + V (e j K)                  e      rK + (1   )(rK + W ): (7)
                          2

Since A has an opportunity cost of 2W to work with M under the licensing contract,
                                             O
in equilibrium it is required that           A      2W; which we assume to hold:
  M 0 s equilibrium payo¤ from outsourcing is, from (4) and (6):


                O       U2 (K; S)       U2 (K; 0)
                M   =                               + U1 (K; S)           (1   )(rK + W ):      (8)
                                    2

  The results for the outsourcing contract are summarized below.


Lemma 2 Under the outsourcing option, the unique equilibrium contract pair is


                     l1O = U1 (K; S)              [(1        )(rK + W )]; sO
                                                                           1 = S;
                              U2 (K; S)          U2 (K; 0)
                     l2O =                                    ; sO
                                                                 2 = S:
                                             2

                                                                                                 O
The equilibrium e¤ort choice by A is e . Equilibrium payo¤s for A and M are                      A

      O
and   M    given in equations (7) and (8).


  Note that outsourcing generates e¢ cient e¤ort by the agent but leads to ine¢ cient


                                                        14
transfer of intellectual capital. Also, because of A’s limited access to capital markets,
M implicitly covers some fraction of the physical capital costs. FDI, by contrast,
leads to e¢ cient transfer of knowledge capital but shirking by the agent. Also, M
bears the full cost of physical capital. Below we investigate the circumstances under
which one option is preferred to the other.


3.4 Equilibrium Choice of Organization Form


  To determine M ’s choice between FDI and outsourcing, one need only examine the
payo¤ di¤erence under the two options. From (3) and (8), this di¤erence is given by


  F      O
  M      M    = [U1 (K; S) + U2 (K; S) + V ( 0j K)               2W    rK]
                                 U2 (K; S)       U2 (K; 0)
                             [                               + U1 (K; S)     (1    )(rK + W )]
                                             2
                                                         U2 (K; S) + U2 (K; 0)
              = [U1 (K; S)          U1 (K; S)] +                               + V (e j K)    W
                                                                   2
                     [V (e j K)       V ( 0j K)]         (w + rK)                                (9)


  In (9), the term U1 (K; S)          U1 (K; S) > 0 represents the gain from FDI due to
better knowledge capital transfer. The term

       U2 (K; S) + U2 (K; 0)
                             + V (e j K)              W > U2 (K; 0) + V ( e~j K)     W >0
                 2

represents the increased surplus accruing to M due to avoidance of hold-up un-
der FDI created by the fact that M owns the K under FDI.9 The third term,
  [V (e j K)     V ( 0j K)] ; represents the loss to M due to the lower e¤ort under FDI.
   9
    That is, under FDI, M only needs to pay A an amount equal to W in t = 2; whereas under
outsourcing A will obtain U2 (K;S)+U
                                  2
                                     2 (K;0)
                                             + V ( e j K) in t = 2 due to its ownership of K and can
hold up M in demanding a higher payo¤.

                                                    15
The …nal term,                 (w + rK) ; re‡ects the ability of M to recapture some of A’s
second-period hold-up rents under outsourcing by requiring A to …nance a portion
of (W + rK) in the …rst period: the higher ; the large this e¤ect which makes out-
                                                                        F            O
sourcing more attractive (FDI less attractive). When                    M            M   > 0, M chooses FDI;
              F       O
when          M       M   < 0, M chooses outsourcing.
                                                                        K
   Notice that for any given S; a lower K; or a lower                   S
                                                                          ;    indicates an industry that
                                                                                                  K
is more knowledge-capital intensive; whereas a higher K; or a higher                              S
                                                                                                    ;   indicates an
industry that is more physical-capital intensive. It is simple to show that FDI will
be chosen by an industry that has a su¢ ciently low physical capital intensity (K) for
a given S. However, some addition structure is need to establish that outsourcing is
chosen by an industry that has a relatively high physical capital intensity for a given
S. We now state out main results in the next two propositions.

Proposition 1 Given any …xed S: (i) There exists some K1 > 0 such that when
                  F        O
K < K1 ;          M        M   > 0: That is, M will choose FDI when the production (industry)
is su¢ ciently knowledge-capital intensive. (ii) Suppose that, for si 2 [0; S] ; both
@Ui (K;si )           d[U1 (K;S) U1 (K; S)]                         @Ui (K;S)
   @K
              and              dK
                                              decrease in K and       @K
                                                                                ! 0 as K ! 1: Then,
                                                                                F         O
there exists some K2                K1 > 0 such that when K > K2 ;              M         M   < 0: That is, M
will choose outsourcing when the production (industry) is su¢ ciently physical-capital
intensive.

                                         F       O
Proof. (i) We can rewrite                M       M   as


                                F       O
                                M       M
                                                               U2 (K; S)       U2 (K; 0)
                          = U1 (K; S)         U1 (K; S) +                                     +
                                                                           2
                               U2 (K; 0) + V ( 0j K)       W (1 + )            rK:                             (10)

                                                          16
Since Ui (K; si ) increase in si ; we have U1 (K; S)                    U1 (K; S) > 0; and U2 (K; S)
U2 (K; 0) > 0: From (iii) of Assumption 1, U2 (K; 0)+V (0j K)                         (1 + ) W: Therefore,
                                                                        F      O
when K (> 0) is su¢ ciently small, we must have                         M      M   > 0:
               @Ui (K;si )         @[U1 (K;S) U1 (K; S)]
  (ii) Since      @K
                             and            @K
                                                           decrease in K;

                    h                                                                      i
                                                           U2 (K;S)+U2 (K;0)
                   @ U1 (K; S)         U1 (K; S) +                 2
                                                                                   (W + rK)
                                      @K
              @ [U1 (K; S) U1 (K; S)] 1 @U1 (K; S) @U1 (K; 0)
            =                        +            +                                                r
                         @K            2   @K         @K

                                                                                           @Ui (K;S)
is decreasing and is negative when K is su¢ ciently large, due to                            @K
                                                                                                       ! 0 as
                                                       U2 (K;S)+U2 (K;0)
K ! 1: Thus U1 (K; S)                 U1 (K; S) +              2
                                                                                   (W + rK) is a (strictly)
concave function that decreases when K > K 0 for some large enough K 0 : Therefore,
since V ( 0j K)       W        0 by (iv) of Assumption 1, there must exist some K2                        K1
               F        O                                           K
such that      M        M    < 0 when K > K2 (or when               S
                                                                        is su¢ ciently large).
  Therefore, M tends to choose FDI in knowledge-capital intensive industries. Since
physical capital is relatively less important in an knowledge-capital intensive industry,
the gain from FDI due to better knowledge capital transfer is more important than
the loss due to lower e¤ort by the agent and the saving of spending on the physical
capital. The opposite is true for physical-capital intensive industries, where M tends
to choose outsourcing. Notice that for result (ii) in Proposition 1 to hold, we need
the additional assumption that the marginal return of K is decreasing and becomes
arbitrarily small when K is su¢ ciently large, as well as the marginal return of K for
the di¤erence U1 (K; S)             U1 (K; S) is also decreasing.10 This guarantees that the
gain from better knowledge transfer under FDI will be outweighed by the losses due
  10
   For example, if the pro…tability of an industry with requirements (K; S) is given by Ui (K; S) =
K S 1 ; this additional assumption is satis…ed.


                                                       17
to poor incentive for e¤ort and the increased spending on physical capital.
                                                            F     O
    We can also say something about how                     M     M   changes when other parameters
of the model change, for any …xed K (and S): Notice that since a higher S will make
S           S larger, it is unlikely that U1 (K; S)             U1 (K; S) is lower with a higher S:
Thus, if we assume that U1 (K; S)                  U1 (K; S) is non-decreasing in S; 11 and notice
that U2 (K; S) is higher with higher S from part (i) in Assumption 1; we will have
    F        O
    M        M   higher with a higher S from equation (10). Next, again from equation (10),
                                                                                 F     O
a higher         lowers U1 (K; S)       U1 (K; S) ; and thereby lowers           M     M:   We have thus
established the following:


Proposition 2 (i) Given any …xed K; suppose that U1 (K; S)                           U1 (K; S) is non-
                                F       O                                               S
decreasing in S: Then           M       M   is higher with higher S (or with higher     K
                                                                                          );   that is, the
relative incentive for FDI is higher in a more knowledge-capital intensive industry. (ii)
                                    F       O
For any …xed K and S;               M       M   is lower with higher ; that is, the relative incentive
for outsourcing is higher if a higher portion of knowledge capital is contractible at
t = 1.

                                                       S
    For a …xed K; a higher S (or higher                K
                                                         )   increases the relative incentive for FDI
for the similar reason given after Proposition 1: a more knowledge-capital intensive
industry bene…ts more from better knowledge capital transfer relative to other consid-
erations. On the other hand, if a higher portion of knowledge capital is contractible,
there will be less a problem of knowledge capital transfer under outsourcing, which
increases the incentive for outsourcing, all else being equal.
    To illustrate our …ndings, consider the following three examples.
    11
         This additional assumption is again satis…ed if Ui (K; S) = K S 1   :




                                                       18
Example 1 Suppose that Ui (K; S) = K (1 + S)1                       ; and V (ej K) =    1
                                                                                        5
                                                                                          rK   (1        40e)2 :
Then, part (i) and (ii) of Assumption 1 are always satis…ed; part (iii) and (iv) are
                                      1
satis…ed as long as K                 5
                                        rK   > W: Furthermore, both the additional assumption
used in part (ii) of Proposition 1 and the additional assumption used in part (i) of
Proposition 2 are satis…ed. We have:


            F       O
            M       M
                                          U2 (K; S) + U2 (K; 0)
  = U1 (K; S)            U1 (K; S) +                            + V (0j K) W    (W + rK)
                                                    2
                                                    K (1 + S)1 + K        1
  = K (1 + S)1                     K (1 + S)1 +                             rK W    (W + rK)
                                                              2           5
                 3                                  1      1
  = K              (1 + S)1          (1 + S)1 +              +     rK (1 + ) W:
                 2                                  2      5

Suppose in addition that               = 32 ; r = 0:5;    = 0:5; W = 0:5;       = 0:3; S = 1; and
                                                                               1                F
K 2 [0:94; 7:02] :Then, it is stragightforward to verify that K                5
                                                                                 rK    > W;     M       > 0;
 O                   O
 M    > 0; and       A   > 2W: Hence all the assumptions of our model are satis…ed, and

                               3                                1       1 2                         2
 F
 M
             O
             M    = K 0:5        (1 + 1)0:5    (1 + 0:5)0:5 +            +     0:5K       1+             0:5
                               2                                2       5 3                         3
                  T 0 if K S 5: 915 5:


That is, corresponding to Proposition 1, K1 = K2 = 5: 915 5:


  Example 1 illustrates our …ndings in Propositions 1: for a given …xed S; M chooses
                         K
FDI when K (or           S
                           )   is below some critical value, and chooses outsourcing when K
      K
(or   S
        )   is above some critical value. Notice that in this example the critical values are
the same, i.e., K1 = K2 : In this example, as well as in the following two examples,
                               O
the condition that             A   > 2W imposes the binding constraints on how high and how

                                                     19
low the parameter value K is allowed for the model.


Example 2 Suppose that everything is the same as in Example 1 above except that
now      = 0:7; then again all assumptions are satis…ed, and

                         3                                         1   1 2                    2
 F
 M
          O
          M    = K 0:5     (1 + 1)0:5          (1 + 0:7)0:5 +           +     0:5K   1+            0:5
                         2                                         2   5 3                    3
               T 0 if K S 4: 592 2:


                                 F        O
Thus, with a higher ;            M        M   is lower for any given K; and K1 = K2 = 4: 592 2:


     Example 2 illustrates Part (ii) of Proposition 2: With a higher ; the incentive for
FDI becomes lower relative to that for outsourcing. This is re‡ected by the smaller
                         F           O
set of K for which       M   >       M   as   increases from 0.5 to 0.7, as compared to Example
1.


Example 3 Suppose again that everything is the same as in Example 1 above, except
that now S = 2 and K 2 [0:94; 11: 045] : Then again all assumptions are satis…ed,
including
                                     O
                                     A    2W > 0 if K 2 [0:6; 11: 04] :

We have:

                             3                                 1       1 2                2
     F
     M
           O
           M   = K 0:5         (1 + 2)0:5       (1 + 1)0:5 +            +    0:5K    1+           0:5
                             2                                 2       5 3                3
               T 0 if K S 10: 915:


                                 F        O
Thus, with a higher S;           M        M   is higher for any given K; and K1 = K2 = 10: 915:



                                                     20
  Example 3 illustrates Part (i) of Proposition 2: With a higher S; the incentive for
FDI becomes higher relative to that for outsourcing. This is re‡ected by the larger
                          F       O
set of K for which        M   >   M    as S increases from 1 to 2, as compared to Example 1.
  Together, our results imply that FDI is the preferred choice for M when M ’s
product is intensive in knowledge capital and knowledge capital is di¢ cult for M to
control under a licensing agreement. When M ’s activity is either extremely intensive
in physical capital or knowledge capital is easy to protect under a licensing agreement,
outsourcing is M ’s preferred choice. Thus, for instance, we see the manufacturing of
standard electronics equipment such as DVD players, CD players and regular TV’s
outsourced as are items like Nike or Adidas athletic shoes. In all of these cases,
production is physical capital intensive and, what knowledge capital there is, is easily
controlled under a licensing agreement. But we do not see Microsoft outsourcing the
writing of its operating systems.
  Our theoretical …ndings have potentially testable implications. In particular, both
Propositions 1 and 2 suggest that …rms produce products that are more knowledge-
capital intensive and/or have a lower             tend to choose FDI. Such a …rm will have a
higher return at t = 1 (U1 (K; S) > U (K; S)), and a lower replacement value (phys-
ical capital value plus the value of explicit intellectual capital). Consequently, such a
…rm will have a higher Tobin’s q:12 This suggests a relationship between Tobin’s q and
outsourcing –…rm’s with high Tobin’s q are more likely to be using FDI while …rm’s
with low Tobin’s q are more likely to be outsourcing. This prediction is supported
by some existing empirical evidence. Morck and Yeung (1991), for example, show
 12
      Recall that Tobin’s q is de…ned as
                                          market value of the …rm
                                  q=                                  :
                                       replacement cost of …rm assets



                                                   21
that controlling for explicit knowledge capital such as R&D and advertising expendi-
tures, …rms with more owned foreign subsidiaries have a higher Tobin’s q. Our theory
provides directions for further empirical studies.
  Our results also have implications for the choice of organizational mode over the
product life cycle. Speci…cally, the product life cycle is often characterized in terms of
recently innovated products being relatively intensive in intellectual assets and estab-
lished products being relatively intensive in physical assets. Under this interpretation,
a recently introduced product is one with K=S small and so it’s manufacturer is likely
to choose FDI; an established product is one with K=S large and so its manufacturer
is likely to choose outsourcing. Again, we have some observations of this pattern in
the data. Sharp, for instance, produces it’s latest ‡at-panel and Plasma TV’s for Eu-
rope in an owned facility in Eastern Europe. Its standard TV’s and older ‡at-panel
models are produced by outsourced manufacturers in Asia.
  Markets in which technologies evolve rapidly so that knowledge capital quickly
depreciates are ones that the model also predicts should feature more outsourcing. In
                                                                                 U2 (K;S)
this case, markets with rapid technological change will feature low values for       2

W as rents from knowledge capital decline quickly with time. As a result, the hold-
up problem that FDI solves is less severe in markets with rapid technological change.
This makes outsourcing a more attractive option. Similarly, products that require
highly skilled agents that are in scarce supply in the foreign country – products for
which W is large relative to U2 (K; S) –are also more likely to be outsourced. Again,
the reason is that the value that FDI generates in terms of reduced hold up is lower
since the agent already captures a large share of second-period rents due to the high
value of W .



                                           22
  To the extent that stronger intellectual property protection or contract enforcement
is likely to lead to a higher ; Proposition 2 further suggets that outsourcing to a
country is likely to increase as it implements stronger intellectual property protection.
  Finally, note that the larger is , the larger is the amount of the second-period
surplus earned by A under outsourcing that M can claim in the …rst period licensing
contract and the larger is the share of physical capital costs borne by A. As a result, as
  becomes larger, outsourcing becomes a more attractive option. Since low values of
  are associated with greater capital market imperfections in the foreign country, FDI
is more likely when capital market imperfections are signi…cant whereas outsourcing
is more likely when capital market imperfections are less signi…cant.


                                 4. CONCLUSION


  In this paper we have examined how the non-excludability of knowledge capital
leads to the ownership of a complementary asset, in our case physical capital, as a
means of protecting intellectual property. The result we …nd is that …rms that are
largely dependent on knowledge capital for their returns will protect these returns by
engaging in FDI rather than outsourcing. The ownership of physical capital protects
the returns of the complementary asset, knowledge capital. The cost of this ownership
is weak incentives for …rm management. Firms whose returns rely little on knowledge
capital and mainly on physical capital outsource to provide stronger management
incentives.
  We conclude the paper by summarizing six empirical implications of the model.
Three relate to the …rms and their technologies. (1) Firms that choose FDI will have
larger values of Tobin’s q, all else equal, than …rms that outsource, (2) …rms and


                                           23
products that are subject to product cycles are likely to use FDI early in a cycle and
outsourcing later, and (3) …rms in industries with rapidly developing technologies
may be more likely to choose outsourcing. Three predictions relate to host-market
characteristics. FDI is more likely chosen in markets where (4) skilled labor has a
low opportunity cost, (5) intellectual property rights and contract enforcement are
relatively weak, and (6) capital markets are relatively under-developed.




                                         24
                                 REFERENCES

Antrás, Pol (2003), “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118, 1375-1418.

Antrás, Pol (2005), “Incomplete Contracts and the Product Cycle”, American Eco-
nomic Review 95, 1054-1071.

Caves, Richard E.(2007), Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, third edition.

Davidson William H. and Donald G. McFetridge (1984), "International Technology
Transactions and the Theory of the Firm", Journal of Industrial Economics 32, 253-
264.

Ethier, Wilfred J. and James R. Markusen (1996), “Multinational Firms, Technology
Di¤usion and Trade,”Journal of International Economics 41, 1-28.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson (2005), “Ownership and Control in Out-
sourcing to China: Estimating the Property-Rights Theory of the Firm”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120, 729-761.

Fosfuri, Andrea, Massimo Motta and Thomas Rønde (2001), Foreign direct invest-
ments and spillovers through workers’mobility, Journal of International Economics
53, 205-222.

Glass, Amy J. And Kamal Saggi (2002), “Multinational …rms and technology trans-
fer”, Scandinavian Journal of Economics 104, 495-513.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart (1986), “The Costs and Bene…ts of Owner-
ship: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration, Journal of Political Economy 94,
691-719.

Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (2002), “Integration versus Outsourcing in
Industry Equilibrium”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 85-120.
Grossman Gene M. And Elhanan Helpman (2004), “Managerial incentives and the
international organization of production”, Journal of International Economics 63,
237-262.

Hart, Oliver D. and John Moore (1990), “Property Rights and the Nature of the
Firm”, Journal of Political Economy 98, 1119-1158.
Horstmann, Ignatius J. and James R. Markusen (1987), “Licensing Versus Direct
Investment: A Model of Internalization by the Multinational Enterprise,” Canadian
Journal of Economics 20, 464 481.

Mans…eld, Edwin and Anthony Romeo (1980), "Technology Transfer to Overseas
Subsidiaries by U.S. Firms", Quarterly Journal of Economics 94, 737-750.

Markusen, James R. (1995), "The Boundaries of Multinational Enterprises and the
Theory of International Trade", Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, 169-189.

Markusen, James R. (2001), “Contracts, Intellectual Property Rights, and Multina-
tional Investment in Developing Countries”, Journal of International Economics 53,
189-204.

Markusen, James R. (2002), Multinational Firms and the Theory of International
Trade, Cambridge: MIT Press.

Maskus, Keith E, Kamal Saggi and Thitima Puttitanun (2005), “Patent Rights
and International Technology Transfer through Direct Investment and Licensing”, in
Keith E. Maskus and Jerome H. Reichman (editors), International Public Goods and
Transfer of Technology under a Globalized Intellectual Property Regime, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 265-281.

Morck, Randall and Bernard Yeung (1991), "Why Investors Value Multinationality",
Journal of Business 64, 165-187.

Morck, Randall and Bernard Yeung (1992), “Internalization: An Event Study”, Jour-
nal of International Economics 33, 41-56.

Smith, Pamela (2001), Patent rights and bilateral exchange: a cross-country analysis
of U.S. exports, FDI, and licensing, Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Teece, David (1986), The Multinational Corporation and the Resource Cost of Inter-
national Technology Transfer, Cambridge: Ballinger.

Wilson, Robert W. (1977), "The E¤ect of Technological Environment and Product
Rivalry on R&D E¤ort and Licensing of Inventions", Review of Economics and Sta-
tistics 59, 171-78.

Yang, G. F. And Keith E. Maskus (2001), “Intellectual property rights and licensing:
An econometric investigation”, Weltwirtschaftsliches Archiv 137, 58-79.



                                         26
