                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          NO TIME TO LOSE? TIME CONSTRAINTS AND PHYSICAL ACTIVITY

                                            John Mullahy
                                         Stephanie A. Robert

                                        Working Paper 14513
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14513


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2008




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 2008 Meetings of the Western Economic Association.
 Thanks are owed to Joe Sabia for the helpful comments he provided at that conference. Partial financial
support was provided by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Health & Society Scholars Program
at UW-Madison. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by John Mullahy and Stephanie A. Robert. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
No Time to Lose? Time Constraints and Physical Activity
John Mullahy and Stephanie A. Robert
NBER Working Paper No. 14513
November 2008
JEL No. I1

                                              ABSTRACT

Although individuals are all endowed with the same time budgets, time use patterns differ owing to
heterogeneity in preferences and constraints. In today's health policy arena there is considerable discussion
about how to improve health outcomes by increasing levels of physical activity. In this paper, we
explore how individuals endowed with different levels of human capital allocate time to physically-demanding
activities that we characterize as health-producing behaviors. Our data are drawn from multiple years
of the American Time Use Survey (ATUS), which are based on daily time use diaries and include
information on detailed physical activity time uses. Since ATUS time use categories are mutually
exclusive and exhaustive -- i.e. "multitasking" is not accommodated -- we employ a novel econometric
share equation techniques to enforce the adding-up requirement that time use is constrained to 1,440
minutes per day. We find that differential human capital endowments result in different manifestations
of how time is used to produce health. While more-educated individuals, e.g., sleep much less than
less-educated individuals, they utilize some of the time so liberated to exercise and work more. We
find as well that various features of individuals' environments, broadly defined, play important roles
in time allocation decisions.


John Mullahy
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Dept. of Population Health Sciences
787 WARF, 610 N. Walnut Street
Madison, WI 53726
and NBER
jmullahy@facstaff.wisc.edu

Stephanie A. Robert
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Dept. of Population Health Sciences
707 WARF, 610 Walnut St.
Madison, WI 53726
sarobert@wisc.edu
1. Background and Motivation
Physical Activity, Health, and Time Use
       Despite evidence that regular physical activity is associated with decreased
risk for obesity, chronic diseases, and premature mortality (USDHHS, 1996), fewer
than half of the U.S. population engaged in recommended levels of physical activity
in 2005 (MMWR, 2007).         Moreover, there are significant disparities in physical
activity by gender, race, and socioeconomic status such that women, racial/ethnic
minorities, and people with lower education and income have significantly lower
levels of physical activity (MMWR, 2007).
       A burgeoning literature aims to understand the various barriers to physical
activity in order to improve the health of the population and reduce health
disparities.   In making choices about how to allocate time to health-enhancing
physical activities, individuals necessarily balance preferences for healthiness and
(perhaps) the intrinsic utility of physical activity against the opportunity costs of the
time spent engaged in such activities, recognizing that the magnitudes of such
opportunity costs arise in part from factors that are exogenously fixed at the time
such decisions are made.        When individuals themselves are asked about their
perceived barriers to exercise, they often cite lack of time due to work and other
demands (Sallis and Owen, 1999; Wolin et al., 2008).            However, very little is
known about people’s actual time use for physical activity, particularly how time
allocations for physical activity are related to time allocations for other aspects of
life (such as work, sleep, caring for others, and other non-exercise leisure
activities), and how factors such as gender, education, and family structure affect
allocation of time for physical activity.
       Time use studies allow us not only to investigate how people allocate time for
a particular health-producing activity (i.e., physical activity), but to examine the
allocations that people make for this activity versus others, and factors that are
systematically related to these time-use allocations (Russell et al., 2007).          As
described further below, human capital and its relationship to time use and health
is part of the fundamental analytical tradition in health economics.
       Research on time use demonstrates that there have been increases in overall
leisure time in the U.S. in recent decades (Aguiar and Hurst, 2008) including an



                                            1
increase in leisure time allocated to physical activity (Berry, 2007).               Aguiar and
Hurst (2008) demonstrate that the increases in leisure time have been greater
among individuals with less education than among those with more. Nevertheless,
SES differences in physical activity remain. For example, estimates from the 2005
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance Survey (BRFSS) show that 54.6% of men and
53.3% of women who were college graduates engaged in regular physical activity,
compared with 37.2% of men and 37.1% of women with less than a high school
education (MMWR, 2007).
      Our main task in this paper is to examine the structure of adults’ time use
patterns, with an emphasis on time allocated to physical activity.                We examine
whether     individuals'   economic     endowments,        human       capital,   demographic
circumstances, and external environments influence time use choices in general
and, specifically, with respect to time allocated to physical activity.                   We are
particularly interested in whether human capital, in the form of educational
attainment, influences the manner in which individuals allocate time towards or
away from physical activity.
      Since    time   is   a   fundamental    input    into   the   production       of   health,
understanding how and why time use patterns emerge should be an important
ingredient in thinking more creatively about how to improve individual and
population health. We anticipate that this research will advance understanding of
health-related    time     allocation   decisions     by   providing     a   solid    economic
conceptualization of these phenomena, by utilizing extraordinarily interesting data
that speaks to this conceptualization, and by deploying a novel econometric
methodology within which these issues can be addressed straightforwardly and
robustly.
      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.                Section 2 considers
several conceptual or theoretical approaches               to thinking about individuals'
"demands" for health-enhancing time use.            Section 3 describes the ATUS data,
points out some important caveats about the ATUS data, and provides details about
the construction of the subsamples we use to explore econometrically the observed
time use patterns. Section 4 exposits our econometric strategy. Section 5 reports
the empirical results, and section 6 closes with a discussion and some conclusions.



                                             2
2. Time Allocation, Human Capital, and Health: Theory
      The context of human capital and its relationship to time use and health is
part of the fundamental analytical tradition in health economics dating back to
Grossman's seminal work in 1972, and thus even further back to Becker's seminal
work on the economics of time allocation in 1965.         In the canonical Grossman
model, time and goods are invested, via health production functions, in such a way
as to influence the next period's health capital level which itself corresponds to how
much healthy time and unhealthy time individuals enjoy in the subsequent period.
In this context, human capital stocks (e.g. educational attainments) influence the
efficiency by which time and goods translate into ultimate health outcomes.          The
role of time and time costs in health production has become quite prominent, for
instance, in the conceptual and empirical economic analysis of obesity (Cutler et al.,
2003; Philipson and Posner, 2008).
      Our main premise is that individuals differentially endowed with human
capital are likely to exhibit different patterns of time use when factors orthogonal to
human capital endowments are held constant. Since one important feature of time
use is how individuals allocate time budgets towards (or away from) time spent
engaging in health-enhancing physical activities, one consequent prediction would
be that the amount of human capital individuals bring to the Table will be related to
the amount of human capital -- specifically, health capital -- that they take away
from the Table.
      However because some of the important determinants of time use patterns
(e.g. shadow prices of different forms of time use, or wage rates) will typically not
be orthogonal to human capital endowments -- e.g. higher educational attainment
and higher wages -- the prediction of how human capital endowments influence
health-enhancing    time   use   patterns   and,   ultimately,   health   outcomes    is
theoretically ambiguous. The goal of this paper is to shed some empirical light on a
set of such relationships in order to sharpen our understanding of time use
determinants and, downstream, to understand how interventions might be designed
to encourage healthier or discourage unhealthier uses of scarce time.
      There are many potential pathways through which human capital stocks
might be expected to influence time use patterns. First, and most obvious, is that



                                            3
differences in human capital stock levels (e.g. educational attainment) will translate
into differences in labor market productivity that will in turn translate into
differential marginal rewards (wage rates) for forms of time use like labor supply.
At the margin, individuals will respond to such differential reward rates in making
time allocation decisions, including how much time to dedicate (or not) to health
enhancing activities. An important study in this genre is Biddle and Hamermesh,
1990, who demonstrate empirically how higher market opportunity costs of time
(wage rates) translate into reduced demand for sleep time.         To the extent that
increased time over the typical margin in a population is health enhancing, the
Biddle-Hamermesh results suggest that -- at least in a static context -- more
human capital does not automatically translate into better health outcomes.
      Alternatively, at a theoretical level, time constraints are equally binding for
all individuals -- 1,440 minutes per day, 8,760 hours per year, etc. -- and within
these bounds individuals are free to allocate their time budgets as they wish subject
to constraints imposed by physical laws like gravity. At a practical level, however,
choices -- including time use choices -- individuals have made in the past as well as
the consequences of these choices are likely to imply varying degrees of quasi-fixity
of current-period time use patterns, with the implication that departures from such
patterns are likely to be costly either in a monetary or in a psychic sense.1 (See
Heckman, 1980, and Hamermesh, 2005, for two perspectives on how past time
allocation choices might influence current patterns of time use.) The role of human
capital stocks in such a setting is to dictate in part the extent to which the
ostensible fixity of individuals' circumstances may be rendered more flexible by,
e.g., the enhanced resources that can be commanded by individuals having higher
levels of human capital (e.g. in the form of financial wealth).
      Our guiding hypothesis is that many individuals are confronted with
significant constraints on their allocation of time for physical activity, and these


1
   For instance, if my child attends regularly a formal day care setting and I elect to
allocate my time in such a manner that I fail to pick her up by the 6PM closing time
(e.g. by attending an after work event at a local tavern), then I am likely to pay
both monetary costs (for staff overtime) as well as to suffer psychic costs (for being
a lousy parent).




                                           4
constraints differ importantly by level of human capital (e.g., educational
attainment).      However, the prediction of how human capital influences time
allocated to physical activity is ambiguous because there are both substitution and
wealth effects at work: since the shadow price of non-labor time use is relatively
greater for high-wage individuals, they may spend less time engaged in health-
promoting activities (as was documented in the Biddle-Hamermesh study for
activities like sleep).       Yet individuals who have amassed high levels of human
capital are both more able to afford health-producing behaviors and more likely to
prefer greater levels of produced health.
      While our focus is ultimately on time use as an input into the production of
health, it is useful to sketch a broader economic framework that encompasses
considerations of the "demands" for various forms of time use but that also speaks
to the broader issues of the role of human capital sketched above.           Assume
individuals are endowed with utility functions


               u = u(h,z,t,v;e),


where h is a measure of health, z is a vector of other commodities produced by
combining goods and time, t=[t1,...,tM] is a vector of time use activities, v is a
vector of other commodity-producing variable inputs that may also confer direct
utility, and e is a vector of exogenously given environmental (social, natural, etc.)
measures that may influence the marginal utilities of the other utility determinants
(e.g. ceteris paribus, ice cream and time jogging may be more enjoyable at
temperatures of 75F than of 15F).
      Health outcomes are produced via the health production function


               h = h ( t, v, k, q, e )



in which k is a vector describing dimensions of non-health human capital, and q is a
vector representing features of family or household structures.           The other
commodities, z, are produced using the same inputs as go into production of h;
note that z may include outputs like the health or wellbeing of other family



                                             5
members. The full income (time and money) constraint is


                           M
             pv + w(k)   ∑m=2 tm = E + w(k)T ,

where labor supply is t1, total time endowment is T (e.g. 1,440 minutes per day,
8,760 hours per non-leap year, etc.), endowment income is E, and where market
wages are written as an explicit function of human capital. The demand or choice
functions that result from constrained utility maximization include the time demand
functions


             tm = tm (k, q, e,E, p ) ,        m=1,...,M



or, in shorthand,


             t = t(x),


whose empirical counterparts, cast as the conditional expectations E ⎡⎣ t x ⎤⎦ , are the

main focus of the subsequent analysis.              In this setting, we will be focusing
particularly on the roles played by human capital (measured here most prominently
by   educational    attainment),     family    structure   (kids'   age   structure,   marital
arrangements), and environmental features of several kinds.2


3. ATUS Data and Sample Construction
ATUS Surveys
      Empirical analysis of time use data is certainly not a new enterprise (see
Juster and Stafford, 1991, and Hamermesh and Pfann, 2005).                    However, only
recently have data been sufficiently rich that analysts can begin realistically


22
   It should be noted that the empirical analysis we undertake below does not have
information on any relevant goods' prices (p) and has at best rough proxy
measures of endowment income (E).




                                                6
thinking about how to deploy time use data to explore issues involving individuals'
health (see Russell et al., 2007, for a discussion of health-related measures in the
ATUS).   While this paper does not tackle health issues per se, the ATUS data
nonetheless provide a level of breadth and depth that permits us to explore how
determinants of time use are likely to translate into health outcomes through the
time use channel—particularly through time use for physical activity.
      The data used in this study are from the 2005 and 2006 American Time Use
Surveys administered by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The ATUS universe is
all residents living in households in the U.S. who are at least 15 years old,
excluding active military personnel and persons residing in institutions (e.g.,
nursing homes and prisons).       The ATUS sample is drawn from the Current
Population Survey (CPS), using a three-stage process.       In the first stage, CPS
respondents are sampled to produce an ATUS sample that is distributed across the
states in approximate proportion of the national population each state represents.
In the second stage, households are oversampled if they have a Hispanic or non-
Hispanic black householder.     Households with children are over-sampled and
households without children are under-sampled. In the third stage, a respondent
from each household is randomly chosen among all eligible householders (civilian,
non-institutionalized persons ages 15 or older). The ATUS response rate averaged
56.6% in 2005 and 55.1% in 2006.
      Over 2,000 respondents participated per month in the ATUS during each of
2005 and 2006, for approximate annual sample sizes of 26,000 for each of these
years. The monthly sample was divided into four randomly selected panels for each
week of the month. The sample was then further split evenly between weekdays
and weekend days, with 10% of the sample assigned to each weekday and 25%
assigned to each of the two weekend days.          The designated respondent was
randomly assigned a day of the week to report on.        The phone interviews with
respondents (in English or Spanish) included a combination of structured questions
and conversational interviewing, focusing particularly on a time-use diary.


Time Use Data
      The time-use diary collects a detailed account of the respondent’s sequential



                                          7
activities "yesterday" starting at 4:00 a.m. the previous day and ending at 4:00
a.m. on the interview day. For each activity reported, the interviewer also collected
information about how long the activity lasted, and for most activities, data were
collected about who was present and where the activity took place. If respondents
listed multiple activities at one time, they were asked to choose which one was the
primary activity.   Activities were then coded in minutes and add up to a total of
1,044 minutes, with only one primary activity coded for any given minute.        The
only secondary or simultaneous activity that was coded was care of children under
age 13. These secondary childcare estimates are made by summing the duration of
activities during which respondents had a child under age 13 in their care while
doing a primary activity. While we do not undertake an analysis of these data in
the current version of this paper, we expect to incorporate considerations of these
issues in a future version.
      One of the strengths of this study is that we examine several types of time
use categories simultaneously. We break the allocation of time into six categories:
sleep, household and personal activities, care for others, work, non-exercise leisure
activities, and physical activities. (This categorization of the time use measures is
primarily based on aggregating the 18 two-digit classifications used in the ATUS,
with exceptions noted).
      Since sleep time has been of considerable interest in the health literature,
and has been shown to vary by SES in particular (Biddle and Hamermesh, 1990),
we include a separate time use category for "sleep" (tsleep). For our purposes, the
total amount of time sleeping includes an estimate of actual sleep time but does not
include time listed as "sleepless" (which is combined under other household and
personal care activities).
      "Household and personal activities" (thhpers) includes a number of activities
viewed as part of daily life such as household chores, using services (professional,
personal, or household), consumer purchases, eating and drinking, and personal
care (other than sleeping). In addition, all time spent in travel between activities
(except for walking listed for the purpose of exercise) are coded here.
      "Caring for others" (tcare) includes providing care for and helping both
household and nonhousehold members of any age. This class of coding has fairly



                                          8
conservative coding criteria as it requires that the care or help be not only the
primary activity, but also that it not be easily counted as something else.           For
example, "watching television with my child" is coded as a leisure activity rather
than care, and "helping my spouse cook dinner" is considered a household activity
rather than care. Care provided through an organization is coded as a volunteer
activity rather than as care for a nonhousehold member.
       "Work" (twork) refers to all working and work-related activities (except travel
to and from work), including activities like work-related socializing and job search
activities.   While the term "market work" is not used in the ATUS lexicon, it is
appropriate to think of this work category as such.
       For    leisure   time,   we   distinguish   between   time   spent   on   "physical
activity/exercise, not work-related" (texerc1), which we refer to as “physical
activity”, and "non-exercise leisure activities" (tnonexc1). We consider physical
activity/exercise to include all the ATUS codes under "Sports and Exercise" (e.g.,
playing sports, running, lifting weights) with the exception of some subcodes that
we decided might not count as exercise as they, on average, are less active:
billiards, boating, bowling, fishing, hunting, and vehicle touring/racing. The latter
activities were allocated to non-exercise leisure activities, which puts them with
other recreational activities such as watching sports, watching television, relaxing,
listening to music, and attending arts, cultural, and entertainment events; we also
put religious and volunteer activities in this category, as well as education activities
(note that we restrict our analyses to respondents ages 25 and older). However, in
a sensitivity analysis described later, we create a second set of measures in which
billiards, boating, bowling, fishing, hunting, and vehicle touring/racing are allocated
to the physical activity category (texerc2) and away from the non-exercise leisure
category (tnonexc2).


Explanatory Variables
       Because ATUS respondents were chosen from among CPS respondents, CPS
data are merged with ATUS data. The CPS interview takes place approximately five
months before the ATUS diary date.          As a consequence, the range of measures
available for defining explanatory variables is extended significantly since both the



                                             9
ATUS interview component as well as the CPS information can be utilized.
      The main covariates from the ATUS and ATUS-CPS data used in the analysis
are: gender (female); age in years (age); race/ethnicity (blacknh (non-Hispanic
black),   Hispanic,   otherre   (other   race),   and    non-Hispanic   white   (omitted));
educational attainment (hsgrad, somecoll, collgrad, advdeg (less than high school
graduate omitted); or a pseudo-continuous years of education measure, educ);
marital status (widowed, divsep, nevmarr (currently married omitted)); presence of
a spouse in the household (sppreshh); household size (hhsize); season (autumn,
winter, spring (summer omitted)); and day of week (sun (Saturday omitted); or
tue,...,fri (Monday omitted)).
      Additionally, we anticipate that intra-household demographic structures will
play an important role in the way adult household members allocate time. As such,
we define and include in our econometric specifications various sets of measures
that indicate the age categories of the youngest child in the household (yghh0005
(5 or younger), yghh0611 (6-11)), a variable indicating the presence of an own
non-household child under the age of 18 (pknhlt18), a variable indicating the
number of household children under the age of 18 (nkhhlt18).              Finally, in some
specifications we consider the inclusion of family income measures despite the
legitimate concern about their endogeneity in a model of time use (fi2550, fi5075,
fi75100, fi100150, fi150up (family income $0-$24,999 omitted)).
      These ATUS and ATUS-CPS measures are supplemented by merging at the
state- and diary-month-level information on several factors that may reasonably be
hypothesized to influence time use choices.             First, state-level data on average
monthly temperature (temperature) and total precipitation (precip) from the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) are linked (data are not
available for Alaska and Hawaii). Obviously these are coarse measures, particularly
so for states having large latitude ranges.3       Second, state-level monthly data on
unemployment rates from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) are merged;
contemporaneous and one-month lagged measures are considered (uerate,


3
 In future work we plan to obtain and merge more geographically- and temporally-
specific climate data. See Connolly, 2008, for discussion.




                                            10
ueratelg).    Finally annual state-level data (estimates, more accurately) on the
prevalence of overweight/obese or obese adults (stobover, stobese) from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Behavioral Risk Factors
Surveillance System (BRFSS) are merged. Based on the individual's diary month,
a weighted average of the current and prior years' data is computed, with weights
(month-1)/12) and ((13-month)/12), respectively.


Sample Characteristics
      In the combined 2005 and 2006 ATUS, there are 18,484 observations on
individuals ages 25-64. We focus on this age group in our analysis based on the
notion that individuals of these ages are (largely) post-schooling and (largely) pre-
retirement.   In this age window, 16,217 observations have fully intact time use
data and thus constitute the main estimation sample.4          Of these, 8,265 are
observations on individuals whose time diaries were completed on weekends or
holidays and 7,952 are on observations whose time diaries were completed on non-
holiday weekdays (recall that the sampling structure is designed to accomplish an
approximately 50% split between weekends and weekdays). Since we expect time
use patterns to be different on weekends and weekdays, we will estimate separate
models for these subsamples (controlling via dummy variables in both instances for
the particular day of week on which the sample is taken).       Due to the missing
climate data for Alaska and Hawaii, the main estimation samples will be based on
samples comprising 8,216 weekend observations and 7,907 weekday observations.
      The unweighted summary statistics for the time use measures and the
covariates are presented in Tables 1 and 2.    Table 3 demonstrates the differences
in summaries of the time use measures between the unweighted and weighted



4
  Fully intact time use data correspond to observations having zero values for all of
the ATUS two-digit "50" subcategories. Insofar as selection on observables within
the 25-64 sample is concerned, a simple logit regression of time use data
missingness on basic demographic variables suggests that older individuals,
females, individuals with larger household sizes, and college graduates and
advanced degree holders are relatively more likely to have missing or otherwise
unusable time use data than their respective counterparts.




                                         11
samples.5 Figure 1 displays pie graphs of the time use measures by gender and
time of week, while Figure 2 depicts time use patterns by educational attainment
and time of week. Even at this level of evidence, gender, education, and time-of-
week differences are evident and prominent. Figure 3 displays the detailed sample
distributions of each time use measure.


4. Econometric Strategy
Limited Dependent Variable Estimation
      The available time use data from the ATUS comprise M mutually exclusive
and exhaustive-of-1440-hours information on respondents' time use patterns for
one randomly selected weekday or one randomly selected weekend day. Because
                                                           M
these data necessarily satisfy the adding up condition   ∑ j=1 t j = T , the nature of the
time demand functions is formally that of economic share equations found, for
example, in the analysis of household expenditure patterns or portfolio allocation
decisions (Poterba and Samwick, 2002; Woodland, 1979).           Normalizing the total
amount of time available to T=1 formalizes the comparison to the share equation
context. Various econometric methods have been used in the literature to analyze
time use (Kooreman and Kapteyn, 1987, and Wales and Woodland, 1977, as well as
related literature analyzing budget share models, e.g. McElroy, 1987, and
Woodland, 1979). Many of these approaches are built on a multivariate Tobit or on
a Dirichlet probability structure.


Multivariate Fractional Regression (MFREG, MFLOGIT)
      As an alternative, this paper uses a generalization of the fractional regression
models proposed by Papke and Wooldridge, 1996, in their study of voluntary
individual contributions to retirement accounts in which the main dependent
variable was the fraction of allowable contributions made by each individual. The
key result in the Papke-Wooldridge paper is that even when the outcome variables
take on values at the extremes of the bounded range they occupy -- i.e. y=0 or

5
  The analysis relies henceforth exclusively on the unweighted samples. The most
prominent differences would appear to be with the tcare variable.




                                          12
y=1 -- the fractional regression (FREG) or fractional logit (FLOGIT) method
provides consistent estimates of the parameters of a univariate conditional mean
function μ ( x;β ) so long as μ ( x;β ) is specified with the correct functional form.

       In the ATUS time use data, there are many observations of tij=0 on particular
time use categories.        Multivariate Tobit-type estimators can handle such data
structures, albeit at the costs of computational complexity and possible non-
robustness to non-homoskedastic-Gaussian or non-Gaussian probability structures.
Dirichlet distributions may also be non-robust to distributional departures, and also
may not accommodate well the y=0 phenomenon. The proposed extension of the
Papke-Wooldridge strategy to multivariate outcomes usefully steers clear of these
econometric potholes (additional details are provided in Mullahy, 2006).
       To this end, let yim=tim/T, m=1,...,M, be the marginal outcomes of interest
                                   M
such that yim∈[0,1] and          ∑m=1 yim = 1 .   Then it is natural to want the estimation

strategy to enforce two restrictions that are likely to be important in applications.
                                                                   M
First is that E[yim|xi]∈(0,1) for all i; second is that         ∑m=1 E[yim | xi] =1   for all i; in

this notation, xi summarizes all relevant exogenous determinants of the specified
conditional means.
       One   functional     form       that   embeds    both    these   considerations     is   the
multinomial logit functional form


                       exp ( xiβm )
       E[yim|xi] =     M
                                          ,            m=1,...,M
                     ∑k =1 exp ( xiβk )
                           exp(xiβm )
                 =          M
                     1+   ∑k =2 exp(xiβk )
                 = μim ( x ) ,



using the normalization β1 =0. In keeping with the Papke-Wooldridge terminology,

this model might be termed a multivariate fractional regression (MFREG) or
multivariate fractional logit (MFLOGIT) mode.                  This model can be estimated
straightforwardly using modifications of standard multinomial logit estimation


                                                  13
algorithms (see the Appendix for further details on estimation and inference).6


Average Partial Effects
      Owing to the necessary parameter normalization that arises from the adding-
up restriction, the interpretation of the parameter point estimates in multinomial
logit-type models can be vexing (Crawford et al., 1998). More interesting are the
average partial effects (APEs) of the xik on the conditional means E[yim|xi]. To this
end, in the case where xk is a dummy variable, we compute APEmk as the sample
                          l , of the difference:
average, evaluated at β = β



       ΔE ⎡⎣yim xi ⎤⎦
                      =
                              (
                           exp x −k,iβm,−k + βmk)      −
                                                                (
                                                            exp x −k,iβm,−k )     ,
           Δxik         1+
                             M
                          ∑ j=2     (               )
                               exp x −k,iβ j,−k + β jk   1+
                                                              M
                                                           ∑ j=2      (         )
                                                                exp x −k,iβ j, −k



where x-k,i is the vector xi for the i-th observation with the k-th element excluded.
When dummy variables are included in x as mutually exclusive and exhaustive
(save an "omitted" category) members of sets of indicators -- e.g. race/ethnicity
groups, educational attainment indicators -- setting up the discrete APE to capture
the proper counterfactual is accomplished by zeroing out all of the group's dummy

6
  Given the large number of parameters estimated by MFLOGIT, a concern arises
regarding multiple comparisons in hypothesis testing. One could use a Bonferroni-
type criterion to reduce the probability of type-1 errors across the family of t-tests
or p-values that arise, but Bonferroni criteria are notoriously conservative, i.e.
intolerant of type-1 errors. An alternative, more powerful, approach is to appeal to
the false discovery rate (FDR) control strategies developed by Benjamini and
Hochberg, 1995, and Benjamini and Yekutieli, 2001, which are based on the
individual tests' p-values but accommodate some degree of tolerance of type-1
errors on the analyst's part, thus enhancing test power.
       Since the p-values associated with the elements of βl will not be mutually
independent, the conservative criterion suggested in Benjamini and Yekutieli, 2001,
offers a sensible middle ground between the perhaps overly liberal approach of
ignoring altogether the multiple comparisons issue (i.e. making inferences based
only on individual parameters' p-values) and the perhaps overly conservative
Bonferroni strategy. Supplementing the standard p-values, the tables of MFLOGIT
results presented below provide the FDR hypothesis rejection (FDR=1) or non-
rejection (FDR=0) recommendations at FDR rate .05.




                                              14
variables at baseline (i.e. setting all group dummies for all observations equal to
the omitted category) and then setting the xik the variable in question equal to one
for all observations.7
      For "continuous" xk, APEmk is computed as the sample average, evaluated at
  l , of the partial derivative
β=β



       ∂E ⎡⎣yim xi ⎤⎦               (
                      = exp ( xiβm ) ×
                                       1+   ∑ j=2 exp ( xiβ j ) ) × βmk − ∑ j=2 exp ( xiβ j ) × β jk
                                               M                               M

                                                                                                       .
                                                        (1 + ∑                     ))
            ∂xik                                                                    2
                                                                 M
                                                                 j=2       (
                                                                       exp xiβ j



As in a standard multinomial logit probability model, it is noteworthy that the sign
of βmk does not necessarily correspond to the sign of APEmk.                            We compute and

report 95% bootstrap confidence intervals8 around the APEs so estimated using the
C2 method suggested by Hansen, 2008.9
      In the empirical analysis that follows we elect to normalize the MFLOGIT
coefficients by setting βtnonexc = 0 ; consequently the other categories' parameters

should be interpreted as βk − βtnonexc .            The interpretation of the APEs' estimates

does not depend on the normalization, however, and as indicated above these and
their sampling variation are likely to be more interesting for most purposes.




7
  We have estimated a set of specifications that include interactions involving
gender, schooling attainment, and other covariates. Calculation of the relevant
interaction-related APEs is somewhat computationally complicated, however. The
next version of this paper will include a presentation of these results.
8
  Multiple comparisons issues may arise as well in the computation of multiple CIs
(Benjamini and Yekutieli, 2005). We do not address these considerations in the
present version of the paper.
9
  Given the size of the parameter vectors being estimated and corresponding size of
the APE vector, the bootstrap exercise is somewhat time intensive (approximately
four bootstrap iterations per minute). As such, the present version of this paper
estimates the APE CIs using 500 bootstrap iterations for the baseline specifications
and 100 bootstrap iterations for the comparison specifications.




                                                   15
5. Results
Baseline Specifications
      The parameter estimates for our baseline specifications are presented in
Tables 4 (weekends & holidays) and 5 (weekdays). These Tables present the point
estimates    (recall   the   βtnonexc = 0   normalization),   robust   t-statistics10,   and

conservative FDR rejection (=1) or non-rejection (=0) recommendation. These are
followed by Table 6, which reports the corresponding APE and .95 CI estimates.
Note that the magnitudes of the parameter estimates are based on scaling the time
use outcomes to the [0,1] or share intervals (i.e. dividing each time use measure
for each individual by 1,440), whereas the APEs are defined on the natural units of
measurement, minutes per day.
      In Tables 4 and 5, neither the signs nor magnitudes of the x's roles as
determinants of the t's are informative (owing to the parameter normalization).
However, the statistical significance of many of the individual point estimates (most
usefully indicated by FDR=1), the magnitude of differences across categories for
given xk, and the joint significance of the category-specific parameters (as indicated

by the Wald χ2 statistics) are all suggestive that the conditional time use patterns

E ⎡⎣tk x ⎤⎦ are likely to vary nontrivially with at least some of the x's. The magnitude

of effects for each parameter can then be assessed most straightforwardly by
consideration of the estimated APEs in Table 6.
      Table 6 demonstrates the APE and .95 CI estimates. Looking at age, we see
that age has a statistically significant association with all categories of time use on
weekends/holidays.        Each greater year of age is associated with almost two
minutes more per day spent in personal and household tasks (1.883 minutes) and
in non-exercise leisure time (1.965 minutes), and about one minute less spent in


10
   In this version of the paper, the parameter estimates' robust covariance matrix
estimator does not consider possible clustering at the state level. The usual cluster
parameter covariance estimator turns out to yield standard error estimates on the
state-level variables that are actually smaller than their non-clustered counterparts.
We have not yet developed the software to generate the clustered bootstrap
confidence intervals (Field and Welsh, 2007); we expect to present these results in
the next version of the paper.




                                             16
sleep (-1.178 minutes), caring for others (-1.797), working (-.742), and exercising
(-.131 minutes).        For weekdays, there is no statistically significant relationship
between age and time for sleep and physical activity, but age has a positive
association with time spent for household and personal care and leisure activities,
and a negative association with time caring for others and time working.
       As demonstrated earlier in Figure 1, gender is significantly related to adult
time use. Looking across all categories of time use on weekends/holidays and on
weekdays, gender has a statistically significant relationship with all forms of time
use    except   one—time       spent   in    physical    activity   on    weekdays.      On   a
weekend/holiday day, women spend almost 7 minutes more time sleeping than do
men, net of all other covariates. On weekdays, they spend about 15 more minutes
sleeping than do men. Women also spend about 83 and 92 more minutes taking
care of household and personal care activities on a weekend/holiday and weekday,
respectively. Women spend more time caring for others on a given day (about 12
more minutes on weekend/holiday days and 39 minutes on weekdays).                        Women
spend less time than men working and participating in non-exercise leisure
activities on both weekends/holidays and weekdays.              On weekends and holidays,
women spend about ten minutes less in physical activity than do men, though there
is no statistically significant relationship between gender and physical activity on
weekdays.
       When it comes to looking at race/ethnicity and time use, our results
demonstrated that there are clear differences between racial/ethnic groups, and
that   the   patterns    of   difference    vary    depending   on    whether   you   look    at
weekends/holidays or weekdays. Compared to people reporting their race as non-
Hispanic white, those self-reporting as non-Hispanic black report that on weekends
and holidays they spend significantly more time in sleep and non-exercise leisure
activities (21 and 48 more minutes, respectively), and less time in household and
personal care activities, caring for others, and exercising (54, 17, and 7 fewer
minutes,     respectively).      On    weekdays,        compared     to   non-Hispanic    white
respondents, non-Hispanic black respondents again spend more time sleeping and
in non-exercise leisure activities (17 and 44 more minutes, respectively), and less
time in household and personal care activities and caring for others (22 and 15



                                               17
fewer minutes, respectively).     Although there were no black/white differences in
work time on weekends, we see that black respondents report about 23 fewer
minutes of work than white respondents on weekdays.              And while there were
differences in time use for physical activity on weekends/holidays, there is no
statistically significant difference in time use for physical activity on weekdays
between black and white respondents.        Hispanic respondents report both similar
and different time use patterns from non-Hispanic white respondents.                 On
weekends/holidays, Hispanic respondents report more time in sleep (23 minutes)
and time working (16 minutes), and less time in caring for others (-16 minutes)
and participating in non-exercise leisure activities (-22 minutes).       There were no
statistically significant differences in time for household and personal care activities
or in time spent in physical activity.      In stark comparison to weekend/holiday
trends, on weekdays there are no statistically significant time use differences
between Hispanic and non-Hispanic white respondents in any time use activity
except for time spent caring for others, where Hispanic respondents report about
16 fewer minutes in this activity.
      Educational attainment is one of the variables of most interest to us in
looking at determinants of time use for physical activity.      On weekends/holidays,
each increment of educational attainment is associated with a higher level of
physical activity. Compared to people with less than a high school degree, those
with a high school degree, some college, a college degree, and an advanced degree
report more time spent in physical activity, although this difference is only
statistically significant for those who are college graduates (20 additional minutes of
physical activity) or who have an advanced degree (28 additional minutes of
physical activity). In contrast, on weekdays, there were no statistically significant
associations between educational attainment and time spent on physical activity,
net of other covariates.        These positive associations between educational
attainment and time allocated to physical activity are particularly interesting given
that educational attainment is negatively related to time use for non-exercise
leisure activities. Whereas more educated people have less time for leisure activity,
they are still more likely to allocate more time for physical activity.
      Other interesting results emerging from Table 6 are: the strong seasonal



                                           18
patterns of physical activity that are of approximately comparable magnitudes in
both the weekend and weekday samples; the positive association of temperature
with physical activity for both the weekend and weekday samples, particular
noteworthy given that season is controlled; the negative association of state obesity
rates with physical activity, suggestive of possible social context factors in
individuals' choices regarding physical activity time patterns; and the important role
of   state   unemployment      rates     as    determinants          of   time       working   on
weekends/holidays.


Gender Differences
      Recalling that Figure 1 suggested some sizable differences in the marginal
time use distributions of females and males, and given that gender affected all time
use activities in Table 6 which controlled for many covariates, we now consider
formal statistical testing for such differences in the context of our baseline
econometric specifications.    If there are meaningful differences by gender in the
structure of time use determinants, the ultimate story about the role of human
capital (and other) determinants may have to be qualified on a gender-specific
basis. The results of the Wald tests of equality of the separate female and male
coefficient vectors are summarized in Table 7.11               In all cases there is strong
evidence suggesting rejection of the null hypotheses of parameter equality—there
are clear and consistent gender differences in determinants of time use.
      Consequently, it is of some interest to investigate how the APEs differ by
gender.      Gender-specific   results   are       displayed    in   Tables      8   and   9   for
weekends/holidays and weekdays.          Among the interesting gender differences or
similarities seen in Table 8 for weekends/holidays are: males but not females
exhibit negative age associations with time dedicated to physical activity; college or
advance degree holders of both genders tend to engage in more physical activity,


11
  The ideal approach here would be to test the null of gender equality of the APEs.
To obtain reliable bootstrap estimates of the estimated APEs' covariance matrixes
would require a significant increase in the number of bootstrap replications above
what is feasible here. We will undertake this exercise in a subsequent version of
the paper.




                                              19
but the magnitudes of these effects are larger for males; having a spouse present
in the household reduces the time spent on physical activity for males, with no
effect for females; and the state obesity rates are negatively associated with
physical activity time for both genders.       The corresponding results for weekdays
(Table 9) indicate: no strong role for educational attainment in determining physical
activity patterns for either females or males, although the significance and
magnitudes of the educational effects on sleep, personal care, work, and non-
exercise leisure time are noteworthy; men with a spouse present in the household
report less time for physical activity; higher temperature is associated with more
physical activity in women but not men, whereas season affects physical activity for
both men and women; living in a state with greater obesity rates is associated with
less physical activity only in women; and no strong race/ethnicity patterns in
physical activity are shown for males, although there are some clear patterns for
females.   Hispanic women, non-Hispanic black women, and women of other non-
white racial groups report less time for physical activity than non-Hispanic white
women on weekdays.


Alternative Specifications of t and x
      Several specifications were estimated to assess the sensitivity of our baseline
specifications' assumptions to alternative definitions of t and x.             In the first
alternative, we redefined t in terms of texerc2 instead of texerc1 and tnonexc1,
using the same covariates as appear in the baseline specification.              Recall that
texerc1 is a more stringent characterization of "exercise" behavior than texerc2 —
texerc1    excludes   billiards,   boating,   bowling,   fishing,   hunting,   and   vehicle
touring/racing as physical activities by moving them into non-exercise leisure time
activities (tnonexc1).    The main findings with respect to the texerc2 outcomes
relative to the texerc1 findings reported in Table 6 are that for both the
weekend/holiday and weekday samples the age, gender, race/ethnicity, and
seasonal effects are larger, the educational attainment effects are smaller, and the
temperature and state obesity effects become statistically insignificant.
      The next three alternative specifications use the original t definition but
consider alternative definitions of x. In the first of these, an indicator of whether



                                              20
there are any children under the age of 18 living in the household (anyklt18) is
added to the covariates. For both weekends/holidays and weekdays, the estimated
APEs for presence of a child indicate no statistically significant relationship with time
in physical activity. However, presence of a child in the household had statistically
significant but small negative associations with time sleeping, and statistically
significant and large associations with time caring for others and time in non-
exercise leisure activities (positive and negative, respectively).
      The next alternative specifies a more-detailed set of household structure
characteristics in x.     Specifically, anyklt18 is replaced with dummy variables
indicating   whether    the   youngest    household    child   is   aged   0-5   (yghh0005;
approximately preschool) or aged 6-11 (yghh0611; approximately elementary
school).     For both weekends and weekdays, the statistically significant results
indicate that having the youngest household child in either age category reduces
time sleeping, working, and in non-exercise leisure activities, and increases time
caring for others, with all these effects being larger in magnitude for the presence
of the youngest household child being 0-5 (except for weekday sleep, where it is
smaller than the effect for the youngest child being aged 6-11). Effects on time in
physical activity are in all instances negative, but only statistically significant for
presence of the youngest household child aged 0-5, and then only on weekdays.
      Cognizant of the significant potential for introducing endogeneity bias, the
final alternative specification adds to the covariates in the baseline specification
dummy variable indicators of family income categories. Endogeneity considerations
notwithstanding, it turns out that the various levels of family income tend to have
only weak associations with the physical activity outcomes.            Interestingly, larger
family incomes are associated with reduced mean levels of sleep even though the
magnitudes and significances of the estimated educational attainment effects on
sleep remain impressive.


6. Discussion and Conclusions
      This paper has attempted to take a comprehensive look at the structure of
adults' time use patterns with a particular focus on whether individuals' economic
endowments,       human       capital,   demographic    circumstances,       and    external



                                             21
environments influence time use choices in general and, specifically, with respect to
time allocated to physical activity. Data from the American Time Use Surveys from
2005 and 2006 provide an ideal platform on which to build such an analysis. Our
investigation suggests that time use patterns are driven in part by all the
aforementioned factors.    While few of our findings' signs are surprising (in the
sense of departing from commonsense priors), we submit that our empirical results
are particularly valuable for describing magnitudes (as measured empirically by the
APEs) of such relationships in a systematic way that is novel and econometrically
robust.
       Our main priority was to examine the association between educational
attainment and time use allocated for physical activity. We found that educational
attainment was positively related to time allocated to physical activity on
weekends/holidays, but not on weekdays, and these effects were stronger for men
than for women.      However, educational attainment was not related to time
allocated to physical activity on weekdays for either men or women. This could be
one place where offsetting effects of education may be at play, as the higher
opportunity cost of time not spent at work may be most acutely felt during
weekdays despite a greater demand for health via health investments like physical
activity.
       Consistent with prior research, our results show that people with less
education spend more time in non-exercise leisure activities than do those with
more education; however those with less education spend less time doing physical
activity than do those with more education (Berry, 2007; Aguiar and Hurst, 2008).
This contrast should be further examined in future work, to determine how and why
total leisure time gets allocated to physical versus non-physical activities, and how
this varies by educational attainment and other factors. Moreover, future work that
controls for health may account for some of the positive relationship between low
education and more time for leisure and between high education and more time for
physical activity.   In future analyses, we will examine whether educational
attainment interacts with other variables in predicting time use for exercise, as it
may be that some effects, such as family structure, differ by educational
attainment.



                                         22
      Just as our educational attainment variables predicted time use differently on
weekends and weekdays, so did many of our other covariates.            Although we
expected that time use itself would be distributed differently on weekends and
weekdays (e.g., less work time on weekends), one of our main findings is that
many of the covariates we examined operate quite differently on weekends than
they do on weekdays. For example, women had less physical activity than men, but
only on weekends/holidays—there were no gender differences in physical activity
on weekdays.
      We also highlight important findings about gender differences in time use.
We found that men and women not only have different overall patterns of time use,
which we expected based on prior work, but that there are predictors of that time
use vary between men and women.         For example, only for men, living with a
spouse is associated with less time allocated to physical activity (on both weekends
and weekdays).     Indeed, some patterns vary specifically by both gender and
weekend vs. weekday. For example, older age is associated with less time spent in
physical activity, but only for males on weekends/holidays.   As another example,
although non-Hispanic black men and women both allocate less time to physical
activity on weekends/holidays than do non-Hispanic white men and women, on
weekdays this difference is only significant between black and white women, with
no race differences for men.
      The gender specificity of the results suggests that future research on time
use should continue to separate analyses by gender, as the role of human capital
and other determinants appears to be qualified on a gender-specific basis.
Similarly, the variations in both time use and predictors of time use between
weekends and weekdays suggests that we theorize more carefully about how
people conceptualize their weeks, particularly how they think about time use trade-
offs for different parts of the week (i.e., weekends versus weekdays), or how
structural factors impinge on time use allocations differently on weekends versus
weekdays. While such theorizing has implications for how we think about time use
broadly, it may be particularly informative regarding the design of exercise
intervention programs. For example, new initiatives might work for some groups
better on weekends or weekdays, and this may vary by gender.



                                        23
      Also notable was our findings of some significant associations between
physical and social environment variables and time use for physical activity.
Season had a relatively robust relationship with physical activity, with summertime
bringing with it greater physical activity allocations.     In terms of the physical
environment, higher temperature was related to higher physical activity in women,
even controlling for season. Of course, it may be that those who want to exercise
outdoors move to a place where this is more enjoyable. However, counterbalancing
this potential selection effect is that people in ill health (i.e., asthma) also
sometimes move to more temperate climates although they exercise little once
they get there. Future analyses that control for self-rated health status will allow
us to examine this and additional questions in more detail.
      In terms of the social environment, living in a state with higher obesity rates
was associated with less time in physical activity among men and women on
weekends, and among women on weekdays.             Although this is consistent with
theory about the role of social norms and social context in determining health
behaviors, it is surprising that this effect is captured using a state-level obesity
variable rather than a more local measure. Given that we demonstrate statistically
significant relationships despite the crude nature of this and other environmental
measures, and while controlling for a range of covariates, we think further
investigation is warranted into the exact nature of these relationships.       Future
research also needs to examine additional state- and local-level covariates.
      In assessing both our results and the limitations of our analyses to date, we
have a number of ideas of next research steps or considerations that may be
productive.   Our sensitivity analysis that examined alternative specifications of
“physical activity” found that the specifications matter.     Our main results used a
specification of physical activity that is conservative—that excludes some activities,
such as bowling, that may be less physically active than many other activities, and
that excludes travel time for the activity.   Indeed, when we examined a looser
definition of physical activity that included less physically active recreational
activities (such as bowling), the educational attainment effects became smaller, and
the temperature and state obesity effects become insignificant.       Future research
will need to consider how to best categorize activities as “physical activity”,



                                         24
attending as we did, to those activities that are truly physical versus those that are
not.
       In a related issue, we examined total time spent on physical activity in a day,
but did not evaluate the adequacy of time spent on physical activity for each person
on that day. Some studies on physical activity attempt to categorize the amount of
time a person spends being physically active as sufficient or insufficient, per CDC
exercise guidelines of approximately 30 minutes, or by some other guideline.
Future research should examine not only predictors of total physical activity time,
but also predictors of the adequacy of time spent on physical activity.
       In addition, in attempting to measure time spent on actual physical activity,
we did not include travel time for exercise in our measurement of time in physical
activity. Although this means our physical activity measure better captures amount
of exertion, it does not represent the total time that people allocate to physical
activity (which would include travel time), and thus we may be underestimating
actual time trade-offs made for physical activity for those physical activities that do
not occur or begin and end at home.
       In future phases of this work, we anticipate undertaking more formal
statistical investigations of the characterizations and subsequent categorizations of
exercise time vs. other time.     Specifically, we plan to conduct formal tests of
aggregation of outcomes along the lines suggested by Cramer and Ridder, 1991,
and Hill, 1983, as well as to investigate a variety of data-driven approaches to
category aggregation/disaggregation (see, e.g., Cotterman and Peracchi, 1992).
Moreover, we plan to undertake some additional sensitivity analyses looking at how
to handle "sports and exercise as part of job" under the work category. Also, there
are activities that although coded under a primary activity elsewhere, may provide
physical activity benefits, such as walking for travel purposes, housework, and
some volunteer activities.
       A potential limitation of time use data is that the one-day frame of the time
diary means that time use activities that are not undertaken on a regular daily basis
will be missed. Whether this presents any analytical concerns depends on the joint
population distribution of activity frequency over days and the intensity of activities
within days, and possibly on the mode of econometric analysis as well.             For



                                          25
categories like time allocated to physical activity, such considerations may not be
trivial. We hope to explore this issue in greater detail in future work, drawing on
the literature that treats the analogous "purchase infrequency" or "consumption
infrequency" problems in consumer demand analysis (Meghir and Robin, 1992;
Robin, 1993).
       In some of our sensitivity analyses, we investigated whether the presence of
a child, and the age of the youngest child, affected time allocations to physical
activity.    Despite literature suggesting the importance of these factors (e.g.,
Kimmel and Connelly, 2007), our results showed non-significant or weak effects.
Presence of a child when the youngest child was aged 0-5 had a small effect on
lower time use for exercise on weekdays, with little other notable effects for related
variables.    However, future research should examine these specifications more
closely, including looking at the role of secondary time use for childcare on physical
activity.
       In sum, our results demonstrate that time use for physical activity varies
significantly by a number of individual and environmental variables, and varies
notably by gender and by time of week (weekend vs. weekdays). Future work that
attempts to further understand how and why time gets allocated for physical
activity between different types of people is fertile ground for informing the design
of exercise intervention messages and programs to target those in most need of
increased physical activity. Moreover, simultaneously attending to where physical
activity occurs may be important as well, as research indicates that people with less
education have been spending more of their leisure time at home (Berry, 2007),
putting opportunity or constraint on how that time might be translated into physical
activity. The ATUS presents many opportunities for researchers to further this work
in interesting and fruitful ways.




                                         26
References
Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst. 2007. "Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time
      over Five Decades." Quarterly Journal of Economics 122: 969-1006.
Aguiar, M. and E. Hurst. 2008. "The Increase in Leisure Inequality." NBER w.p.
      13837.
Becker, G.S. 1965. "A Theory of the Allocation of Time." Economic Journal 75: 493-
      517.
Benjamini, Y. and Y. Hochberg. 1995. "Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A
      Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing." JRSS-B 57: 289-300.
Benjamini, Y. and D. Yekutieli. 2001. "The Control of the False Discovery Rate in
      Multiple Testing under Dependency." Annals of Statistics 29: 1165-1188.
Benjamini, Y. and D. Yekutieli. 2005. "False Discovery Rate-Adjusted Multiple
      Confidence Intervals for Selected Parameters." JASA 100: 71-81.
Berry, B. 2007. "Disparities in Free Time Inactivity in the United States: Trends and
      Explanations." Sociological Perspectives 50: 177-208.
Biddle, J.E. and D.S. Hamermesh. 1990. "Sleep and the Allocation of Time." Journal
      of Political Economy 98: 922-943.
Connolly, M. 2008. "Here Comes the Rain Again: Weather and the Intertemporal
      Substitution of Leisure." Journal of Labor Economics 26: 73-100.
Cotterman, R. and F. Peracchi. 1992. "Classification and Aggregation: An
      Application to Industrial Classification in CPS Data." Journal of Applied
      Econometrics 7: 31-51.
Cramer, J.S. and G. Ridder. 1991. "Pooling States in the Multinomial Logit Model."
      Journal of Econometrics 47: 267-272.
Crawford, D.L. et al. 1998. "Simple Inference in Multinomial and Ordered Logit."
      Econometric Reviews 17: 289-299.
Cutler, D.M., E.L. Glaeser, and J.M. Shapiro. 2003. "Why Have Americans Become
      More Obese?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 17: 93: 118.
Field, C.A. and A.H. Welsh. "Bootstrapping Clustered Data." JRSS-B 69:369-390.
Graybill, F.A. 1983. Matrixes with Applications in Statistics. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth
      Publishing.
Grossman, M. 1972. "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health."



                                          27
      Journal of Political Economy 80: 225-255.
Hamermesh, D.S. 2005. "Routine." European Economic Review 49: 29-53.
Hamermesh, D.S. and G.A. Pfann. 2005. The Economics of Time Use. Contributions
      to Economic Analysis 271. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Hansen, B. 2008. Econometrics. Textbook manuscript, Dept. of Economics, Univ. of
      Wisconsin-Madison (http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~bhansen/econometrics/)
Heckman, J.J. 1980. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error with an
      Application to the Estimation of Labor Supply Functions." in J. Smith, Ed.,
      Female Labor Supply: Theory and Estimation. Princeton: Princeton University
      Press.
Hill, M.A. 1983. "Female Labor Force Participation in Developing and Developed
      Countries: Consideration of the Informal Sector." Review of Economics and
      Statistics 65: 459-468.
Juster, F.T. 1986. "Response Errors in the Measurement of Time Use." Journal of the
      American Statistical Association 81: 390-402.
Juster, F.T. and F.P. Stafford. 1991. "The Allocation of Time: Empirical Findings,
      Behavioral Models, and Problems of Measurement." Journal of Economic
      Literature 29: 471-522.
Kimmel, J. and Connelly, R.     2007.   Mothers’ time choices: caregiving, leisure,
      home production, and paid work. The Journal of Human Resources,
      42(3):643.
Kooreman, P. and A. Kapteyn. 1987. "A Disaggregated Analysis of the Allocation of
      Time within the Household." Journal of Political Economy 95: 223-249.
McElroy, M.B. 1987. "Additive General Error Models for Production, Cost, and
      Derived Demand or Share Systems." Journal of Political Economy 95: 737-
      757.
Meghir, C. and J.-M. Robin. 1992. "Frequency of Purchase and the Estimation of
      Demand Systems." Journal of Econometrics 53: 53-85.
Mullahy, J. 2006. "Squandering Time? An Econometric Analysis of Youth Time Use."
      Working paper.
Papke, L.E. and J.M. Wooldridge. 1996. "Econometric Methods for Fractional
      Response Variables With an Application to 401 (K) Plan Participation Rates."



                                        28
      Journal of Applied Econometrics 11: 619-632.
Philipson, T. and R. Posner. 2008. "Is the Obesity Epidemic a Public Health
      Problem? A Decade of Research on the Economics of Obesity." NBER w.p.
      14010.
Pollak, R.A. 1999. "Notes on Time Use." Monthly Labor Review (August): 7-11.
Poterba, J.M. and A.A. Samwick. 2002. "Taxation and Household Portfolio
      Composition: U.S. Evidence from the 1980s and 1990s." Journal of Public
      Economics 87: 5-38.
Robin, J.-M. 1993. "Econometric Analysis of the Short-Run Fluctuations of
      Households' Purchases." Review of Economic Studies 60: 923-934.
Russell, L.B. et al. 2007. "Health-Related Activities in the American Time Use
      Survey." Medical Care (in press).
US Department of Health and Human Services. 1996. Physical Activity and Health:
      Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and
      Human Services, CDC.
Wales, T.J. and A.D. Woodland. 1977. "Estimation of the Allocation of Time for
      Work, Leisure, and Housework." Econometrica 45: 115-132.
Wolin, K.Y. et al. 2008. "Low Discretionary Time as a Barrier to Physical Activity and
      Intervention Uptake." American Journal of Health Behavior 32: 563-569.
Woodland, A.D. 1979. "Stochastic Specification and the Estimation of Share
      Equations." Journal of Econometrics 10: 361-383.




                                          29
Appendix: Estimation Details
       Appealing to the estimation methods described by Papke and Wooldridge for
the univariate case, one can set up a multinomial logit-like criterion function

                                                                     ∑i=1 ∑m=1 yim × log (μim ( x ) ) ,
           N     M                                                     N     M
         ∏i=1 ∏m=1 μim ( x ) im
                                 y
Q(β) =                                 whose     log   is   J(β) =

where β is either a kx(M-1) matrix or k(M-1)x1 vector depending on the particular

reference. The corresponding estimating or score equations are:
                              ⎡     ⎛                     ⎞⎤
       ∂J(β)         N        ⎢y − ⎜     exp(xiβm )       ⎟ ⎥ , j=2,...,M,
             =   ∑       x,
                     i =1 i   ⎢ im ⎜⎜     M               ⎟⎥
       ∂βm
                              ⎢⎣    ⎝
                                      1+ ∑k =2
                                               exp(xiβk ) ⎟ ⎥
                                                          ⎠⎦
which are obviously the same solution equations as those corresponding to a
standard multinomial logit estimator; note, however, that in this case the yim are
                                           l follows from standard arguments, in
not binary.12 Consistency of the resulting β

                  ⎡ ∂J(β) ⎤       ⎡ ∂J(β) ⎤
particular that E ⎢       ⎥ = ExE ⎢      x⎥ = 0 .
                  ⎣ ∂βm ⎦         ⎣ ∂βm ⎦
       It should be noted that although estimating the model using MNL-type
pseudo-likelihood methods will provide consistent estimates of the βM parameters,

the corresponding MNL covariance matrix will not be a consistent estimator of the
true covariance matrix so long as Pr(yim∈(0,1)|xi)>0, which is to be expected in the
time use data.       In particular, the data in such cases will exhibit underdispersion
relative to a maintained multinomial probability structure. It can be demonstrated
formally that the difference between the MNL covariance estimator obtained as the
negative inverse expected Hessian and the expected standard robust "sandwich"
estimator is positive semidefinite so that, e.g., standard errors obtained using the
MNL covariance estimator will tend to be too large relative to actual standard errors
(a result opposite that more commonly found in the literature on overdispersion).
See Mullahy, 2006, for details.



12
   Standard canned multinomial logit estimation packages, like Stata's, do not
readily accommodate nonbinary yim. The estimates presented here are obtained
using an author-written procedure written in Stata's Mata language, Version 9,
which is available on request.




                                                  30
                                       Table 1
                      Sample Summary Statistics (unweighted),
                 Time Use Variables, Measured in Minutes (N=16,217)



                          Weekends & Holidays (N=8,265)

Variable     Mean     Std. Dev.    Min     Max     .25 Pctl   .50 Pctl   .75 Pctl   %=0
    tsleep    546.6       136.6       0     1360       470        540        625     0.17
  thhpers     317.9       187.5       0     1440       175        295        435     0.34
     tcare     52.0       101.6       0     1020         0          0         60     52.0
    twork      83.0       183.5       0     1313         0          0         15     73.5
tnonexc1      427.4       206.1       0     1400       275        415        570     0.67
tnonexc2      422.0       204.7       0     1400       270        410        560     0.67
  texerc1      13.2        45.4       0      610         0          0          0     86.6
  texerc2      18.6        62.8       0      735         0          0          0     84.7




                                  Weekdays (N=7,952)

Variable     Mean     Std. Dev.    Min     Max     .25 Pctl   .50 Pctl   .75 Pctl   %=0
    tsleep    479.5       124.5       0     1436       415        475         540    0.05
  thhpers     252.4       165.2       0     1400       135        210         328    0.14
     tcare     53.3        97.4       0     1065         0          0        71.5    53.8
    twork     335.0       263.9       0     1330         0        440         520    30.6
tnonexc1      309.3       182.2       0     1250       181        275         395    0.59
tnonexc2      307.2       180.4       0     1250       180        274         390    0.60
  texerc1      10.5        34.5       0      837         0          0           0    84.9
  texerc2      12.6        42.6       0      837         0          0           0    84.0




                                          31
                                Table 2
Sample Summary Statistics (unweighted), Explanatory Variables (N=16,217)

    Variable          Mean      Std. Dev.            Min           Max
       female          .557          .497              0             1
            age      43.378        10.506             25            64
      blacknh          .119          .324              0             1
     hispanic          .134           .34              0             1
      otherre           .05          .218              0             1
     whitenh           .697           .46              0             1
    nohsgrad           .099          .299              0             1
       hsgrad          .264          .441              0             1
    somecoll           .291          .454              0             1
     collgrad          .219          .414              0             1
      advdeg           .127          .333              0             1
          educ       13.931         2.933              0            20
    widowed            .026          .159              0             1
       divsep          .188           .39              0             1
     nevmarr           .172          .377              0             1
      married          .615          .487              0             1
    sppreshh           .641           .48              0             1
        hhsize        2.976         1.492              1            16
      autumn           .238          .426              0             1
        winter         .258          .438              0             1
        spring         .267          .442              0             1
     summer            .237          .425              0             1
      sunday           .248          .432              0             1
     monday            .103          .304              0             1
     tuesday           .099          .298              0             1
  wednesday            .097          .296              0             1
    thursday           .099          .298              0             1
         friday        .101          .301              0             1
    saturday           .253          .435              0             1
   yghh0002             .14          .347              0             1
   yghh0305            .111          .315              0             1
   yghh0611             .18          .384              0             1
   yghh1214            .078          .268              0             1
   yghh1517            .053          .223              0             1
    pknhlt18           .015          .122              0             1
    nkhhlt18          1.074         1.186              0             8

                              (continued)




                                  32
                                  Table 2 (continued)
       Sample Summary Statistics (unweighted), Explanatory Variables (N=16,217)

           Variable          Mean      Std. Dev.           Min            Max
               fi0025         .203          .402              0              1
               fi2550         .275          .447              0              1
               fi5075         .094          .292              0              1
             fi75100          .134          .341              0              1
           fi100150            .11          .313              0              1
             fi150up          .063          .243              0              1
        temperature         55.365        16.292            5.8           84.4
               precip        3.221         2.017            .01          15.69
               uerate        4.894         1.012            1.8             11
            ueratelg         4.927         1.014            2.2             11
           stobover         36.604          .887           32.2         39.483
             stobese         24.38         2.526           16.8         31.358

Note: N=16,123 for temperature and precip since data are not available for Alaska and
Hawaii; and N=14,279 for the family income variables fixxxx.




                                         33
                                 Table 3
     Weighted and Unweighted Sample Time Use Measures by Time of Week


                                        Means
             Weekends & Holidays (N=8,265)      Weekdays (N=7,952)
              Unweighted       Weighted      Unweighted     Weighted
    tsleep       546.6            551.5        479.5          481.7
  thhpers        317.9            307.6        252.4          249.9
     tcare       52.0             43.4          53.3           41.9
    twork        83.0             84.9         335.0          340.8
tnonexc1         427.4            439.7        309.3          315.7
  texerc1        13.2             12.8          10.5           10.0




                                   34
                                   Table 4
Parameter Estimates, Baseline Specification: Weekends & Holidays (N=8,216)
         (Robust t-statistics and FDR Rejection Recommendations)


                 tsleep      thhpers         tcare        twork     texerc1

      age         -.007          .001        -.04         -.014        -.015
          t      10.491         1.268      15.301         5.284        3.881
        fdr           1             0           1             1            1

  female            .125        .379          .343        -.404        -.616
          t        9.751      18.457         7.318        7.531        8.073
        fdr            1           1             1            1            1

 blacknh           -.071        -.291        -.489        -.005        -.823
          t        3.324        8.387        5.831         .059        5.688
        fdr            1            1            1            0            1

hispanic            .092         .048        -.301         .238         .002
          t        4.421        1.509        3.527          2.8         .012
        fdr            1            0            1            0            0

 otherre            .118         .073         .066         .308        -.395
          t        3.511        1.637         .652        2.664        2.365
        fdr            1            0            0            0            0

  hsgrad           -.006         .045         .321         .311          .41
          t         .227        1.076        2.847        2.785        1.934
        fdr            0            0            0            0            0

somecoll            .003         .137          .41          .48          .61
          t         .103        3.287        3.638        4.325        2.968
        fdr            0            1            1            1            1

collgrad               0         .162         .622         .307        1.162
          t         .001        3.737        5.485        2.603        5.806
        fdr            0            1            1            0            1

  advdeg            .019         .207         .716         .225        1.398
          t         .702        4.499         6.06        1.808        6.868
        fdr            0            1            1            0            1

  hhsize             .02         .038         .25          .031        -.015
          t        3.416        4.374      13.738         1.383         .469
        fdr            1            1           1             0            0

sppreshh            .004         .074         .306        -.091         -.18
          t         .242        2.841        4.686        1.308        1.846
        fdr            0            0            1            0            0

temperat               0        -.001            0        -.002         .009
          t         .615        1.053         .199         .533        1.911
        fdr            0            0            0            0            0




                                   35
                        Table 4 (cont.)

              tsleep    thhpers           tcare      twork   texerc1

  precip           0      -.001            .015      -.013     -.006
         t      .019        .14           1.364       .997      .324
       fdr         0          0               0          0         0

 stobese       -.004       -.01            .003      -.007      -.07
         t     1.362      2.285            .281       .601     4.263
       fdr         0          0               0          0         1

ueratelg       -.002      -.002            .014      -.041      .109
         t      .352       .167             .61      1.339     2.595
       fdr         0          0               0          0         0

  winter       -.031      -.098            .061      -.214      -.44
         t      .985      2.005            .554      1.696     2.272
       fdr         0          0               0          0         0

  spring       -.013      -.025            .187      -.156     -.377
         t      .578       .684           2.268      1.642     2.731
       fdr         0          0               0          0         0

  autumn       -.012      -.049            .051      -.133     -.371
         t       .53      1.367            .624      1.424      2.82
       fdr         0          0               0          0         0

     sun        .022      -.108           -.153      -.456     -.087
         t      1.71      5.425           3.435      8.329     1.142
       fdr         0          1               1          1         0

    cons        .533        -.4       -2.238         -.428    -2.113
         t     5.983      2.766        6.207         1.139     3.975
       fdr         1          0            1             0         1


Wald, All
    Chi-Sq 2013.398    1331.005     7694.526      3806.098   8612.045
      d.f.        20         20           20            20         20
          p        0          0            0             0          0
Wald, Slopes
    Chi-Sq   369.938    583.449      896.377       207.098   391.947
      d.f.        19         19           19            19        19
          p        0          0            0             0         0




                              36
                                  Table 5
    Parameter Estimates, Baseline Specification: Weekdays (N=7,907)
        (Robust t-statistics and FDR Rejection Recommendations)


                tsleep      thhpers        tcare        twork     texerc1

     age         -.008         .002        -.041        -.015         -.009
         t        9.84        1.489       17.097       10.754         2.477
       fdr           1            0            1            1             0

  female            .11        .454         .892        -.285         .041
         t         7.55      21.786       19.832       10.556         .533
       fdr            1           1            1            1            0

 blacknh         -.101        -.226        -.459        -.208         -.338
         t       4.171        6.471        6.008        4.489         2.675
       fdr           1            1            1            1             0

hispanic          .033         .044        -.318         .041         -.097
         t       1.317        1.273        3.923         .907          .688
       fdr           0            0            1            0             0

 otherre           .015         .011       -.033        -.143         -.13
         t         .427         .211        .334        2.256         .703
       fdr            0            0           0            0            0

  hsgrad         -.081        -.074         .049         .173         .008
         t        2.73        1.675         .499        2.896         .032
       fdr           0            0            0            0            0

somecoll          -.04        -.005         .229         .361          .413
         t       1.349         .106         2.39        6.142         1.698
       fdr           0            0            0            1             0

collgrad           .022        .049         .392          .52          .779
         t         .724       1.093        4.034        8.735         3.232
       fdr            0           0            1            1             1

  advdeg          .063          .06         .446         .671         1.031
         t       1.882        1.252        4.213       10.617         4.124
       fdr           0            0            1            1             1

  hhsize          .015         .032         .306        -.015         -.021
         t       2.325        3.628       20.182        1.232          .601
       fdr           0            1            1            0             0

sppreshh          .061          .16         .245         .098         .025
         t       3.232        6.162        4.337        2.801         .255
       fdr           1            1            1            0            0

temperat              0            0           0            0          .007
         t         .111         .182        .001         .224         1.862
       fdr            0            0           0            0             0




                                  37
                       Table 5 (cont.)

              tsleep   thhpers           tcare     twork   texerc1

  precip           0      .002            .018         0      .001
         t      .103      .455           1.732      .038       .06
       fdr         0         0               0         0         0

 stobese       -.002     -.002           -.003     -.005     -.044
         t      .775      .343            .346      .778      2.79
       fdr         0         0               0         0         0

ueratelg       -.014     -.012           -.005      -.05     -.008
         t     1.891     1.077            .228     3.397      .233
       fdr         0         0               0         1         0

  winter       -.019     -.041            .132     -.017     -.515
         t      .541      .843            1.27      .269      2.99
       fdr         0         0               0         0         0

  spring        .016      .013            .165      .057     -.305
         t      .596      .368           2.127      1.19     2.412
       fdr         0         0               0         0         0

  autumn        .006     -.078            .153      .015     -.639
         t      .234     2.236           2.008      .319     5.287
       fdr         0         0               0         0         1

     tue        .024      .003           -.055       .06      .074
         t     1.058       .08            .855      1.38      .597
       fdr         0         0               0         0         0

     wed        .019      .037           -.052      .089      .083
         t      .801     1.098            .779     2.037      .679
       fdr         0         0               0         0         0

     thu        .013      .018           -.075      .061      .202
         t      .557      .536           1.168     1.429     1.625
       fdr         0         0               0         0         0

     fri       -.129      -.09           -.226     -.101     -.101
         t     5.683     2.828           3.287      2.38      .774
       fdr         1         0               1         0         0

    cons        .811     -.594       -1.915         .828    -2.417
         t     7.984     4.198        6.205        4.334     3.687
       fdr         1         1            1            1         1


Wald, All
    Chi-Sq   4376.61   979.663     6097.943      691.824   8777.272
      d.f.        23        23           23           23         23
          p        0         0            0            0          0
Wald, Slopes
    Chi-Sq   405.933    660.06      1476.48      580.297   275.435
      d.f.        22        22           22           22        22
          p        0         0            0            0         0


                             38
                                                                 Table 6
                                         Estimated APEs, Baseline Specification, by Time of Week
                                 (.95-CI Estimated using Hansen C2 Method and 500 Bootstrap Iterations)

                Weekends & Holidays (N=8,216)                                                        Weekdays (N=7,907)
              tsleep   thhpers     tcare     twork   texerc1   tnonexc1                     tsleep   thhpers     tcare      twork   texerc1   tnonexc1

     age      -1.178     1.883    -1.797     -.742     -.131      1.965            age       -.142     2.232    -1.771     -2.526     -.017      2.223
      ci-L     -1.51     1.489    -2.016    -1.173     -.236      1.567             ci-L     -.432     1.889    -1.981     -3.078     -.089      1.804
      ci-U     -.889     2.271    -1.575     -.333      -.03      2.403             ci-U       .15     2.604     -1.53     -2.002      .057      2.664

  female       6.809     82.55    11.508   -43.205    -9.583    -48.079         female      15.132    91.936    39.134   -121.736     -.351    -24.113
      ci-L      .613    74.781     7.459   -51.254   -11.707    -57.196             ci-L     9.526    85.036    35.251   -133.397    -1.926    -31.701
      ci-U    12.614    91.191    15.546   -34.289    -7.603    -38.739             ci-U    20.766    98.669    43.147     -109.9     1.326    -15.925

 blacknh      20.686   -53.629   -16.692      8.81    -7.095      47.92        blacknh      17.412   -21.658   -14.736    -23.094    -1.932     44.008
      ci-L     8.931     -66.5    -22.82    -7.356    -9.348     33.966             ci-L      6.97   -33.695   -21.252    -41.684     -4.21     31.071
      ci-U    32.903   -40.422   -10.659    22.757    -4.976     64.188             ci-U    27.811   -11.581    -8.751     -4.931      .312     57.766

hispanic       22.68     -.826   -15.969    16.409     -.649    -21.644    hispanic          7.473     6.915   -15.542      7.856    -1.146     -5.556
      ci-L    13.275   -13.455    -22.73     2.753    -3.859     -35.98          ci-L       -2.355    -5.125   -21.679    -11.595    -3.819    -20.174
      ci-U     33.07    11.441    -9.576    29.313     2.565     -7.938          ci-U       16.538     18.64    -10.28     26.693     1.424      8.341

 otherre      20.794    -2.475     -.802     20.75    -5.099    -33.168        otherre      20.313      9.28     -.356    -36.415    -1.011       8.19
      ci-L     5.901   -19.423   -10.159    -1.306    -8.196    -52.066             ci-L     7.038    -7.969    -9.676    -61.837    -4.377    -11.051
      ci-U    36.335    15.686     8.589    41.076    -1.828    -12.575             ci-U    33.289    27.314     8.485    -11.558     2.229      27.25

  hsgrad     -26.424      .515    15.186    23.414     5.376    -18.067         hsgrad     -39.887   -18.774     2.401     57.488     -.002     -1.225
      ci-L   -39.446   -16.981      .796     3.823    -3.047    -36.799             ci-L   -52.074    -35.36    -7.385     30.574     -5.56    -20.327
      ci-U   -13.054    18.305    26.721    40.354    10.926       .954             ci-U   -27.087    -3.916    10.797     87.073     4.502     15.055

somecoll     -43.429     16.99    17.794    35.358     8.037     -34.75    somecoll        -58.646   -21.763     7.635     94.958     3.609    -25.793
      ci-L   -54.603      .361     2.837    16.832    -1.325    -50.719          ci-L      -71.403   -37.539    -2.149     68.799    -3.428    -44.178
      ci-U   -29.479    34.164     28.37    53.327    13.808    -14.342          ci-U      -44.568    -7.562    17.074    124.814     9.031     -10.17

collgrad     -50.773    21.171    30.966    18.296    19.581    -39.241    collgrad        -67.649   -28.662    12.241    126.149     7.456    -49.535
      ci-L   -62.157     4.161     14.81    -1.594     6.386    -54.763          ci-L      -80.029   -44.636     2.097     98.565    -1.663    -67.473
      ci-U   -36.475    39.987    43.856    36.687    27.552    -20.054          ci-U        -53.7   -13.988    20.916    156.437    13.208    -32.805

  advdeg     -53.322    27.614    37.871     8.571    28.001    -48.735         advdeg     -79.193    -41.28    11.512    165.279    10.999    -67.317
      ci-L   -65.285     8.304     18.43   -12.597    10.873     -68.53             ci-L   -92.633    -57.95     1.109    132.136     -.806    -86.696
      ci-U   -37.532    49.207    52.242    25.535      38.1    -28.194             ci-U   -64.223    -25.85    21.735    196.648    18.867    -50.035

  hhsize      -3.738     3.556    11.389      .402     -.542    -11.067         hhsize      -1.465     3.104    14.889    -10.736     -.407     -5.385
      ci-L     -6.11      .074     9.595    -2.525    -1.272     -14.78             ci-L    -4.149      .324    13.428    -15.337     -1.09     -8.996
      ci-U    -1.387     6.775    13.002      3.81      .314     -6.957             ci-U     1.055     6.403    16.304     -5.996      .295     -1.988




                                                                          39
                                                                Table 6 (cont.)

                Weekends & Holidays (N=8,216)                                                       Weekdays (N=7,907)
              tsleep   thhpers    tcare     twork   texerc1   tnonexc1                     tsleep   thhpers     tcare     twork   texerc1   tnonexc1

sppreshh      -9.304    16.498   13.598    -9.345    -2.705     -8.743    sppreshh         -9.163    19.949     8.209     6.229     -.585    -24.638
      ci-L   -17.148     6.327    8.405   -19.063    -5.425     -20.42          ci-L      -15.976    10.425     3.034    -7.167    -2.363    -34.748
      ci-U    -1.519    25.834   19.313     2.055      .182      4.026          ci-U        -2.52    28.865    13.074     21.42     1.523    -14.364

temperat        .008     -.221    -.001     -.089      .119       .183    temperat          -.104      .016     -.007      .061      .074       -.04
      ci-L     -.301     -.651    -.235     -.509      .011      -.329          ci-L        -.394     -.304     -.215     -.502         0       -.45
      ci-U      .335      .191     .217      .323      .218       .614          ci-U         .179      .377      .217      .637      .152       .366

  precip        .245       -.1     .781     -1.04     -.068       .181         precip       -.359      .276       .86     -.447         0      -.331
      ci-L    -1.103    -2.008    -.294    -2.968     -.457     -1.938             ci-L    -1.777    -1.572     -.116    -3.493     -.368     -2.276
      ci-U     1.732     1.675    1.908      .883      .376      2.117             ci-U       .94     2.106     1.838     2.545      .369      1.581

 stobese        .457    -1.784     .393     -.204     -.855      1.993        stobese        .053      .261     -.035     -.634      -.43       .785
      ci-L     -.929     -3.66    -.494    -1.838    -1.248      -.097             ci-L    -1.144     -1.28     -.809    -3.343     -.741      -.937
      ci-U     1.668     -.164    1.301     1.681     -.403      3.946             ci-U     1.291     1.821      .927      1.58     -.106      2.406

ueratelg       -.142      .105     .847    -3.199     1.463       .927    ueratelg          2.087     1.631      .681   -10.227      .111      5.717
      ci-L    -3.397    -3.946   -1.668    -7.413      .385     -3.331          ci-L         -.66    -2.278     -1.64   -16.397     -.644      1.718
      ci-U     3.234      3.79    2.921      .949     2.552       5.34          ci-U        4.843     5.143     2.769    -3.694      .895     10.309

  winter        8.56    -16.29    5.691   -13.273     -4.65     19.961         winter      -1.528    -6.287     7.954     -.484    -4.611      4.956
      ci-L    -5.314   -36.534   -5.983   -32.087    -8.838     -3.701             ci-L   -13.233   -21.117    -3.539   -25.536     -7.55    -15.009
      ci-U    23.377     1.868   16.682     3.405     -.989     39.976             ci-U    12.142     9.706    18.993     27.55    -1.746     23.045

  spring       1.162     -3.26   10.859   -11.183    -4.375      6.797         spring      -4.427     -2.94     7.515    10.584    -3.249     -7.484
      ci-L    -8.777   -18.245    2.346   -25.753    -7.497    -10.243             ci-L   -14.327   -14.023     -.535    -7.634    -5.558    -21.313
      ci-U    12.239    11.524   19.427     1.617    -1.575     22.769             ci-U     4.839     8.021    14.822    31.938     -.875      4.105

  autumn       6.478    -7.828    3.912     -8.71    -4.176     10.324         autumn       5.776    -17.79     8.667     6.993    -5.636       1.99
      ci-L    -3.176   -21.999   -4.178   -22.209    -7.021     -5.678             ci-L    -3.798   -29.855      .618    -12.07     -7.45    -11.184
      ci-U     15.89     6.152   11.426     3.099     -1.39     24.647             ci-U    15.189    -7.447    15.951    26.923    -3.852     15.615

     sun      37.793   -19.138   -5.312   -33.086     -.483     20.225            tue       1.575    -4.492    -3.881    12.736      .551     -6.488
      ci-L    32.145    -26.92    -9.46   -40.583    -2.523     11.915             ci-L    -6.407   -14.552    -9.296    -7.403    -2.352    -20.834
      ci-U     43.26   -11.312    -1.63   -25.201     1.448     30.322             ci-U    10.321     6.572     1.606      31.2     2.872      6.782

                                                                                  wed      -6.228     1.223    -4.282     18.72      .524     -9.956
                                                                                   ci-L   -14.199   -10.137    -9.503     -.816    -1.983    -23.285
                                                                                   ci-U     3.632    12.098     1.759    35.138     2.852      3.731

                                                                                  thu      -3.661     -.642    -4.826    13.513      1.99     -6.374
                                                                                   ci-L   -12.393   -10.402   -10.386    -4.681     -.755    -19.356
                                                                                   ci-U     4.851    10.069      .531    30.983     4.559      6.254

                                                                                  fri     -18.453      .282    -6.689    -3.531     -.109     28.501
                                                                                   ci-L   -27.126    -9.923   -13.141    -22.93    -2.686     15.969
                                                                                   ci-U    -9.714    11.632     -.807    12.881     2.344     41.975



                                                                         40
                                   Table 7
 Wald Test Results for Female-Male Parameter Equality, Baseline Specification



                 Weekends & Holidays                     Weekdays

                 χ2        d.f.     p-value       χ2         d.f.     p-value

        All
               736.7        95       <.0001     1441.1       110      <.0001
Parameters
    Slopes
               148.6        90       <.0002      369.5       105      <.0001
      Only




                                     41
                                                                  Table 8
                                  Estimated APEs, Baseline Specification by Gender: Weekends & Holidays
                                 (.95-CI Estimated using Hansen C2 Method and 100 Bootstrap Iterations)

                       Females (N=4,655)                                                                Males (N=3,561)
              tsleep   thhpers     tcare     twork   texerc1   tnonexc1                      tsleep   thhpers     tcare     twork   texerc1   tnonexc1

     age      -1.343     2.234    -2.183     -.724     -.088      2.103            age        -.915     1.457    -1.349     -.919     -.178      1.903
      ci-L    -1.709     1.776    -2.482    -1.207     -.189      1.298             ci-L     -1.346      .893    -1.722     -1.58     -.372      1.157
      ci-U      -.98     2.832    -1.878      -.35      .016      2.583             ci-U      -.429     2.023     -.951     -.309     -.005      2.547

 blacknh      27.177   -46.277   -22.438     1.919    -5.838     45.457        blacknh        25.92   -65.797   -15.914    22.151    -9.267     42.906
      ci-L    14.056   -62.732   -30.665   -13.971    -8.094     25.173             ci-L        .02   -87.014   -25.235    -6.049   -13.464     16.938
      ci-U    47.025   -28.877   -14.507    18.168    -4.098     60.892             ci-U     49.982   -46.799    -8.129    49.683    -4.863     65.513

hispanic      31.818     4.175   -19.688     1.685    -1.463    -16.526    hispanic           19.72   -24.257   -15.764    38.958    -1.894    -16.763
      ci-L    23.884   -13.852   -30.689   -14.297     -5.13    -34.847          ci-L         3.533   -48.079   -25.683    14.417    -8.247    -41.096
      ci-U    44.117     21.96   -12.057    18.068     1.209      -.997          ci-U        30.437    -8.278    -5.599    66.657      4.15      7.825

 otherre      20.127    -7.927     1.159     26.17      -3.3    -36.229        otherre       33.578   -12.345   -10.581    21.093    -9.713    -22.033
      ci-L    -4.625   -27.818   -14.711      .519     -7.59    -69.545             ci-L      10.24   -36.418   -21.587   -10.521   -14.581    -50.988
      ci-U    39.991    18.671    12.359    54.521      .233     -9.212             ci-U     57.575      7.82      .029    48.215     -4.28     21.353

  hsgrad     -38.517     8.382     27.35    23.575     9.288    -30.078         hsgrad      -72.246    31.845    28.777    52.115    14.334    -54.825
      ci-L   -65.488   -22.938       -.1   -11.379    -2.169    -56.681             ci-L    -96.933    -8.555      .397     3.267    -7.307    -98.688
      ci-U   -10.085    40.423    45.718    49.335    15.912      5.429             ci-U    -47.433    84.627    56.465    90.311    25.521    -16.682

somecoll     -47.585    18.889    28.617    24.847    12.638    -37.406    somecoll         -88.481    45.747    29.771    68.987     15.49    -71.515
      ci-L   -72.044     -8.14     4.883    -4.381     -.925    -65.256          ci-L      -115.973    10.754       .33     5.168    -4.566   -112.601
      ci-U   -21.468    52.704    47.043    51.044    20.507     -5.044          ci-U       -62.117    97.165    52.298   109.403     28.38    -31.354

collgrad     -59.474    22.384    40.404     19.07    20.246     -42.63    collgrad         -93.372    52.008    41.602    49.812    28.998    -79.047
      ci-L   -86.298    -4.838    11.536   -10.454     4.582    -73.756          ci-L       -122.61    12.403      9.85     -3.39      .581   -119.215
      ci-U   -28.276    52.946    62.074    47.665    29.766    -11.731          ci-U       -64.947   104.214    65.452    90.759    45.957     -32.93

  advdeg     -66.353    19.409    48.999    19.901     26.89    -48.846         advdeg       -99.34    70.675    49.814    30.975     42.86    -94.984
      ci-L   -92.586   -13.939    13.653   -13.859      .135    -77.229             ci-L   -125.465    25.843    11.077   -21.128     5.585   -145.382
      ci-U   -34.787    51.831    78.615     47.63    40.796    -14.189             ci-U    -64.447   133.412    80.672    70.138    62.742    -42.866

  hhsize      -5.403     5.949    13.177    -1.138     -.569    -12.016         hhsize       -1.393      .849     8.253     1.407     -.432     -8.684
      ci-L    -8.174     2.371    11.115    -5.868    -1.359     -16.51             ci-L     -5.271    -4.563     5.464    -3.517    -2.019    -15.016
      ci-U    -1.698      10.8    15.696     3.005      .251     -6.865             ci-U      3.686     5.861    10.968      7.38       .92     -4.264

sppreshh      -7.031    22.339     8.303   -19.974     -.525     -3.112    sppreshh         -14.071     9.769    22.078     6.455    -6.181     -18.05
      ci-L   -19.314    11.191     1.579   -32.305    -2.608      -21.8          ci-L       -28.363    -6.436    14.189   -12.981   -11.617    -36.161
      ci-U     1.849    39.404    15.559    -6.971     1.175      9.624          ci-U        -1.574     26.63    30.943    27.521     -.303      2.505




                                                                          42
                                                                Table 8 (cont.)

                       Females (N=4,655)                                                              Males (N=3,561)
              tsleep   thhpers    tcare     twork   texerc1   tnonexc1                     tsleep   thhpers     tcare     twork   texerc1   tnonexc1

temperat       -.204      .022     .075     -.232      .121       .219    temperat           .293     -.571     -.106       .11      .131       .144
      ci-L     -.585     -.555    -.172     -.673      .002      -.318          ci-L         -.11    -1.226     -.458     -.699     -.065      -.443
      ci-U      .146      .523     .402      .209      .201       .776          ci-U         .882     -.067      .162      .712      .392       .956

  precip        .005      2.34     .521    -1.693     -.417      -.756         precip         .61    -2.979     1.084     -.401        .4      1.285
      ci-L    -1.821      .056    -.912    -4.145     -.783     -2.868             ci-L    -1.753    -5.922     -.544    -3.055      -.45     -1.954
      ci-U     1.919     4.975    2.011      1.52      .072       2.22             ci-U     2.497     -.562     2.741     3.161     1.149      4.213

 stobese        .596    -1.497    -.143      .026     -.736      1.754        stobese        .317    -2.209     1.024     -.532    -1.001      2.401
      ci-L     -1.01    -4.165   -1.154    -2.362    -1.123      -.644             ci-L    -1.551    -4.893     -.381    -3.418    -1.573        -.8
      ci-U     2.507      .604    1.197     2.072     -.332      4.298             ci-U     2.093      .382     2.603     2.759     -.259      4.998

ueratelg       -2.52    -1.902    1.147      -.99      .302      3.964    ueratelg          2.952      3.35      .711    -6.247      2.98     -3.746
      ci-L    -6.484    -8.171   -1.557    -6.131     -.714     -2.347          ci-L       -2.233    -2.231    -2.717   -14.769      .775     -9.731
      ci-U     1.554     3.711    3.856     2.583     1.439     10.133          ci-U        7.619     9.312     3.773     1.139     4.945       3.97

  winter        .179    10.575   10.174   -22.632    -4.473      6.177         winter      25.349   -58.517     7.821   -13.097   -10.019     48.464
      ci-L    -28.92   -24.657   -5.395   -54.075   -10.234    -30.437             ci-L    -9.256   -93.167    -13.82   -53.258   -19.142     12.535
      ci-U    23.011    35.062   24.041     8.153       .65     47.312             ci-U    56.393   -19.632    25.502    24.793     2.459     87.193

  spring        .239     7.402   14.824   -21.991    -5.668      5.194         spring      13.196   -32.753    10.887   -11.185    -7.808     27.662
      ci-L   -20.243   -19.398    4.039   -49.959    -9.744    -23.015             ci-L   -14.054   -60.455    -9.118   -40.897   -15.182     -2.687
      ci-U    17.313    31.597   28.626     6.016     -.945     34.393             ci-U    38.673     1.743    28.155    24.464     2.936     59.059

  autumn       4.669     7.736   10.163   -17.774    -4.568      -.226         autumn      16.121   -40.253     5.184   -13.146    -9.114     41.208
      ci-L   -18.187   -19.145   -3.764   -45.176    -9.044    -30.908             ci-L   -16.233   -68.235   -12.816   -51.194   -15.558      6.049
      ci-U    25.151    28.173    22.82    17.061     -.302     28.061             ci-U    37.867    -6.951     20.42    24.879     2.185     73.193

     sun      37.719   -28.126       -4    -23.79      .494     17.703            sun      38.264     -7.69     -7.08   -45.117    -1.593     23.216
      ci-L    29.886   -36.658   -9.301   -32.243    -1.175      5.853             ci-L    28.004   -17.872   -12.542   -58.677    -6.337     10.058
      ci-U     44.13   -17.417     .868   -14.514     2.009     26.883             ci-U    46.942     3.819      -.23   -29.165     2.901     37.952




                                                                         43
                                                                   Table 9
                                         Estimated APEs, Baseline Specification by Gender: Weekdays
                                   (.95-CI Estimated using Hansen C2 Method and 100 Bootstrap Iterations)

                         Females (N=4,317)                                                                Males (N=3,590)
               tsleep    thhpers     tcare     twork   texerc1   tnonexc1                      tsleep   thhpers     tcare     twork   texerc1   tnonexc1

     age        -.262      2.583    -2.678    -1.742       .01       2.09            age         .187     2.069     -.728    -4.122     -.019      2.614
      ci-L      -.706      2.014    -3.035    -2.471      -.07      1.588             ci-L      -.284     1.704    -1.023    -5.145     -.148      1.999
      ci-U        .13      3.049    -2.338     -.895      .097      2.647             ci-U        .62     2.548     -.499    -3.286      .114      3.464

 blacknh       22.235    -21.056    -21.95     1.168    -5.861     25.463        blacknh       18.013   -20.247   -13.445   -56.355     3.477     68.557
      ci-L     11.294     -39.04   -30.679   -23.986    -8.244      6.016             ci-L     -2.397   -37.509   -20.187   -84.395    -1.203     48.651
      ci-U     36.166     -3.016   -13.813    25.473    -3.621     37.821             ci-U     35.953    -6.888    -7.912    -27.84     7.579     95.382

hispanic       11.515     14.474   -19.675     4.498     -4.45     -6.361    hispanic           9.516   -10.557   -14.413     6.311     2.439      6.704
      ci-L     -2.363       -8.1   -28.785   -20.295    -7.392    -23.481          ci-L        -2.775   -24.712   -23.468   -22.124    -3.784    -12.748
      ci-U     24.612     29.222   -10.047    34.236    -1.432     11.072          ci-U        20.584     6.904    -7.165     35.37     6.823     28.909

 otherre       34.114     10.533    -9.768   -28.886    -3.606     -2.386        otherre       11.127     2.766     1.163    -46.73     1.445     30.229
      ci-L     15.277    -20.074    -21.38   -61.829    -5.905    -28.555             ci-L      -8.94    -19.93    -9.581   -82.648     -7.41       2.71
      ci-U     51.578     37.807      4.37    10.335      -.83     21.305             ci-U     32.684    22.291    11.151   -11.141     8.521     55.872

  hsgrad      -98.734    -61.353     9.517   179.862      4.25    -33.542         hsgrad      -63.572     -9.55     7.788    84.676     1.764    -21.107
      ci-L   -127.708    -93.144   -13.945   130.571    -5.147    -69.512             ci-L    -89.272   -39.048   -12.018    28.594   -10.286    -54.211
      ci-U    -71.925    -28.649    30.077   230.654    11.416      4.335             ci-U    -36.616    26.262    27.124   141.542    11.656     14.153

somecoll      -103.86    -65.881    13.419   198.391     5.799    -47.868    somecoll         -83.152    -4.719     9.974   111.544     6.366    -40.013
      ci-L   -127.684    -93.326    -5.741   145.101    -4.222    -77.228          ci-L       -107.69   -33.004   -13.463    53.885   -11.952    -80.345
      ci-U    -76.964    -37.579    33.044   253.312    13.619    -16.601          ci-U        -53.45    32.421    29.955   178.906    18.024      2.783

collgrad      -121.13    -74.734    18.389   238.348     6.787     -67.66    collgrad         -87.481   -11.434    12.795   133.667    12.951    -60.499
      ci-L   -148.779   -109.292    -7.792   195.867    -1.708    -100.94          ci-L      -114.197   -38.856   -10.651    75.281    -9.674    -97.766
      ci-U    -95.115    -44.925    39.459   297.161    15.332    -29.514          ci-U       -60.157    27.677    32.955   189.771    25.695    -22.874

  advdeg     -135.181    -85.947    18.418   273.484    10.695    -81.468         advdeg      -106.22   -25.814    13.162   189.731    16.674    -87.534
      ci-L   -164.379   -119.886    -8.973   215.743    -5.597   -120.621             ci-L   -139.652   -54.201   -15.367   136.429   -14.269   -116.433
      ci-U    -106.68    -49.873    40.949   335.579     19.68    -47.274             ci-U    -75.848    13.943    36.918   258.201    33.201    -49.215

  hhsize         -2.1     10.262    20.081   -26.065      .153     -2.332         hhsize         .974    -4.224     8.066     2.616      -.65     -6.781
      ci-L      -4.89      6.131    17.549   -33.309      -.78     -6.934             ci-L     -2.446    -8.522     6.433    -5.543    -1.761    -10.837
      ci-U      1.076     14.208    21.735   -19.399     1.013      2.089             ci-U       4.72    -1.065     9.624     8.731      .472       .059

sppreshh       -1.136     31.752     5.325   -18.562     1.335    -18.714    sppreshh         -23.524     3.805    13.635    45.873    -3.868    -35.922
      ci-L      -9.58     19.221    -1.943    -34.42     -.636    -33.677          ci-L       -34.481    -8.505     8.217    22.959    -7.433    -58.568
      ci-U      8.302     45.171    11.791      .833     3.955     -5.379          ci-U       -13.204     17.65    20.113     71.15     -.347     -20.44




                                                                            44
                                                                 Table 9 (cont.)

                       Females (N=4,317)                                                               Males (N=3,590)
              tsleep   thhpers     tcare     twork   texerc1   tnonexc1                     tsleep   thhpers     tcare     twork   texerc1   tnonexc1

temperat        .044      .177     -.037     -.271      .112      -.025    temperat          -.297     -.176      .017      .495      .028      -.067
      ci-L     -.385     -.308     -.451    -1.048      .034      -.529          ci-L        -.679     -.639     -.177     -.445     -.086       -.87
      ci-U      .401      .745      .242      .542      .203        .64          ci-U         .177      .277      .278     1.417      .165       .636

  precip      -1.444      -.09     1.422     1.602      .212     -1.702         precip        .854      .757      .388    -2.726     -.332      1.059
      ci-L    -2.835    -2.885      .106    -1.166     -.348     -4.487             ci-L    -1.767    -1.348     -.825    -7.438     -.795     -2.755
      ci-U      .565     2.627     2.475     5.813      .793       .394             ci-U     2.925     2.854     1.518     3.265      .234      4.074

 stobese        .011      .919       .26    -1.344     -.629       .783        stobese        .201     -.214      -.49     -.268     -.122       .892
      ci-L    -1.898    -1.555    -1.131    -5.229    -1.057     -1.715             ci-L    -1.757    -1.979    -1.512    -3.331     -.594     -1.697
      ci-U     2.007     3.126     1.664     2.569      -.28      2.695             ci-U     1.843      1.29      .634     2.602      .383      3.556

ueratelg       1.599    -1.365      .762   -10.015      .308      8.711    ueratelg          2.618      4.51      .461    -9.872     -.084      2.367
      ci-L    -2.009    -6.238    -2.778   -17.343     -.571      4.774          ci-L       -2.871     -.656    -1.667   -20.612    -1.241     -4.295
      ci-U     5.466     4.212     4.724    -2.787     1.201     12.764          ci-U        8.663     8.286     2.454    -1.433      .917      9.515

  winter      -1.183    -2.753    15.579     4.323     -5.26    -10.706         winter      -2.249   -21.299     7.666     6.434    -9.874     19.323
      ci-L    -23.15   -35.849   -10.016    -41.95    -9.254     -43.15             ci-L   -27.034   -46.706    -7.053   -49.461   -15.809     -29.68
      ci-U    20.919     25.86    30.229    46.628     -.219     21.706             ci-U    28.398     3.471    22.742    56.123    -3.051     65.931

  spring        -.71    -7.936    17.747    12.076    -4.978    -16.199         spring      -6.809   -10.629     3.786     15.88    -7.762      5.533
      ci-L   -20.407   -35.887    -1.017   -26.628    -8.504    -39.791             ci-L   -25.503   -33.473    -7.407   -22.944   -12.869    -37.418
      ci-U    17.655    17.095    29.835    57.018      .139     11.764             ci-U    18.251    15.425    15.191    61.277    -1.663      42.14

  autumn       3.787   -17.181    16.844    14.611    -6.351     -11.71         autumn       5.253   -23.144     7.209     4.866   -10.246     16.062
      ci-L   -16.701   -47.293    -2.245   -21.658   -10.287    -40.394             ci-L   -12.258   -44.148    -6.762   -39.019   -15.657    -23.627
      ci-U    19.877       4.7    30.152     63.15    -1.751     15.194             ci-U    27.563      .377    20.033    49.381    -3.678     54.641

     tue      -6.237    -3.753    -10.86     20.91      .503      -.563            tue       -.766    -5.322    -2.769    14.451     1.552     -7.146
      ci-L   -23.102   -23.567   -23.716   -16.008    -3.511     -20.67             ci-L   -17.868   -26.639   -11.524    -17.06     -4.84     -29.77
      ci-U     7.753     21.71     2.634    57.341     3.769     20.446             ci-U    15.914    11.374      4.69    47.506     6.712     15.508

     wed      -15.72    -8.276   -11.699     36.04     1.727     -2.071            wed      -3.228    10.504    -2.789     6.425      .277    -11.189
      ci-L   -30.848   -24.325   -24.457      4.47    -2.253    -28.312             ci-L   -19.193    -9.679   -12.757   -19.767    -6.081    -34.521
      ci-U      -.77    12.387     1.941    69.995     5.477     19.721             ci-U     12.04     25.03     4.758    41.005     5.641      9.362

     thu      -9.472     -2.59   -11.717    24.127     1.397     -1.745            thu      -6.185      .915    -2.839    12.284     2.823     -6.997
      ci-L   -23.521   -22.211   -24.291    -5.543    -1.449    -27.126             ci-L   -23.874   -21.341   -11.699   -20.386    -5.127    -35.084
      ci-U     3.377     19.34     1.274    61.022     4.966     18.797             ci-U    10.302    19.615     5.886    41.279      8.73     14.077

     fri     -24.071      -5.6   -13.809    13.109     1.122      29.25            fri     -14.098     6.285    -3.403    -5.764     -.601     17.582
      ci-L   -38.629   -25.274   -28.695   -16.616    -2.734      6.146             ci-L   -32.895   -16.961   -11.237   -36.191    -7.868     -7.248
      ci-U   -11.856    16.258     -.043    48.894     4.522     54.817             ci-U      2.13     25.09     4.148    27.539     4.976     39.055




                                                                          45
                                                         Figure 1
                 Time Use Patterns by Gender, Time of Week, and Physical Activity Measurement (Unweighted)


Females, Weekdays                   Females, Weekends & Holidays         Males, Weekdays              Males, Weekends & Holidays




 Sleeping                                Sleeping                        Sleeping                            Sleeping
 HH/Personal Activities                  HH/Personal Activities          HH/Personal Activities              HH/Personal Activities
 Care for Others                         Care for Others                 Care for Others                     Care for Others
 Work                                    Work                            Work                                Work
 Nonexercise Leisure-1                   Nonexercise Leisure-1           Nonexercise Leisure-1               Nonexercise Leisure-1
 Nonwork Exercise-1                      Nonwork Exercise-1              Nonwork Exercise-1                  Nonwork Exercise-1


Females, Weekdays                   Females, Weekends & Holidays         Males, Weekdays              Males, Weekends & Holidays




 Sleeping                                Sleeping                        Sleeping                            Sleeping
 HH/Personal Activities                  HH/Personal Activities          HH/Personal Activities              HH/Personal Activities
 Care for Others                         Care for Others                 Care for Others                     Care for Others
 Work                                    Work                            Work                                Work
 Nonexercise Leisure-2                   Nonexercise Leisure-2           Nonexercise Leisure-2               Nonexercise Leisure-2
 Nonwork Exercise-2                      Nonwork Exercise-2              Nonwork Exercise-2                  Nonwork Exercise-2




                                                                   46
                                                                      Figure 2
                                    Time Use Patterns by Educational Attainment and Time of Week (Unweighted)


    Non H.S. Graduates, Weekdays               High School Graduates, Weekdays                   Some College, Weekdays              College/Advanced Deg., Weekdays




          Sleeping                                    Sleeping                                       Sleeping                                Sleeping
          HH/Personal Activities                      HH/Personal Activities                         HH/Personal Activities                  HH/Personal Activities
          Care for Others                             Care for Others                                Care for Others                         Care for Others
          Work                                        Work                                           Work                                    Work
          Nonexercise Leisure-1                       Nonexercise Leisure-1                          Nonexercise Leisure-1                   Nonexercise Leisure-1
          Nonwork Exercise-1                          Nonwork Exercise-1                             Nonwork Exercise-1                      Nonwork Exercise-1


Non H.S. Graduates, Weekends & Holidays    High School Graduates, Weekends & Holidays        Some College, Weekends & Holidays   College/Advanced Deg., Weekends & Holidays




          Sleeping                                    Sleeping                                       Sleeping                                Sleeping
          HH/Personal Activities                      HH/Personal Activities                         HH/Personal Activities                  HH/Personal Activities
          Care for Others                             Care for Others                                Care for Others                         Care for Others
          Work                                        Work                                           Work                                    Work
          Nonexercise Leisure-1                       Nonexercise Leisure-1                          Nonexercise Leisure-1                   Nonexercise Leisure-1
          Nonwork Exercise-1                          Nonwork Exercise-1                             Nonwork Exercise-1                      Nonwork Exercise-1




                                                                                        47
                                                    Figure 3a
    Full-Sample Distributions of Time Use Measures by Time of Week: tsleep, thhpers, tcare (Unweighted)
                       (Note: y-scales differ across categories but not within categories)


                                                         Weekdays
                               .4                                                                                                 .8
                                                                               .3



                               .3                                                                                                 .6

                                                                               .2




                                    Fraction




                                                                                    Fraction




                                                                                                                                       Fraction
                               .2                                                                                                 .4


                                                                               .1
                               .1                                                                                                 .2




                                0                                               0                                                  0
0    360      720     1080   1440              0   360     720        1080   1440              0   360         720       1080   1440
           Sleeping                                HH/Personal Activities                                Care for Others




                                                   Weekends & Holidays
                               .4                                              .3                                                 .8




                               .3                                                                                                 .6
                                                                               .2
                                    Fraction




                                                                                    Fraction




                                                                                                                                       Fraction
                               .2                                                                                                 .4


                                                                               .1
                               .1                                                                                                 .2




                                0                                               0                                                  0
0    360      720     1080   1440              0   360     720        1080   1440              0   360         720       1080   1440
           Sleeping                                HH/Personal Activities                                Care for Others




                                                              48
                                                     Figure 3b
    Full-Sample Distributions of Time Use Measures by Time of Week: twork, tnonexc1, texerc1 (Unweighted)
                        (Note: y-scales differ across categories but not within categories)


                                                        Weekdays
                              .8                                             .25                                            1



                                                                             .2                                             .8
                              .6


                                                                             .15                                            .6




                                   Fraction




                                                                                  Fraction




                                                                                                                                 Fraction
                              .4

                                                                             .1                                             .4


                              .2
                                                                             .05                                            .2



                              0                                               0                                              0
0      360    720   1080   1440               0   360      720      1080   1440              0   360     720      1080    1440
             Work                                 Nonexercise Leisure-1                           Nonwork Exercise-1




                                                  Weekends & Holidays
                              .8                                             .25                                            1



                                                                             .2                                             .8
                              .6


                                                                             .15                                            .6
                                   Fraction




                                                                                  Fraction




                                                                                                                                 Fraction
                              .4

                                                                             .1                                             .4


                              .2
                                                                             .05                                            .2



                              0                                               0                                              0
0      360    720   1080   1440               0   360      720      1080   1440              0   360      720      1080   1440
             Work                                 Nonexercise Leisure-1                            Nonwork Exercise-1




                                                             49
