                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   RE-EVALUATING SWEDISH MEMBERSHIP IN EMU:
                       EVIDENCE FROM AN ESTIMATED MODEL

                                          Ulf Söderström

                                       Working Paper 14519
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14519


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2008




This paper was prepared for the NBER conference on "Europe and the Euro" in October 2008. I am
grateful for comments from, and discussions with, Carlo Altomonte, Carlo Favero, Nils Gottfries,
Steinar Holden, Lars Jonung, Thomas Lindblom, Anders Vredin, and the editors, Alberto Alesina
and Francesco Giavazzi. I also thank seminar participants at Sveriges Riksbank and participants at
the NBER conference. And I am indebted to Malin Adolfson and Jesper Lindé for help with the estimated
open-economy model. The views expressed in this paper are solely the responsibility of the author
and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Executive Board of Sveriges Riksbank
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Ulf Söderström. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Re-Evaluating Swedish Membership in EMU: Evidence from an Estimated Model
Ulf Söderström
NBER Working Paper No. 14519
December 2008
JEL No. E42,E58,F41

                                               ABSTRACT

I revisit the potential costs and benefits for Sweden of joining the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)
of the European Union. I first show that the Swedish business cycle since the mid-1990s has been
closely correlated with the Euro area economies, suggesting that common shocks have been an important
driving force of business cycles in Europe. However, evidence from an estimated model of the Swedish
economy instead suggests that country-specific shocks have been important for fluctuations in the
Swedish economy since 1993, implying that EMU membership could be costly. The model also indicates
that the exchange rate has to a large extent acted to destabilize, rather than stabilize, the Swedish economy,
pointing to the costs of independent monetary policy with a flexible exchange rate. Finally, counterfactual
simulations of the model suggest that Swedish inflation and GDP growth might have been slightly
higher if Sweden had been a member of EMU since the launch in 1999, but also that GDP growth
might have been more volatile. The evidence is therefore not conclusive about whether or not participation
in the monetary union would be advantageous for Sweden.


Ulf Söderström
Sveriges Riksbank
Research Division
Monetary Policy Department
10337 Stockholm
Sweden
ulf.soderstrom@riksbank.se
1       Introduction

When the Swedish government negotiated the treaty of accession to the European
Union in 1993–94, the negotiations did not include an exemption to the third stage of
the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). In contrast to Denmark and the United
Kingdom, which did obtain such exemptions, Sweden is therefore required by EU law
to join EMU and adopt the euro as soon as the convergence criteria specified in the
Maastricht treaty are fulfilled. Nevertheless, the Swedish Parliament (the Riksdag)
decided in 1997 that Sweden would not join the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) of
the European Monetary System, and the Swedish central bank (Sveriges Riksbank)
has followed a policy of inflation targeting with a flexible exchange rate since 1993.
As a consequence, in the assessments made by the European Commission prior to the
launch of EMU in 1999 and every two years since 2000, Sweden has been judged not
to fulfill the criterion regarding exchange rate stability, which requires the member
state to participate in the ERM (now the ERM II). Sweden therefore is a member
state with a derogation from the third stage of EMU, but is not exempted from
participation.1 A national referendum on Swedish participation in EMU was held
in September 2003, and the result was a rejection of membership with 56% of the
electorate voting against and 42% voting in favor. As a consequence, the Riksdag
decision of 1997 remains in force, and Sweden remains outside EMU.
    Ten years after the launch of EMU, I revisit the question of the potential costs
and benefits for Sweden of joining the monetary union. I first (in Section 2) return
to the report of the Calmfors Commission, the government commission assigned
to study the consequences of EMU membership in 1995–96. I summarize the main
conclusions of the Commission, and provide an updated evaluation of the arguments
made in the report. Some of these arguments speak more strongly in favor of
Swedish EMU membership today than in 1996, while others more clearly speak
against membership.
    I then take a broad look at European business cycles (in Section 3) and discuss the
comovement between the Swedish and European economies. I show that European
business cycles are closely correlated with each other, suggesting that business cycles
in Europe are largely driven by common shocks. Although the large EMU member
countries show stronger comovement with the Euro area, Sweden tends to be at least
    1
    The assessments also conclude that Swedish legislation concerning the financial independence of
the Riksbank and the Riksbank’s integration into the European System of Central Banks (ESCB)
is not consistent with the Maastricht Treaty and the statutes of the ESCB and the European
Central Bank (ECB).




                                                1
as strongly correlated with the Euro area as some EMU members (for instance,
Finland), and more closely correlated than Norway and the UK. This evidence
indicates that membership in EMU would not be very costly for Sweden, and not
more so than for some current EMU members.
    Next, I present evidence from an estimated model of the Swedish economy. I
discuss in Section 4 the importance of country-specific shocks for Swedish business
cycle fluctuations since 1993, and I study the source and effects of fluctuations in
the exchange rate. In contrast to the evidence in Section 3, the estimated model
suggests that country-specific shocks are an important source of Swedish business
cycle fluctuations, and therefore that participation in the monetary union may be
costly. On the other hand, the model interprets most fluctuations in the exchange
rate as caused by shocks to the exchange rate risk premium, rather than endogenous
movements that help the economy adjust after disturbances to other sectors in the
economy. As such risk premium shocks induce inefficient volatility in the macroe-
conomy, the benefits of having a flexible exchange rate may be small, speaking in
favor of EMU membership (which to a large extent would eliminate exchange rate
fluctuations).
    I then (in Section 5) use the model for a counterfactual experiment to evaluate
what would have been the consequences for the Swedish economy if Sweden had
joined EMU in January 1999. The simulations predict that Swedish membership in
the monetary union might have led to slightly higher GDP growth and inflation, but
also higher volatility in GDP growth. Furthermore, EMU membership might have
implied higher inflation in 2004–05 when inflation was exceptionally low in Sweden.
However, the effects of EMU membership are not dramatic, reflecting the strong
comovement of the Swedish and Euro area economies in the last decade.
    The model is silent on many relevant issues. I discuss some of these in Section 6,
for instance, the impact of EMU on economic integration and labor markets, and
whether Sweden has lost political influence in the EU by not participating in EMU.
Finally, I conclude in Section 7 that, perhaps unsurprisingly, the evidence presented
here is not conclusive about the whether the costs or the benefits of Swedish EMU
membership dominate. These conclusions may however be sharpened by the out-
come of the current financial crisis.




                                          2
2       The Calmfors Commission

Ahead of the Riksdag decision in 1997 concerning Swedish membership in EMU,
the Swedish government appointed a commission (the “Calmfors Commission”) to
analyze the consequences of EMU and of Swedish membership in the monetary
union. The Commission, composed of five economists and three political scientists,
was appointed in October 1995 and delivered its report in October 1996, see Calmfors
et al. (1996).
    The Commission argued that monetary union would lead to small efficiency gains
due to reduced transaction costs and exchange rate uncertainty and increased com-
petition, speaking in favor of Swedish membership. However, these gains needed
to be weighed against the adverse effects of large country-specific disturbances that
could have severe consequences if they were not counteracted by independent mone-
tary policy and exchange rate policy. While these large disturbances normally would
not be an important problem, the Commission argued that independent monetary
policy could be an important insurance against such extreme events.
    An important argument in favor of Swedish EMU membership was deemed to be
the potential loss of political influence within the EU if Sweden were to stay outside
the monetary union.
    All in all, the final assessment of the Commission was that the economic argu-
ments did not favor participation, while the political arguments were in support of
membership, but that the arguments against membership in 1999 were stronger than
those in favor. Therefore, the Commission concluded that while Sweden should aim
at future membership in the monetary union, it would be better not to join EMU
in the first wave of 1999.2
    The Commission listed four main reasons for its conclusion:

    1. EMU membership would be risky with the then high level of unemployment, as
       the economy would be particularly vulnerable to adverse shocks. After a long
       period with an unemployment rate around 2–3%, the Swedish unemployment
       rate had increased quickly to above 9% during the recession in 1992–93, and
       remained at this level until the late 1990s. (See also Figure 3 below.)

    2. The already precarious fiscal situation also made membership risky, as fiscal
       measures would need to carry a larger burden of stabilization policy within the
    2
   One member of the Commission dissented from this conclusion, arguing that the costs of
monetary union would be large also in the longer term, and that Sweden should not join the
monetary union in the future. See Gottfries (1996).




                                            3
     monetary union, and a deterioration of the government finances would need
     to be followed by drastic countermeasures to satisfy the rules of the Stability
     and Growth Pact. The ratio of government debt to GDP was close to 75% in
     1995–96, and the government deficit amounted to 9% and 7% of GDP in 1994
     and 1995, respectively. Again, this difficult fiscal situation was partly caused
     by the recession in the early 1990s.

  3. To ensure legitimacy among the electorate, the commission saw a need for a
     broad public debate concerning the monetary union before a definitive decision
     was taken. There had not been any extensive debate of EMU before the
     referendum concerning EU membership in 1994, as EMU membership was
     seen as an issue separate from EU membership.

  4. The fact that only a subset of EU members were likely to join the monetary
     union, and, in particular, not Denmark and the UK, implied that the potential
     economic gains of membership seemed small, while the costs of staying outside
     in terms of lost political influence seemed limited. In 1996, many observers
     expected that only a small core of EU member states (consisting of Germany,
     France, the Benelux countries, Austria, and perhaps Finland and Ireland)
     would be able to qualify for EMU membership.

The Commission stressed that its assessment of membership would be positively
affected if unemployment were to fall and the fiscal situation stabilized. At the
same time, the Commission feared that staying outside EMU might lead to a loss of
credibility for the Swedish currency, leading to increased short-term interest rates
and a continued large spread between Swedish and EMU long-term interest rates.
    When revisiting the issues more than ten years later, some arguments seem to
speak more strongly in favor of Swedish membership in EMU, while other arguments
speak more strongly against. First, the EMU project must be deemed as a great
success. More countries than expected joined in 1999, and although Denmark is
not an EMU member, it maintains a fixed exchange rate against the euro, and its
monetary policy shadows that of the ECB. The ECB has established credibility for
a low inflation policy, and the euro has become a major currency, probably more
important than the individual currencies taken together. The gains in terms of
economic integration also seem fairly large, perhaps larger than expected in 1996
(see Section 6). Second, since 1996, unemployment has fallen considerably in Sweden
(to around 6% in September 2008), and the fiscal situation has been stabilized
(government debt in 2007 was around 40% of GDP and the government ran a surplus



                                         4
of around 3.5% of GDP). Thus, Sweden today seems less vulnerable to adverse shocks
than in 1996. Finally, there do not seem to have been any large country-specific
disturbances to the Swedish economy, so the gains from independent monetary policy
may have been small. While the last point is not particularly strong, as independent
monetary policy may turn out to be of crucial importance in the future, the other
arguments suggest that the case for EMU membership may be stronger today than
in 1996.
    There are however also arguments that speak more strongly against EMU mem-
bership today. First, the Commission’s fears about a loss in credibility for Swedish
monetary policy and the Swedish currency never materialized. As we will see next,
Swedish long-term interest rates have converged substantially toward European
rates, although not to the same extent as those in the EMU member countries.
Second, the recent literature does not find strong support for the proposition that
Sweden has lost political influence within the EU (see Section 6). And third, while
there was a broad public debate about Swedish EMU membership ahead of the
referendum in 2003, public opinion seems to be largely against membership.3
    All in all, the events of the past ten years help to gain perspective on some of the
important issues concerning Swedish membership in EMU that were discussed by
the Calmfors Commission. However, at this stage it is not clear whether the case for
membership has become stronger or weaker. The remaining Sections will therefore
cover many of these issues in more detail.


3       European business cycles

In this section I give an overview of the convergence of business cycles in Europe.
The purpose is to give a broad view of the similarities of the Swedish and Euro
area business cycles, and thus the possible consequences for Sweden of joining the
monetary union, and to compare with other European countries that have chosen
different strategies in their relationship with the EU and the EMU. I thus compare
Swedish data with those of the Euro area as a whole and three groups of coun-
tries. The first group contains the four largest Euro area member countries: France,
Germany, Italy and Spain. The second group consists of three Nordic countries:
Denmark, which is a member of the EU but not of EMU, although it maintains a
    3
    According to Statistics Sweden, since 2004 around 50% of the Swedish population have been
against EMU membership while 35–40% have been for membership. However, a more recent poll
by SIFO (in October 2008) suggests that the balances may have shifted somewhat in favor of
membership, with 47% against and 42% for.




                                             5
fixed exchange rate against the euro within ERM II; Finland, which is a member of
EMU; and Norway, which remains outside the EU. Finally, I include in the compar-
ison the United Kingdom, which like Sweden is a member of the EU, but neither of
EMU nor ERM II.4
    To evaluate convergence and the effects of EMU, I compare data from two sub-
samples: the period before EMU from 1994 to 1998, and the period after the launch
of EMU from 1999 to 2007.5 The data were collected from various sources; see
Appendix A for details.
    I study the properties of business cycles in the selected countries in terms of the
average level and volatility of a number of business cycle indicators in the different
countries and their correlation with the Euro area: GDP growth and the GDP gap
(the percent deviation of GDP from trend); the rate of unemployment; the CPI
inflation rate; short-term (3-month) and long-term (10-year) interest rates; and the
nominal and real exchange rates.
    The data are presented in Figures 1–8, while Tables 1–3 show sample means,
standard deviations and correlations with the Euro area for the two subperiods. The
main impression is that there is strong comovement of business cycles across Europe.
Most countries experienced an expansion in 1997–2000 with high growth, increasing
output gaps, and falling unemployment. This period was followed by a contraction
in 2001–2003, with low growth, falling output gaps, and increasing unemployment,
but since around 2003, most countries have experienced a gradual expansion of
economic activity. At the same time, inflation and interest rates fell dramatically
from the early 1990s until around 1999, after which they have been stabilized at
low levels. In particular, long-term interest rates have converged strongly since the
early 1990s, and in particular after 1999 (with the possible exception of Norway and
the UK).6 Also Swedish interest rates (short- and long-term) have converged toward
the EMU rates, less so than in the EMU member countries and Denmark, but more
than in Norway and the UK.
    Table 1 shows that most countries have experienced lower average GDP growth,
unemployment, and short- and long-term interest rates in the post-EMU period
than before 1999, while inflation has been low throughout the sample period. On
average Sweden has experienced higher GDP growth, lower unemployment, and
  4
      The case of the UK is analyzed in detail in the chapter in this volume by DiCecio and Nelson.
  5
    I choose 1994 as the starting point for the pre-EMU sample to avoid the turbulent years in
the early 1990s in Sweden and many other European countries.
  6
      Ehrmann et al. (2007) study in detail the convergence of interest rates within the Euro area.




                                                  6
lower inflation than most Euro area countries in both sample periods. Table 2 shows
that Sweden, along with Italy, Spain and the other Nordic countries, have tended to
have more volatile business cycles than the three large economies (Germany, France,
and the UK), and than the Euro area at large.
    As for business cycle correlations, Table 3 shows that the Swedish GDP growth
and GDP gap are fairly strongly correlated with its Euro area counterparts, with
correlation coefficients above 0.70 after 1999. Although the Swedish business cycle
correlation with the Euro area is weaker than those of the largest Euro area members,
France, Germany, Italy, and Spain (which often have correlation coefficients around
0.9), the business cycle in Sweden seems more strongly correlated with the Euro
area than in Norway and the UK, and the correlation is similar to that in Denmark
and Finland.
    To summarize, European business cycles are closely correlated with each other,
and the Swedish business cycle is no exception. Although the large EMU members
show even stronger comovement with the Euro area, Sweden tends to be at least
as strongly correlated with the Euro area as some EMU members (for instance,
Finland), and more closely correlated than Norway and the UK. This evidence
suggests that European business cycles are to a large extent driven by common
shocks. If this is the case, then membership in EMU would not be very costly for
Sweden, and not more so than for some current EMU members. However, before
drawing this conclusion, we take a further step by using an estimated model to study
the importance of country-specific shocks relative to foreign shocks for the Swedish
economy.


4   The role of country-specific shocks and exchange rate
    volatility for macroeconomic fluctuations

The traditional arguments against monetary union rest on two assertions. First, in-
dependent monetary policy is helpful to stabilize the economy after country-specific
(or “asymmetric”) shocks. Such shocks could therefore be costly in a monetary
union where the common central bank would not adjust policy sufficiently, as it
focuses on stabilizing the union-wide economy. Second, exchange rate movements
help to stabilize the economy after shocks. For instance, the economy will recover
more easily after a contractionary shock if the exchange rate is allowed to depreci-
ate, something that will not be possible within a monetary union. Both arguments
are more important for a small open economy such as Sweden, which would carry a




                                         7
small weight within the monetary union and where exchange rate movements have
a strong effect on the economy.
    The importance of the first argument depends on the prevalence of country-
specific shocks: the more important are these shocks for the domestic economy, the
more critical is independent monetary policy. However, the evidence from Section 3
suggests that common shocks may be more important than country-specific shocks
for European business cycles. The validity of the second argument rests on the notion
that the nominal exchange rate adjusts appropriately after shocks. But exchange
rate movements are known not to be very strongly linked to fundamentals (see,
for instance, Obstfeld and Rogoff, 2000). If exchange rate movements are driven
mainly by idiosyncratic shocks (for instance, to the foreign exchange risk premium),
they may induce additional volatility rather than help the economy to adjust after
shocks.7
    In this Section, I try to shed more light on these issues by studying the im-
portance of shocks for the Swedish economy in a model of a small open economy
developed and estimated on Swedish data by Adolfson et al. (2007a, 2008).8

4.1     A model of a small open economy

The model used for these exercises is a Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium
(DSGE) model with optimizing agents and rational expectations. The model econ-
omy consist of four groups of agents: households, firms, the government and the for-
eign economy. Households maximize utility over an infinite horizon. They consume
a basket of domestically produced goods and imported goods, which are supplied
by domestic and importing firms, respectively. Households save in domestic and
foreign currency-denominated nominal bonds, but must pay a premium on foreign
bond holdings, a premium that depends on the domestic economy’s net foreign asset
position and an idiosyncratic shock. Households also own the capital stock, which
they rent to domestic firms, and they decide the rate of capital accumulation given
costs of adjusting the rate of investment. Finally, households supply a differentiated
labor service under monopolistic competition and staggered wages.
    The choice between domestic and foreign bond holdings implies that domestic
and foreign interest rates are linked by an uncovered interest rate parity (UIP)
condition. However, the premium on foreign bond holdings leads to an exchange
rate risk premium that generates short-run deviations from the fundamental value
  7
      This argument is emphasized by several of the contributions in Jakobsson (2003).
  8
      Adolfson et al. (2007b) provide a more detailed non-technical description.




                                                  8
of the exchange rate determined by UIP. Idiosyncratic shocks to this risk premium
generate volatility in the exchange rate and therefore inefficient fluctuations in the
economy.
    There are three types of firms—in the domestic, import, and export sectors—
that produce differentiated goods under monopolistic competition and set prices in a
staggered fashion. Domestic firms either produce consumption or investment goods.
Staggered prices on imports and exports imply that exchange rate pass-through to
both import and export prices is incomplete in the short run. Thus, changes in the
exchange rate do not immediately feed through to import and export prices, but
only after a gradual process of price changes.
    The government spends resources on consuming part of the domestic good, col-
lects taxes from households, and sets monetary policy. The fiscal surplus/deficit
plus the seigniorage are transferred back to the households in a lump sum fashion.
Monetary policy is delegated to an independent central bank that sets the interest
rate according to a Taylor (1993)-type interest rate rule. In particular, the one-
period nominal interest rate is set as a function of current and past CPI inflation,
the deviation of current and past GDP from trend, and the real exchange rate and
the interest rate in the previous quarter. In addition there is a shock to the inter-
est rate rule that captures temporary deviations from the systematic behavior of
monetary policy.
    Finally, as Sweden is a small open economy, the foreign economy is assumed to
be independent of the Swedish economy, so foreign inflation, output, and the foreign
interest rate follow an exogenous vector autoregressive (VAR) model. The foreign
variables are trade-weighted averages of foreign data.
    In total, the model describes the evolution of 27 variables, 15 of which are ob-
servable. The model also includes 21 different exogenous disturbances: one is a non-
stationary global technology shock common to the domestic and foreign economies,
nine shocks are specific to the domestic economy (including a stationary technology
shock), three originate in the foreign economy, seven are related to monetary and
fiscal policy, and the remaining shock is to the foreign exchange risk premium. The
model was is rewritten in terms of stationary variables, log-linearized around its
steady state, and then estimated by Adolfson et al. (2007a) on quarterly data from
1980 until the third quarter of 2005, with a structural break in the first quarter
of 1993, as Sweden moved from a fixed exchange rate regime to a regime with an
inflation target and a flexible exchange rate. I here present results pertaining to the
period starting in 1993.




                                          9
4.2   The sources of macroeconomic fluctuations

To analyze the relative importance of different shocks in the estimated model, I
decompose the volatility of key variables—annual domestic and CPI inflation, annual
GDP growth, the annualized short-term interest rate, and the real exchange rate—at
different horizons into the fraction caused by each shock. I then study these variance
decompositions to see (i ) what has been the relative importance of domestic shocks
for overall volatility; and (ii ) what has been the relative importance of exchange
rate shocks for volatility in the exchange rate and in the economy at large.
    The results are reported in Table 4.9 First, panel (a) shows the total forecast
error variance (in percentage points) in each variable at different horizons. The
dynamics of the model implies that most of the volatility appears after four quarters,
and the real exchange rate is more volatile and persistent than the other variables.
    Panel (b) reveals that shocks originating in the domestic economy account for
much of the variability in domestic variables at all horizons. In the short run,
domestic shocks account for 55–95% of the volatility in CPI inflation, 65–85% of the
volatility in GDP growth, and 35–55% of the volatility in the short-term interest
rate. Also at longer horizons domestic shocks account for most of the volatility of all
variables. Shocks originating in the foreign economy in panel (c), on the other hand,
account for between 15 and 25% of the volatility of CPI inflation volatility, GDP
growth and the short-term interest rate. Thus, although the analysis in Section 3
suggested the existence of an important common component in the Swedish and
Euro area business cycles, the estimated model finds that country-specific shocks
are two to three times more important than foreign shocks for Swedish business
cycle fluctuations.
    There are reasons to be careful when interpreting these results. Justiniano and
Preston (2006) argue that models of small open economies such as the one used
here are not very successful in capturing the influence of foreign variables. While
the common non-stationary technology shock in our model increases the influence
of foreign shocks relative to their model, our model still does not seem to capture all
comovement of the domestic and foreign economies. For instance, the model implies
an unconditional contemporaneous correlation between domestic and foreign output
growth of 0.19, while in the data used to estimate the model this correlation is 0.54;
the correlation of domestic and foreign inflation is 0.05 in the model and 0.29 in
the data; and the interest rate correlation is 0.16 in the model but 0.86 in the
  9
    The variance decompositions are calculated from impulse responses to each shock. In the
calculations I exclude a shock to the inflation target, as this has been constant since 1993.




                                             10
data. While the inflation correlation in the data is inside a 95% probability interval
around the model correlations, the correlations of output and the interest rate are
not. Thus, the model may well overestimate the importance of domestic shocks
relative to foreign shocks.
    Comparisons with vector autoregressive (VAR) models estimated on Swedish
data give mixed support for this view. In a background study for the Calmfors
Commission, Jansson (1997) studied the importance of country-specific shocks in an
estimated VAR model using data from eleven European countries over the period
from 1960 to 1994. He found that country-specific shocks accounted for 75–80% of
fluctuations in Swedish GDP as well as in the GDP deflator, with the remaining 20–
25% being due to common (that is, foreign) shocks. In comparison, country-specific
shocks accounted for merely 25–30% of GDP fluctuations in the core EMU countries
(Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, and the Netherlands), but 93% in Finland and
Ireland. This evidence is consistent with the results in panel (b). On the other hand,
Lindé (2003) studies a VAR model of the Swedish economy estimated over the more
recent period from 1986 to 2002. He reports that foreign shocks account for 45–
55% of fluctuations in Swedish domestic inflation and GDP, in particular at low
frequencies. This evidence thus assigns a less important role to country-specific
shocks than do the open-economy model and the evidence of Jansson (1997), also
suggesting that the open-economy model underestimates the influence of foreign
shocks on the Swedish economy.
    We now turn to the importance of shocks to the exchange rate. Panel (d ) of
Table 4 shows that such shocks account for a large fraction of the volatility in the
real exchange rate (above 70% at short horizons), but also 25–45% of medium-term
volatility in CPI inflation (which to some extent is directly determined by exchange
rate movements), 15–30% of GDP growth volatility and 15–20% of interest rate
volatility at medium-term horizons. Thus, exchange rate movements do help to
stabilize the economy after disturbances in other sectors, as close to 30% of the
volatility in the real exchange is due to endogenous responses to other shocks. How-
ever, the remaining volatility in the exchange rate is due to inefficient fluctuations
in the exchange rate risk premium, which act to destabilize the Swedish economy,
and these shocks are responsible for a significant portion of Swedish business cycle
fluctuations.10
  10
    In their paper in this volume, DiCecio and Nelson argue that shocks to the exchange rate risk
premium may be endogenous responses to fundamentals rather than inefficient disturbances. The
estimated model used here, however, interprets all such movements as inefficient disturbances to
the exchange rate.




                                               11
    The evidence presented here thus gives a mixed view of the costs and benefits
of monetary union. On the one hand, the estimated model suggests that country-
specific shocks are an important source of Swedish business cycle fluctuations, and
therefore that independent monetary policy is imperative in order to stabilize the
economy. (There is reason, though, to suspect that the model overestimates the
influence of country-specific shocks.) On the other hand, exchange rate fluctuations
are mainly driven by inefficient shocks to the exchange rate risk premium, which
are responsible for a large portion of macroeconomic volatility, implying that the
benefits of a flexible exchange rate may be small.11


5        What if Sweden had joined EMU in 1999? A counterfac-
         tual experiment

A strength of the estimated model is that it is based on the optimizing behavior of
private households and firms, and the estimated parameters reflect structural fea-
tures of the economy, such as preferences and technology, which in principle should
be independent of the behavior of monetary and fiscal policy. We can therefore use
the model to perform counterfactual policy experiments without being vulnerable
to the Lucas (1976) critique.12
    Thus, in this Section I use the model to evaluate what would have been the
consequences if Sweden had joined EMU at the outset in January 1999. The dis-
cussion in Section 3 showed that the Swedish economy is fairly well aligned with
the Euro area, suggesting that membership in EMU might not have had important
consequences for Sweden. On the other hand, the evidence presented in Section 4
showed that country-specific shocks have been the main source of business cycle fluc-
tuations in Sweden since 1993, suggesting that EMU membership might be costly.
The counterfactual experiment can help us balance these conflicting views.
    11
     For the United Kingdom, HM Treasury (2003) reports that most movements in the exchange
rate between the British pound and the euro have been stabilizing, that is, movements in response
to other shocks. This conclusion is based, first, on the fact that the sterling exchange rate largely
has moved in the appropriate direction with respect to the position of the UK business cycle relative
to foreign economies, and second, on evidence from an estimated VAR model where exchange rate
shocks have a negligible impact on output, prices and interest rates in the UK.
    12
    Recently, however, Chari et al. (2008) and Faust (2008) have criticized such a strong structural
interpretation of DSGE models.




                                                 12
5.1   A first impression

For a first informal impression, Figure 9 shows the monetary policy interest rate,
the rate of GDP growth, and the CPI inflation rate in Sweden and the Euro area
since 1999. The horizontal lines in panel (c) represent the Riksbank’s tolerance band
from one to three percent around its two-percent inflation target.
    Initially, in 1999 and early 2000, GDP growth was higher and inflation lower in
Sweden than in the Euro area, and on balance, monetary policy was slightly more
contractionary in Sweden. As inflation and GDP growth picked up in the Euro area,
the ECB increased the interest rate more aggressively than the Riksbank in 2000, and
kept a more contractionary policy until the end of 2001. The recession that started
in 2001 was more long-lived in the Euro area than in Sweden, necessitating a more
aggressive monetary expansion by the ECB, with the Riksbank following about a
year later when inflation started falling in Sweden. The higher rate of inflation in the
Euro area also made the ECB tighten monetary policy earlier and more aggressively
in 2006–07. Consequently, monetary policy was more contractionary in Sweden than
in the Euro area throughout 2002 and 2003, but more expansionary in 2005–07. In
general, the two interest rates have followed similar cycles, but the Euro area interest
rate has tended to lead the Swedish interest rate.
    Panel (b) shows that although fluctuations in GDP growth have been closely
correlated, the GDP growth rate has been higher in Sweden than in the Euro area
in almost every quarter since 1999 (with the exception of the 2001 contraction). At
the same time, inflation in panel (c) has typically been lower (and more volatile) in
Sweden than in the Euro area. In particular, the Swedish CPI inflation rate was
below one percent (the lower bound of the Riksbank’s tolerance band) in 1999–2000
and in 2004–05.
    Due to the uncertain lags in the transmission of monetary policy, it is difficult to
say how Swedish membership in EMU from 1999 would have affected the behavior
of GDP growth and inflation in Sweden. The ECB’s more contractionary monetary
policy in 2000–01 might have been appropriate in the boom experienced in Sweden
in 2000, and the more expansionary policy in 2002–03 might have dampened the
brief downturn in 2003 and increased inflation somewhat in 2004–05, when inflation
in Sweden was exceptionally low. However, with slightly longer transmission lags, a
more contractionary monetary policy in 2000–01 might have deepened the downturn
in 2003, with even lower inflation as a consequence.




                                          13
5.2    Evidence from the estimated model

To construct a more rigorous counterfactual experiment I use the estimated model
to analyze the possible effects of Swedish EMU membership from 1999 until 2005.13
In particular, I impose the Euro area short-term interest rate instead of the Swedish
interest rate and simulate the model starting from the actual situation in the fourth
quarter of 1998, feeding in the estimated historical series of the disturbances (exclud-
ing those to monetary policy and the exchange rate). I thus obtain model predictions
of what would have been the development of the Swedish economy if the interest
rate had followed the ECB interest rate since January 1999.14
    To impose the ECB interest rate on the model, I follow two different strategies.
In the first strategy, I introduce shocks to the estimated monetary policy rule so
that the interest rate coincides with the ECB interest rate. This exercise manages
to exactly mimic the ECB policy, but it assumes that these deviations from the
estimated policy rule are unexpected by private agents, and so it does not capture the
effects of systematic monetary policy. That is, private agents expect the Riksbank
to follow the estimated Swedish policy rule, but are surprised in every period by the
fact that Sweden is in fact a member of EMU.
    As an alternative strategy, I instead respecify the monetary policy rule in the
model so that it responds also to the rate of nominal exchange rate depreciation
and fluctuations in the foreign economy (the current level and three lags of foreign
output, inflation and interest rate). I then find the coefficients in this monetary
policy rule that best match the behavior of the ECB interest rate since 1999.
    Before presenting the results of these two experiments, Figure 10 compares the
model predictions of the short-term interest rate, GDP growth, domestic inflation,
and CPI inflation with the estimated monetary policy rule. We note that the model
tends to underpredict GDP growth in 2001–04, while capturing fairly well the move-
ments in domestic and CPI inflation.15
  13
    The experiment ends in the third quarter of 2005 as this is the last observation used when
estimating the model.
  14
     If the model had been estimated on Swedish and Euro area data, it would have been natural to
simply set the Swedish interest rate equal to the foreign interest rate, implying that the exchange
rate would have been fixed (assuming that there were no risk premium shocks). However, the
foreign variables in the model represent trade-weighted averages of foreign data, where the Euro
area (including Denmark) only represents around 60%. Therefore this strategy is not possible.
Furthermore, as the trade-weighted exchange rate would have fluctuated in ways that are difficult
to predict even if Sweden had been an EMU member, I do not study the consequences of EMU
membership for the exchange rate.
  15
    The deviations of GDP growth and inflation from the actual data are due to measurement
errors introduced when estimating the model. Without these measurement errors, the model would




                                                14
Introducing counterfactual monetary policy shocks

Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 11 show the interest rate when introducing the counter-
factual monetary policy shocks in the estimated interest rate rule, and the implied
shocks needed to mimic the ECB interest rate. These shocks are not particularly
large: their standard deviation is seven basis points, and the largest shock is 14
basis points. For comparison, the standard deviation of monetary policy shocks in
the estimated model is ten basis points. Fairly small shocks are thus required to
make the Swedish interest rate mimic the ECB interest rate.
    Figure 12 shows the predicted development of GDP growth, domestic inflation
and CPI inflation with the counterfactual monetary policy shocks. Even if the
required shocks are fairly small, the effects are nevertheless reasonably large. With
the ECB interest rate, Swedish GDP growth would have been slightly lower in the
2000–01 recession (due to the more contractionary monetary policy), but higher in
the period from 2002 to 2003 (after a more expansionary policy). CPI inflation
would have been higher in 2000, lower in 2001, and higher in 2002–05. In particular,
the ECB policy would have kept Swedish CPI inflation more closely within the
Riksbank’s tolerance band of one to three percent in 2004 and 2005.
    On average, this exercise suggests that EMU membership would have raised
Swedish GDP growth by around 0.1 percentage points per year and inflation by
around 0.25 percentage points; see panels (b) and (c) of Table 5. Inflation would
also have been less volatile under the ECB policy with no effects on the volatility of
GDP growth.
    Under this scenario, EMU membership would thus have been unambiguously
beneficial for Sweden.

Imposing a counterfactual monetary policy rule

Panels (c) and (d) of Figure 11 instead show the interest rate obtained with the
counterfactual policy rule. In this case it is not possible to perfectly mimic the
ECB interest rate, and occasionally there are large deviations of the counterfactual
interest rate from the ECB interest rate. Nevertheless, the counterfactual interest
rate follows the same cyclical patterns as the ECB interest rate, and, as shown in

have perfectly matched the actual data, as these data were used in the estimation. See Adolfson
et al. (2008) for details. Note also that the data for the GDP growth rate in Figure 10 are slightly
different from those in Figures 1 and 9. The data in Figure 10 are seasonally adjusted data obtained
from Statistics Sweden, while those in the earlier figures are unadjusted data obtained from the
OECD.




                                                15
Figure 13, it implies the same qualitative effects of EMU relative to the Swedish in-
terest rate: more contractionary monetary policy in 2000–01 and 2004–05 and more
expansionary policy in 1999 and 2001–04. Figure 13 shows that the counterfactual
rule (which captures the systematic effects of monetary policy) has a stronger effect
on the economy than the rule with the counterfactual shocks in Figure 12, and as
shown in panel (d ) of Table 5, GDP growth is substantially more volatile with the
counterfactual rule. The overall patterns are similar, however. The counterfactual
rule model predicts that GDP growth would have been lower than the actual growth
rate in 2000 and early 2001, but higher in late 2001 and early 2002 and in late 2003
and early 2004, similar to the model with counterfactual shocks. Also, the coun-
terfactual rule model implies that CPI inflation would have been lower in 2000–01
but higher in 2002–05. Finally, the ECB policy would have kept inflation within the
target range in 2004–05, but in this case, inflation would have been far below the
lower bound in 2000.
    This counterfactual experiment thus gives a more ambiguous, but largely neg-
ative, picture: EMU membership would have increased average GDP growth only
marginally (by 0.05 percentage points) but increased its volatility substantially (by
around 0.25 percentage points), and the effects on inflation would have been small
on average.

5.3   Going forward

The model was estimated by Adolfson et al. (2007a) using data only up until the
third quarter of 2005, so it cannot make any predictions about the development in
more recent years. Nevertheless, going back to Figure 9, we see that inflation in
both economies has picked up in 2007, and more recently (in October 2008) reached
4.0% in Sweden and 3.2% in the Euro area. At the same time GDP growth has
slowed down to 0.9% in Sweden and 1.4% in the Euro area in the second quarter of
2008 (according to the OECD). As shown in panel (a), the ECB started increasing
its interest rate already in late 2005, and until late 2007, the ECB interest rate was
50 to 75 basis points above the Riksbank rate. Had we been able to continue our
experiments through 2007, the model with the ECB interest rate might therefore
have predicted lower inflation but also lower GDP growth in Sweden in 2007–08
than has been the case in practice.




                                         16
6     Additional issues

The estimated model used in the counterfactual experiments was developed to ex-
plain the effects of monetary policy on the economy and the interplay between
monetary policy and private sector behavior. However, it is largely silent on many
other possible consequences of EMU membership. In this Section I therefore briefly
discuss some of these issues.

6.1   Fiscal policy and the Stability and Growth Pact

Fiscal policy in EMU member countries is constrained by the possibility of sanctions
if the rules specified in the Stability and Growth Pact are violated. These rules
require government debt to be below 60% of GDP and the deficit in the government’s
finances to be below 3% of GDP. Would these restrictions on fiscal policy have had
important implications for Sweden as an EMU member? Probably not. According
to Eurostat, Sweden had in 2007 a government surplus of 3.6% of GDP and a gross
debt to GDP ratio of 40.4%. And in the period since 1999, the largest government
deficit in Sweden has been 1.2% of GDP (in 2002) and the largest debt ratio 65.6% of
GDP (in 1999). According to the assessments made by The European Commission,
Sweden has therefore always fulfilled the criterion of fiscal sustainability, so the
Stability and Growth Pact would likely not have constrained fiscal policy if Sweden
had joined EMU in 1999.

6.2   Economic integration

An important motivating factor behind the creation of EMU was to enhance eco-
nomic integration within the European Union and thus increase competition and
economic efficiency. Many studies have also tried to measure the impact of EMU
on economic integration, such as international trade patterns, financial market in-
tegration, and foreign direct investment (FDI).
    While the estimated model does take into account the short-run effects of mon-
etary policy on imports and exports, it assumes that the long-run trade shares
are constant, and therefore is unable to make any predictions about the effects of
EMU membership on long-run trade patterns. Similarly, the counterfactual exer-
cises mimic financial integration by removing the premium on foreign bond holdings
for Swedish residents. But financial integration can be expected to happen also
in other financial markets. And the model is completely silent on the impact of
monetary union on foreign direct investment.




                                        17
    A large literature has measured the effects of EMU on international trade. Most
of these studies have shown that the creation of EMU has increased trade between
the member countries, although the exact estimates vary. Micco et al. (2003) esti-
mate that EMU increased trade within the Euro area by 13% per year between 1999
and 2002. They also find that the introduction of the euro increased trade between
members and non-members by an average of 8% per year.16 A more recent study
by Flam and Nordström (2007c) finds that intra-Euro area trade has increased by
26% after the creation of EMU, and trade with non-EMU members by 12%. In a
literature survey, Baldwin (2006) concludes that EMU has increased trade between
members countries by between 5 and 15% with a best estimate of 9%, while trade
with non-EMU members has increased by around 7%.17
    There is thus no evidence of trade diversion: most studies show that trade with
non-EMU members has also increased as an effect of the introduction of the euro.
Swedish trade has therefore already seen increased trade flows due to EMU, and
according to Baldwin (2006), the additional gains from EMU membership may be
modest. Flam and Nordström (2007b), on the other hand, argue that Swedish trade
with the EMU countries would have been 13% larger in 2002–05 if Sweden had been
a member of EMU, implying that the costs of staying outside the monetary union
may have been large.
    Empirical studies also suggest that financial markets have become more inte-
grated as a consequence of EMU. De Santis (2006) estimates that portfolio flows
(in equity and bonds) among Euro area countries increased significantly due to
EMU, thus contributing to enhanced regional financial integration and risk-sharing,
in addition to the elimination of exchange rate risk. (See also Lane, 2006a; 2006b.)
Similarly, Coeurdacier and Martin (2007) argue that EMU significantly reduced
transaction costs for equity and bonds inside the Euro area for all investors, but
twice as much for investors from EMU member countries than for non-EMU in-
vestors. Thus, EMU led to a diversion effect in that EMU countries purchase less
equity from non-EMU countries. This evidence suggests that the launch of EMU
may have relocated portfolio holdings from Sweden to the EMU member countries,
and that Sweden might experience an increase in international portfolio inflows and
outflows as a consequence of EMU membership, thus enhancing the efficiency of
portfolio diversification.
  16
       See also the chapter in this volume by Frankel.
  17
     Melitz (2005) argues that the effect is probably closer to 15% than the 9% favored by Baldwin
(2006).




                                                  18
    As for foreign direct investment, de Sousa and Lochard (2006) estimate that EMU
has stimulated FDI within the Euro area: FDI stocks have increased by around 20%
within EMU, and FDI flows have increased much more. They find no evidence of an
investment diversion effect: the UK, Denmark and Sweden have not experienced a
fall in FDI inflows, but rather seem to have experienced a positive effect of EMU. In
contrast, Flam and Nordström (2007a) do not find any effects of EMU on FDI, but
instead argue that the effects on FDI are due to the Single Market. Nevertheless,
both studies imply that the gains from Swedish membership in EMU in terms of
FDI would be small.

6.3   Labor markets and wage formation

Labor mobility could act as an adjustment mechanism in the presence of country-
specific shocks in a monetary union. Compared with for instance the United States,
labor mobility is fairly low between European countries. There are many reasons
for this, for instance, language and cultural differences, incompatibilities between
bureaucracies, and welfare systems (including pension systems). However, labor
mobility is low also within European countries, suggesting that other factors are
also important.
    Unfortunately, data on labor mobility across countries are not readily available.
As a proxy, U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of International Labor Affairs (2002)
reports that the average share of movers in the population in the 1990s was 7% in the
European Union but 16% in the U.S. The share also varies considerably across EU
countries, from around 2.5% in Italy to above 15% in Finland. Likewise, data from
the OECD and the U.S. Census Bureau show that the fraction of foreign workers in
the total labor force is typically below 10% in European countries, while it is around
15% in the U.S. There is some evidence that labor market reforms have become
more frequent after the establishment of monetary union, mainly in the direction of
deregulation of labor markets (see, for instance, Bertola and Boeri, 2002), although
it is unclear whether the reforms were an effect of monetary union (see Duval and
Elmeskov, 2005, or the chapter in this volume by Alesina, Ardagna, and Galasso).
Nevertheless, it seems unlikely that labor mobility across EMU member states will
be sufficient to eliminate the effects of country-specific shocks. Also, it is unlikely
that the pace of labor market reform would accelerate significantly as a consequence
of Swedish EMU membership.
    A second issue related to labor markets regards the effect of monetary union
on wage formation. In theory, monetary union may either increase or decrease




                                          19
wage restraint. On the one hand, trade unions may internalize the effects of wage
demands on inflation and monetary policy to a smaller extent in a monetary union
than before, as the effects on union-wide inflation and monetary policy become
weaker. This mechanism would imply that wage demands become stronger within
a monetary union. (See Soskice and Iversen, 1998, and Cukierman and Lippi, 2001,
who build on insights from Calmfors and Driffill, 1988.)
    On the other hand, trade unions in a monetary union may take into account the
effects of wage demands on their country’s competitiveness to a larger extent, as lost
competitiveness can not be regained by exchange rate depreciation or devaluation.
Therefore wage coordination and restraint may increase, especially in the traded
sector. (See Holden, 2003; 2005.)
    Posen and Popov Gould (2006) estimate that wage restraint has increased in
almost all Euro area members after the launch of EMU. However, wage restraint
increased also in Sweden and the UK in the early 1990s, suggesting that the effect
may be largely due to the increased credibility of monetary policy, rather than to
the creation of EMU per se. Wage restraint is also small throughout the period in
Germany, where monetary policy credibility was strong also before EMU. Thus, if
wage restraint depends mostly on the credibility of monetary policy, EMU member-
ship would be unlikely to affect wage restraint in Sweden, where Sveriges Riksbank
currently enjoys strong credibility for its monetary policy.

6.4   Political influence

One possible cost of staying outside EMU, stressed by the Calmfors Commission,
could be the potential loss of political influence within the EU. For instance, Euro
area finance ministers regularly meet with the Euro Group on the day before meet-
ings of the ECOFIN Council, and outsiders may fear that many important issues
may be settled within the Euro Group before the Council meeting.
    Recent research casts some light on this issue. Adler-Nissen (2008) conducted in-
terviews with Danish and British EU representatives. She reports that many Danish
representatives felt that being outside EMU constrained their possibilities to advance
Danish interests within the EU, and that various strategies were needed to compen-
sate for this constraint. Other studies instead suggest that being outside EMU is not
a decisive disadvantage within the European Council. Lindahl and Naurin (2003)
and Naurin (2007) conducted interviews with working group representatives in the
European Council to study the cooperation patterns within the EU. Their results
show that the most popular cooperation partners were Germany, France, and the




                                         20
UK, with Sweden, the Netherlands, and Denmark following closely, in spite of their
small weights in the final voting procedures. Similarly, Tallberg (2008) reports ev-
idence on the EU bargaining power based on interviews with present and former
heads of government and top officials. He reports that, again, Germany, France and
the UK exert the greatest influence in Council negotiations. When asked directly,
79% of the respondents in the study by Lindahl and Naurin (2003) replied that
different countries’ decision to join or stay outside EMU does not matter at all for
the cooperation pattern. Consequently, while this is not a settled issue, the avail-
able evidence suggests that there are no strong political disadvantages for Sweden
of remaining outside EMU.


7   Final remarks

After the referendum in 2003 and the strong rejection of the euro, the question of
Swedish membership in EMU disappeared from the political agenda. The major
political parties agreed that at least two parliamentary elections would be needed
before the issue could be taken up for serious consideration again. Thus, EMU mem-
bership is not likely to appear on the agenda until after the elections of September
2010.
    Ten years after the launch of EMU, the present paper nevertheless offers an
analysis of the pros and cons of Swedish membership. The evidence presented here is
not conclusive about whether participation in EMU would be beneficial or costly for
the Swedish economy. The analysis also suggests that the consequences of Swedish
membership in EMU since the launch in 1999 would not have been dramatic. To
some extent, this result probably reflects the fact that the last ten years have been a
relatively calm period for the world economy, without any large disturbances to the
Swedish nor to the Euro area economy. At least this was the case until mid-2007.
The outcome of the current financial crisis could lead to sharper conclusions about
the potential costs and benefits of EMU.
    The crisis could also have effects on public opinion in Sweden vis-à-vis the mone-
tary union. There is no doubt that the Swedish decision in 1994 to become a member
of the European Union was influenced by the deep recession in the early 1990s, cou-
pled with a banking crisis and the European exchange rate crisis in 1992–93. Sweden
goes into the current crisis in a strong position, with low unemployment and solid
government finances. If the Swedish economy were to suffer strong adverse effects
of the crisis in spite of its apparent strength, then public opinion may well shift and




                                          21
participation in EMU could become reality sooner than expected. If, on the other
hand, Sweden were to come out well from the crisis relative to the Euro area, then
Swedish participation in the monetary union might be postponed for a long time. In
any case, the present study could be used as a starting point for a renewed debate
on possible membership in the third stage of the Economic and Monetary Union.




                                       22
A    Data definitions and sources

GDP: Gross domestic product, constant prices, 2000=100. Source: OECD.

Unemployment: Standardized unemployment rate, all persons, seasonally ad-
   justed, per cent. Source: OECD.

Consumer prices: Euro area: Harmonized index of consumer prices, all items,
    2000=100. Other countries: Consumer price index, all items, 2000=100.
    Source: OECD.

Short-term interest rate: Euro area: 3-month EURIBOR; Sweden: 90-day trea-
    sury bill yield; France: 3-month PIBOR; Germany: 3-month FIBOR; Italy:
    3-month interbank deposit rate; Spain: 3-month interbank loan rate; Den-
    mark: 3-month uncollateralized interbank rate; Finland: 3-month HELIBOR;
    Norway: 3-month NIBOR; UK: 3-month mean LIBID/LIBOR. All rates per
    cent per annum. Source: OECD.

Long-term interest rate: 10-year government bond yield, per cent per annum.
    Source: OECD.

Nominal exchange rate: Noon buying rates in New York City for cable transfers
   payable in foreign currencies, quarterly averages of daily data. Source: Federal
   Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Real exchange rate: Nominal exchange rate deflated by consumer price index,
     1999=100.

Monetary policy rate: Quarterly averages of daily data. Source: European Cen-
   tral Bank, Sveriges Riksbank.




                                        23
References
Adler-Nissen, Rebecca (2008), “The diplomacy of opting out: A Bourdieudian ap-
 proach to national integration strategies,” Journal of Common Market Studies,
 46 (3), 663–684.

Adolfson, Malin, Michael K. Andersson, Stefan Laséen, Jesper Lindé, and Anders
 Vredin (2007a), “Modern forecasting models in action: Improving macroeconomic
 analyses at central banks,” International Journal of Central Banking, 3 (4), 111–
 144.

Adolfson, Malin, Stefan Laséen, Jesper Lindé, and Mattias Villani (2007b),
 “RAMSES—A new general equilibrium model for monetary policy analysis,”
 Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review , 2, 5–39.

——— (2008), “Evaluating an estimated New Keynesian small open economy
 model,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 32 (8), 2690–2721.

Baldwin, Richard (2006), In or Out: Does It Matter? An Evidence-Based Analysis
  of the Euro’s Trade Effects, Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Bertola, Giuseppe and Tito Boeri (2002), “EMU labour markets two years on: Mi-
  croeconomics tensions and institutional evolution,” in Marco Buti and André
  Sapir (eds.), EMU and Economic Policy in Europe: The Challenge of the Early
  Years, Edward Elgar.

Calmfors, Lars and John Driffill (1988), “Bargaining structure, corporatism, and
  macroeconomic performance,” Economic Policy, 3 (6), 13–61.

Calmfors, Lars, Harry Flam, Nils Gottfries, Magnus Jerneck, Rutger Lindahl,
  Janne Haaland Matlary, Ewa Rabinowicz, Anders Vredin, and Christina Nordh
  Berntsson (1996), Sverige och EMU , SOU 1996:158, EMU-utredningen. Published
  in English as EMU: A Swedish Perspective, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997.

Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan (2008), “New Keynesian
 models: Not yet useful for policy analysis,” Research Department Staff Report
 No. 409, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Coeurdacier, Nicolas and Philippe Martin (2007), “The geography of asset trade
  and the Euro: Insiders and outsiders,” Discussion Paper No. 6032, Centre for
  Economic Policy Research. Forthcoming, Journal of the Japanese and Interna-
  tional Economies.

Cukierman, Alex and Francesco Lippi (2001), “Labour markets and monetary union:
 A strategic analysis,” Economic Journal , 111 (473), 541–565.

De Santis, Roberto A. (2006), “The geography of international portfolio flows, in-
  ternational CAPM and the role of monetary policy frameworks,” Working Paper
  No. 678, European Central Bank.



                                       24
de Sousa, José and Julie Lochard (2006), “Does the single currency affect FDI? A
  gravity-like approach,” Manuscript, University of Paris 1-Panthéon-Sorbonne.

Duval, Romain and Jørgen Elmeskov (2005), “The effects of EMU on structural
 reforms in labour and product markets,” Working Paper No. 438, Economics
 Department, OECD.

Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher, Refet S. Gürkaynak, and Eric T. Swanson
  (2007), “Convergence and anchoring of yield curves in the Euro area,” Working
  Paper No. 817, European Central Bank.

Faust, Jon (2008), “DSGE models in a second-best world of policy analysis,”
  Manuscript, Johns Hopkins University.

Flam, Harry and Håkan Nordström (2007a), “The euro and Single Market impact
  on trade and FDI,” Manuscript, Institute for International Economic Studies,
  Stockholm University.

——— (2007b), “Euron och utrikeshandeln: Hur mycket handel förlorar Sverige
 årligen?” Ekonomisk debatt, 35 (5), 16–30.

——— (2007c), “Explaining large euro effects on trade: The extensive margin and
 vertical specialization,” Manuscript, Institute for International Economic Studies,
 Stockholm University.

Gottfries, Nils (1996), “Reservation (Statement of dissenting opinion),” in Calmfors
 et al. (1996).

HM Treasury (2003), “The exchange rate and macroeconomic adjustment,” EMU
 Study.

Holden, Steinar (2003), “Wage-setting under different monetary regimes,” Econom-
  ica, 70 (278), 251–265.

——— (2005), “Monetary regimes and the coordination of wage setting,” European
 Economic Review , 49 (4), 833–843.

Jakobsson, Ulf (ed.) (2003), Därför euron. Tio ekonomer om den gemensamma
  valutan, Ekerlids, Stockholm.

Jansson, Per (1997), “How large is the risk of asymmetric shocks for Sweden?”
  Swedish Economic Policy Review , 4 (2), 447–486.

Justiniano, Alejandro and Bruce Preston (2006), “Can structural small open econ-
  omy models account for the influence of foreign disturbances?” Manuscript,
  Columbia University.

Lane, Philip R. (2006a), “Global bond portfolios and EMU,” International Journal
  of Central Banking, 2 (2), 1–23.




                                        25
——— (2006b), “The real effects of European monetary union,” Journal of Eco-
 nomic Perspectives, 20 (4), 47–66.

Lindahl, Rutger and Daniel Naurin (2003), “Gemenskap, utanförskap och inflytande
  i EU:s ministerråd,” Working Paper No. 03/2, Centrum för Europaforskning vid
  Göteborgs universitet (CERGU).

Lindé, Jesper (2003), “Monetary policy shocks and business cycle fluctuations in
  a small open economy: Sweden 1986–2002,” Working Paper No. 153, Sveriges
  Riksbank.

Lucas, Robert E. (1976), “Econometric policy evaluation: A critique,” Carnegie-
  Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1, 19–46.

Melitz, Jacques (2005), “Comments on Richard Baldwin, ‘The euro’s trade effects’,”
 ECB conference on “What effects is EMU having on the euro area and its member
 countries?”, Frankfurt, 16–17 June.

Micco, Alejandro, Ernesto Stein, and Guillermo Ordoñez (2003), “The currency
 union effect on trade: Early evidence from EMU,” in Richard Baldwin, Giuseppe
 Bertola, and Paul Seabright (eds.), EMU: Assessing the Impact of the Euro, Black-
 well Publishing. Also published in Economic Policy, 18 (37), 2003, 315–356.

Naurin, Daniel (2007), “Network capital and cooperation patterns in the working
  groups of the council of the EU,” Working Paper No. 2007/14, Robert Schumann
  Center for Advanced Studies, European University Institute.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff (2000), “The six major puzzles in inter-
 national macroeconomics: Is there a common cause?” in Ben S. Bernanke and
 Kenneth Rogoff (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual , The MIT Press.

Posen, Adam S. and Daniel Popov Gould (2006), “Has EMU had any impact on the
  degree of wage restraint?” Working Paper No. 06-6, Institute for International
  Economics.

Soskice, David and Torben Iversen (1998), “Multiple wage-bargaining systems in
  the single European currency area,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 14 (3),
  110–124.

Tallberg, Jonas (2008), “Bargaining power in the European Council,” Journal of
  Common Market Studies, 46 (3), 685–708.

Taylor, John B. (1993), “Discretion versus policy rules in practice,” Carnegie-
  Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, 195–214.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of International Labor Affairs (2002), “Labor
  market in the 21st century: Skills and mobility,” Proceedings of a Joint United
  States and European Union Conference.




                                       26
                Table 1: Sample mean of selected business cycle indicators
 Sample       Euro        Sweden   France   Germany   Italy    Spain   Denmark   Finland   Norway   UK
              area

 (a) GDP growth
 1994–1998    2.2a          3.1      2.2      1.8       1.8     3.4a     3.2       4.3       4.1    3.2
 1999–2007    2.1           3.1      2.1      1.5       1.4b    3.6      2.0       3.3       2.3    2.7

 (b) Unemployment
 1994–1998   10.4           9.2     11.3      8.7      11.1    17.5      6.2      14.2       4.7    7.7
 1999–2007    8.4           6.0      9.0      8.8       8.5b   10.3      4.7       8.8       3.8    5.1b

 (c) CPI inflation rate
 1994–1998       2.1        1.1      1.4      1.7       3.3     3.2      2.0       1.0       1.9    2.1
 1999–2007       2.0        1.3      1.6      1.5       2.2     3.0      2.1       1.5       1.9    1.5

 (d) Short-term interest rate
 1994–1998      5.4       6.0        4.7      4.0       7.9     6.9      4.8       4.3       5.1    6.5
 1999–2007      3.2       3.1                                            3.4                 4.9    4.9

 (e) Long-term interest rate
 1994–1998      7.0       7.9        6.3      6.0       8.8     8.2      6.9       7.1       6.6    7.3
 1999–2007      4.4       4.6        4.4      4.3       4.6     4.4      4.5       4.4       5.2    4.8

Note: Quarterly data, 1994:1–2007:4, except a 1996:1–1998:4, b 1999:1–2007:3.




                                                      27
               Table 2: Standard deviation of selected business cycle indicators
    Sample        Euro     Sweden   France   Germany   Italy    Spain    Denmark       Finland       Norway   UK
                  area

    (a) GDP growth
    1994–1998   0.73a       1.18     1.01     0.82      1.22     0.95a      1.75        1.22          1.89    0.64
    1999–2007   1.04        1.16     0.99     1.39      1.24c    0.72       1.50        1.28          1.38    0.64

    (b) GDP gap
    1994–1998   0.54b       0.87     0.59     0.55      0.77     0.72b      0.88        1.07          1.17    0.34
    1999–2007   0.76        0.81     0.71     1.04      0.85c    0.52       1.12        1.05          0.83    0.42

    (c) Unemployment
    1994–1998   0.25        0.72     0.30     0.55      0.31     1.63       1.09        2.01          1.05    1.20
    1999–2007   0.55        0.88     0.63     1.05      1.44c    1.37       0.66        0.98          0.68    0.38c

    (d) CPI inflation rate
    1994–1998     0.61     1.17      0.53     0.64      1.28     1.23       0.22        0.59          0.63    0.45
    1999–2007     0.43     0.87      0.51     0.55      0.41     0.59       0.56        0.95          1.12    0.55

    (e) Short-term interest rate
    1994–1998     1.19      1.96     1.36     0.87      2.00     1.94       1.16        1.10          1.16    0.74
    1999–2007     0.94      0.87                                            1.07                      2.07    0.84

    (f ) Long-term interest rate
    1994–1998     1.59       2.15    1.18     0.95      2.81     2.52       1.31        1.86          1.00    1.11
    1999–2007     0.65       0.74    0.64     0.61      0.65     0.70       0.72        0.70          0.98    0.38

    (g) Nominal exchange rated
    1994–1998             4.52       1.52     2.56      4.14     2.53       1.93        3.63          2.71    9.43
    1999–2007             3.27                                              0.15                      3.42    4.89

    (h) Real exchange rate
    1994–1998              4.09      1.89     2.80      4.83     1.97       1.65        3.24          2.33    9.75
    1999–2007              4.90      0.94     1.58      0.55     2.56       0.86        2.43          3.85    6.34

                                                       a                    b                    c
Note: Quarterly data, 1994:1–2007:4, except                1996:1–1998:4,       1995:1–1998:4,       1999:1–2007:3.
d
 1999=100.




                                                       28
Table 3: Correlation coefficient of selected business cycle indicators with Euro area
counterpart
 Sample         Sweden      France   Germany    Italy   Spain   Denmark   Finland   Norway    UK

 (a) GDP growth
 1996–1998      0.77         0.84     0.80      0.73    0.88    −0.02      0.79     −0.09     0.80
 1999–2007      0.70         0.89     0.93      0.93a   0.89     0.70      0.85      0.50     0.71

 (b) GDP gap
 1995–1998        0.84       0.80     0.76      0.79    0.91     0.19     −0.31     −0.19     0.78
 1999–2007        0.74       0.89     0.95      0.92a   0.93     0.73      0.84      0.52     0.66

 (c) Unemployment
 1994–1998     0.86          0.80    −0.15     −0.50    0.78     0.61      0.73      0.69     0.67
 1999–2007     0.50          0.87     0.47      0.47a   0.58     0.74      0.63      0.58     0.07a

 (d) CPI inflation rate
 1994–1998        0.79       0.85     0.75      0.84    0.96     0.18     −0.29     −0.48     0.64
 1999–2007        0.52       0.85     0.80      0.65    0.75     0.01      0.25      0.10     0.09

 (e) Short-term interest rate
 1994–1998        0.95        0.96    0.81      0.86    0.94     0.89      0.92      0.24    −0.53
 1999–2007        0.79                                           0.99                0.73     0.67

 (f ) Long-term interest rate
 1994–1998        0.99        0.99    0.98      0.99    0.99     0.99      0.97      0.93     0.94
 1999–2007        0.94        1.00    1.00      1.00    1.00     0.99      1.00      0.93     0.83

Note: Quarterly data, 1994:1–2007:4, except a 1999:1–2007:3.




                                                  29
                  Table 4: Variance decomposition in estimated model
   Horizon (quarters)      Domestic        CPI               GDP         Short-term         Real
                           inflation     inflation        growth rate   interest rate   exchange rate

 (a) Variance
           1                  0.71          0.51              0.48          0.23             5.52
           4                  1.00          0.89              0.97          0.25            23.57
          20                  0.02          0.11              0.08          0.05             3.23
          40                  0.01          0.02              0.01          0.02             0.61

 (b) Fraction due to domestic shocks
            1              99.4           95.2               83.5          35.0             19.6
            4              90.6           54.6               66.2          53.7             15.2
           20              35.8           32.0               45.8          66.2             74.1
           40              68.3           71.2               59.4          71.1             73.3

 (c) Fraction due to foreign shocks
            1                0.3           1.3                5.0           0.9              3.7
            4                4.9          15.6               17.2          16.1             11.2
           20               29.3          23.9               19.1          18.1              1.1
           40               30.2           8.8                9.3          28.2             22.2

 (d ) Fraction due to exchange rate shock
             1               0.3          2.8                 1.4           1.8             75.4
             4               3.9         27.0                12.3          21.2             71.7
            20              34.0         43.1                31.9          15.6             24.6
            40               0.0         19.0                29.7           0.1              4.0

 (e) Fraction due to policy shocks
            1                 0.0           0.7              10.2          62.4              1.3
            4                 0.6           2.8               4.4           9.0              1.9
           20                 0.9           0.9               3.2           0.1              0.2
           40                 1.5           1.0               1.6           0.7              0.4


This table reports the forecast error variance of key variables (in percentage points) in the estimated
model at different horizons and the fraction of this variance (in percent) that is due to different
sets of shocks. The GDP growth rate and the inflation rates are four-quarter rates, all data are
expressed as percent per annum. The shock to the time-varying inflation target was excluded from
the calculations; the policy shocks include shocks to monetary policy (to the interest rate rule)
and to fiscal policy (to tax rates and government expenditure).




                                                     30
      Table 5: Properties of actual data and simulated model data, 1999–2005
  Horizon (years)           Short-term              GDP              Domestic            CPI
                           interest rate         growth rate         inflation         inflation

 (a) Data
 Mean                          3.18                 2.61               1.46              1.53
 Standard deviation            0.83                 1.26               0.59              0.95

 (b) Estimated model
 Mean                          3.18                 2.17               1.39              1.55
 Standard deviation            0.83                 1.42               0.60              0.97

 (c) Model with counterfactual monetary policy shocks
 Mean                          2.96                2.28                1.56              1.79
 Standard deviation            0.95                1.41                0.50              0.82

 (d ) Model with counterfactual monetary policy rule
 Mean                          2.96                  2.23              1.96              1.56
 Standard deviation            0.97                  1.68              0.68              0.92


This table reports the mean and standard deviation of key macroeconomic variables in actual data,
the estimated model, and two models with counterfactual paths for the short-term interest rate.
Original data are measured as quarterly averages, the GDP growth rate and the inflation rates are
four-quarter rates, all data are expressed as percent per annum.




                                               31
Figure 1: Annual GDP growth rate in the Euro area and selected European
economies, 1990–2007

            Sweden                              France                            Germany
  8                                  8                                  8
  6                                  6                                  6
  4                                  4                                  4
  2                                  2                                  2
  0                                  0                                  0
−2                                  −2                                 −2
 1990    1995     2000   2005        1990   1995   2000    2005         1990   1995    2000   2005

                Italy                           Spain                             Denmark
  8                                  8                                  8
  6                                  6                                  6
  4                                  4                                  4
  2                                  2                                  2
  0                                  0                                  0
−2                                  −2                                 −2
 1990    1995     2000   2005        1990   1995   2000    2005         1990   1995    2000   2005

             Finland                            Norway                              UK
  8                                  8                                  8
  6                                  6                                  6
  4                                  4                                  4
  2                                  2                                  2
  0                                  0                                  0
−2                                  −2                                 −2
 1990    1995     2000   2005        1990   1995   2000    2005         1990   1995    2000   2005
Note: Four-quarter GDP growth rate in Euro area (thick line) and selected European countries
(thin line). Percent per annum. The vertical line represents the launch of EMU in January 1999.
Source: OECD.




                                              32
Figure 2: GDP gap in the Euro area and selected European economies, 1990–2007

             Sweden                               France                               Germany

  2                                    2                                    2

  0                                    0                                    0

−2                                    −2                                   −2

 1990    1995     2000   2005         1990    1995    2000    2005         1990    1995    2000    2005

                Italy                              Spain                               Denmark

  2                                    2                                    2

  0                                    0                                    0

−2                                    −2                                   −2

 1990    1995     2000   2005         1990    1995    2000    2005         1990    1995    2000    2005

             Finland                              Norway                                UK

  2                                    2                                    2

  0                                    0                                    0

−2                                    −2                                   −2

 1990    1995     2000   2005         1990    1995    2000    2005         1990    1995    2000    2005
Note: Percent deviation of GDP from trend in Euro area (thick line) and selected European
countries (thin line). The trend was calculated by the author using the Hodrick-Prescott filter over
the entire sample and a smoothing parameter of 1,600. The vertical line represents the launch of
EMU in January 1999. Source: OECD.




                                                33
Figure 3: Unemployment rate in the Euro area and selected European economies,
1990–2007
            Sweden                             France                            Germany

10                                 10                                 10


  5                                  5                                 5


 0                                  0                                  0
 1990   1995     2000   2005        1990   1995    2000   2005         1990   1995    2000   2005

               Italy                            Spain                             Denmark
                                   20
10                                                                    10
                                   15

                                   10
  5                                                                    5
                                     5

 0                                  0                                  0
 1990   1995     2000   2005        1990   1995    2000   2005         1990   1995    2000   2005

             Finland                           Norway                              UK
20
                                   10                                 10
15

10
                                     5                                 5
  5

 0                                  0                                  0
 1990   1995     2000   2005        1990   1995    2000   2005         1990   1995    2000   2005
Note: Standardized unemployment rate in Euro area (thick line) and selected European countries
(thin line). Percent. The vertical line represents the launch of EMU in January 1999. Source:
OECD.




                                             34
Figure 4: CPI inflation rate in the Euro area and selected European economies,
1990–2007
            Sweden                              France                             Germany
  8                                  8                                   8
  6                                  6                                   6
  4                                  4                                   4
  2                                  2                                   2
  0                                  0                                   0
−2                                  −2                                  −2
 1990    1995     2000   2005        1990   1995    2000   2005          1990   1995   2000    2005

                Italy                            Spain                             Denmark
  8                                  8                                   8
  6                                  6                                   6
  4                                  4                                   4
  2                                  2                                   2
  0                                  0                                   0
−2                                  −2                                  −2
 1990    1995     2000   2005        1990   1995    2000   2005          1990   1995   2000    2005

             Finland                            Norway                               UK
  8                                  8                                   8
  6                                  6                                   6
  4                                  4                                   4
  2                                  2                                   2
  0                                  0                                   0
−2                                  −2                                  −2
 1990    1995     2000   2005        1990   1995    2000   2005          1990   1995   2000    2005
Note: Four-quarter CPI inflation rates in Euro area (thick line) and selected European countries
(thin line). Quarterly averages of monthly data, percent per annum. The vertical line represents
the launch of EMU in January 1999. Source: OECD.




                                              35
Figure 5: Short-term interest rate in the Euro area and selected European economies,
1990–2007
             Sweden                               France                              Germany
15                                   15                                   15

10                                   10                                   10

  5                                    5                                   5

 0                                    0                                    0
 1990    1995     2000   2005         1990    1995   2000    2005          1990   1995    2000    2005

                Italy                             Spain                               Denmark
15                                   15                                   15

10                                   10                                   10

  5                                    5                                   5

 0                                    0                                    0
 1990    1995     2000   2005         1990    1995   2000    2005          1990   1995    2000    2005

             Finland                              Norway                               UK
15                                   15                                   15

10                                   10                                   10

  5                                    5                                   5

 0                                    0                                    0
 1990    1995     2000   2005         1990    1995   2000    2005          1990   1995    2000    2005
Note: 3-month interest rates in Euro area (thick line) and selected European countries (thin line).
Quarterly averages, percent per annum. The vertical line represents the launch of EMU in January
1999. Source: OECD.




                                                36
Figure 6: Long-term interest rate in the Euro area and selected European economies,
1990–2007
            Sweden                             France                            Germany
15                                 15                                 15

10                                 10                                 10

  5                                  5                                 5

 0                                  0                                  0
 1990   1995     2000   2005        1990   1995    2000   2005         1990   1995    2000   2005

               Italy                            Spain                             Denmark
15                                 15                                 15

10                                 10                                 10

  5                                  5                                 5

 0                                  0                                  0
 1990   1995     2000   2005        1990   1995    2000   2005         1990   1995    2000   2005

             Finland                           Norway                              UK
15                                 15                                 15

10                                 10                                 10

  5                                  5                                 5

 0                                  0                                  0
 1990   1995     2000   2005        1990   1995    2000   2005         1990   1995    2000   2005
Note: 10-year government bond yield in Euro area (thick line) and selected European countries
(thin line). Quarterly averages, percent per annum. The vertical line represents the launch of
EMU in January 1999. Source: OECD.




                                             37
Figure 7: Nominal exchange rate against the ECU/Euro in selected European
economies, 1990–2007

              Sweden                              France                          Germany
  9.5                                 7
                                                                     2.05
    9                               6.8                                 2
  8.5                                                                1.95
                                    6.6
    8                                                                 1.9
                                    6.4                              1.85
  7.5
   1990    1995      2000   2005     1990    1995    2000   2005        1990   1995   2000   2005

                  Italy                           Spain                           Denmark

                                    160                               7.8
2000
                                    150                               7.6
1800
                                    140                               7.4
1600                                                                  7.2
                                    130
   1990    1995      2000   2005      1990   1995    2000   2005        1990   1995   2000   2005

               Finland                            Norway                           UK

  6.5                                                                 0.8
                                    8.5
                                                                     0.75
    6
                                      8                               0.7
  5.5
                                                                     0.65
    5                               7.5
   1990    1995      2000   2005     1990    1995    2000   2005        1990   1995   2000   2005
Note: Domestic currency price of ECU/Euro. Quarterly averages of daily data. The vertical line
represents the launch of EMU in January 1999. Source: FRED data base, Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis.




                                             38
Figure 8: Real exchange rate against the ECU/Euro in selected European economies,
1990–2007
             Sweden                              France                         Germany
130                               130                               130
120                               120                               120
110                               110                               110
100                               100                               100
 90                                90                                90
 80                                80                                80
  1990   1995     2000   2005       1990   1995    2000   2005        1990   1995   2000   2005

                Italy                            Spain                          Denmark
130                               130                               130
120                               120                               120
110                               110                               110
100                               100                               100
 90                                90                                90
 80                                80                                80
  1990   1995     2000   2005       1990   1995    2000   2005        1990   1995   2000   2005

             Finland                           Norway                            UK
130                               130                               130
120                               120                               120
110                               110                               110
100                               100                               100
 90                                90                                90
 80                                80                                80
  1990   1995     2000   2005       1990   1995    2000   2005        1990   1995   2000   2005
Note: Nominal exchange rate (domestic currency price of ECU/Euro) deflated by the consumer
price level. Quarterly averages, 1999=100. The vertical line represents the launch of EMU in
January 1999. Source: Author’s calculation based on data from the FRED data base, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis (nominal exchange rates) and OECD (consumer prices).




                                            39
Figure 9: Monetary policy rate, GDP growth rate, and CPI inflation rate in the
Euro area and Sweden, 1999–2007

               (a) Monetary policy rates                                   (b) GDP growth

   5                                   Euro area            5
                                       Sweden
   4                                                        4

   3                                                        3

   2                                                        2

   1                                                        1

   0                                                        0
        2000     2002      2004        2006    2008             2000     2002     2004      2006      2008


                   (c) CPI inflation
  3.5
   3
  2.5
   2
  1.5
   1
  0.5
   0
−0.5
        2000     2002      2004        2006    2008

Note: ECB refinancing rate and Sveriges Riksbank repo rate, quarterly averages of daily data; Four-
quarter GDP growth rate, quarterly data; Four-quarter CPI inflation rate, quarterly averages of
monthly data. Percent per annum. The horizontal lines in panel (c) represent the Riksbank’s infla-
tion target range from one to three percent. Source: European Central Bank, Sveriges Riksbank,
and OECD.




                                                   40
Figure 10: The Swedish economy 1999–2005 according to actual data and the esti-
mated model
               (a) Interest rate                                    (b) GDP growth
5                                                       8

4                                                       6

3                                                       4

2                                                       2

1                                                       0
                                   Actual
                                   Estimated
0                                                      −2
     2000        2002         2004         2006             2000      2002         2004       2006


            (c) Domestic inflation                                  (d) CPI inflation
4                                                       4


3                                                       3


2                                                       2


1                                                       1


0                                                       0

     2000        2002         2004         2006             2000      2002         2004       2006

Note: Average quarterly data, four-quarter GDP growth rate and inflation rates, percent per
annum. The horizontal lines in panel (d) represent the Riksbank’s tolerance band around its
two-percent inflation target.




                                                  41
Figure 11: ECB interest rate 1999–2005 and the interest rate in the models with
counterfactual monetary policy shocks or a counterfactual monetary policy rule

    (a) Interest rate with counterfactual shocks                (b) Counterfactual monetary policy shocks
5                                                         0.2
                                       Actual
                                       Model
4
                                                          0.1

3
                                                           0
2

                                                         −0.1
1

0                                                        −0.2
       2000         2002        2004         2006                  2000        2002        2004          2006


     (c) Interest rate with counterfactual rule                     (d) Counterfactual rule deviations
5
                                       Actual             0.6
                                       Model
4                                                         0.4

3                                                         0.2
                                                           0
2                                                        −0.2

1                                                        −0.4
                                                         −0.6
0
       2000         2002        2004         2006                  2000        2002        2004          2006

Note: Average quarterly data, percent per annum.




                                                    42
Figure 12: The Swedish economy 1999–2005 according to the estimated model and
the model with counterfactual monetary policy shocks

               (a) Interest rate                                    (b) GDP growth
5                                                     8
                                                                                 Estimated
                                                                                 Counterfactual
4                                                     6

3                                                     4

2                                                     2

1                                                     0

0                                                   −2
     2000        2002         2004     2006                2000       2002         2004       2006


            (c) Domestic inflation                                  (d) CPI inflation
4                                                     4


3                                                     3


2                                                     2


1                                                     1


0                                                     0

     2000        2002         2004     2006                2000       2002         2004       2006

Note: Average quarterly data, four-quarter GDP growth rate and inflation rates, percent per
annum. The horizontal lines in panel (d) represent the Riksbank’s tolerance band around its
two-percent inflation target.




                                              43
Figure 13: The Swedish economy 1999–2005 according to the estimated model and
the model with a counterfactual monetary policy rule

               (a) Interest rate                                    (b) GDP growth
5                                                     8
                                                                                 Estimated
                                                                                 Counterfactual
4                                                     6

3                                                     4

2                                                     2

1                                                     0

0                                                   −2
     2000        2002         2004     2006                2000       2002         2004       2006


            (c) Domestic inflation                                  (d) CPI inflation
4                                                     4


3                                                     3


2                                                     2


1                                                     1


0                                                     0

     2000        2002         2004     2006                2000       2002         2004       2006

Note: Average quarterly data, four-quarter GDP growth rate and inflation rates, percent per
annum. The horizontal lines in panel (d) represent the Riksbank’s tolerance band around its
two-percent inflation target.




                                              44
