                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE UNOFFICIAL ECONOMY AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

                                            Rafael La Porta
                                            Andrei Shleifer

                                        Working Paper 14520
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14520


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008




Dartmouth College and Harvard University, respectively. We are grateful to Nicholas Coleman for
excellent research assistance, to Jorge Rodriguez Mesa for help with the World Bank surveys, and
to Chad Jones, Pete Klenow, Greg Mankiw, James Rauch, Jeremy Stein, and William Nordhaus for
helpful comments. This research was supported by the Kauffman Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Rafael La Porta and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Unofficial Economy and Economic Development
Rafael La Porta and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 14520
December 2008
JEL No. O17

                                           ABSTRACT

In developing countries, informal firms (those that are not registered with the government) account
for about half of all economic activity. We consider three broad views of the role of such firms in
economic development. According to the romantic view, these firms would become the engine of
economic growth if not stopped by government regulation. According to the parasite view, informal
firms, by avoiding taxes and regulations, unfairly compete with the more efficient formal firms and,
by taking away their market share, undermine economic progress. According to the dual view, informal
firms are highly inefficient, do not pose much threat to the formal firms, but also do not contribute
to economic growth, which is driven by the efficient formal firms.

Using data from World Bank firm level surveys, we find that informal firms are small and extremely
unproductive, compared even to the small formal firms, and especially relative to the larger formal
firms. Compared to the informal firms, formal ones are run by much better educated managers. As
a consequence, they use more capital, have different customers, market their products, and use more
external finance. Hardly any formal firms had ever operated informally. This evidence is inconsistent
with the romantic and parasite views, but supports the dual view. In this "Walmart" theory of economic
development, growth comes from the creation of the highly productive formal firms. Informal firms
keep millions of people alive, but disappear over time.


Rafael La Porta
Tuck School
314 Woodbury
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
rafael.laporta@dartmouth.edu

Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M-9
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu
I. Introduction.

         In many developing countries, unofficial economic activity ‐‐ that conducted by unregistered
firms or by registered firms but hidden from taxation – accounts to between a third and a half of the
total.   This share declines sharply as the economy develops. Despite the sheer magnitude of this
unofficial activity, little is understood about its role in the process of economic development, and in
particular about how important “officializing” these hidden resources might be for economic growth.

         In this paper, we attempt to shed some light on these issues by presenting some new facts
about the unofficial economy and interpreting them in light of various theories. We begin in section II
by reviewing the basic stylized facts: that the official economy is huge, that it shrinks sharply in relative
terms as the economy develops, and that various policy variables that determine the costs and benefits
of becoming and staying official influence its size. This evidence is consistent with the generally
accepted view that unofficial firms avoid paying taxes and adhering to regulations, but lose the access to
public goods and other benefits of official status, such as external finance. Much of the existing
literature on the unofficial economy, including De Soto (1989), Loayza (1996), Johnson et al. (1997),
Friedman et al. (2001), Djankov et al. (2002), Almeida and Carneiro (2006), Dabla‐Norris, Gradstein, and
Inchauste (2008), and Russo (2008), as well as the recent work on Brazil (De Paula and Scheinkman
2008, Monteiro and Assuncao 2006, Fajnzylber, Maloney, and Rojas 2006) emphasizes these public
policy aspects of the problem.

    Yet crucial as this perspective might be, it does not tell us much about the role of unofficial firms in
development. There are three broad views of this role, which we refer to as the romantic view, the
parasite view, and the dual economy (or dual for short) view. According to the romantic view, which we
associate with the work of De Soto (1989, 2000), unofficial firms are either actually or potentially
extremely productive, and are held back by government taxes and regulations, as well as by lack of
secure property rights and of access to finance.         Pending the necessary legal reforms “four billion
people around the world are robbed of the chance to better their lives and climb out of poverty,
because they are excluded from the rule of law” (United Nations, 2008, page 1). If the barriers to
officialdom are lowered and capital is supplied through micro finance, unofficial firms will register,
borrow, take advantage of other benefits of official status, and by doing so expand and spark economic
growth. The key aspect of this optimistic view is that unofficial firms are fundamentally similar to the
official ones, but kept down by policy. In particular, unofficial firms should look similar to official firms



                                                     1
with respect to characteristics not affected by government policies, such as the characteristics of
entrepreneurs (e.g., their education).

        The other two views are more skeptical about the unofficial firms, and in particular see them as
quite unproductive not just because they are deprived of the benefits of the official status, but also
because they are run by lower human capital entrepreneurs. In these alternative views, development
does not come from the unleashing of informal firms as much as from their displacement by efficient
formal firms, usually run by totally different people. It is the “Walmart” theory of development.

        The two views differ in what they see the benefits and the harms of the unofficial sector. The
parasite view, associated primarily with the excellent empirical studies by the McKinsey Global Institute,
sees the unofficial firms primarily from the perspective of their illegality. These firms need to stay small
to avoid detection and, therefore, lack the necessary scale to produce efficiently. However, the
“substantial cost advantage that informal companies gain by avoiding taxes and regulations more than
offsets their low productivity and small scale” (Farrell, 2004, page 28). The cost advantage conferred by
avoiding taxes and regulations allows unofficial firms to undercut official firms in prices. Informal firms
then hurt growth both because their small scale makes them unproductive and because they take away
market share from bigger, more productive formal competitors. According to one McKinsey report,
“The high proportion of small firms in service industries makes them particularly likely to operate
informally, ignoring tax requirements, employee benefits, and other regulations. This is a much larger
barrier to growth than most policymakers in emerging – and developed – economies acknowledged.
Steps in reducing informality in local service sectors will be rewarded with rapid increases in their
productivity, growth, and employment.” (Baily, Farrell, and Remes 2005, page 18). The first step to
redress the problems created by informal firms is to “add resources and beef up a government’s audit
capabilities” (Farrell, 2004, page 34). More broadly, government policy should aim to eradicate informal
firms by reducing tax evasion and increasing the enforcement of government regulations.

        The dual view, associated in our minds with traditional development economics a la Harris‐
Todaro (1970), likewise emphasizes the inherent inefficiency of unofficial firms. This view is intimately
related to the big push models of development economics, which see the coordinated transition from
the informal/pre‐industrial economy to the formal/industrial one as the crucial strategy of economic
development (e.g., Rosenstein‐Rodan 1943, Rostow 1960, Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny 1989). The
earliest formal model of the unofficial economy is Rauch (1991), who uses the Lucas (1978) framework
to consider the allocation of talent between the unofficial and the official sectors.           In Rauch’s

                                                     2
framework, the lower human capital workers work in informal and smaller firms, and receive lower
wages, whereas the higher human capital workers allocate to the larger and more productive firms, and
receive higher wages (see also Amaral and Quintin 2006, and de Paula and Scheinkman 2008).

        Unlike the romantic view, the dual view predicts that unofficial firms should look very different
from official firms in their characteristics not affected by government policies. Productive entrepreneurs
pay taxes and bear the cost of government regulation in order to advertise their products, raise outside
capital, and access public goods. Such entrepreneurs find it more profitable to run the bigger official
firms than the smaller unofficial ones.         In contrast, the increase in firm value that less‐able
entrepreneurs or managers would be able to generate by operating formally is not large enough to
offset the additional costs from taxes and regulations. The strong prediction of the dual view is that
managers and assets are matched through a sorting process that results in low‐ability managers being
paired with low‐quality assets.

        Unlike the parasite view, the dual model does not see the unofficial firms as threatening the
official ones, because they are hugely inefficient and are unlikely be able to charge lower prices for the
same products.      Indeed, official and unofficial firms operate largely in different markets and have
different customers.     The dual view sees the unofficial firms as providers of livelihood to millions,
perhaps billions, of extremely poor people (Tokman 1992), and cautions against any policies raising the
costs of the unofficial firms. The dual view sees the hope of economic development in policies, such as
human capital, tax, and regulatory policies that promote the creation of official firms, letting the
unofficial ones die as the economy develops. The official firms will be new firms run by new people, not
the previously unofficial ones1.

        To shed light on these alternative views, this paper follows the presentation of basic correlations
with a comparative analysis of characteristics and productivity of official and unofficial firms in several
developing countries. We use three sets of surveys of both official and unofficial firms conducted
recently by the World Bank.        The first set of surveys, known as Enterprise Surveys, covers small,
medium, and large registered firms in nearly 100 countries.              We use these surveys largely for
comparison. The second set of surveys, known as Informal Surveys, cover primarily unregistered, but


1
  The sharp distinction we draw between the parasite and the dual views is too extreme. For example, informal
firms may compete with formal ones in some industries and not in others, and might pose a greater competitive
threat at higher levels of economic development, when they perhaps become more “similar.” We will return to
the discussion of the relevance of the two views after presenting some of the data.

                                                       3
also some registered, small firms in about a dozen countries. The third set of surveys, known as Micro
Surveys, covers primarily registered, but also some unregistered, small firms in about a dozen mostly
different countries.   These surveys enable us to make comparative statements about size, inputs,
management characteristics, and – in a rough way – productivity of both official and unofficial firms.

        We note from the start that the data we use have many problems, not the least because we
focus on firms that are by definition avoiding the government’s notice. Nonetheless, our findings tend
to favor the dual view over the romantic and the parasite views. The unofficial firms tend to be small
and unproductive – compared even to the small but registered firms (which themselves are much less
productive than larger registered firms).   The unofficial firms use lower quality inputs and have less
access to public goods and finance. Extremely few of the registered firms have ever operated as
unregistered, again suggesting, as argued by Rauch (1991), that the two groups are very separate
animals.   The evidence points to substantial difference between the registered and the unregistered
firms in the human capital of their managers, and suggests that this human capital drives many other
differences, including the quality of inputs and access to finance. The unregistered firms pay sharply
lower wages to their employees, again consistent with the dual model.

        As a final step, we consider the perception of obstacles to doing business by firms in the three
surveys. Informal firms see lack of access to markets and finance as their biggest problems. Formal
firms emphasize those, but also taxes, tax administration, and corruption.             The legal system,
regulations, and registration procedures do not rank as highly as obstacles to doing business among
either formal or informal firms.   Finally, there is little evidence in the surveys that unregistered firms
pose much of a competitive threat to the registered ones: the latter do not treat such competition (or
unfair competition more generally) as a serious problem. This last result does not support the parasite
view of the unofficial economy, which focuses on price undercutting by informal firms.

        Overall, the evidence paints a relatively consistent picture. There is very little support for the
romantic view, and indeed the differences in productivity between the formal and informal firms are so
large that it is very hard to believe that the registration of unregistered firms would eliminate the gap.
On the other hand, there is not much support for the parasite view, either, and the evidence suggests
that beefing up “enforcement” against the unofficial firms would devastate the livelihood of millions of
people surviving near subsistence. The evidence rather points to the dual view, with the fairly standard
implication that the hope of economic development lies in the creation of large registered firms, run by


                                                    4
educated managers and utilizing modern practices, including modern technology, marketing, and
finance.




II. The size of the informal economy

           This section examines the size of the informal economy and its determinants. Measuring the
size of the informal economy is inherently difficult. To start with, the informal economy encompasses
very different phenomena. One is hidden firms. Such firms hide all of their output from the police, the
tax authorities, or the regulators. Another phenomenon is hidden output. Output may be hidden even
by registered firms to reduce their tax liability. In a developing country, there are always some hidden
firms but also output hidden from tax authorities even by registered firms. Indeed, the face of
informality may change as the economy develops, from firms being entirely informal at earlier stages to
mere tax avoidance in the richer countries.

           Beyond these conceptual issues, there are serious practical problems in measuring hidden firms
and output. Nevertheless, a variety of methods have been proposed to measure the size of the informal
economy. Since each method has strengths and weaknesses, we gather data on seven measures of the
informal economy based on alternative methodologies and sources. All these measures of the informal
economy are ‐‐if anything‐‐ likely to understate its true size.

           Surveys are the most direct, although necessarily subjective, measure of the size of the informal
economy. We assemble data on two survey measures. The first is an indicator of the business activity
that is unofficial or unregistered from the 2006‐2007 World Competitiveness Report. Top business
leaders from 125 countries were asked to estimate the size of the informal sector using a 1 to 7 scale,
where 1 indicates that more than 50% of economic activity is unrecorded and 7 that all business is
registered. For comparability with the other measures of the informal economy, we rescale this index
on a scale from 0% to 50% of GDP. The 50% cutoff adopted by the World Competitiveness Report is
arbitrary and introduces a downward bias in this measure of the informal economy. The second survey
measure is the percentage of total sales that a typical establishment reports for tax purposes from the
World Bank Enterprise Survey. The respondents are the top managers of registered businesses in
(mostly) developing countries. Accordingly, this measure of tax evasion likely understates the size of the
informal economy as entrepreneurs in the informal sector are not surveyed. This measure of tax evasion



                                                      5
is available for 95 countries. Most countries have been surveyed twice and we average the available
observations between 2002 and 2006.

        An alternative method for measuring the informal economy relies on inferring its size from
observable variables. The list of candidate variables includes the incidence of micro and small
enterprises, male participation rate in the labor force, the fraction of workers contributing to social
security, electricity consumption, and currency in circulation.          We gather data on three of such
indicators.


         The first indicator is the percentage of the active labor force that is self‐employed. The
definition of self‐employed includes “jobs where the remuneration is directly dependent upon the
profits derived from the goods and services produced” (International Labor Office, 2007) but not unpaid
family workers, although the incidence of informality among the latter is probably high.                 This is
admittedly a crude measure of the informal economy. In most developing countries, there is a strong
association between self‐employment and informal activity, as most self employed tend to be low‐
skilled, unregistered workers (Loayza and Rigolini, 2006). Of course, self‐employment in developing
countries may be high not only because informality is prevalent but also because self‐employment is
common in agriculture. For this reason, the second indicator of the size of the informal economy is the
percentage of self‐employment in the non‐agricultural sector. Other interpretations of self‐employment
are also possible. In particular, self‐employment has been used as an indicator of entrepreneurial
activity in the United States. However, the vast majority of self‐employed workers in our data are, in
fact, “own‐account” workers that do not hire persons to work for them. Mondragon‐Velez and Pena‐
Parga (2008) show along these lines that the self‐ employed are rarely business owners in Colombia.
Data on self‐employment is collected through population censuses as well as through household or
labor force surveys.2 Data on total and non‐agricultural self‐employment is available for 133 countries
and 96 countries, respectively, from the International Labor Organization.


        The third objective indicator of the informal economy is based on electricity consumption. For
each country, the ratio of electricity consumption to overall GDP for a base period is calculated and then


2
  There are two known biases in the self‐employment data. First, OECD statistics relate to civilian employment
and, as such, leave out the armed forces. Second, self‐employment statistics in most Latin American countries
relate to urban areas only. Self‐employment statistics understate the true size of self‐employment as a result of
these two biases.

                                                       6
extrapolated to the present assuming that the elasticity of electricity consumption to overall GDP is one
(Johnson et al. 1997, Enste and Schneider 1998). The size of the informal sector is then computed as the
difference between the overall and the official GDP. This measure of the informal economy understates
its size to the extent that informal activities are less electricity intensive than formal activities. Similarly,
the size of the informal economy will also be biased down if technological progress makes it possible to
increase the output generated by a unit of electricity. This indicator is available for 57 countries from
Friedman et al. (2001).


        Still another approach to measuring the informal economy models hidden output as a latent
variable using several indicator and causal variables. This is the approach followed by Schneider (2007)
to estimate a multiple indicators multiple causes (MIMIC) model. The indicator variables include the
age 18‐64 labor force participation rate, annual GDP growth, and the change in local currency per capita.
The causal variables are the tax‐to‐GDP ratio, the Heritage Foundation index of economic freedom, the
unemployment rate, GDP per capita, and lagged values of the latent variable. This measure of the
informal economy is only as good as the model that supports it.             Later in this section, we present
evidence that the correlation between the size of the informal economy and variables such as tax rates
is not particularly robust.    This measure of the informal sector is available for 145 countries from
Schneider (2007).

        As a final robustness check we gather data on a direct measure of the formal economy: the
number of registered businesses per one thousand inhabitants. This measure of the informal economy
–like all the previous ones – has problems. The number of firms per capita may increase with
development, for example, as product variety expands. The number of firms per capita may also be
affected by cross‐country differences in entrepreneurship. Finally, the data on total registered firms may
be biased upward because of underreporting of firms that have closed or exited, especially in developing
countries. Data on the number of registered businesses is available for 83 countries from the World
Development Indicators.

        We group the determinants of the size of the unofficial economy into three broad categories:
the cost of becoming formal, the cost of staying formal, and the benefits of being formal.

        As a proxy for the cost of becoming formal, we use the (log) number of procedures required to
legally start a business from Djankov et al. (2002) and the 2008 Doing Business Report. The costs of
staying formal include paying taxes and obeying government regulations. We use six proxies for the cost

                                                       7
of staying formal. First, we use two measures of the cost of paying taxes from Djankov et al. 2008: (1)
the total tax rate payable by businesses (except for labor taxes) after accounting for deductions and
exemptions as a percentage of profit; and (2) the time it takes to prepare, file and pay (or withhold) the
corporate income tax, the value added tax and social security contributions (in hours per year). Second,
we capture the cost of complying with labor laws with three variables: (1) an index of the difficulty of
hiring a new worker; (2) an index of the difficulty and expense of firing a redundant worker; and (3) the
nonwage labor costs (i.e. payroll taxes and social security payments) associated with hiring a new
employee as a percentage of the worker’s salary. Data on labor laws is from Botero et al. (2004) and the
2008 Doing Business Report. Third, we capture the cost of red tape using the percentage of senior
management's time spent in dealing with requirements imposed by government regulations (e.g. taxes,
customs, labor regulations, licensing and registration) including dealings with officials, completing forms,
etc. The latter variable is from the World Bank’s Enterprise Survey.

        The benefits of being formal include expanded access to both public goods and finance.
Regarding public goods, registered business may find it easier to use courts to enforce property rights
and adjudicate disputes. We use two proxies for the efficiency of courts: (1) the (log) number of steps
required to collect on a bounced check from Djankov et al. (2003) and the 2008 Doing Business report;
and (2) the efficiency of the bankruptcy procedure from Djankov et al. (2008). We measure the quality
of property rights using the indices of corruption and rule of law from Kaufman et al. (2005).           In
addition, we use road density from the World Development Indicators as a rough proxy for the scope of
the domestic market. Finally, we measure the benefits of access to finance using three indicators of size
of financial markets. The first two indicators are standard: private credit and the market capitalization
of domestic firms, both as a ratio to GDP. These two variables are also from the World Development
Indicators. The third measure of the size of financial markets is a subjective indicator of the ease of
access to credit from the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report 2006‐2007. The
index ranges from 1 (impossible) to 7 (easy).

        Table I presents our measures of the size of the informal economy. Countries are grouped into
quartiles based of average per capita PPP income over the period 1996‐2006. In practice, measures of
the size of the informal sector based on multiple indicators, energy consumption, self‐employment and
the World Economic Forum survey are highly correlated with each other (see the correlation table in the
appendix). In contrast, tax evasion and the number of registered businesses are less correlated with the
other four indicators of the informal economy.

                                                     8
        Two facts stand out. First, the average size of the informal economy is large, ranging from
22.5% according to the tax evasion measure to 34.5% according to the multiple‐indicators approach.
These are large numbers in light of the fact that our measures of the informal economy are likely biased
down.    About 26.5% of the workers are, on average, self‐employed. That figure rises to 30.8% in the
non‐agricultural sector. Respondents of the World Economic Forum survey estimate that 27.6% of
output is informal. Estimates based on electricity consumption suggest that 29% of output is informal.
The various estimates thus suggest that, in an average country, roughly 30% of the economy is informal.

        Second, the size of the informal economy is strongly negatively correlated with income per
capita. Figure I illustrates the relationship between the size of the informal economy as proxied by the
multiple indicators variable and income per capita. This implies that the size of the informal economy is
very large in poor countries, ranging from 29% according to the tax evasion measure to 57.3% according
to the non‐agricultural self‐employment measure. Survey measures suggest that the size of the informal
economy is, depending on the measure, between 18 and 21 percentage points larger in poor countries
than in rich ones. Estimates based on electricity consumption and multiple indicators also suggest that
the informal economy is between 21 and 24 percentage points larger in poor countries than in rich ones,
respectively.   Even tax evasion by registered businesses –which is likely to understate tax evasion in
poor countries – is 21 percentage points higher in poor countries than in rich ones.           The self‐
employment statistics show that the fraction of self‐employed workers rises from 13.3% in rich
countries to 46.4% in poor ones. Figure II illustrates the striking relationship between self‐employment
and income per capita. The pattern for non‐agricultural self‐employment is even more extreme: self‐
employment as a share of non‐agricultural employment rises by 44.8 percentage points as we move
from the rich countries to the poor ones. Consistent with this pattern, the number of registered
businesses rises from 3.2 to 41.8 per thousand inhabitants as we move from the poor to the rich
countries. These findings suggest that understanding the decline of informal firms may be central to
development economics.

        Table II examines the determinants of the size of the informal sector. We first present results
without GDP per capita (Panel A) and then with GDP per capita (Panel B). The dependent variables are
the five proxies for the size of the informal economy as well as the number of registered businesses per
capita. (We omit presenting the results using non‐agricultural self‐employment as they are qualitatively
similar as those for total self‐employment). The independent variables are proxies for the cost of



                                                   9
becoming formal and the costs and benefits of operating in the formal sector.         Each cell in Panel A
presents the results from a univariate regression (we do not report the constant).

        The results in Panel A show the influence of policy variables. First, our proxy for the cost of
becoming formal ‐‐the number of procedures to start a business – is consistently associated with a
larger informal sector as well as with fewer registered firms. However, the economic effect is modest in
size. For example, a one standard deviation increase in the number of procedures is associated with a
4.9 percentage point rise in the multiple‐indicators measure of the size of the informal economy.

        Second, the results for proxies for the cost of staying formal are mixed. All six proxies for the
cost of operating in the formal sector are statistically significant when the dependent variable is the
measure from the World Economic Forum survey. On the other hand, none of the explanatory variables
is significant when using the tax evasion proxy. Results for the other dependent variables are in
between these two extremes. Among the explanatory variables in this category, the most consistent
one is the time required to comply with taxes, which is significant for all dependent variables except tax
evasion. Even then, the effect of increasing the time required to comply with taxes by one standard
deviation is associated with an increase of only 4.8 percentage points in the multiple‐indicators measure
of the size of the informal economy.

        Third, the proxies for the benefits of being formal are consistently associated with the size of the
informal sector and the number of registered firms (the only two exceptions are court formalism in the
regressions for tax evasion and registered firms). The economic impact of increasing these variables by
one standard deviation on the multiple‐indicator measure of the informal economy ranges from 5.8
percentage points for court formalism to 9.6 percentage points for rule of law. In sum, without
controlling for income per capita, both the cost of becoming formal and the benefits of operating in the
formal sector have a reliable but modest impact on the size of the informal economy. Our proxies for
the cost of operating in the formal sector also have a modest effect on the size of the informal sector
but are less often significant.

        Next, we rerun the previous regressions adding GDP per capita. The motivation for including
GDP per capita in the regressions is that the extent of the informal economy may be correlated with a
country’s development level. In poor countries, the informal economy may provide subsistence income
for workers who are unable to find formal employment. To the extent that informal firms avoid labor
laws, the benefits of informality may be larger in the labor‐intensive activities common in poor countries


                                                    10
than in the capital‐intensive activities common in rich countries. Along the same lines, informality may
decline as more transactions are intermediated through the financial system. Finally, tax compliance
may rise with income per capita as governments become more efficient at collecting taxes. On the
other hand, we may be over‐correcting by including GDP per capita in the regressions since it is
correlated with some of the institutional variables that we are interested in. In particular, GDP per
capita is strongly correlated (i.e. 70%+) with the efficiency of bankruptcy, private credit, corruption, as
well as the rule of law (see the correlation table in the appendix). Interestingly, variables that explicitly
capture a country’s economic structure (e.g. the share of agriculture in GDP) leave unchanged much of
the explanatory power of income per capita.

        With these caveats in mind, Panel B shows the coefficients for the variables of interest when we
control for GDP per capita. As in Panel A, we do not report the constant. Moreover, we do not report
the coefficient for GDP per capita either, but it is strongly significant in all regressions. Most estimated
coefficients fall in value and loose significance. Results remain consistently significant only for the World
Economic Forum survey (estimated coefficients are significant in 11 of the 14 regressions). Results for
the other dependent variables are mostly insignificant. Our proxy for the cost of becoming formal
remains significant in four of the six regressions (World Economic Forum survey, tax evasion, multiple
indicators, and registered firms). Among the proxies for the cost of operating in the formal sector, the
strongest variable is the time to comply with taxes, which is significant in four of the six regressions. Yet,
in contrast to the results on tax rates, nonwage costs are significant in only one regression. Finally,
among the proxies for the benefits of operating in the formal sector, the strongest variables are road
density (significant in four regressions) and the subjective assessment of access to credit (significant in
five regressions).   The results using objective measures of the development of financial markets are
mixed: private credit remains significant in three regressions, but market capitalization does so in only
two regressions

        In sum, GDP per capita is the most robust predictor of the size of the informal economy. The
most straightforward interpretation of the results in this section is that the informal economy is a
manifestation of underdevelopment. It recedes as the economy develops, perhaps because public
goods become better and financial markets larger or because avoiding detection becomes harder.              It
remains a crucial, and open, question whether this decline of the informal sector results from the
conversion of informal firms to the official status, or from their death and replacement by formal firms.



                                                     11
        An alternative interpretation is that we are over‐correcting by including GDP per capita.
Although GDP per capita is strongly correlated with some of the determinants of the size of the informal
economy, multicolinearity is unlikely to explain why tax rates, non‐wage costs, and labor laws work so
poorly when we control for GDP per capita. We return to this issue in Section IV when we examine the
productivity of informal firms using micro data.

        Although the cross‐country evidence reveals some interesting patterns, it is merely suggestive
and does not discriminate among the hypotheses. For this we need micro data, which we analyze next.
Accordingly, the remainder of the paper is organized as follows.      Section III describes our data on
informal and formal firms.    We ask questions such as: Are informal firms engines of growth as the
romantic view would hold? For example, do informal firms grow quickly and over time join the formal
sector? Is there evidence that ‐‐consistent with the parasite view—formal and informal firms operate in
the same markets or that formal firms fear competition from informal firms?      What evidence is there
that –as predicted by the dual view – informal firms have inferior assets and management?

        Section IV is the heart of the paper. It presents evidence on the relative productive of formal
and informal firms. We ask five questions. First, is our data on productivity reliable? Second, how big
are the differences in productivity between formal and informal firms? We want to know whether the
prediction of the parasite view that informal firms have a cost advantage is borne out by the data.
Third, what views of the informal economy are consistent with the observed differences in productivity?
We want to examine whether it is plausible to believe –as in the romantic view – that all that is holding
back informal firms are high taxes and bad government regulation. Fourth, what accounts for the
difference in the productivity of formal and informal firms? The goal is to see whether differences in
productivity can be traced to differences in inputs. Finally, what evidence is there that better‐able
managers run firms with better assets? Evidence of a strong selection effect would support the dual
view and cast doubt on the prediction of the romantic view that relieving informal firms from oppressive
taxes and regulation would put an end to poverty as we know it.

        Section V focuses on obstacles do doing business, as reported by firms in all three surveys. We
ask which of several problems, such as access to markets, financing, taxes, regulations, but also unfair
competition are perceived as principal obstacles to doing business.        These results shed light on
alternative theories, but perhaps bear most directly on the parasite theory. Section VI concludes with
some implications of the evidence.


                                                   12
III. Characteristics of informal firms.

        In this section we describe our data and present simple descriptive statistics.        Our basic
approach is to compare country‐by‐country the relative performance of formal and informal firms. To
do so, we combine data from three World Bank surveys of individual firms. The first survey –the
Enterprise survey—covers formal firms and is available for 105 countries. The other two surveys –the
Informal and Micro surveys‐‐ contain information on both informal and formal firms in a few poor
countries.   The Informal survey is available for 13 countries, including Bangladesh, Brazil, Cambodia,
Cape Verde, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Niger, Pakistan, Senegal, Tanzania and Uganda. With
the exception of Brazil, all these countries are below the world median income in 2003 and 7 out of 13
are below the 25th percentile. The Micro survey is available for 14, mostly African, countries, including
Angola, Botswana, Burundi, Congo, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea‐Bissau, India, Mauritania, Namibia,
Rwanda, Swaziland, Tanzania, and Uganda. With the exception of Botswana, all are below the world
median income, and 9 out of 14 are below the 25th percentile. The concept of informality used in the
Informal and Micro surveys focuses on registration (as we discuss below, there are several possible kinds
of registration). Although questions about tax avoidance are asked, they are indirect. As discussed in
Section II, this definition has both advantages and conceptual limitations.

        Before describing the data in detail, we need to preempt a possible misconception about the
nature of the firms in our data. In the context of poor countries, the term informal firm evokes the
image of street hawkers selling goods out of baskets or of eateries in front of homes. In fact, such image
is a good description of how the very poor people make a living (Banerjee and Duflo, 2007). However,
the informal firms in our sample do not fit that image. For example, roughly 85% of the observations in
the Informal and Micro surveys have –in addition to the entrepreneur‐‐ two employees or more.         The
informal firms in our sample are likely to be substantially more productive than the own‐account
workers of Banerjee and Duflo.

III.A Data

         All three World Bank surveys have a similar structure and differ mainly in the firms that they
sample. It is easiest to start by describing the Enterprise Survey‐‐the source for our control group of
registered or formal firms. It covers mainly manufacturing and certain services firms with five or more
employees in 105 countries. The earliest available data is from 2002 and the latest is from 2007. The

                                                    13
initial step in carrying out an Enterprise survey involves contacting the government statistical office of
the relevant country to request a list of registered establishments. In some instances, the World Bank
supplements the government’s list with firms registered with the Chamber of Commerce of the relevant
country or listed by Dun and Bradstreet or by similar private vendors of business directories. Thus,
although firms in the Enterprise Survey may hide some of their output, the government typically knows
of their existence. We refer to these firms as “registered” and define the term below. The next step
involves contacting the firms that will be sampled. Enterprise Surveys use either simple random
sampling or random stratified sampling. A local World Bank contractor phones the firms to set up an
interview with the person who most often deals with banks or government agencies. At that stage,
firms with fewer than 5 employees are dropped from the sample, as are government‐owned
establishments, cooperatives, and community‐owned establishments. Typical final sample sizes range
between 250 and 1,500 businesses per country. The core questionnaire is organized in two parts. The
first part seeks managers’ opinions on the business environment.           The second part focuses on
productivity measures and is often completed with the help of the chief accountant or human resource
manager.

        The World Bank has also conducted separate surveys of informal firms to complement the
Enterprise Survey in countries with large informal economies. Initially, data on the unofficial sector was
collected through the “Informal Sector” questionnaire. Starting in 2005, the World Bank has switched
to the “Micro Sector” questionnaire while phasing out the “Informal Sector” questionnaire. Institutional
amnesia makes it hard to ascertain the precise methodology followed with the Informal Sector
questionnaire. Nevertheless, the basic outlines of what was done are clear. World Bank contractors
identified neighborhoods perceived to have a large number of informal firms.       These neighborhoods
were then divided into enumeration blocks. These enumeration blocks were subsequently surveyed on
foot.

        A similar methodology was followed to implement the Micro Sector questionnaire. Specifically,
a local contractor selected districts and zones of each district where, based on national information
sources, there was a high concentration of establishments with fewer than five employees (i.e. “micro”
establishments). The contractor then created a comprehensive list of all establishments in these zones.
Finally, the contractor selected randomly from that list and went door‐to‐door to set up interviews with
the top managers of the selected establishments. Although the Micro survey targets establishments



                                                   14
with fewer than five employees, larger establishments are not dropped from the sample. In fact,
establishments with fewer than five employees account for only 50% of the Micro sample.

        Participation in the surveys is voluntary, and respondents are not paid to participate.3
Respondents are asked sequentially about the business environment, infrastructure, government
relations, employment, financing, and firm productivity. There is some variation in the response rate
across questions. To illustrate, out of 6,466 Informal and Micro firms surveyed, we have: (1) the age of
6,412 firms, (2) the number of employees of 6, 416 firms, (3) the sales of 6, 136 firms, (4) the fraction of
investment financed internally of 5,689 firms, (5) assessments of the fraction of taxes typically evaded
by firms in their industry of 4,670 respondents, and (6) capacity utilization of 3,083 firms. Since Informal
and Micro firms typically do not keep detailed records of their operations, some respondents may
simply not know the information being asked. Unfortunately, we have no way of quantifying the biases,
if any, from missing data.

        Critically, the “Informal” and “Micro” surveys cover registered firms as well as firms that exist
without the government’s knowledge (i.e., “unregistered” firms). In the remainder of this paper, we
focus on informality understood in terms of hidden firms rather than hidden output. To compare the
performance of registered and unregistered firms, we need to define what it means to be registered.
The questions regarding the legal status of the firm are worded differently in the Informal and Micro
questionnaires.    In the Informal Survey, we rely on respondent’s answer to whether firms are
“registered with any agency of the central government". In practical terms, firms are registered with an
agency of the central government if they have obtained a tax identification number. In the Micro Survey,
we rely on respondent’s answer to whether firms have either “registered with the Office of the
Registrar…or other government institutions responsible for commercial registration” or have “obtained
a tax identification number from the tax administration or other agency responsible for tax
registration”.4      Both surveys also keep track of whether firms are registered with “any local
government agency” or with any “industry board or agency”. We focus on registration with the central
government because this form of registration is more directly relevant to avoiding taxes, enforcing
contracts, and raising finance.       We will also present statistics on municipal and industry board
registration. In sum, the Informal and Micro surveys allow us to examine the productivity of (small)

3
  We lack detailed data on non‐participation rates. In Mali, the only country for which we have data on non‐
participation, the refusal rate is 9%.
4
  We obtain very similar results if the definition of Micro “registered” firms only includes firms that have a tax
identification number.

                                                       15
registered and unregistered firms whereas the Enterprise Survey provides information on the
productivity of registered firms that have at least five employees.

III.B. Descriptive Statistics

        Table III lists the countries surveyed and presents the number of observations and average sales
for the Informal (Panel A) and Micro samples (Panel B). Each panel also shows similar statistics for a
control group of firms from the Enterprise Survey. Most of the surveys (19 out of a total of 27) were
carried out in African countries but there are also 6 surveys done in Asia and 2 in Latin America. India,
Uganda, and Tanzania were surveyed with both the Informal and Micro questionnaires. As indicated
earlier, most countries covered by the Informal and Micro surveys are poor. The average income per
capita in purchasing power terms is roughly $2,400, and ranges from $281 in Congo to $12,744 in
Botswana.

        The Informal Survey covered 13 countries. They were typically carried out in 2003 and, on
average, have 223 firms with non‐missing sales in each country. The Micro surveys were carried out in
14 countries in 2006 and, on average, have 214 firms with non‐missing sales per country. The World
Bank also carried out Enterprise surveys in parallel with the relevant Informal and Micro surveys. We
use firms from the Enterprise survey as a control group. The average number of firms in the control
group with available sales data is 474 for the Informal sample (Panel A) and 554 for the Micro sample
(Panel B), and ranges from 53 in Niger (Panel A) to 3,860 in India (Panel B).

        Throughout the paper we emphasize productivity differences between registered and
unregistered firms and between small and big firms. Critically, whereas firms in the Informal survey are
typically unregistered, firms in the Micro survey are typically registered. The average Informal survey
has 31 registered firms out of a total of 223 firms, while the average Micro survey has 137 registered
firms out of a total of 214 firms. To examine differences in size, we group Enterprise‐survey firms in
three categories according to the number of employees: (1) fewer than 20 employees (“Small”);
between 20 and 99 employees (“Medium”); and 100 employees or more (“Big”). When assessing some
of our results on productivity, it is worth keeping in mind that the distribution of firms across these
three categories is fairly uneven. For example, there is one Big firm with non‐missing sales data (out of
93) in the control group for firms in Cape Verde but 337 (out of 640) in the control group for firms in
Indonesia (see Panel A).        Related to the small number of observations, there are few extreme outliers
in the data (most likely resulting from errors in currency units). To mitigate the role of outliers, we cap


                                                       16
at the 95th percentile the value of sales, sales per employee, and value added per employee in each
country and in each survey. Capping does not qualitatively change the results we present.

         The most striking fact in Table III is that the average sales of firms in the Informal and Micro
surveys is tiny even in comparison with the average annual sales of Small firms in the Enterprise survey.
Specifically, average sales are $24,671 for Informal firms but $948,805 for Small Enterprise firms in the
control group. Similarly, average sales are $50,853 for Micro firms but $354,318 for Small Enterprise
firms in the control group. Unregistered firms are even smaller than the average firm in the Informal
and Micro surveys. For example, in the Informal survey sample, average sales for unregistered Brazilian
firms are $32,528 compared to $51,227 for registered firms. Looking across countries, unregistered
firms in the Informal survey sample have average sales of $23,509 compared to $36,240 for registered
firms.   Similarly, unregistered firms in the Micro survey sample have sales of $29,994 compared to
$59,335 for registered firms. It is natural to worry that the reported sales of unregistered firms may be
low because respondents lie about their output. We address this issue in Section IV.

         What do unregistered firms do? Tables IV and V shed light on some of the basic characteristics
of firms in the Informal and Micro surveys, respectively. Both Tables have a similar –but not identical‐‐
structure since there are only small differences between the two questionnaires. For each variable, we
present the mean for each group (e.g., unregistered, registered, Small, Medium, and Big) as well as t‐
statistics for the difference between the means of different groups of interest (e.g. Small vs.
unregistered). To avoid the possibility that the results are driven by the country with the most
observations, we first average all observations within a country and then compute means and t‐statistics
across countries.

         We discuss both tables in order, beginning with Table IV. The first block of variables shows
some general characteristics of the firms.     Unregistered firms, although younger (9.9 years) than the
average firm in the control group (17.8), have been operating for quite a long time.          By definition,
unregistered firms are not registered with the central government. Yet, 34% of them are registered with
a local government agency and 7.2% are registered with an industry board or agency.

         The next four variables describe the assets owned by firms in the Informal survey. Unregistered
firms own 52.3% of the land and 45.1% of the buildings that they occupy. Registered firms have
comparable figures (55.5% and 48.1%).        In contrast, firms in the Enterprise survey own a significantly
larger fraction of the land and buildings that they occupy (on average, 67.4% and 71.2%, respectively).


                                                     17
The ownership of electric generators –a key asset in poor countries – shows a similar pattern.        Few
unregistered and registered firms own a generator (5.5% and 5.1%, respectively). In contrast, 20.1% of
the Small firms in the Enterprise survey and 77% of Big firms in that survey own a generator. Capacity
utilization rates do not vary much between unregistered and Enterprise survey firms (61.9% vs. 68.2%,
respectively). The evidence suggests that unregistered and registered firms may not share the same
clients. In the Informal survey, only 1.2% of the unregistered firms make the largest fraction of their
sales to large firms. In contrast, large firms are the main client of 13.5% of registered firms – a
percentage comparable to the average firm in the Enterprise survey (15.1%).

         The next block of variables describes the employees and their human capital in the Informal
survey. Unsurprisingly, unregistered firms have the smallest average number of employees (3.9). More
interestingly, registered firms and Small Enterprise firms have very similar employment levels (9.8 vs.
10.3). The key fact regarding informal firms is that –consistent with the dual view but not with the other
two views‐‐ their top managers have low human capital. For example, the probability that the top
manager of a firm has some college education is only 6.1% if the firm is unregistered compared to 15.9%
for registered firms and 63.9% for all firms in the Enterprise survey.     To summarize the differences in
human capital, we create an index ranging from 1 to 4 according to whether the top manager attended
primary school, secondary school, vocational school, or college. This index equals 1.6 for managers of
unregistered firms and 3.3 for managers of Enterprise survey firms. We construct a similar index for the
employees. Here the pattern is strikingly different than for top managers. Employees of informal firms
have very similar levels of education as those of Enterprise survey firms (2.4 vs. 2.3).

         Next, we turn to how firms are financed. All views of informality agree that greater access to
finance is an important benefit of operating in the formal sector. In fact, roughly 75.1% of the
unregistered informal firms have never even had a commercial loan. Instead, they finance 74.9% of
investment with internal funds and 10.5% with help from the family.           The most striking fact about
financing is that all small firms –and not just unregistered ones‐‐‐ lack access to finance. In fact, Small
firms in the Enterprise survey finance 67.8% of their investment with internal funds and 6.3% with family
funds.   Big firms in the enterprise survey have more access to external finance than small ones. For
example, internal funds pay for 50.4% of the investment of Big firms rather than for 67.8% as in the case
of Small firms. Yet, the fact that all Small firms lack access to finance suggests that it may be misguided
to put access to finance for unregistered firms at the center of the development agenda.



                                                     18
         Finally, contrary to the romantic view, there is no evidence in the Informal survey that these
young unregistered firms are dynamic engines of employment creation.             Specifically, the two‐year
growth rate of employment is 5.2% for unregistered firms, 7.1% for registered firms, and 10% for all
Enterprise survey firms.

         Firms in the Micro sample show very similar patterns as those in the Informal sample (see Table
V). For this reason, we discuss them only briefly focusing on the questions that are only available on the
Micro questionnaire and on the few results that are different between the two questionnaires. The
Micro questionnaire gives us a bit more insight into the firms’ assets. Only 17.2% of the unregistered
firms and 13.4% of the registered ones are located in the owners’ house. Most unregistered (71.4%)
and registered firms (80.4%) occupy a permanent structure. However, there is evidence of hardship
resulting from the lack of secure title (De Soto, 2000). Specifically, 11.3% of registered firms and 8.8% of
unregistered firms were forced to move in the previous year because of lack of secure title.

         Much like their counterparts in the Informal survey, unregistered firms in the Micro sample are
significantly less likely to own a generator than all other firms. The shortage of generators is suggestive
of insufficient capital since registered firms are significantly less likely to have an electrical connection
than registered ones (60% vs. 79.2%). Furthermore, unregistered firms are much less likely to use their
own transportation equipment than registered firms (6.6% vs. 22.9%, respectively). Consistent with the
view that unregistered and Enterprise survey firms may serve different clients, Big firms export 19.9% of
their sales while unregistered firms export only 0.1% of their sales. Finally, there is evidence that
unregistered firms have less access to computers than do other firms. In particular, unregistered firms
are less likely to use email to communicate with their clients than either registered or Enterprise survey
firms (3.2%, 9.1%, and 39%, respectively). Similarly, unregistered firms are less likely to use a webpage
to connect with clients than either registered or Enterprise survey firms (0.9%, 2.8%, and 14.1%,
respectively). Consistent with the dual view, unregistered firms own low quality assets.

         Unregistered firms in the Micro sample – unlike their counterparts in the Informal sample –
have a faster growth rate of employment than firms in the Enterprise Survey. The annual employment
growth rate of unregistered firms (24.3%), while not quite matching the growth rate of registered firms
(27.1%), exceeds that of Enterprise survey firms (17.6%).          The fast employment growth rate of
unregistered Micro firms is consistent with the romantic view. However, this finding needs to be
interpreted cautiously since unregistered firms remain very small despite having been around for 7
years.

                                                     19
        To complement the evidence on growth rates, we examine, for a few countries, how often
registered firms initially started operating as unregistered. The Enterprise survey files for fourteen Latin
American countries have available a question on whether firms were registered when they started
operations and, if not, on whether they have since registered. As it turns out, all firms in this sample of
fourteen countries are registered. Table VI shows the available data regarding the initial legal status of
these firms. The fraction of firms that were registered initially ranges from 77.7% in El Salvador to 98%
in Chile, and averages 91.2% (Panel A). Since 1.3% of the respondents did not answer the question, we
estimate that only 7.5% of the firms registered after starting operations. Firms that start operations
without being registered do so relatively quickly. Specifically, 36.5% of the initially unregistered firms
had registered by the end of the second year of operations (Panel B). It is unclear whether those firms
spent two years hiding from the government or, alternatively, started operations while their request for
a permit was pending. Either way, firms rarely start as unregistered and later change their status. This
is not the pattern that we would expect to see if the informal sector were a reservoir of entrepreneurial
talent as predicted by the romantic view. Nor is it the pattern that we would expect to see if
entrepreneurs used entry into the informal sector as a way of acquiring information (e.g. about demand
for the firm’s products) at a lower cost than entry into the formal sector (Bennett and Estrin, 2007).

        We conclude this section by presenting some data on the institutional environment in which
firms operate.    All views of informality agree on the basic tradeoff faced by firms (i.e. taxes and
regulatory burden vs. public goods and finance). The previous literature has emphasized access to
public goods as one of the main attractions of operating in the formal sector. Table VII presents data on
the institutional environment faced by firms and on how they operate in it. Panel A shows results for
the Informal survey and Panel B for the Micro survey.

        Three facts stand out. First, consistent with all views of informality, unregistered firms enjoy
tangible advantages. Specifically, managers of unregistered firms in the Informal sample estimate that a
typical firm in their sector evades 74.8% of its tax liability. Tax evasion sharply decreases with firm size.
For example, managers of Small firms in the control group estimate that a typical firm in their sector
evades 35.5% of its liability and tax evasion drops to 22.9% for Big firms in the control group. Tax
evasion by unregistered Micro firms and Small firms in the control group follows a similar pattern (67.7%
vs. 44.4%, respectively).

        Likewise, the regulatory burden increases rapidly with firm size.           Whereas managers of
unregistered firms in the Informal (Micro) sample report spending 5.6% (1.5%) of their time dealing with

                                                     20
government regulations, that task requires 14.5% (10.5%) of time for managers of Big firms in the
control group. Finally, unregistered firms pay a lower fraction of their sales in bribes than firms in the
control group. Specifically, managers of unregistered firms in the Informal survey estimate that firms in
their sectors pay 3.6% of their sales to “get things done”. In contrast, managers of registered firms in
the Informal survey report that bribes equal 4.8% of sales, a percentage similar to that reported by firms
in the control group (4.6%). Similarly, managers of unregistered firms in the Micro survey estimate that
firms in their sectors pay 4.0% of their sales to “get things done”. In contrast, managers report that
bribes equal 3.5% of sales for registered firms in the Micro survey and 6.6% of sales for firms in the
control group. In sum, lower taxes and less regulation confer a clear cost advantage to unregistered
firms.

         Second, the quality of public goods in our sample is very bad.         In the informal survey,
unregistered firms report that they experienced power outages on 50 days of the previous year. Firms
in the Enterprise survey fare only slightly better (48 days on average). On many days, firms experience
multiple power outages. For this reason, the number of power outages for the Micro survey is radically
higher than the number of days without power in the Informal survey. Specifically, unregistered firms in
the Micro survey experienced 167.1 power outages in the previous year. Once again, Enterprise survey
firms do only marginally better (143.7 days). In such an environment, only firms large enough to afford
a generator can be productive. Outages of water, phones, and transportation are less frequent than
power outages but nevertheless very high for the standards of developed countries. As a result, the
performance of firms that are too small to provide for substitutes for public goods (e.g. use their own
transportation equipment) may be severally impaired.

         Third, outright theft is very prevalent in our sample, but small firms do not make much use of
police and of courts.    Theft affects all small firms and not just unregistered ones.        Specifically,
unregistered firms in the Informal survey report that, in a typical year, losses from theft amount to 2.9%
of annual sales.   Registered firms and Small firms in the enterprise survey report even higher losses
(3.5% and 3.8%, respectively). Somewhat surprisingly, losses as a result of theft appear to be lower for
Micro firms (0.5%) than for Small firms in the control group (2.6%). To put these figures in context, note
that Enterprise Survey respondents estimate losses as a result of theft equal to 0.54% of sales in
Germany, 0.26% in Ireland, and 0.22% in Spain.

         In response to theft, firms spend heavily on security and make “protection” payments to
gangsters. For example, security and protection payments equal respectively 1.8% and 1.0% of the sales

                                                   21
of unregistered firms in the Informal sample. Firms in the control group spend a bit more on security
and a bit less on protection but their total expenditure is similar (3%) to that of unregistered firms
(2.8%). The police do not appear to play a central role in addressing theft. In fact, most theft is not
even reported to the police. Only 14.1% of the incidents suffered by unregistered firms in the Informal
survey are reported to the police. In contrast, 26.2% of the incidents experienced by registered firms in
the Informal survey are reported to the police–still a low figure. This pattern is consistent with the view
that unregistered firms may have trouble protecting their property rights. Alternatively, the absolute
value of the losses suffered by unregistered firms may be too low to justify filing a police complaint.
Firm size does play a role in reporting theft to the police. However, even Big firms in the control group
for the Informal sample only report to the police roughly half of the theft incidents (54%).

        Interestingly, small firms do not make much use of courts to adjudicate disputes, either. Only
29.2% of unregistered and 33.2% of registered firms in the Micro sample used courts to resolve
commercial disputes during the previous year.        In the control group, the use of courts to solve
commercial disputes rises quickly with firm size from 51.3% for Small firms to 81.8% for Big firms.
Surprisingly, courts appear to work in a reasonably efficient manner. It takes roughly 62 days to resolve
a commercial dispute in the Informal sample countries and approximately 52 days in the Micro sample
countries. These figures are in line with the average length of court proceedings in Germany (35 days),
Ireland (79), and Spain (91 days).   The fact that unregistered firms and Small firms in the control group
behave similarly regarding how they solve commercial disputes suggests that inadequate access to
courts is unlikely to explain differences in productivity between the two groups of firms. The same
argument applies to lack of police protection.

        The tentative picture that emerges from this section is inconsistent with the romantic view.
Unregistered firms have been around for a long time (7 to 10 years), but their sales are still trivially
small. Moreover, few registered firms started out unregistered. The small size of unregistered firms is
symptomatic of uneducated management and low‐quality assets. When public goods are unreliable,
unregistered firms are too small to afford owning generators, computers, or transportation equipment.
They do not have large firms as clients. They do not export. Despite De Soto’s emphasis on access to
credit as the key to igniting the growth of unregistered firms, lack of external finance appears to be an
attribute of all small firms in poor countries – not just of unregistered firms. In sum, the limitations of
unregistered firms appear to be far more severe than acknowledged by proponents of the romantic
view.

                                                    22
IV. Productivity of unregistered firms.

        In this section we examine the productivity of unregistered firms and present the key findings of
the paper. In measuring the productivity of unregistered firms, we face severe data limitations. In
particular, we do not have information on how much capital these firms have. The Informal and Micro
questionnaires do not collect such information since unregistered entrepreneurs typically lack detailed
records to estimate the value of their assets. We thus have to measure productivity without capital.

        To this end, we use two crude measures of productivity: (1) sales per employee; and (2) (gross)
value added per employee, where (gross) value added is defined as sales net of expenditure on raw
materials and energy.5 Thus, we define value added per employee for firm i in industry s:

                                                   Psi Ysi − Pm M si - PE E si
                                         VA si =
                                                              L si

where PsiYsi is the level of sales, PmMsi is expenditure on raw materials, PEEsi is expenditure on energy,
and Lsi is the number of employees. The definition of employees includes both full‐ and part‐time
workers but not seasonal workers. To the extent that seasonal employment is more prevalent in
unregistered firms than in the formal sector, we overstate the productivity of unregistered firms. We
use expenditure on production inputs (e.g., energy) as a crude proxy for capital invested.

        This approach to productivity measurement has recently received considerable criticism, since
the sales measure obviously combines physical output and prices.                 But in a competitive equilibrium,
prices may vary inversely with efficiency exactly to eliminate any variation in productivity as measured
by sales (or value added) per employee. The recognition of this problem in the absence of firm‐specific
price indices is credited to Klette and Griliches (1997); more recent studies that recognize and seek to
address it include Bernard et al. (2003), Katayama, Lu, and Tybout (2003), Foster, Haltiwanger, and
Syverson (2008), and Hsieh and Klenow (2007).             We follow the approach of the latter study, which
assumes that all firms in an industry use the same Cobb‐Douglas production technology and that
industry output is a CES aggregate of the outputs of all the firms. They then show that, in a competitive




5
  Data on wages is unavailable for most countries in the Informal sample. For this reason, we are unable to remove
labor costs from our measure of value added.

                                                         23
equilibrium, physical productivity Asi (or real output per employee) can be estimated from nominal sales
using the following formula:

                                                            σ
                                                    (P Y ) σ −1
                                          A si = κ s si si
                                                       L si

where κs is an unobserved constant, and σ is the elasticity of substitution of output. Although we do
not observe κs, relative productivities are unaffected by setting κs equal to 1 for each industry s.
Intuitively, goods sold by very productive firms must command lower prices to induce buyers to demand
the higher output. Raising sales to the power σ/ (σ‐1) yields Ysi, making it possible to infer real output
from nominal revenues. Since registered firms tend to have higher sales, productivity differences
between registered and unregistered firms are increasing in σ. Empirically, estimates of σ range from 3
to 10. We follow Hsieh and Klenow (2007) and conservatively set σ equal to 3.

         Before turning to the results, we note the empirical finding of Foster et al. (2008) that the
correlation between the sales‐based and corrected measures of productivity is incredibly high, well over
.9. Thus, although the theoretical objection to the traditional measures is compelling, its empirical
significance appears to be minor.      Indeed, Foster et al. have data on both prices and sales. The
correlation that they report between nominal and real output is based on actual data rather than on a
model.




V.A Measurement error

         Even aside from the theoretical concerns, we need to deal with the fact that our sales numbers
come from unofficial firms, raising concerns about measurement error. There is good reason to worry
that our productivity measures may be biased since unregistered entrepreneurs may choose to hide
output not only from the government but also from the World Bank contractors. For example, de Mel,
McKenzie, and Woodruff (2007) find that micro‐enterprises underreport profits by 30% to researchers,
although they attribute this more to lack of recall than to intentional understatement.

         We offer two pieces of evidence that support the view that biases are unlikely to drive the main
results in the paper. First, Table VIII shows the available information regarding expenditure on various
production inputs (scaled by sales). If unregistered entrepreneurs lied only about sales, inputs as a


                                                   24
fraction of sales would be higher for unregistered firms than for other firms. In fact, expenditure on raw
materials by Small firms in the control group is 12.7 percentage points higher than for unregistered firms
in the Informal sample and 2.7 percentage points higher than for unregistered firms in the Micro
sample. Moreover, expenditure on energy by unregistered firms is comparable to that of firms in the
control group. Other variables show a mixed pattern. In particular, expenditure on labor by Small firms
in the control group is 8.1 percentage points higher than that by unregistered firms in the Informal
sample but 1.7 percentage points lower than that by unregistered firms in the Micro sample. Similarly,
expenditure on machines by Small firms in the control group is 14.8 percentage points higher than by
unregistered firms in the Micro sample but equal to that by unregistered firms in the Informal sample.
Finally, there is weak evidence that unregistered firms in the Informal survey spend more on land and
rent than Small firms in the control group.      In sum, there is no evidence that unregistered firms
consistently spend a larger fraction of their sales on inputs than Small firms in the control group as
would be the case if unregistered entrepreneurs lied only about their sales.

        Second, Table IX shows the available data on wages per employee. Under the dual hypothesis,
unregistered firms should pay low wages (Harris and Todaro 1970). These low wages may be consistent
with some on‐the‐job home production by workers in unregistered firms. Alternatively, workers in
unregistered firms may be less skilled that those in registered firms. Either way, the dual view predicts
that the measured output of unregistered firms should be low relative to the output of workers in the
control group. In contrast, wages in the formal and informal sectors should be comparable if observed
differences in productivity are due only to measurement error. Panel A shows wages per employee in
Cape Verde – the only country in the Informal sample with wage data.           Panel B shows wages per
employee for the countries covered by the Micro sample. Wages are scaled by income per capita.

        Three facts stand out. First, there is no clear correlation between size and wages within the
control group. Big firms pay higher wages than do Small firms in Congo and Tanzania. The reverse is
true in Angola. On average, wages in Big and Small firms are indistinguishable from each other.
Second, unregistered firms consistently pay lower wages than Small firms in the control group. Cape
Verde illustrates this point. Wages in unregistered firms are 10% lower than per capita income. In
contrast, wages in the control group of Small firms are 2.92 times higher than per capita income. On
average, in the Micro sample, wages are 1.9 times higher than per capita income in unregistered firms
and 3.75 times higher in Small firms. Third, although there is considerable heterogeneity across
countries, the workers of unregistered firms are not the poorest among the poor. In India, for example,

                                                   25
wages for the employees of unregistered firms exceed GDP per capita by 31%. Similarly, in the Micro
sample, the average wage of unregistered workers is roughly equal to twice GDP per capita. Taken at
face value, the large wedge in wages between unregistered firms and the control group is strongly
consistent with the dual view of unregistered firms. Of course, we cannot rule out the alternative
interpretation that respondents shrewdly lie to the World Bank about sales, inputs, and wages.
However, the findings on inputs and wages should allay some of the concerns regarding data quality.

        As a final point, it seems to us that concerns about intentional understatement of revenues
should not be exaggerated for our data. Firms participating in the surveys do so voluntarily. Virtually all
of them answer questions about sales, even though they do not have to. They also give answers
suggesting massive underpayment of taxes and bribe payments by “firms like theirs.” This is not
behavior of those fearful that World Bank contractors will turn them in (or that authorities would do
anything about it). Our view is that most informal firms operate in the open, that they have done so for
years, that they pay the police and other authorities to leave them alone, and that fear of reprisals for
truly reporting revenues to the World Bank is very far from most of their minds. This particular concern
is a rich‐country fear rather than a poor country reality.




IV.B Productivity of unregistered firms

        Tables X and XI present the main findings in the paper. Table X shows estimates of (log) value
added (Panel A), (log) sales per employee (Panel B), and (log) real output per employee (Panel C) for the
Informal sample and its Enterprise Survey control group. Table XI shows analogous data for the Micro
sample. Three key facts stand out. First, registered firms in either the Informal or the Micro surveys are
more productive than the same‐survey unregistered ones.         Firms in India in the 2006 Micro Survey
illustrate this pattern.   Value added per employee for registered firms is 35% higher than for
unregistered firms (8.40 vs. 8.05). Sales per employee for registered Indian firms are 46% higher than
for unregistered ones (9.12 vs. 8.66). Real output per employee for registered Indian firms is 75% higher
than for unregistered ones (13.59 vs. 12.84). Most countries exhibit a similar pattern although Burundi,
Mauritania, Niger, and Pakistan are exceptions. On average, value added per employee for registered
firms in the Informal and Micro samples are respectively 18% and 39% higher than for their unregistered
counterparts. Differences in sales per employee are even larger: 38% for the Informal sample and 59%



                                                     26
for the Micro sample. Differences between unregistered and registered firms are most extreme for real
output per employee: 47% in the Informal sample and 74% in the Micro sample.

        Second, these differences become much more dramatic when we compare Informal or Micro
survey firms to the Enterprise Survey firms. The productivity gap between unregistered firms and even
the Small firms in the control group is truly enormous. Take the case of in India in 2006 again. Value
added per employee for Small firms is 70% higher than for unregistered firms, while sales and real
output per employee for Small firms are 113% and 147% higher, respectively, than they are for
unregistered ones. The example of India is representative of the results for other countries although
value added and real output per employee in Burundi and sales per employee in Indonesia do not
conform to this pattern. Bearing in mind that the observations are unevenly distributed across size
groups (e.g. there are only 2 Small firms in Indonesia with non‐missing sales), the consistency of the
results across countries is striking. On average, based on the Informal sample, the productivity of Small
Enterprise Survey firms is around 154%, 180%, or 282% higher than for unregistered firms depending on
whether we look at value added, sales per employee, or real output per employee. Similarly, based on
the Micro sample, the productivity wedge between Enterprise Survey Small firms and unregistered firms
is 104%, 124%, or 210% depending on whether we look at value added, sales per employee, or real
output per employee.

        Third, Big firms are significantly more productive than Small ones. Continuing with the example
of India in 2006, the productivity wedge between Big and Small firms is 68% for value added, 35% for
sales per employee, and 269% for real output per employee.            This large heterogeneity in firm
productivity is consistent with work by Hsieh and Klenow (2007) showing sizable gaps in the marginal
products of labor and capital across plants within narrowly‐defined industries in China and India. On
average, depending on the measure and on the sample, productivity of Big firms is between 59% and
246% higher than that of Small ones.

         The cumulative effect of these productivity differences is large. Returning to the example of
India in 2006, Big firms are 139%‐416% more productive than unregistered firms.         On average, the
productivity wedge between Big and unregistered firms in the Informal sample is 212% for value added,
243% for sales per employee, and 526% for real output per employee.         The numbers for the Micro
sample are of the same order of magnitude: 171% for value added, 209% for sales per employee, and
460% for real output per employee.


                                                   27
        To illustrate what these differences in productivity mean in practice, consider the average
unregistered Micro firm in India. It has sales of $2,420 per employee and value added of $1,279 per
employee. In contrast, an average Small firm in the control group has sales of $12,285 per employee
and value added of $4,335 per employee. If the unregistered firm could achieve the value added level
of a Small firm only by registering, would it choose to do that? By assumption, changing its legal status
would generate $3,056 (=$4,335‐$1,279) in additional cash flow. However, the firm would have to pay
registration fees and taxes as well as comply with regulations. The registration fee –including the value
of the entrepreneurs’ time – would probably amount to roughly $400 (Djankov et al., 2002). The firm
would also need to pay labor taxes (17%), corporate taxes (35%), and VAT (12.5%). Recall that our value
added estimates are based on expenditures on energy and materials and do not exclude labor costs. To
keep things simple, assume that wages are 20% of sales (=$2,457) and that there are no additional costs.
Moreover, to bias the example against the firm choosing to register, assume that the firm would evade
all taxes if unregistered but comply fully if registered. Under these assumptions, the firm would owe
additional payments of $418 (=0.17*$2,457) in labor taxes, $657 in corporate taxes (=0.35*($4,335‐
$2,457)), and VAT of $235 (=0.125*($4,335‐$2,457). Thus, the firm would have to disburse $1,710 per
employee in taxes and fees. In this back‐of‐the‐envelope calculation, the firm would pocket $1,346
(=$3,056‐$1,710) per employee by registering.


        Of course, the gains would be even larger if the unregistered firm could –merely by registering ‐‐
duplicate the value added per employee of Big firms in the control group. On average, such firms have
value added per employee of $8,715 on sales of $20,301. Calculations similar to the preceding ones
suggest that the unregistered firm would gain $4,135 per employee if ‐‐ only by registering‐‐ it could
duplicate the level of value added per employee of Big firms.


        A similar set of calculations illustrates that unregistered entrepreneurs can simply not afford to
pay taxes unless sales sharply increase from merely registering.       Assuming wages equal 20% of sales
(=$484), the average unregistered firm has a pre‐tax profit per employee of $795 (=1,279‐$484) and
owes taxes of $460 per employee.6 Unless sales dramatically increase as a result of registering, the
average unregistered firm would have considerable difficulty paying $400 to register.



6
  Such firm owes $82 in labor taxes (=0.17*$484), $278 in corporate taxes (=0.35*($1,279‐$484)), and $99 in VAT
(=0.125*(1,279‐$484)).

                                                      28
         In practice, these calculations mean that believers in the romantic view need to blame the
precarious existence of unregistered firms on something beyond costly entry procedures and high tax
rates. Given the very large difference in productivity between unregistered firms and the control group,
the cost of complying with government regulations would have to be implausibly high to justify
operating as an unregistered firm. A more realistic scenario is that –consistent with the dual view ‐‐
unregistered firms would not be able to achieve the performance of Small firms just by registering.
Perhaps, for example, unregistered firms lack the human capital necessary to match the quality of the
goods produced by formal firms. The image of unregistered firms consistent with their observed levels
of productivity is not that of predators but rather that of relics of the past.

         What accounts for the large difference in productivity between unregistered firms and the
control group? We begin by running simple OLS regressions and discuss self‐selection issues later.                 In
principle, the productivity differences that we document in Tables X and XI could be driven by industry
effects, by differences in inputs, including human capital, or by differences in size. The goal of the OLS
regressions that follow is to examine whether unregistered firms remain unusually unproductive after
we control for these factors. In simple terms, we interpret the estimated coefficient on the unregistered
dummy as a measure of our ignorance regarding the production function of unregistered firms. Killing
the unregistered dummy would not mean that unregistered firms are as productive as registered ones,
but that differences in productivity are captured by differences in inputs, as in Rauch’s (1991) selection
story.

         All specifications include the following four dummy variables: (1) the firm is in the Informal
survey; (2) the firm is registered and in the Informal survey; (3) the firm is in the Micro survey; and (4)
the firm is registered and in the Micro survey. Firms in the Enterprise survey are the omitted category.
We then add –one at a time – (log) income per capita, eight industry dummies, expenditure on raw
materials, expenditure on energy, expenditure on machines, the index of manager education, and (log)
sales.7 All three expenditure variables are scaled by employees.

         Table XII shows OLS regressions for (log) value added per employee. Tables XIII and XIV show
similar regressions for (log) sales and real output per employee, respectively. The results for value
added, sales, and real output per employee are qualitatively similar. We discuss the findings on value
added in some detail and point out where the results for sales and real output per employee differ. The
7
  Errors are clustered at the country level. We do not include country fixed effects since frequency of unregistered
firms in our sample may not reflect the incidence of unregistered firms in the population.

                                                         29
first regression only includes dummies for whether the firm is in the Informal sample or in the Micro
sample, and the interactions between each of those two variables and whether the firm is registered.

        The results confirm the findings in Tables X and XI. The estimated coefficients equal ‐1.78 for
the Informal sample and ‐1.29 for the Micro one.        Moreover, the interactions of Informal and Micro
with registered equal 0.81 and 0.35, respectively. All four dummies are highly statistically significant.
Adding GDP per capita does not change the basic pattern. Similarly, the estimated coefficients for the
four dummies barely change as we add industry controls. Coefficients do change when we add
expenditure on raw materials. Specifically, the estimated coefficients for each of the four dummies are
roughly cut in half. Adding expenditure on energy further lowers the estimated coefficients on the four
dummies but not significantly so. The four coefficients barely change as we add expenditure on
machinery. The coefficients for expenditure on raw materials, energy, and machines are not only
statistically significant but also economically important. For example, increasing raw materials by one
standard deviation is associated with a 43% increase in value added. Similar increases in expenditure on
energy and machines have somewhat smaller effects (32% and 16%, respectively).           Coefficients fall
another notch when we add manager education. Interestingly, ignoring selection issues, the estimated
coefficient on manager education suggests that a top manager with some college education increases
value added per employee by 27 percent (=0.09 X 3) relative to a top manager with some lower school
education. Finally, there is no evidence that unregistered firms are unusually unproductive once we
control for (log) sales. Specifically, the estimated coefficients on both Informal and Micro switch signs
when we add (log) sales to the regression. In fact, the coefficient on the Micro is not only positive but
also significant. The interaction between registered and informal is the only interaction dummy that
remains statistically significant.

        The results on sales and real output per employee (see Tables XIII and XIV, respectively) are very
similar to those for value added. In the full specification, the estimated coefficients for both the
Informal and the Micro dummies are positive and significant. The interaction between registered and
informal is insignificant while the interaction between unregistered and Micro takes a small –but
statistically significant—negative value.




                                                   30
IV.C Selection

        The OLS results in this section suggest that unregistered firms are not unusually unproductive
once we take into account their expenditure on inputs, the human capital of their top managers, and
their small size. Of course, these are all endogenous variables. In fact, a key distinguishing factor
between the dual and other views of unregistered firms is the emphasis on the sorting process that
matches able managers with good assets. High quality managers are willing to pay taxes and bear the
cost of government regulation in exchange for being able to advertise their products, raise outside
capital, and access public goods. In contrast, low quality managers avoid taxes and regulations since the
benefits of operating in formal economy are less valuable for small firms.

        Table XV examines the sorting process. Specifically, we examine the relationship between the
quality of the firm’s assets and the human capital of its top manger –our only proxy for managers’
ability. The dependent variables fall into two categories: dummy variables (Panel A) and continuous
variables (Panel B). The dummy variables include indicators for whether: (1) the firm is registered; (2)
the firms has ever had a loan; (3) the main buyers are large firms; (4) the firm occupies a permanent
structure; (5) the firm is located in the owner’s house; (6) the firm owns the building it occupies; (7) the
firm owns the land it occupies; (8) the firm uses its own transportation equipment; (9) the firm owns a
generator; (10) the firm uses email to communicate with clients; (11) the firm uses a website to
communicate with clients; and (12) the firm has an electrical connection.             Finally, we use five
continuous variables as dependent variables: (1) the percentage of investment that is financed
internally; (2) expenditure on raw materials as a fraction of sales; (3) expenditure on energy as a fraction
of sales; (4) expenditure on machines as a fraction of sales; and (5) capacity utilization. All regressions
control for income per capita and include eight industry dummies.

        Many –but not all—the correlations in Table XII are consistent with sorting on managers’ ability.
Specifically, firms with more educated managers are more likely to be registered, to sell to a large firm,
to use their own transportation equipment, to own a generator, to communicate with clients through
email, to have a webpage, and to have an electric connection.       Along the same lines, managers who
attended college are more likely to work for firms that own land and buildings. Moreover, firms with
more educated managers use more raw materials and operate with higher capacity utilization.             The
economic significance of these coefficients is large. The probability of being registered increases by 41
percentage points if the top manager has some college education (rather than some lower school
education). Having a top manager with some college also has large effects on the probability of having a

                                                    31
generator (+36.7 percentage points), the probability of using email (+48 percentage points), the
probability of having a webpage (+25.7 percentage points), and the probability of having an electrical
connection (+28.3 percentage points). In contrast, having a top manager with some college education
has a moderate effect on the probability that the main buyers are large firms (+3.2 percentage points),
the probability of owning a building (+11.2 percentage points), the probability of owning land (+9.8
percentage points), and the probability of owning transportation equipment (+11.8 percentage points).
Similarly, having a top manager with some college education increases expenditure on raw materials by
a modest 8.7 percentage points (the standard deviation is 23.3%), and capacity utilization by 5.5
percentage points (the standard deviation is 21.4%).

           The evidence on external finance is mixed. On the one hand, firms with more educated
managers rely more on external finance (Panel B). On the other hand, the education of managers does
not affect the probability that the firm has ever had a loan (Panel A).     The evidence on investment in
machines is also weak. The only significant coefficient is for vocational schooling. Nor is there evidence
that expenditure on energy increases with managers’ education. Only one regression has statistically
significant coefficients with the “wrong” sign: the likelihood that the firm operates in the house of the
owner is higher when managers have attended secondary or vocational schools rather than lower
schools.

           These results suggest an explanation for the puzzling low productivity of unregistered firms. The
productivity gap between registered firms and the control group disappears once we take into account
crude proxies for physical and human capital and control for size. Of course, size is an endogenous
variable. These results on manager selection are broadly consistent with the view that part of the
reason why unregistered firms are small is that they are run by managers of low ability (Rauch 1991).
These managers do not find it worthwhile to pay the cost of running a formal firm.       Unregistered firms
are small because they are run by less able managers and, as such, face a high cost of capital, few
opportunities to advertise their products, and insufficient scale to own critical assets such as generators
and computers.




V. Obstacles to Doing Business.

           As a final step, we present information on obstacles to doing business, as reported by
respondents in Informal, Micro, and Enterprise surveys. All obstacles are reported on the 0‐4 scale for

                                                      32
their perceived significance, with 0 representing “no obstacle”, 1 “minor obstacle”, 2 “moderate
obstacle”, 3 “major obstacle”, and 4 “very severe obstacle”. In Table XVI, we compare average
responses about various obstacles for Informal firms (Panel A) and their Enterprise Survey counterparts,
as well as for Micro survey firms and their control group (Panel B).

        Starting with the Informal survey, the most striking finding is the similarity in many responses
between the registered Informal Survey firms and Enterprise Survey firms. Both groups consider tax
rates and tax administration as their most significant problems. Registered Informal survey firms, like
Enterprise Survey firms, regard the cost of financing and access to financing as major obstacles as well.
Neither the Informal Survey firms not the Enterprise survey firms consider access to land, procedures to
register, crime, skills of the workforce, labor regulations (with the exception of big firms), or the legal
system to be major obstacles to doing business.

        There are some significant differences as well. Informal firms consider access to or availability
of markets to be a huge problem.            The unregistered informal firms do not consider taxes or tax
administration to be a huge problem, in obvious contrast to the registered firms.                  Corruption is a
smaller problem for the informal firms than for the formal ones. Indeed, both tax administration and
corruption are perceived as more serious obstacles by big firms than by small ones (but only differences
in the perception of tax administration as an obstacle are statistically significant).

        We can also use the information on obstacles to shed light on the parasite theory of the
informal economy. Unfortunately, the question asked in the surveys is not ideal. Respondents provide
an assessment on a 0‐4 scale of whether “anticompetitive and informal practices” are an obstacle to
their business. Of course, anticompetitive practices can come not only from the informal firms, but also
from formal firms with political or other connections. Nevertheless, several points emerge from these
data. First, contrary to the parasite view, “anticompetitive and informal” practices are not among the
key obstacles perceived by managers of firms in either the Informal or the Enterprise survey (the
average score is 1.78 for the Informal survey and 1.97 for the Enterprise survey).8 Second, the answer is
only slightly higher for the Enterprise Survey firms than for the Informal firms, which is not consistent
with the view that the informal firms undercut formal ones. Third, one might have guessed that it is the


8
  Among Big firms, concern over “anti‐competitive or informal practices” ranks after concerns over: (1) tax rates;
(2) tax administration; (3) cost of financing; (4) corruption; (5) macroeconomic instability; and (6) electricity. On
the other hand, it ranks ahead of, among others, concerns over: (1) economic policy uncertainty; (2) access to
financing; (3) crime, theft, and disorder; and (4) customs and trade regulations.

                                                         33
Small registered firms in the Enterprise survey that would be most severely affected by the informal
firms. However, these firms perceive anti‐competitive and informal practices to be a smaller problem,
on average, than do the larger firms. None of this evidence is supportive of the parasite theory.

          The patterns in the Micro survey are very similar to those in the Informal survey (except some of
the questions differ). Access to financing and electricity emerge as by far the greatest obstacles to
Micro firms. These are also huge obstacles for their counterpart Enterprise Survey firms, along with the
tax rates. Finally, anti‐competitive and informal practices are not among the top obstacles for firms in
the Micro survey.

          A final piece of evidence comes from the Informal survey, which in Cape Verde only asked the
respondents about the benefits and obstacles to registering. The findings are summarized in Table XVII.
The main benefits of registering are improved access to markets, to services, and to financing – broadly
consistent with the previous findings about the obstacles to doing business faced by informal firms.
Better property rights and lower need to pay bribes are not nearly as important. On the cost side, the
main obstacles to registration are taxes and the cost of registering (along with the difficulty of obtaining
information about how to register). Labor regulation and tax compliance are seen as much less
important. Here as well, the picture that emerges is one in which the formal firms have better access to
markets, services, and finance, and hence can be much more productive, but need to pay taxes.
Presumably, for the Cape Verde firms in the Informal Survey, the tax price is too high to justify
registration.

          The evidence on obstacles further supports the dual theory, and seems rather inconsistent with
the parasite theory. Between their extreme inefficiency and operation in very different markets,
informal firms do not appear to pose much of a threat to the formal firms, at least as perceived by the
latter. Informal firms clearly recognize the many benefits of being official, including access to markets
and to finance (although it is far from clear that they would gain the latter even if they registered). They
do not seem to think that regulation, or the cost of registration, and the biggest obstacles to
registration. On the other hand, they do see taxes as a huge problem. In this respect, the results are
consistent with the dual theory, as well as with the findings reported in Section II and by Djankov et al.
(2008).




VI. Conclusion.

                                                     34
         We briefly summarize our findings and discuss their implications. Our most basic finding is that
high productivity comes from formal firms, and in particular large formal firms. Productivity jumps
sharply if we compare small formal firms to informal firms, and rises rapidly with the size of formal
firms. To the extent that productivity growth is central to economic development, the formation and
growth of formal firms is necessary for economic growth (see also Lewis 2004, Banerjee and Duflo
2005).

         Formal firms appear to be very different animals than informal firms, which accounts for their
sharply superior productivity.     Perhaps most importantly, they are run by much better educated
managers.       As a consequence, besides being larger, they tend to use more capital, have different
customers, market their products, and use external finance to a greater extent than do the informal
firms. There is no evidence that informal firms become formal as they grow. Rather, virtually none of
the formal firms had ever been informal. Consistent with this result, Bruhn (2008) shows that business
registration reform had a large effect on new registrations in Mexico, but that the new official entrants
were former wage earners rather than informal entrepreneurs. Similarly, Mandragon‐Velez and Pena‐
Parga (2008) find surprisingly little transition between self‐employment and business ownership in
Colombia. It does not appear from the available evidence that informal firms would sharply increase
their productivity if only they registered.

         This interpretation raises the crucial question of what happens to informal firms as the economy
develops. After all, the most basic fact about the informal economy is that its role diminishes sharply as
incomes grow. How does this happen? Do informal firms register or do they die? We do not have a
definitive answer to this question, but what we have points in the direction of death rather than
registration.    It is still possible of course that a minority of informal firms, and especially the most
productive ones, end up joining the formal economy, perhaps by supplying formal firms. But there is no
evidence, at least in our data, that this is the typical story. The vast majority of informal firms appear to
begin and to end their lives as unproductive informal firms.

         Informal firms nonetheless play a crucial role in developing economies. They represent perhaps
30 to 40 percent of all economic activity. They provide livelihood to billions of poor people. Because
these firms are so inefficient, taxing them or forcing them to comply with government regulations would
likely put most of them out of business, with dire consequences for their employees and proprietors. If
anything, strategies that keep these firms afloat and allow them to become more productive, such as
microfinance, are probably desirable from the viewpoint of poverty alleviation. But these are not

                                                     35
growth strategies in that turning unofficial firms into official ones is unlikely to generate substantial
improvements in productivity.

        Growth strategies, then, need to focus on formal firms, especially the larger ones. Surely
reducing the costs of formality, such as the registration costs, is a good idea, but this is not the whole
story. Likewise, some of the almost‐standard proposals for development, such as improving land rights,
the legal environment, and even the human capital of the employees appear to be relatively minor
factors, from the viewpoint of official entrepreneurs. The main obstacles to the operations of formal
firms, according to our data, are three: 1) taxation, 2) electricity, and 3) finance.

        To us, the most striking finding is the sharply higher education of managers of official than
unofficial firms, with no corresponding difference in the human capital of the employees. This might
suggest that educational policies, particularly those emphasizing secondary education, might be
conducive to the formation of entrepreneurial talent that can run formal firms. We do not mean to
suggest that formal education is either a necessary or sufficient condition for entrepreneurial skills. But
the data seem to be quite clear that some types of management (for example marketing or finance)
require education.     One can also think of other sources of human capital, such as immigration, as
supplying the required entrepreneurial talent.

        There is growing evidence that corporate income taxation deters investment and formal
entrepreneurship.     Using a new data set of corporate income taxes in a large number of countries,
Djankov et al. (2008) find strong evidence that these taxes reduce investment, foreign direct investment,
and entrepreneurial activity. Our evidence similarly shows that official firms perceive taxation as the
top obstacle to doing business. To the extent that formation and growth of official firms are the
principal engines of development, this perception must be taken seriously. Needless to say, one needs
to also think about alternative sources of public finance, as well as the size of government, in the
developing countries to figure out whether corporate income tax cuts are warranted. But the evidence
points to a potentially serious problem.

        The evidence suggests that official firms (just like the unofficial ones) perceive lack of access to
finance to be a serious obstacle to doing business. Recent research has pointed to a broad range of legal
and regulatory reforms that can underpin the development of financial markets, reforms that broadly
seek to improve the legal rights of creditors and (in the case of very large firms) shareholders (see La



                                                      36
Porta et al. 2008 for a survey). Unlike with tax cuts, there seem to be no compelling counterarguments
to improving laws and institutions that underpin financial markets.

        Finally, the evidence indicates that electricity supply, including disruptions, presents a problem
for the unofficial as well as the smaller official firms. This compares to an interesting lack of concern
with other limitations of infrastructure, such as transport, phone, or mail. Most large firms have their
own generators, although smaller official firms, and the unofficial ones, do not and hence are more
vulnerable.

        The overall picture of economic development that emerges from this analysis is in many ways
similar to the traditional pre‐growth‐theory development economics, although it is related to the
modern reformulations of economic growth through the lens of development economics (Banerjee and
Duflo 2005).     The recipe for productivity growth is the formation of official firms, the larger and the
more productive, the better. Such formation must perhaps be promoted through tax, human capital,
infrastructure, and capital markets policies, very much along the lines of traditional dual economy
theories.     From the perspective of economic growth, we should not expect much from the unofficial
economy, and its millions of entrepreneurs, except to hope that it disappears over time.              This
“Walmart” theory of economic development receives quite a bit of support from firm level data.




                                                    37
                                             References




Almeida, Rita, and Pedro Manuel Carneiro. 2006. “Enforcement of Regulation, Informal Labour, Firm Size
   and Firm Performance.” Discussion Paper No. 5976. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research
   (December). Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=955337

Amaral, Pedro, and Erwan Quintin. 2006. “A Competitive Model of the Informal Sector.” Journal of
   Monetary Economics 53, no. 7: 1541‐53.

Baily, Martin, Diana Farrell, and Janna Remes. 2005. Domestic Services: The Hidden Key to Growth.
    Mimeo. McKinsey Global Institute.

Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. 2005. “Growth Theory through the Lens of Development
   Economics.” In Handbook of Economic Growth, 1A, edited by Steve Durlauf and Philippe Aghion,
   473–552. Holland: Elsevier Science.

Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo. 2007. “The Economic Lives of the Poor.” Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 21, no. 1: 141‐68.

Bennett, John, and Saul Estrin. 2007. “Informality as a Stepping Stone: Entrepreneurial Entry in a
   Developing Economy.” Discussion Paper No. 2950. Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor (July).
   Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1006774.

Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum. 2003. “Plants and Productivity
   in International Trade.” American Economic Review 93, no. 4, 1268‐1290.

Botero, Juan, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez‐de‐Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2004.
   “The Regulation of Labor.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, no. 4: 1339–82.

Bruhm, Miriam. 2008. “License to Sell: The Effect of Business Registration Reform on Entrepreneurial
   Activity in Mexico.” World Bank: Policy Research Working Paper 4538.

Dabla‐Norris, Era, Mark Gradstein, and Gabriela Inchauste. 2008. “What Causes Firms to Hide Output?
   The Determinants of Informality.” Journal of Development Economics 85, no. 1: 1‐27.

de Mel, Suresh, David John McKenzie, and Christopher M. Woodruff. 2007. “Measuring Microenterprise
   Profits: Don't Ask How the Sausage is Made.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4229.
   Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=985001.

de Paula, Aureo, and José Scheinkman. 2008. “The Informal Sector.” Working Paper No. 08‐018.
   Philadelphia: Pennsylvania Institute for Economic Research (May).     Available at SSRN:
   http://ssrn.com/abstract=1135724.


                                                 38
de Soto, Hernando. 1989. The Other Path: The Invisible Revolution in the Third Worlds. New York:
   Harper and Row Publishers.

de Soto, Hernando. 2000. The Mystery of Capital. Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
   Everywhere Else. New York: Basic Books.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez‐de‐Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2002. “The Regulation
    of Entry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, no. 1: 1–37.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez‐de‐Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “Courts.”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 2: 453–517.

Djankov, Simeon, Oliver Hart, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “Debt Enforcement around
    the World.” Journal of Political Economy 116, no. 6:xxxx‐xxxx.

Djankov, Simeon, Tim Ganser, Caralee McLiesh, Rita Ramalho, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “The Effect of
    Corporate Taxes on Investment and Entrepreneurship.” Working Paper 13756. Cambridge, Mass.:
    National Bureau of Economic Research (January).

Enste, Dominik, and Friedrich Schneider. 1998. “Increasing Shadow Economies all over the World ‐
    Fiction or Reality.” Discussion Paper No. 26. Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor (December).
    Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=166559 or DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.166559.

Fajnzylber, P., W. F. Maloney, and G. V. Montes Rojas. 2006. “Does Formality Improve Microfirm
    Performance? Quasi‐experimental Evidence from the Brazilian SIMPLES Program.” Photocopy.
    World Bank, Washington, DC.

Farrell, Diana. 2004. “The Hidden Dangers of the Informal Economy.” McKinsey Quarterly 2004, no. 3:
    26–37.

Forster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson. 2008. “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and
    Efficiency: Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review 98, no. 1: 394‐425.

Friedman, Eric, Simon Johnson, Daniel Kaufmann and Pablo Zoido. 2001. “Dodging the Grabbing Hand:
    The Determinants of Unofficial Activity in 69 Countries.” Journal of Public Economics 76, no. 3: 459‐
    93.

Harris, John, and Michael Todaro. 1970. “Migration, Unemployment and Development: A Two‐Sector
    Analysis.” American Economic Review 60, no. 1: 126‐142.

Hsieh, Chang‐Tai, and Peter Klenow. 2007. “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India.”
    Working Paper No. W13290. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research. Available at
    SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1005603.

International Labour Organization. 2007. Key Indicators of the Labour Market. Fifth edition, CD Rom
    version.

Johnson, Simon, Daniel Kaufmann, and Andrei Shleifer. 1997. “The Unofficial Economy in Transition.”
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1997, no. 2: 159‐239.



                                                   39
Katayama, Hajime, Shihua Lu, and James Tybout. 2006. “Firm‐level Productivity Studies: Illusions and a
    Solution.” Mimeo, Penn State University.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi. 2005. “Governance Matters IV: Governance
   Indicators for 1996‐2004.” Working Paper No. 3630. Washington: World Bank Policy Research (May).
   Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=718081 or DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.718081.

Klette, Tor Jakob, and Zvi Griliches. 1997. “The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators when Output
    Prices are Unobserved and Endogenous.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 11, no. 4: 343‐361.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez‐de‐Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “The Economic Consequences of
    Legal Origins.” Journal of Economic Literature 46, no. 2: 285–332.

Lewis, William. 2004. The Power of Productivity: Wealth, Poverty, and the Threat to Global Stability.
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Loayza, Norman. 1996. “The Economics of the Informal Sector: A Simple Model and Some Empirical
   Evidence from Latin America.” Carnegie‐Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 45: 129‐62.

Loayza, Norman, and Jamele Rigolini. 2006. “Informality Trends and Cycles.” Working Paper No. 4078.
   Washington:        World Bank Policy Research (December). Available at SSRN:
   http://ssrn.com/abstract=950133.

Lucas, Robert. 1978. “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms.” Bell Journal of Economics 9, no. 2: 508‐
    23.

Mondragon‐Velez, Camilo and Ximena Pena‐Parga, 2008, “Business Ownership and Self‐employment in
  Developing Economies: The Colombian Case,” Mimeo Universidad de los Andes, Documentos CEDE
  4672.

Monteiro, Joana, and Juliano Assuncao. 2006. “Outgrowing the Shadows: Estimating the Impact of
  Bureaucratic Simplification and Tax Cuts on Informality and Investment.” Pontifica Universidade
  Catolica, Department of Economics, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Murphy, Kevin, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1989. “Industrialization and the Big Push.” Journal
   of Political Economy 97, no 5: 1003‐1026.

Rauch, James. 1991. “Modeling the Informal Sector Formally.” Journal of Development Economics 35,
   no. 1: 33‐47.

Rosenstein‐Rodan, Paul. 1943. “Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and South‐eastern Europe.”
   Economic Journal 53, September‐October: 202‐211.

Rostow, Walt. 1960. Stages of Economic Growth. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

Russo, Francesco. 2008. “The Cost of the Legal System and the Hidden Economy.” Mimeo, Boston
   University.

Schneider, Friedrich. 2007. “Shadow Economies and Corruption All Over the World: New Estimates for
   145 Countries.” Economics: The Open‐Access, Open‐Assessment E‐Journal, Vol. 1, 2007‐9.
   http://www.economics‐ejournal.org/economics/journalarticles/2007‐9.

                                                    40
Tokman, Victor. 1992. Beyond Regulation: The Informal Sector in Latin America. Bolder: Lynne Rienner
   Publishers.

United Nations. 2008. “Making the Law Work for Everyone.” Volume 1. Report of the Commission on
    Legal Empowerment of the Poor.

World Bank. 2008. Doing Business 2008. Washington: World Bank Publications.




                                                41
                                           80
                      %Informal economy --Multiple Indicators
                                                                                         BOL
                                                                                         GEO
                                                                                                         PAN
                                                                                          ZWE
                                                    60

                                                                                                AZE   PER
                                                                    TZA   NGA      HTI
                                                                                                     UKR THA
                                                                                     KHM HND GTM                URY
                                                                     ZAR ZMB COG
                                                                           BEN                         BLR
                                                                           TCD SENMDA         ARM
                                                                                              NIC
                                                                                                LKA SLV       RUS
                                                                              CAF
                                                                              UGA CIV
                                                                                   AGO             PHLKAZ
                                                                    SLE
                                                                      NERMLIBFA       GHA
                                                                          MOZ
                                                                         ETH
                                                                    MWI MDGRWA KGZGIN                     COLBRALVA
                                      40




                                                                                NPL                        TUN
                                                                     BDI        TGO
                                                                                  BGD PAK
                                                                                      MRTPNG     JAM
                                                                                                 MAR         YUG EST
                                                                                                           BGR
                                                                                                           TON
                                                                            KEN UZB             EGYKIR
                                                                                                ECU LBNDZA
                                                                                                        MKD
                                                                                                        BIH
                                                                                                        VEN ROM
                                                                                      SLB
                                                                                      CMR         ALB FJI DOM
                                                                                                           TUR    HRV
                                                                                                                BWA
                                                                                   LAO      LSO
                                                                                             VUT BTN WSM  NAM
                                                                                                          FSM   MEX
                                                                                                                MYS
                                                                                                  MDV
                                                                                                   PRY            LTU
                                                                         YEM        MHL                 PLW      ZAFPOL KORPRI
                                                                                                               CRI ARG SVN GRC
                                                                                                                             ARE TWN
                                                                                                                                ITA
                                                                                          IND                          HUN
                                                                                              IDN                            ISR
                                                                                                                           PRT
                                                                                                                             ESPBEL
                            20




                                                                                   MNG         SYR JOR IRN       CHL SVK    KWT
                                                                                                                     OMN
                                                                                                                      SAUCZE     SWE  NOR
                                                                                        VNM                                        DNK
                                                                                                                                 FIN
                                                                                                                                  HKG
                                                                                                                                DEU
                                                                                                    CHN                           CAN
                                                                                                                                    IRL
                                                                                                                                  FRA
                                                                                                                               SGPAUS
                                                                                                                                   NLD
                                                                                                                             NZL  GBR
                                                                                                                                 JPN
                                                                                                                                   AUT
                                                                                                                                     CHE
                                                                                                                                      USA
                                           0




                                                                6          7               8             9                10                11
                                                                                                Ln(GDP/POP)



Figure 1. Scatter plot of the multiple‐indicators measure of the size of the informal economy against (logarithm) GDP per capita in purcahsing power terms.
                                            MWI




                            80
                                                  MLI

                                   60               TCD        BGD
                                                  ZMB       CMR LSO
                                                  YEM UGA LAO                     MDV
                   %Self-employment


                                                        SEN
                                                                       ZWE
                                                                   BOL IDN PRY VENGAB
                                                                                  COL
                                                  MDG                              DOM
                                                  ETH            VNM NIC
                                                               KHM
                         40




                                                                     HND GUY      IRN
                                                            KGZPAKGEO      GTM
                                                                            PHLPER
                                                                                KAZ
                                                            MDA
                                                             MNG          JAM
                                                                        SYR
                                                                         ECU        THA
                                                                         LKA
                                                                          MAR SLVLCA
                                                                                  PAN
                                                        WBG              EGY DMA   TUR             GRC
                                                                                 DZA    MEX
                                                                                          CHL
                                                                                        URY       KOR
                                                        BFA                        TUN
                                                                                 BLZ   CRI
                                                                                     BRA
                                                                                VCTGRD HRV   ARG PRT
                                                                               SWZ  ROM
                            20




                                                                             CUB            POL     CYP     TWN
                                                               DJI                      MYSTTO
                                                                                         ZAF
                                                                                           ATG        NZL
                                                                      ARM UKRMKD  SUR
                                                                                  NAM      MUS  NCL
                                                                                                  CZE    ITAIRL
                                                                                                       ESP
                                                                                                 BHS
                                                                                           LTU HUN  BRB
                                                                                                    PRI    CANIMY
                                                                                                             CHE
                                                                                    BGR BWAKNASVK MLT ISR
                                                                                                        SGP ISL
                                                                                                           BEL
                                                                                                           GBR
                                                                                                           AUS
                                                                                              OMNSYC      FIN
                                                                                                         DEUAUT
                                                                                                           HKG
                                                                                                            NLD
                                                                                                              SMR
                                                                                         LVA       SVN MACJPN
                                                                                                           FRA
                                                                                                          SWE
                                            TZA                                       RUS EST ANT           DNKUSA
                                                                                                               NOR LUX
                                                                                                      ABW                QAT
                            0




                                        6          7                     8            9                   10      11
                                                                             Ln(GDP/POP)


Figure 2. Scatter plot of self‐employment against (logarithm) GDP per capita in purchasing power terms.
                                                                             Table I: The size of the informal economy

This table shows averages for seven indicators of the size of the informal sector for countries grouped into quartiles of GDP per capita in purchasing power terms.


                                                                                                  Measure of Informality
                                                      % GDP Informal          % Tax Evasion                                % Self‐employment        % GDP Informal           % GDP Informal        Registered firms /
                                  GDP/Population                                                  % Self‐employment
                                                   (World Economic Forum)   (Enterprise survey)                              non‐agriculture   (electricity consumption)   (multiple indicators)   population (000s)
    First GDP/POP quartile              429                  35.4                  29.0                  46.4                      57.3                    38.9                    42.3                    3.2
    Second GDP/POP quartile            1,362                 33.7                  23.3                  35.7                      37.1                    42.7                    39.8                    8.2
    Third GDP/POP quartile             4,002                 27.6                  19.7                  23.1                      24.6                    31.3                    34.1                   28.7
    Fourth GDP/POP quartile           20,348                 17.3                   8.2                  13.3                      12.5                    17.6                    18.3                   41.8
    Sample mean                       10,015                 27.6                  22.5                  26.5                      30.8                    29.0                    34.5                   24.7
    First minus Fourth quartile      ‐19,919a               ‐18.1a                ‐20.8a                ‐33.1a                    ‐44.8a                  ‐21.4a                  ‐23.9a                 38.7a
    Observations                        185                  125                    95                   133                        96                      57                     145                     83




Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                               Table II – Determinants of the size of the informal sector

Panel A presents estimated coefficients for univariate OLS regressions. The regressions in Panel B also include GDP per capita. The dependent variables are six proxies
for the size of the unofficial economy. All regressions include a constant (not reported). Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses.

                                                            Panel A: OLS regressions without controlling for GDP per capita
                                                                              %Informal                                         %Informal
                                                                                                        Self     %Informal                    Registered
                                                                             (World Econ Tax evasion                             (multiple
                                                                                                     employment (electricity)                   firms
                                                                               Forum)                                           indicators)


                                                                              10.1815a    14.7558a     13.9296a    11.3482a     11.9328a      ‐23.8551a
                                             Ln(procedures register)
                                                                              (1.2958)    (3.3801)     (2.6355)    (3.3149)     (2.1122)       (4.4736)

                                                                               0.0426b      0.0599     ‐0.0408      ‐0.1107      0.0579a      ‐0.2745b
                                             Total Tax Rate
                                                                               (0.0173)    (0.0524)    (0.0995)     (0.0774)     (0.0182)     (0.1361)

                                                                               5.9038a     ‐0.4877     7.4048a      8.4290a      6.4492a      ‐13.2818a
                                             Time to comply with taxes
                                                                               (0.8215)    (2.3969)    (1.8772)     (2.5841)     (1.4057)      (3.4070)

                                                                               0.5087a      0.3931     0.6275a       0.4452       0.3928       ‐0.2511
                                             % Management time regulations
                                                                               (0.1069)    (0.2941)    (0.2175)     (0.3513)     (0.2411)      (0.5630)

                                                                               0.1096a      0.0274      0.0614       0.0809      0.1638a       ‐0.0859
                                             Hiring Index
                                                                               (0.0280)    (0.0660)    (0.0526)     (0.0716)     (0.0387)      (0.0875)

                                                                               0.0942b      0.0079     0.0996c       0.0558      0.1147b      ‐0.2565b
                                             Firing Index
                                                                               (0.0371)    (0.0599)    (0.0574)     (0.0971)     (0.0530)     (0.1206)

                                                                               0.1583a     ‐0.2358      0.0880       0.0273       ‐0.1008      ‐0.2031
                                             Nonwage costs
                                                                               (0.0494)    (0.1553)    (0.0794)     (0.1159)     (0.0980)      (0.1359)

                                                                               3.2047a      1.3864     3.3703a      4.4214a      5.4614a       ‐5.0812
                                             Formalism Check Collection
                                                                               (0.8214)    (1.5126)    (1.1305)     (1.5261)     (1.3257)      (3.2976)

                                                                              ‐0.2207a     ‐0.1832b    ‐0.2537a     ‐0.2686a    ‐0.2981a       0.3117b
                                             Efficiency of bankruptcy
                                                                              (0.0252)     (0.0757)    (0.0347)     (0.0677)    (0.0352)       (0.1175)

                                                                              ‐0.0090a     ‐0.0334b    ‐0.0112a     ‐0.0137a    ‐0.0163a       0.0297a
                                             Ln(paved roads / surface)
                                                                              (0.0019)     (0.0130)    (0.0020)     (0.0023)    (0.0018)       (0.0109)

                                                                              ‐7.4778a     ‐7.1143a    ‐10.8238a    ‐8.5364a    ‐9.4626a      11.9029a
                                             Corruption
                                                                              (0.3604)     (1.8722)     (0.9804)    (1.6594)    (0.5970)      (1.9284)

                                                                              ‐8.0286a     ‐6.0779a    ‐11.6845a    ‐9.1701a    ‐9.9850a      13.3112a
                                            Rule of law
                                                                              (0.3697)     (1.7659)     (0.9440)    (2.0373)    (0.6170)      (2.0744)

                                                                              ‐14.3709a   ‐14.8612a    ‐19.2173a   ‐11.7983a    ‐19.7457a     25.4301a
                                             Private Credit / GDP
                                                                               (1.5940)    (5.2608)     (2.8056)    (3.5882)     (2.3164)     (8.9047)

                                                                              ‐9.3152a     ‐6.9204     ‐10.5142a    ‐9.4449a    ‐13.8049a     10.2845b
                                            Stock Market Cap / GDP
                                                                              (1.7191)     (5.8906)     (2.5057)    (2.5483)     (3.0358)     (4.2383)

                                                                              51.5059a    32.8132a     60.4548a    71.4457a     62.0713a      ‐13.1594
                                            Access to credit
                                                                              (1.6596)    (5.3360)     (4.8082)    (7.8939)     (3.3155)      (9.7251)
                                                       Table II – Determinants of the size of the informal sector (continued)



                                                                     Panel B: OLS regressions controlling for GDP per capita
                                                                                    %Informal                                         %Informal
                                                                                                              Self     %Informal                    Registered
                                                                                   (World Econ Tax evasion                             (multiple
                                                                                                           employment (electricity)                   firms
                                                                                     Forum)                                           indicators)


                                                                                    3.9083a     12.1526a      1.4158       1.7380      3.6917c      ‐13.1812b
                                                  Ln(procedures register)
                                                                                    (1.1217)    (3.5141)     (2.0266)     (3.2263)     (1.8926)      (5.2796)

                                                                                    ‐0.0039       0.0283      0.0389      ‐0.2306b     ‐0.0049      ‐0.3029a
                                                  Total Tax Rate
                                                                                    (0.0170)     (0.0563)    (0.0648)     (0.0866)     (0.0196)     (0.1019)

                                                                                    3.1399a       ‐0.5181    2.6988c       2.5281      3.3539a      ‐6.9528b
                                                  Time to comply with taxes
                                                                                    (0.6296)     (2.3814)    (1.5122)     (2.6397)     (1.2687)     (3.2654)

                                                                                    0.3950a       0.2007      0.2610       0.2312       0.2400        0.3767
                                                  % Management time regulations
                                                                                    (0.0725)     (0.3011)    (0.1829)     (0.3418)     (0.1962)      (0.4977)

                                                                                    0.0485a       ‐0.0033    ‐0.0388       ‐0.0201     0.0777b        0.0537
                                                  Hiring Index
                                                                                    (0.0182)     (0.0631)    (0.0397)     (0.0526)     (0.0342)      (0.0682)

                                                                                     0.0311       ‐0.0294     0.0170       ‐0.0469      0.0274        ‐0.1100
                                                  Firing Index
                                                                                    (0.0275)     (0.0547)    (0.0420)     (0.0752)     (0.0470)      (0.1007)

                                                                                    0.0806b       ‐0.1075    ‐0.0405       ‐0.0966      0.0917        ‐0.0579
                                                  Nonwage costs
                                                                                    (0.0311)     (0.1649)    (0.0571)     (0.0714)     (0.0769)      (0.1090)

                                                                                    1.7096a       2.2855      0.5051       ‐1.9308     3.3370a        ‐2.0003
                                                  Formalism Check Collection
                                                                                    (0.5891)     (1.5024)    (0.8129)     (1.3614)     (1.0474)      (2.8724)

                                                                                    ‐0.0560       ‐0.0491    ‐0.0252      0.2044b      ‐0.0356        0.0752
                                                  Efficiency of bankruptcy
                                                                                    (0.0395)     (0.0863)    (0.0545)     (0.0895)     (0.0417)      (0.1736)

                                                                                    ‐0.0025      ‐0.0168c    ‐0.0029a     ‐0.0044b    ‐0.0051a        0.0175
                                                  Ln(paved roads / surface)
                                                                                    (0.0016)     (0.0088)    (0.0010)     (0.0018)    (0.0016)       (0.0119)

                                                                                    ‐5.6768a      ‐3.4956    ‐1.8315       0.3169     ‐6.9316a        3.8139
                                                  Corruption
                                                                                    (0.6844)     (3.0779)    (1.9129)     (3.1140)    (1.1440)       (3.7512)

                                                                                    ‐6.4793a      ‐2.1094    ‐2.5183       1.6005     ‐7.7984a        4.9209
                                                  Rule of law
                                                                                    (0.7095)     (3.0715)    (2.2886)     (3.9196)    (1.3920)       (3.3668)

                                                                                    ‐5.6811a      ‐6.1499     2.7131      9.3552b     ‐8.1961a        6.2312
                                                  Private Credit / GDP
                                                                                    (1.6812)     (6.1198)    (2.3110)     (4.5279)    (3.1009)      (12.5764)

                                                                                    ‐3.3739a      ‐1.1785     0.5142       0.6396     ‐5.3196a        ‐3.5914
                                                  Stock Market Cap / GDP
                                                                                    (1.0313)     (5.7787)    (1.4782)     (2.0652)    (1.8352)       (8.0838)

                                                                                    68.5488a      ‐0.3639   125.7942a    164.0424a    99.0417a      ‐82.9238a
                                                  Access to credit
                                                                                    (4.2760)     (1.7380)   (17.0908)    (21.0187)    (7.5245)      (14.1297)




Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                                           Table III – Basic descriptive statistics

This table presents average sales (in USD purchasing power terms) and number of observations for countries in the Informal survey (Panel A) and the Micro survey
(Panel B). The control group is formed by firms in the Enterprise survey. Firms in the control group are broken in three categories: (1) Small (less than 20 employees),
(2) Medium (between 20 and 99 employees), and (3) Big (at least 100 employees).

                                                   Panel A: Informal Survey and control group from the Enterprise Survey

                                                     Informal Survey                                                                  Enterprise Survey
                                Unregistered           Registered                     All                       Small               Medium                   Big                  All
                                 Sales     Obs.       Sales         Obs.        Sales       Obs.       Sales            Obs.      Sales       Obs.       Sales      Obs.      Sales     Obs.
Bangladesh           2003       19,794     195       48,856           2        20,089       197      321,193             64     2,360,761     259     8,367,846     642    6,221,918     965
Brazil               2003       32,528     218       51,227         126        39,377       344      767,484            252     3,419,992     811     24,100,000    406     8,683,195   1,469
Cambodia             2003       25,710     209       75,165           6        27,090       215      167,574            193      979,849       40     3,260,287      26      603,488     259
Cape Verde           2006       29,917      85       18,922          18        27,996       103      374,308             69     1,738,857      23     4,149,963       1      752,375      93
Guatemala            2003       16,339     183       23,604          10        16,716       193      460,772            163     1,782,770     131     9,557,032      83    2,922,765     377
India                2002       31,956     419       69,237          30        34,447       449      459,165            749     2,804,990     485     17,200,000    230    3,871,384    1,464
Indonesia            2003       29,237     276          .             .        29,237       276       34,244              2     4,608,116     301     41,500,000    337    24,000,000    640
Kenya                2003       20,297     149       30,712          36        22,323       185     1,675,268            49     6,070,552      65     31,800,000     41    11,500,000    155
Niger                2005       15,169      48       14,927          58        15,037       106     4,999,650            34     4,416,983      16     14,700,000      3     5,371,892     53
Pakistan             2003       15,435     210        7,805           3        15,327       213     2,066,015             7     4,316,266      66     9,332,258      33     5,729,247    106
Senegal              2004       24,944     153       29,827          41        25,976       194      433,291             86     4,542,087      90     18,400,000     35    5,169,733     211
Tanzania             2003       9,212      285       19,260          23        9,963        308      278,088             77     3,754,425      62     15,700,000     38    4,796,542     177
Uganda               2003       35,082      91       45,341          23        37,152       114      297,418            107     3,222,021      58     10,700,000     28    2,681,279     193
Average                         23,509     194       36,240          31        24,671       223      948,805            142     3,385,975     185     16,059,030    146     6,331,063    474

                                                    Panel B: Micro Survey and control group from the Enterprise Survey
                                                      Micro Survey                                                                     Enterprise Survey
                                Unregistered            Registered                    All                       Small               Medium                    Big                 All
                                 Sales      Obs.       Sales       Obs.          Sales      Obs.      Sales             Obs.      Sales       Obs.       Sales      Obs.     Sales      Obs.
Angola               2006       22,524        8       46,153       107          44,509       115     219,543             353     440,131       64       826,909       6     261,533      423
Botswana             2006       27,192       27      105,688        73          84,494       100    1,054,364            212    4,027,974      86      9,497,498     39    2,790,306     337
Burundi              2006       31,950       16       44,336       121          42,889       137     262,566             219    1,313,305      43      2,923,213      8     508,740      270
Congo, Dem. Rep.     2006       20,150       40       32,891        64          27,991       104     156,191             258     779,580       71      1,675,336     11     335,518      340
Gambia, The          2006       12,955       47       20,307        76          17,498       123     191,976             118     975,985       47      3,564,678      7     543,472      172
Guinea               2006       93,345       27      129,568        77         120,164       104     180,759             194     979,018       19      2,246,573      7     315,430      220
Guinea‐Bissau        2006       22,532       29       48,451       108          42,965       137     155,735              97     441,720       16                           196,228      113
India                2006       40,179      643       92,382       906          70,713      1,549    391,872            2,839   2,121,049      714     8,301,780    307    1,340,829    3,860
Mauritania           2006       56,070       69       38,977        53          48,644       122     258,159             181    2,287,588      44      8,216,648     5      819,408      230
Namibia              2006       5,392        49       31,419        47          18,134       96      665,167             225    2,917,353      82      9,329,198    17     1,689,759     324
Rwanda               2006       8,295        22       46,821       106          40,199       128     344,204             143    2,071,016      53      7,671,968    16     1,328,946     212
Swaziland            2006       5,658        34      52,230         83          38,696       117     391,593             207    2,418,694      55      6,982,505    32     1,488,191     294
Tanzania             2006       30,093       25       48,327        40          41,314       65      326,825             259    3,430,273      111    16,400,000    44     2,866,305     414
Uganda               2006       43,584       38       93,144        59          73,729       97      361,505             367    1,609,611      149     5,885,212    36     1,058,645     552
Average                         29,994       77       59,335       137          50,853       214     354,318             405    1,843,807      111     6,424,732    41     1,110,236     554
                                                                            Table IV: Attributes of the firms in the Informal Survey

This table presents indicators of general firm characteristics, employees, finance, and growth for the sample of countries in the Informal survey. Results for unregistered
and registered firms in the Informal surveys are shown in columns 2 and 3, respectively. Results for a control group of Small (less than 20 employees), Medium (between
20 and 99 employees), and Big (at least 100 employees) firms from the Enterprise survey are shown in columns 5 through 7, respectively.
                                                                                     Informal Survey                     Enterprise Survey                                         Differences
                                                                                                                                                      Enterprise vs   Registered vs         Small vs
                                                                      Unregistered     Registered       All    Small   Medium          Big     All                                                        Big vs Small
                                                                                                                                                        Informal      Unregistered        Unregistered
   General Characteristics:
                                                                                                                                                               a                                     a            a
    Age of the firm (in years)                                            9.9             11.6          9.9    14.4     18.8           22.6   17.8       7.9             1.7                 4.5            8.1
    % of firms that are registered with a central government agency      0.0%            100.0%        14.9%     .       .               .      .          .          100.0%                     .            .
    % of firms that are registered with a local government agency        34.0%           47.2%         37.0%     .       .               .      .          .           13.2%                     .            .
    % of firms that are registered with an industry board or agency      7.2%            14.8%         8.9%      .       .               .      .          .            7.6%                     .            .
    % of occupied land that is owned by the firm                         52.3%           55.5%         53.9%   59.0%   70.9%          70.8%   67.4%   13.5%             3.2%               6.7%          11.8%
                                                                                                                                                               b                                                  b
    % of occupied buildings that is owned by the firm                    45.1%           48.1%         44.9%   60.8%   74.8%          79.3%   71.2%   26.2%             3.0%              15.7%          18.4%
                                                                                                                                                               a                                     a            a
    % of firms that own a generator                                      5.5%             5.1%         5.6%    20.1%   53.9%          77.0%   45.9%   40.3%            ‐0.4%              14.6%          56.8%
    Average capacity utilization (%)                                     61.9%           65.8%         62.4%   66.5%   68.0%          71.2%   68.2%    5.8%             3.9%               4.5%           4.7%
                                                                                                                                                               a                                     a
    % of firms for which the main buyer are large firms                  1.2%            13.5%         1.6%    9.2%    17.8%          16.1%   15.1%   13.5%            12.3%               8.0%           6.9%
    Anticompetitive and informal practices a big obstacle (0‐4)           1.74            2.16         1.78    1.74     1.98           2.11   1.97       0.2             0.4                 0.0            0.4


   Employees
                                                                                                                                                               a                                     a            a
      Average number of employees                                         3.9              9.8          4.1    10.3     43.1          487.8   151.0    146.9             5.9                 6.4          477.5
                                                                                                                                                               a                                     a            a
      Median number of employees                                          3.8              4.6          4.1    10.2     42.9          426.7   100.6     96.5             0.9                 6.4          416.5
                                                                                                                                                               a               b                     a            a
      Index of education of top manager                                   1.6              2.0          1.6     2.8     3.3            3.8     3.3       1.7             0.4                 1.2            1.0
                                                                                                                                                               a               c                     a            a
        % of top managers with primary education                         64.8%           47.8%         64.2%   13.0%    7.0%          2.1%    8.9%    ‐55.3%          ‐17.0%             ‐51.8%          ‐10.9%
                                                                                                                                                                                                     c            a
        % of top managers with secondary education                       19.3%           20.8%         18.6%   34.8%   19.5%           5.9%   18.1%    ‐0.5%            1.4%              15.4%          ‐28.9%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c
        % of top managers with vocational education                      9.8%            15.6%         10.4%   10.9%    8.2%          4.6%    9.1%     ‐1.3%            5.8%               1.0%           ‐6.3%
                                                                                                                                                               a               b                     a            a
        % of top managers with college education                         6.1%            15.9%         6.8%    41.4%   65.2%          87.5%   63.9%   57.0%             9.8%              35.3%          46.1%
      Index of education of average employee                              2.4              2.5          2.4     2.3     2.3            2.4     2.3      ‐0.1             0.1                ‐0.1            0.2
        % of employees with primary education                            59.0%           50.0%         58.2%   52.3%   51.5%          45.2%   47.9%   ‐10.3%           ‐9.1%              ‐6.8%           ‐7.1%
        % of employees with secondary education                          34.3%           40.2%         34.9%   24.4%   27.7%          33.5%   32.5%    ‐2.4%            5.9%              ‐9.9%           9.0%
                                                                                                                                                               a                                     b
        % of employees with college education                            6.7%             9.8%         6.9%    21.8%   18.3%          17.7%   17.4%   10.5%             3.2%              15.1%           ‐4.0%


   Finance
      %firms that have ever had a loan                                   24.9%           35.6%         26.0%     .       .               .      .          .           10.7%                     .            .
                                                                                                                                                               a                                                  b
      % of financing from internal funds                                 74.9%           71.0%         75.7%   67.8%   56.3%          50.4%   58.2%   ‐17.5%           ‐3.9%              ‐7.2%          ‐17.4%
      % of financing from trade                                          4.6%             6.2%         4.7%    4.9%     6.2%           7.2%   5.9%     1.2%             1.7%               0.4%           2.2%
      % of financing from family                                         10.5%            9.1%         9.5%    6.3%     6.3%           3.7%   6.6%     ‐2.9%           ‐1.4%              ‐4.2%           ‐2.6%
                                                                                                                                                               a                                     b            a
      % of financing from banks                                          3.0%             4.0%         3.0%    9.6%    16.0%          20.9%   15.0%   12.0%             1.1%               6.6%          11.4%
                                                                                                                                                               b                                     b
      Duration of last loan (in months)                                   14.6            13.3         14.1    29.0     32.7           35.1   32.2      18.1            ‐1.2                14.5            6.1


   Growth
                                                                                                                                                               c
      Annual growth in employees over previous two years                 5.2%             7.1%         5.4%    8.1%    11.1%          11.6%   10.0%    4.6%             1.9%               2.9%           3.5%




Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                                                       Table V: Attributes of the firms in the Micro Survey

This table presents indicators of general firm characteristics, employees, finance, and growth for the sample of countries in the Micro survey. Results for unregistered
and registered firms in the Micro surveys are shown in columns 2 and 3, respectively. Results for a control group of Small (less than 20 employees), Medium (between
20 and 99 employees), and Big (at least 100 employees) firms from the Enterprise survey are shown in columns 5 through 7, respectively.
                                                                                           Micro Survey                     Enterprise Survey                                         Differences
                                                                                                                                                         Enterprise vs   Registered vs           Small vs
                                                                            Unregistered    Registered     All    Small   Medium          Big     All                                                           Big vs Small
                                                                                                                                                            Micro        Unregistered          Unregistered
     General Characteristics:
                                                                                                                                                                  a                                        a            a
      Age of the firm (in years)                                                7.0            8.2         7.8     9.2     14.3           18.3   10.7       3.0             1.2                     2.2           9.1
      % of firms that are registered with a central government agency          0.0%          100.0%       68.4%     .       .               .      .          .          100.0%                        .            .
                                                                                                                                                                                  a
      % of firms that are registered with a local government agency            39.4%          81.1%       68.7%     .       .               .      .          .           41.7%                        .            .
      % of firms that are registered with an industry board or agency          5.0%           30.7%       20.0%     .       .               .      .          .           25.7%                        .            .
      % of firms located in the owners home                                    17.2%          13.4%       13.8%     .       .               .      .          .           ‐3.9%                        .            .
      % of firms located in a permanent structure                              71.4%          80.4%       77.0%     .       .               .      .          .            9.0%                        .            .
                                                                                                                                                                  a                                                     a
      % of occupied land that is owned by the firm                             21.7%          20.1%       20.1%   28.4%   54.3%          71.0%   36.2%   16.1%            ‐1.6%                 6.7%           42.7%
      % of firms forced to move last year because of lack of secure title      11.3%          8.8%        9.8%      .       .               .      .          .           ‐2.5%                        .            .
                                                                                                                                                                  a               c                        a            a
      % of firms that own a generator                                          12.7%          23.6%       20.2%   32.5%   52.1%          75.8%   43.0%   22.8%            10.9%                19.8%           43.3%
                                                                                                                                                                                  c
      % of firms with an electrical connection                                 60.0%          79.2%       73.6%     .       .               .      .          .           19.2%                        .            .
                                                                                                                                                                                  a
      % uses own transportation equipment                                      6.6%           22.9%       18.2%     .       .               .      .          .           16.3%                        .            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
      Hours per week that the firm operates                                     64.8           64.6       64.9    59.4     60.9           79.8   62.2      ‐2.7            ‐0.2                     ‐5.4         20.4
                                                                                                                                                                                  a
      % of firms for which the main buyer are large firms                      0.4%           2.6%        1.8%    21.1%   36.1%          44.7%   29.0%   27.2%             2.2%                20.7%           23.6%
                                                                                                                                                                  a               a                        a            a
      %exports                                                                 0.1%           0.7%        0.5%    0.9%     4.4%          19.9%   2.8%     2.3%             0.7%                 0.8%           19.0%
                                                                                                                                                                  a               a                        a            a
      % of firms that use email to connect with clients                        3.2%           9.1%        7.1%    29.5%   57.8%          78.7%   39.0%   31.9%             5.9%                26.3%           49.1%
                                                                                                                                                                  a               b                        a            a
      % of firms that use a webpage to connect with clients                    0.9%           2.8%        2.2%    8.9%    22.2%          42.2%   14.1%   11.8%             2.0%                 8.0%           33.3%
                                                                                                                                                                  a                                        a
      Anticompetitive and informal practices a big obstacle (0‐4)               1.54           1.43       1.47    1.40     1.46           1.48   1.41      ‐0.1            ‐0.1                     ‐0.1          0.1


     Employees
                                                                                                                                                                  a               b                        a            a
        Average number of employees                                             2.9            4.5         3.9     8.7     38.7          290.4   32.7      28.8             1.5                     5.8         281.6
                                                                                                                                                                  a               b                        a            a
        Median number of employees                                              2.7            3.7         3.5     8.7     39.4          253.2   29.1      25.6             1.0                     5.9         244.5
                                                                                                                                                                  a               a                        a            a
        Index of education of top manager                                       1.8            2.3         2.1     2.7     3.2            3.8     2.8       0.7             0.4                     0.8           1.1
                                                                                                                                                                  a               c                        a            a
          % of top managers with primary education                             49.8%          35.9%       40.2%   22.1%    0.1            2.2%   19.6%   ‐20.6%          ‐13.9%               ‐27.7%           ‐19.9%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
          % of top managers with secondary education                           27.8%          26.2%       26.2%   25.3%    0.1            5.5%   21.6%    ‐4.6%           ‐1.7%                ‐2.6%           ‐19.8%
                                                                                                                                                                                                           b            a
          % of top managers with vocational education                          10.2%          13.4%       12.4%   17.0%    0.1            6.9%   15.7%    3.3%             3.2%                 6.8%           ‐10.1%
                                                                                                                                                                  a               a                        a            a
          % of top managers with college education                             12.2%          24.6%       21.2%   35.7%    0.6           85.3%   43.1%   21.9%            12.4%                23.5%           49.7%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        b
        Index of education of average employee                                  2.3            2.3         2.3     2.5     2.5            2.8     2.5       0.2             0.0                     0.1           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        b
          % of employees with primary education                                48.7%          46.1%       46.4%   47.8%    0.4           31.2%   44.8%    ‐1.6%           ‐2.7%                ‐0.9%           ‐16.5%
          % of employees with secondary education                              40.2%          41.2%       41.3%   42.9%    0.5           52.8%   45.8%    4.5%             1.0%                 2.7%            9.9%
          % of employees with college education                                4.0%           5.7%        5.3%    9.3%     0.1           16.0%   9.4%     4.1%             1.7%                 5.3%            6.6%


     Finance
                                                                                                                                                                                  b
        %firms that have ever had a loan                                       7.3%           12.5%       10.9%     .       .               .      .          .            5.1%                        .            .
                                                                                                                                                                  c                                        c            a
        % of financing from internal funds                                     81.9%          76.9%       78.9%   75.5%   64.4%          59.1%   72.4%    ‐6.5%           ‐5.1%                ‐6.4%           ‐16.4%
                                                                                                                                                                                                           c
        % of financing from trade                                              8.3%           11.5%       10.6%   13.3%   17.3%          16.5%   14.2%    3.6%             3.3%                 5.0%            3.2%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
        % of financing from family                                             6.6%           6.7%        6.2%    4.6%     3.1%           0.9%   4.1%     ‐2.1%            0.1%                ‐2.0%            ‐3.7%
                                                                                                                                                                  a               a                        a
        % of financing from banks                                              0.4%           2.0%        1.5%    4.1%    11.3%          18.5%   6.4%     4.9%             1.6%                 3.7%           14.4%
                                                                                                                                                                  c               b                        b            b
        Duration of last loan (in months)                                       13.2           29.9       26.8    30.5     39.3           55.5   37.6      10.8            16.8                 17.4             25.0


     Growth
                                                                                                                                                                  a                                        b
        Annual growth in employees over previous two years                     24.3%          27.1%       25.9%   17.5%   18.9%          14.6%   17.6%    ‐8.3%            2.8%                ‐6.8%            ‐2.9%



Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                 Table VI: Legal status of Enterprise Survey firms in selected countries

Panel A presents the percentage of firms that started operating as registered firms, as well as their age, for Latin American firms in the 2006 Enterprise Survey. Panel B
reports the frequency distribution of the time that it took firms that were initially unregistered to register. All firms were registered at the time of the survey.



                                             Panel A: Legal status of Enterprise Survey firms when they started operations
                                                                                      %Started       %Does not
                                             Country               Observations                                    Firm Age
                                                                                     registered        know
                                             Argentina                1,051            92.8%           1.1%          28.6
                                             Bolivia                   609             85.7%           0.7%          21.8
                                             Chile                    1,007            98.0%           1.0%          26.6
                                             Colombia                  995             89.0%           0.5%          17.0
                                             Ecuador                   652             91.6%           0.9%          21.3
                                             El Salvador               683             77.7%           1.4%          21.4
                                             Guatemala                 511             90.4%           2.1%          20.9
                                             Honduras                  424             89.4%           2.8%          20.5
                                             Mexico                   1,439            94.9%           2.8%          18.5
                                             Nicaragua                 474             80.4%           0.8%          22.9
                                             Panama                    601             97.8%           0.5%          24.5
                                             Paraguay                  608             94.4%           0.8%          21.3
                                             Peru                      630             96.8%           0.3%          19.8
                                             Uruguay                   607             97.5%           2.3%          28.8
                                             Average                                   91.2%           1.3%          22.4

                                                   Panel B: Time to register for firms that were initially unregistered

                                                                                                          Cumulative
                                                           Years         Frequency         Percent
                                                                                                           Percent
                                                            1                 129            17.9           17.9
                                                            2                 134            18.6           36.5
                                                            3                  79            11.0           47.5
                                                            4                  52            7.2            54.7
                                                            5                  58            8.1            62.8
                                                            6                  26            3.6            66.4
                                                            7                  28            3.9            70.3
                                                            8                  19             2.6           72.9
                                                            9                  22             3.1           76.0
                                                            10                 23             3.2           79.2
                                                                                                             Table VII: Institutional environment

This table presents indicators of compliance with government regulations, the quality of public goods, and property rights for the sample of countries in the Informal
survey (Panel A) and in the Micro survey (Panel B). Results for unregistered and registered firms in the Informal and Micro surveys are shown in columns 2 and 3,
respectively. Results for a control group of Small (less than 20 employees), Medium (between 20 and 99 employees), and Big (at least 100 employees) firms from the
Enterprise survey are shown in columns 5 through 7, respectively.

                                                                                         Panel A: Informal sample and Enterprise survey control group
                                                                                                                   Informal Survey                     Enterprise Survey                                    Differences
                                                                                                                                                                                    Enterprise vs     Registered vs            Small vs        Big vs
                                                                                                    Unregistered     Registered       All    Small   Medium          Big     All
                                                                                                                                                                                      Informal        Unregistered           Unregistered      Small
             Compliance with government regulations
                                                                                                                                                                                              a                 c                        a
              % of tax liability evaded by "typical" firm                                              74.8%           53.5%         72.2%   35.5%   28.6%          22.9%   30.3%   ‐41.9%            ‐21.4%             ‐39.3%              ‐12.6%
                                                                                                                                                                                              a                                          c                b
              % of management's time spent dealing with government regulations                         5.6%             6.8%         5.3%    9.8%    15.4%          14.5%   12.9%    7.6%              1.2%                   4.2%             4.7%
              % of sales a "typical" firm pays in informal gifts or payments to get things done        3.6%             4.8%         3.9%    4.6%     4.1%          3.8%    4.6%     0.7%              1.1%                   1.0%            ‐0.8%


             Public goods
              Days last year with power outages                                                         50.0            56.3         50.6    44.9     52.1          53.5    48.0      ‐2.6               6.3                   ‐5.0              8.6
              Days last year with water outages                                                         33.6            31.3         34.3    22.5     24.4          24.2    23.5     ‐10.8              ‐2.4                  ‐11.1              1.6
              Days last year with telephone outages                                                     4.1             19.3         14.2    13.1     10.6          11.8    11.7      ‐2.5              15.2                    9.0             ‐1.3
              Days last year with transportation outages                                                33.6            22.0         32.7     7.1      9.2          10.9     9.1     ‐23.6             ‐11.6                  ‐26.5              3.8


             Property rights
              % of sales lost last year owing to theft                                                 2.9%             3.5%         3.1%    3.8%     1.7%          0.8%    2.2%     ‐0.9%             0.6%                   0.9%            ‐3.0%
              % of sales spent on security expenses                                                    1.8%             1.2%         1.6%    2.2%     2.3%          2.5%    2.3%     0.6%              ‐0.6%                  0.4%             0.3%
              % of sales spent on "protection payments"                                                1.0%             0.5%         1.0%    0.5%     0.8%          0.7%    0.7%     ‐0.3%             ‐0.5%                 ‐0.5%             0.3%
                                                                                                                                                                                              b                                          b
              % of incidents reported to the police                                                    14.1%           26.2%         19.1%   36.0%   38.0%          54.0%   42.6%   23.5%             12.1%                  21.9%            18.1%
              % of firms that had payment dispute in last 2 years                                      21.5%            0.0%         21.3%     .        .             .       .           .           ‐21.5%                       .                .
              Days it took a typical court case to be resolved                                          60.9            90.3          66.2   67.9     56.1          68.3    61.9      ‐4.3              29.4                    7.0              0.4


                                                                                             Panel B: Micro sample and Enterprise survey control group
                                                                                                                   Micro Survey                        Enterprise Survey                                       Differences
                                                                                                                                                                                     Enterprise vs     Registered vs       Small vs
                                                                                                   Unregistered      Registered       All    Small   Medium          Big     All                                                      Big vs Small
                                                                                                                                                                                        Micro          Unregistered      Unregistered
             Compliance with government regulations
                                                                                                                                                                                                  b                                  a                c
              % of tax liability evaded by "typical" firm                                             67.7%            54.2%         58.3%   44.4%   33.7%          32.5%   41.6%   ‐16.6%            ‐13.5%            ‐23.3%               ‐11.9%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  a             a                    a                c
              % of management's time spent dealing with government regulations                         1.5%            4.2%          3.5%    8.2%     9.3%          10.5%   8.5%      5.0%              2.7%                 6.6%             2.3%
              % of sales a "typical" firm pays in informal gifts or payments to get things done        4.0%            3.5%          3.3%    6.6%     7.1%           5.6%   6.6%      3.2% a           ‐0.5%                 2.6%             ‐1.0%


             Public goods
              Number of power outages in the last year                                                167.1            134.4         138.8   138.3    151.7         157.9   143.7       4.9             ‐32.7                ‐28.8             19.6
              Days last year with water outages                                                          .               .             .     57.9     56.4           51.8    51.9             .             .                    .             ‐6.1
              Days last year with telephone outages                                                      .               .             .      3.7      4.8           3.5     4.0              .             .                    .             ‐0.2


             Property rights
              % of sales lost last year owing to theft                                                 0.5%            0.5%          0.5%    2.6%     1.8%           1.6%   2.4%      1.8% a            0.0%                 2.1%    a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ‐1.0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  c                                                   a
              % of sales spent on security expenses                                                    3.4%            2.8%          2.9%    2.3%     2.1%           1.2%   2.1%      ‐0.8%            ‐0.6%                 ‐1.1%            ‐1.1%
              % of sales spent on "protection payments"                                                  .               .             .     0.4%     2.9%          0.2%    1.2%              .             .                    .            ‐0.1%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  c                                                   a
              % of firms that had payment dispute in last 2 years                                      6.0%            8.4%          7.5%    9.5%    16.6%          19.4%   11.4%     4.0%              2.3%                 3.5%             9.9%
              If there was a payment dispute, % of firms that used court to resolve it                29.2%            33.2%         30.1%   51.3%   67.6%          81.8%   58.3%    28.3% a              4%                  22%    c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               31%    a

              Days it took a typical court case to be resolved                                          .               44.3          44.3    45.4    74.1           64.4    51.9       7.7                 .                    .             19.1




Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                                                                   Table VIII: Production Inputs

This table presents average expenditure to sales ratios for the sample of countries in the Informal survey (Panel A) and in the Micro survey (Panel B). Results for
unregistered and registered firms in the Informal and Micro surveys are shown in columns 2 and 3, respectively. Results for a control group of Small (less than 20
employees), Medium (between 20 and 99 employees), and Big (at least 100 employees) firms from the Enterprise survey are shown in columns 5 through 7, respectively.

                                                                                           Panel A: Enterprise survey and control group

                                                            Informal Survey                                        Enterprise Survey                                                                 Differences
                                                                                                                                                                  Enterprise vs            Registered vs          Small vs
                                            Unregistered      Registered             All           Small      Medium               Big            All                                                                                    Big vs Small
                                                                                                                                                                    Informal               Unregistered         Unregistered
                                                                                                                                                                             a                                           b
Expenditure on raw materials / Sales (%)        30.5%           35.2%           31.0%              43.2%       47.2%              41.3%          46.4%            15.4%                     4.7%                 12.7%                   ‐1.9%
Expenditure on energy / Sales (%)               6.8%             6.8%            6.8%               6.8%        6.8%              6.8%            6.8%                0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%                   0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c
Expenditure on labor / Sales (%)                13.4%           21.8%           14.9%              21.5%       17.8%              17.3%          18.9%                4.0%                  8.4%                  8.1%                   ‐4.2%
Expenditure on machines / Sales (%)             0.1%             0.1%            0.1%               0.1%        0.1%              0.0%            0.1%                0.0%                  0.0%                  0.0%                   0.0%
Expenditure on land / Sales (%)                 8.3%            13.2%           10.4%               4.2%        1.6%              2.0%            3.6%            ‐6.8%                     4.9%                 ‐4.1%                   ‐2.2%
                                                                                                                                                                             a                                           b                       b
Expenditure on rent / Sales (%)                 7.5%            9.7%            7.9%                3.9%        2.2%              1.3%            2.8%            ‐5.1%                     2.3%                 ‐3.6%                   ‐2.6%
Average                                                                                                                                                            1.3%                     3.4%                  2.2%                   ‐1.8%


                                                                                             Panel B: Micro survey and control group

                                                           Micro Survey                                      Enterprise Survey                                                         Differences
                                                                                                                                                         Enterprise vs            Registered vs           Small vs
                                           Unregistered     Registered         All              Small      Medium           Big            All                                                                               Big vs Small
                                                                                                                                                           Informal               Unregistered          Unregistered
Expenditure on raw materials / Sales (%)      38.5%           39.7%           39.6%            41.3%       44.4%           49.3%          42.6%           3.0%                     1.2%                  2.7%                 8.0%
                                                                                                                                                                  c
Expenditure on energy / Sales (%)             3.6%            2.9%            2.9%              4.2%        3.8%           4.6%           4.1%            1.2%                    ‐0.7%                  0.6%                 0.4%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     c
Expenditure on labor / Sales (%)              23.3%           21.0%           21.5%            21.6%       19.7%           17.7%          20.9%          ‐0.5%                    ‐2.3%                 ‐1.7%                ‐3.9%
Expenditure on machines / Sales (%)           2.9%            3.3%            3.1%             17.8%       44.1%           32.9%          18.6%          15.5%                     0.4%                 14.8%                15.1%
Expenditure on land / Sales (%)                 .               .               .               0.7%        0.7%           0.7%           0.7%                .                        .                     .                0.0%
                                                                                                                                                                  c                                                                  a
Expenditure on rent / Sales (%)               7.4%            8.3%            8.0%              6.7%        3.5%           2.3%           5.8%           ‐2.2%                     0.9%                 ‐0.6%                ‐4.4%
Average                                                                                                                                                   3.4%                    ‐0.1%                  3.2%                 2.5%




Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                                               Table IX: Wages per employee

This table presents the average ratio of wage per employee to GDP per capita for the sample of countries in the Informal survey (Panel A) and in the Micro survey (Panel
B). Results for unregistered and registered firms in the Informal and Micro surveys are shown in columns 3 and 4, respectively. Results for a control group of Small (less
than 20 employees), Medium (between 20 and 99 employees), and Big (at least 100 employees) firms from the Enterprise survey are shown in columns 6 through 8,
respectively.

                                                                         Panel A: Informal sample and control group

                                                 Informal Survey                               Enterprise Survey                                 Differences
                                                                                                                              Enterprise vs Registered vs    Small vs
                                  Unregistered     Registered       All           Small     Medium           Big       All                                                Big vs Small
                           Year                                                                                                 Informal    Unregistered Unregistered
                                                                                                                                          a                          a
     Cape Verde           2006        0.90            1.25         0.96           2.92        4.03           2.62      3.19     2.23           0.35        2.03           ‐0.30


                                                                          Panel B: Micro sample and control group
                                                 Micro Survey                                 Enterprise Survey                                  Differences
                                                                                                                              Enterprise vs Registered vs    Small vs
                                  Unregistered    Registered       All           Small     Medium           Big       All                                                Big vs Small
                          Year                                                                                                   Micro      Unregistered Unregistered
                                                                                                                                      a               c          a               a
    Angola                2006        1.35           2.23          2.17          3.26        3.02           1.51      3.20     1.03           0.88        1.91           ‐1.74
                                                                                                                                      a               a          a
    Botswana              2006        0.35           0.58          0.52          0.89        1.05           1.03      0.95     0.43           0.23        0.54            0.14
                                                                                                                                      a               c          a
    Burundi               2006        1.76           3.13          2.97          5.84        7.29           4.82      6.04     3.07           1.37        4.08           ‐1.02
                                                                                                                                      a                          a               a
    Congo, Dem. Rep.      2006        5.64           5.45          5.52          8.25        11.35          9.26      8.93     3.41           ‐0.18       2.62            1.01
                                                                                                                                      a               a          a
    Gambia, The           2006        0.54           1.04          0.85          1.52        2.41           1.92      1.78     0.94           0.49        0.98            0.40
                                                                                                                                      c               b          a
    Guinea                2006        0.83           1.23          1.13          1.30        1.13           0.91      1.27     0.15           0.40        0.47           ‐0.39
                                                                                                                                      b                          c
    Guinea‐Bissau         2006        6.11           7.21          6.97          9.64        6.92            .        9.25     2.29           1.10        3.53               .
                                                                                                                                      a               a          a
    India                 2006        1.31           1.43          1.39          1.54        1.82           1.62      1.64     0.25           0.12        0.22            0.09
                                                                                                                                      a                          a
    Mauritania            2006        2.12           2.10          2.11          3.88        3.98           4.33      3.91     1.80           ‐0.02       1.76            0.44
                                                                                                                                      a               a          a
    Namibia               2006        0.27           0.79          0.55          2.48        2.56           2.30      2.49     1.94           0.51        2.21           ‐0.19
                                                                                                                                      a                          a
    Rwanda                2006        1.29           1.52          1.47          4.01        5.70           3.12      4.36     2.89           0.23        2.72           ‐0.89
                                                                                                                                      a               a          a
    Swaziland             2006        0.50           1.20          1.05          1.92        2.21           1.88      1.97     0.92           0.69        1.42           ‐0.04
                                                                                                                                      a                          a               a
    Tanzania              2006        1.44           1.59          1.53          3.59        5.07           5.72      4.21     2.68           0.16        2.15            2.13
                                                                                                                                      b                          b
    Uganda                2006        3.08           3.93          3.60          4.32        4.90           3.91      4.45     0.85           0.85        1.24           ‐0.42
                                                                                                                                      b                          b
    Average                           1.90           2.39          2.27          3.75        4.24           3.26      3.89     1.62           0.49        1.85           ‐0.04




Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                                 Table X – Productivity of firms in the Informal Survey

Panel A presents average values of (logarithm) value added per employee for the countries in the Informal survey. Panel B presents average values of (logarithm) sales
per employee for the countries covered in the Informal survey. Panel C presents average values of (logarithm) real output per employee for the countries covered in
the informal survey. Results for unregistered and registered firms in the Informal survey are shown in columns 3 and 4, respectively. Results for a control group of Small
(less than 20 employees), Medium (between 20 and 99 employees), and Big (at least 100 employees) firms from the Enterprise survey are shown in columns 6 through 8,
respectively.

                                                                      Panel A: Log of value added per employee
                                             Informal Survey                             Enterprise Survey                                        Differences
                                                                                                                          Registered vs     Small vs                                   Big vs
        Country        Year   Unregistered     Registered      All        Small      Medium             Big       All                                         Big vs Small
                                                                                                                          Unregistered    Unregistered                              Unregistered
                                                                                                                                                   b                                          a
        Bangladesh    2003        7.09            7.92         7.10        7.96        8.53             8.69     8.61      0.83            0.87                       0.73             1.60
                                                                                                                                   a               a                         a                a
        Brazil        2003        8.30            8.77         8.47        9.22        9.58            10.36     9.74      0.48            0.92                       1.14             2.06
        Cambodia      2003        7.19            8.01         7.22         .           .                    .     .       0.82                .                         .                .
        Cape Verde    2006        8.12            7.85         8.07        8.47        9.21             9.78     8.78      ‐0.27           0.35                       1.30             1.65
                                                                                                                                                   a                         a                a
        Guatemala     2003        7.37            8.59         7.48        8.95        9.39             9.42     9.21      1.22            1.57                       0.48             2.05
                                                                                                                                   a               a                         a                a
        India         2002        7.64            8.29         7.69        9.16        9.43             9.90     9.36      0.64            1.52                       0.74             2.26
                                                                                                                                                                                              a
        Indonesia     2003        7.73              .          7.73        8.53        8.39             9.16     8.80          .           0.80                      0.64              1.44
                                                                                                                                                   a                         a                a
        Kenya         2003        7.76            8.04         7.83        9.58        9.99            10.30     9.94      0.28            1.82                       0.71             2.54
        Niger         2005        9.32            7.16         8.24       11.44       10.01             9.98     10.83     ‐2.16           2.12                      ‐1.46             0.66
                                                                                                                                                   a                                          a
        Pakistan      2003        7.21            6.59         7.20        9.78        9.76             9.18     9.58      ‐0.62           2.58                      ‐0.60             1.98
                                                                                                                                                   a                         a                a
        Senegal       2004        7.19            7.22         7.20        9.09        9.81             9.96     9.54      0.03            1.90                       0.87             2.77
                                                                                                                                                   a                                          a
        Tanzania      2003        6.23              .          6.23        8.65        9.51             9.83     9.40          .           2.43                       1.18             3.61
                                                                                                                                                   a                         a                a
        Uganda        2003        7.15            7.92         7.30        8.71        9.33            10.02     9.09      0.76            1.56                       1.31             2.87
                                                                                                                                   a               a                         b                a
        Average                   7.56            7.85         7.52        9.13        9.41             9.72     9.41      0.18            1.54                       0.59             2.12

                                                                          Panel B: Log of sales per employee
                                             Informal Survey                             Enterprise Survey                                             Differences
                                                                                                                          Registered vs     Small vs                                   Big vs
        Country        Year   Unregistered     Registered      All        Small      Medium             Big       All                                                Big vs Small
                                                                                                                          Unregistered    Unregistered                              Unregistered
                                                                                                                                                   a                         c                a
        Bangladesh    2003        7.82            8.82         7.83        9.39       10.00             9.61     9.70      1.00            1.57                       0.22             1.79
                                                                                                                                   a               a                         a                a
        Brazil        2003        8.63            9.18         8.83        9.84       10.23            11.02     10.38     0.55            1.21                       1.18             2.40
                                                                                                                                   a               a                                          a
        Cambodia      2003        7.77            9.10         7.80        8.84        8.95             8.61     8.84      1.33            1.08                      ‐0.24             0.84
                                                                                                                                                   a
        Cape Verde    2006        8.35            8.33         8.34        9.82       10.35             9.94     9.96      ‐0.02           1.48                       0.12             1.60
                                                                                                                                                   a                         a                a
        Guatemala     2003        7.80            8.12         7.81        9.70       10.14            10.19     9.96      0.32            1.90                       0.49             2.39
                                                                                                                                   a               a                         a                a
        India         2002        8.20            8.83         8.25       10.09       10.32            10.77     10.27     0.63            1.89                       0.67             2.56
                                                                                                                                                                             b                a
        Indonesia     2003        8.38              .          8.38        7.66        9.07            10.04     9.58          .          ‐0.72                       2.38             1.66
                                                                                                                                                   a                                          a
        Kenya         2003        8.11            8.34         8.15       10.76       11.07            10.98     10.95     0.24            2.65                       0.22             2.87
                                                                                                                                   c               a                                          a
        Niger         2005        7.80            7.45         7.61       11.40       10.76            10.95     11.18     ‐0.35           3.60                      ‐0.45             3.15
                                                                                                                                                   a                                          a
        Pakistan      2003        7.73            7.30         7.73       10.73       10.83            10.17     10.62     ‐0.44           2.99                      ‐0.56             2.43
                                                                                                                                                   a                         a                a
        Senegal       2004        7.81            7.95         7.84       10.16       10.77            11.34     10.61     0.14            2.35                       1.19             3.53
                                                                                                                                   a               a                         a                a
        Tanzania      2003        7.26            8.08         7.32        8.96       10.28            10.68     9.79      0.82            1.70                       1.73             3.42
                                                                                                                                                   a                         a                a
        Uganda        2003        7.73            8.12         7.81        9.42       10.02            10.69     9.79      0.38            1.69                       1.27             2.96
                                                                                                                                   b               a                         b                a
        Average                   7.95            8.30         7.98        9.75       10.21            10.38     10.12     0.38            1.80                       0.63             2.43
                                                                                       Table X (continued)

                                                                         Panel C: Log of real output per employee

                                               Informal Survey                               Enterprise Survey                                          Differences
                                                                                                                            Registered vs     Small vs                                  Big vs
         Country         Year   Unregistered     Registered       All          Small      Medium            Big      All                                              Big vs Small
                                                                                                                            Unregistered    Unregistered                             Unregistered
         Bangladesh     2003       12.49           14.79         12.51         15.35       16.90           17.29    17.05    2.30 b          2.86   a
                                                                                                                                                                       1.94   a
                                                                                                                                                                                        4.80   a

                                                                                                                                     a              a                         a                a
         Brazil         2003       13.49           14.34         13.80         16.12       17.21           19.25    17.59    0.85            2.63                      3.13             5.76
                                                                                                                                     a              a                         a                a
         Cambodia       2003       12.56           14.66         12.62         14.23       15.26           16.00    14.57    2.10            1.67                      1.77             3.44
                                                                                                                                                    a
         Cape Verde     2006       13.02           13.09         13.03         15.87       17.28           17.66    16.24    0.06            2.84                      1.80             4.64
                                                                                                                                                    a                         a                a
         Guatemala      2003       12.46           13.00         12.49         15.74       17.04           18.15    16.72    0.54            3.28                      2.40             5.69
         India          2002       13.14           14.18         13.21         16.29       17.24           18.98    17.02    1.04 a          3.15   a
                                                                                                                                                                       2.69   a
                                                                                                                                                                                        5.84   a

                                                                                                                                                                              a                a
         Indonesia      2003       13.32              .          13.32         12.69       15.42           18.25    16.90        .          ‐0.62                      5.55             4.93
                                                                                                                                                    a                         a                a
         Kenya          2003       12.82           13.29         12.91         17.36       18.51           19.31    18.36    0.47            4.54                      1.95             6.49
                                                                                                                                                    a                                          a
         Niger          2005       12.27           12.01         12.13         18.31       18.10           19.16    18.29    ‐0.26           6.03                      0.85             6.88
                                                                                                                                                    a                                          a
         Pakistan       2003       12.38           11.63         12.37         17.26       18.08           18.08    18.03    ‐0.75           4.88                      0.82             5.70
                                                                                                                                                    a                         a                a
         Senegal        2004       12.51           12.69         12.55         16.35       17.99           19.71    17.61    0.18            3.84                      3.36             7.20
                                                                                                                                     a              a                         a                a
         Tanzania       2003       11.55           12.85         11.65         14.55       17.28           18.72    16.40    1.30            2.99                      4.17             7.17
                                                                                                                                                    a                         a                a
         Uganda         2003       12.39           13.08         12.53         15.05       16.66           18.59    16.05    0.69            2.66                      3.54             6.20
                                                                                                                                     a              a                         a                a
         Average                   12.65           13.30         12.70         15.78       17.15           18.40    16.99    0.71            3.14                      2.61             5.75


Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                                                       Table XI – Productivity of firms in the Micro Survey

Panel A presents average values of (logarithm) value added per employee for the countries in the Micro survey. Panel B presents average values of (logarithm) sales per
employee for the countries covered in the Micro survey. Results for unregistered and registered firms in the Micro survey are shown in columns 3 and 4, respectively.
Results for a control group of Small (less than 20 employees), Medium (between 20 and 99 employees), and Big (at least 100 employees) firms from the Enterprise
survey are shown in columns 6 through 8, respectively.

                                                                                             Panel A: Log of value added per employee
                                                            Micro Survey                                          Enterprise Survey                                                               Differences
                                                                                                                                                                  Registered vs          Small vs                                  Big vs
Country                    Year          Unregistered        Registered        All              Small          Medium               Big             All                                                    Big vs Small
                                                                                                                                                                  Unregistered         Unregistered                             Unregistered
                                                                                                                                                                           a                   a                                         a
Angola                     2006              7.48               8.35           8.30             8.97            8.86                9.34           8.97            0.87                 1.50                0.36                 1.86
Botswana                   2006              9.00               8.85           8.88             9.49            10.02               9.52           9.66            ‐0.15                0.48                0.03                 0.51
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    b
Burundi                    2006              8.52               7.81           7.91             8.19            9.23                9.11           8.47            ‐0.72               ‐0.33                0.92                 0.59
                                                                                                                                                                           b                   a                                         a
Congo, Dem. Rep.           2006              6.91               7.65           7.38             8.25            8.89                8.53           8.47            0.74                 1.34                0.28                 1.62
                                                                                                                                                                           c                   a                                         a
Gambia, The                2006              6.86               7.39           7.24             8.23            8.76                9.35           8.44            0.52                 1.37                1.12                 2.49
                                                                                                                                                                           c                                        a                    b
Guinea                     2006              8.01               8.65           8.49             8.34            8.67                9.60           8.41            0.64                 0.33                1.26                 1.59
Guinea‐Bissau              2006              7.78               8.39           8.31             8.28            8.47                  .            8.32            0.61                 0.50                    .                    .
                                                                                                                                                                           a                   a                    a                    a
India                      2006              8.05               8.40           8.25             8.75            8.99                9.44           8.93            0.35                 0.70                0.68                 1.39
                                                                                                                                                                           b                                        b                    c
Mauritania                 2006              8.43               7.50           8.16             8.69            9.23                9.34           8.92            ‐0.93                0.26                0.66                 0.91
                                                                                                                                                                           b                   a                    b                    a
Namibia                    2006              6.76               7.82           7.51             9.81            10.21              10.44           10.04           1.06                 3.05                0.63                 3.68
                                                                                                                                                                                               a                                         c
Rwanda                     2006              7.51               8.38           8.32             9.15            9.36                9.10           9.21            0.86                 1.64               ‐0.05                 1.59
                                                                                                                                                                           b                   a                                         a
Swaziland                  2006              7.63               8.64           8.54             9.83            9.55                9.62           9.67            1.00                 2.20               ‐0.21                 1.99
                                                                                                                                                                                               a                    a                    a
Tanzania                   2006              7.88               8.21           8.09             8.92            9.74               10.37           9.32            0.33                 1.05                1.44                 2.49
                                                                                                                                                                                               a                    a                    a
Uganda                     2006              8.13               8.40           8.30             8.66            8.92                9.71           8.80            0.27                 0.52                1.05                 1.57
                                                                                                                                                                           b                   a                    a                    a
Average                                      7.78               8.17           8.12             8.83            9.21                9.50           8.97            0.39                 1.04                0.63                 1.71



                                                                                                Panel B: Log of sales per employee
                                                                Micro Survey                                              Enterprise Survey                                                            Differences
                                                                                                                                                                       Registered vs          Small vs                                  Big vs
        Country                   Year       Unregistered         Registered          All              Small       Medium                   Big            All                                                  Big vs Small
                                                                                                                                                                       Unregistered         Unregistered                             Unregistered
                                                                                                                                                                                   a                  a                                          a
        Angola                    2006              8.16               8.90           8.85              9.58            9.50               9.92            9.58            0.74                1.43                 0.34                 1.77
                                                                                                                                                                                   a                  a                                          a
        Botswana                  2006              8.53               9.49           9.23             10.33           10.78               10.62          10.48            0.95                1.80                 0.28                 2.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            b                    b
        Burundi                   2006              9.09               8.69           8.73              9.25            9.86               10.15           9.37            ‐0.40               0.16                 0.91                 1.06
                                                                                                                                                                                   c                  a                     b                    a
        Congo, Dem. Rep.          2006              7.91               8.38           8.20              8.91            9.52               9.57            9.06            0.48                1.01                 0.66                 1.67
                                                                                                                                                                                   a                  a                     a                    a
        Gambia, The               2006              7.42               8.02           7.79              8.76            9.41               10.30           9.00            0.60                1.34                 1.55                 2.88
                                                                                                                                                                                   b                                        b
        Guinea                    2006              8.88               9.53           9.36              8.92            9.18               9.90            8.98            0.66                0.05                 0.98                 1.03
                                                                                                                                                                                   c                  a
        Guinea‐Bissau             2006              8.49               9.05           8.93              9.27            9.35                  .            9.28            0.57                0.79                     .                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                   a                  a                     a                    a
        India                     2006              8.66               9.12           8.93              9.79            9.93               10.14           9.85            0.46                1.13                 0.35                 1.48
                                                                                                                                                                                   b                  a                     s                    a
        Mauritania                2006              9.14               8.79           8.99              9.98           10.24               11.14          10.05            ‐0.35               0.84                 1.17                 2.00
                                                                                                                                                                                   a                  a                     a                    a
        Namibia                   2006              7.17               8.21           7.68             10.34           10.65               10.96          10.45            1.04                3.16                 0.63                 3.79
                                                                                                                                                                                   a                  a                     b                    a
        Rwanda                    2006              7.39               8.62           8.41              9.26            9.96               10.01           9.49            1.23                1.87                 0.74                 2.61
                                                                                                                                                                                   a                  a                                          a
        Swaziland                 2006              7.62               8.94           8.55              9.87           10.25               10.06           9.96            1.32                2.25                 0.19                 2.44
                                                                                                                                                                                                      a                     a                    a
        Tanzania                  2006              8.51               8.93           8.77              9.36           10.21               11.12           9.77            0.42                0.85                 1.76                 2.61
                                                                                                                                                                                   a                  a                     a                    a
        Uganda                    2006              8.66               9.17           8.97              9.32            9.69               10.36           9.49            0.50                0.66                 1.04                 1.70
                                                                                                                                                                                   a                  a                     a                    a
        Average                                     8.26               8.85           8.67              9.50            9.89               10.33           9.63            0.59                1.24                 0.81                 2.09
                                                                                 Table XI (continued)

                                                                      Panel C: Log of real output per employee

                                         Micro Survey                            Enterprise Survey                                          Differences
                                                                                                                 Registered vs     Small vs                            Big vs
Country            Year   Unregistered    Registered     All      Small       Medium             Big      All                                        Big vs Small
                                                                                                                 Unregistered    Unregistered                       Unregistered
Angola             2006      12.97          14.13       14.05     15.57        15.94           17.27     15.65    1.16 a          2.60 a
                                                                                                                                                      1.71 a         4.30 a
                                                                                                                          a              a                    a              a
Botswana           2006      13.38          14.89       14.49     16.63        18.01           18.54     17.20    1.52            3.25                1.92           5.16
                                                                                                                                                              a              b
Burundi            2006      14.20          13.67       13.73     14.96        16.58           17.71     15.30    ‐0.53           0.75                2.76           3.51
                                                                                                                          b              a                    a              a
Congo, Dem. Rep.   2006      12.44          13.32       12.98     14.46        16.02           16.92     14.87    0.88            2.02                2.46           4.48
                                                                                                                          a              a                    a              a
Gambia, The        2006      11.77          12.72       12.35     14.22        15.94           18.11     14.85    0.95            2.46                3.89           6.35
                                                                                                                          b                                   a              a
Guinea             2006      14.06          15.02       14.77     14.47        15.55           17.57     14.66    0.96            0.42                3.10           3.51
                                                                                                                          c              a
Guinea‐Bissau      2006      13.23          14.01       13.84     15.01        15.78                 .   15.12    0.78            1.78                    .              .
                                                                                                                          a              a                    a              a
India              2006      13.76          14.68       14.30     15.33        16.71           18.04     15.80    0.92            1.57                2.71           4.28
                                                                                                                          b              a                    a              a
Mauritania         2006      14.42          13.92       14.20     16.07        17.15           19.31     16.35    ‐0.49           1.65                3.24           4.89
                                                                                                                          a              a                    a              a
Namibia            2006      11.17          12.92       12.02     16.64        17.72           19.15     17.04    1.75            5.47                2.52           7.99
                                                                                                                          a              a                    a              a
Rwanda             2006      11.62          13.44       13.13     15.00        16.75           17.89     15.65    1.82            3.38                2.89           6.27
                                                                                                                          a              a                    a              a
Swaziland          2006      11.71          14.03       13.35     15.91        17.17           17.85     16.36    2.31            4.20                1.94           6.14
                                                                                                                          c              a                    a              a
Tanzania           2006      13.33          14.13       13.82     15.17        17.16           19.36     16.15    0.80            1.84                4.19           6.03
                                                                                                                          a              a                    a              a
Uganda             2006      13.79          14.72       14.36     15.14        16.33           18.28     15.66    0.94            1.35                3.15           4.50
                                                                                                                          a              a                    a              a
Average                      12.99          13.97       13.67     15.33        16.63           18.16     15.76    0.98            2.34                2.80           5.19




Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                             Table XII – OLS Regressions for (log) value added per employee

This table presents results of OLS regressions for the sample of 27 countries covered by the Informal and Micro surveys. The dependent variable is (logarithm) value
added per employee in purchasing power terms. The control variables include: (1) a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is in the Informal survey, (2) a dummy equal to 1 if the
firm is in the Informal survey and is registered, (3) a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is in the Micro survey, (4) a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is in the Micro survey and is
registered, (5) (logarithm) GDP per capita in purchasing power terms, (6) (logarithm) expenditure on raw materials per employee, (7) (logarithm) expenditure on energy
per employee, (8) (logarithm) expenditure on machines per employee, (9) an index of the firm’s top manager education, (10) (logarithm) sales, and (11) eight industry
dummies. Errors are clustered at the country level and reported in parentheses.
                                   Informal Survey                         ‐1.7788a   ‐1.7894a   ‐1.8135a   ‐0.8875a   ‐0.7075a   ‐0.6901a   ‐0.5574a    0.1247
                                                                           (0.1455)   (0.1265)   (0.1160)   (0.1788)   (0.1517)   (0.1543)   (0.1597)   (0.1225)

                                   Informal Survey and Registered          0.8077a    0.6241a    0.5906a    0.3032b     0.1612     0.1705     0.1281    0.2948a
                                                                           (0.2476)   (0.1499)   (0.1204)   (0.1449)   (0.1223)   (0.1237)   (0.1226)   (0.0939)

                                   Micro Survey                            ‐1.2910a   ‐1.2810a   ‐1.2488a   ‐0.7925a   ‐0.6626a   ‐0.5711a   ‐0.4746a   0.3720a
                                                                           (0.1464)   (0.0963)   (0.1035)   (0.1127)   (0.1256)   (0.1218)   (0.1133)   (0.0660)

                                   Micro Survey and Registered             0.3454a    0.3763a    0.3115a    0.1821a    0.1510a    0.1387a    0.0986b     ‐0.0728
                                                                           (0.0368)   (0.0436)   (0.0330)   (0.0350)   (0.0467)   (0.0418)   (0.0398)   (0.0527)

                                   Ln(GDP per capita)                                 0.3960a    0.4279a    0.3272b    0.2985b    0.2739b    0.2665b     0.0584
                                                                                      (0.1164)   (0.1333)   (0.1184)   (0.1166)   (0.0983)   (0.0966)   (0.0760)

                                   Ln(Raw Materials / Employee)                                             0.2873a    0.2140a    0.2034a    0.1977a     0.0381
                                                                                                            (0.0509)   (0.0491)   (0.0489)   (0.0483)   (0.0392)

                                   Ln(Energy/Employee)                                                                 0.2059a    0.1909a    0.1834a    0.1093a
                                                                                                                       (0.0348)   (0.0317)   (0.0326)   (0.0303)

                                   Ln(Expenditure Machines / Employee)                                                            0.0570a    0.0544a     0.0078
                                                                                                                                  (0.0102)   (0.0100)   (0.0112)

                                   Manager Education                                                                                         0.0986a     ‐0.0231
                                                                                                                                             (0.0292)   (0.0160)

                                   Ln(Sales)                                                                                                            0.4204a
                                                                                                                                                        (0.0564)

                                   Industry dummies
                                                                             No         No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes


                                   Constant                                9.2615a    6.1996a    5.7435a    4.0303a    3.6547a    3.7987a    3.6445a    1.9736a
                                                                           (0.1389)   (0.9186)   (1.0810)   (0.9428)   (0.9646)   (0.8459)   (0.8393)   (0.6059)

                                   Observations                             8,478      8,478      8,478      8,478      8,478      8,478      8,478      8,478
                                   Adjusted R2                              24.19%    28.07%     29.90%     43.13%     46.83%     47.94%     48.47%     64.00%




Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                                   Table XIII – OLS Regressions for sales per employee

This table presents results of OLS regressions for the sample of 27 countries covered by the Informal and Micro surveys. The dependent variable is (logarithm) sales per
employee in purchasing power terms. The control variables include: (1) a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is in the Informal survey, (2) a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is in
the Informal survey and is registered, (3) a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is in the Micro survey, (4) a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is in the Micro survey and is registered,
(5) (logarithm) GDP per capita in purchasing power terms, (6) (logarithm) expenditure on raw materials per employee, (7) (logarithm) expenditure on energy per
employee, (8) (logarithm) expenditure on machines per employee, (9) an index of the firm’s top manager education, (10) (logarithm) sales, and (11) eight industry
dummies. Errors are clustered at the country level and reported in parentheses.
                                 Informal Survey                           ‐1.9768a   ‐1.9861a   ‐1.9875a   ‐0.5355a   ‐0.3742b   ‐0.3625b   ‐0.2536    0.3420b
                                                                           (0.1395)   (0.1190)   (0.1173)   (0.1783)   (0.1468)   (0.1442)   (0.1548)   (0.1349)

                                 Informal Survey and Registered            0.7707a    0.6036a    0.5618a     0.1077     ‐0.0215   ‐0.0155    ‐0.0501     0.0916
                                                                           (0.2493)   (0.1560)   (0.1211)   (0.1797)   (0.1615)   (0.1601)   (0.1620)   (0.1069)

                                 Micro Survey                              ‐1.4258a   ‐1.4163a   ‐1.3843a   ‐0.6690a   ‐0.5474a   ‐0.4840a   ‐0.4048a   0.3288a
                                                                           (0.1389)   (0.1087)   (0.1151)   (0.1002)   (0.1126)   (0.1107)   (0.1018)   (0.0515)

                                 Micro Survey and Registered               0.4048a    0.4335a    0.3677a    0.1634a    0.1350a    0.1265a    0.0937a    ‐0.0554b
                                                                           (0.0447)   (0.0423)   (0.0532)   (0.0292)   (0.0326)   (0.0328)   (0.0314)   (0.0217)

                                 Ln(GDP per capita)                                   0.3685a    0.4094a    0.2533a    0.2271a    0.2101a    0.2040a     0.0233
                                                                                      (0.0903)   (0.1081)   (0.0762)   (0.0736)   (0.0605)   (0.0590)   (0.0420)

                                 Ln(Raw Materials / Employee)                                               0.4536a    0.3835a    0.3759a    0.3713a    0.2300a
                                                                                                            (0.0509)   (0.0479)   (0.0478)   (0.0475)   (0.0449)

                                 Ln(Energy/Employee)                                                                   0.1934a    0.1829a    0.1768a    0.1126a
                                                                                                                       (0.0331)   (0.0313)   (0.0322)   (0.0273)

                                 Ln(Expenditure Machines / Employee)                                                              0.0400a    0.0380a    ‐0.0031
                                                                                                                                  (0.0088)   (0.0086)   (0.0096)

                                 Manager Education                                                                                           0.0807a    ‐0.0256
                                                                                                                                             (0.0247)   (0.0155)

                                 Ln(Sales)                                                                                                              0.3675a
                                                                                                                                                        (0.0485)

                                 Industry dummies
                                                                             No         No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes


                                 Constant                                  10.0297a   7.1802a    6.6180a    3.8967a    3.5466a    3.6473a    3.5206a    2.0659a
                                                                           (0.1430)   (0.7136)   (0.8958)   (0.6490)   (0.6878)   (0.6190)   (0.6062)   (0.3207)

                                 Observations                               8,564      8,564      8,564      8,564      8,564      8,564      8,564      8,564
                                           2
                                 Adjusted R                                28.95%     32.20%     34.72%     68.86%     70.06%     70.60%     70.94%     82.59%




Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                                    Table XIV – OLS Regressions for real output per employee

This table presents results of OLS regressions for the sample of 27 countries covered by the Informal and Micro surveys. The dependent variable is (logarithm) real
output per employee in purchasing power terms. The control variables include: (1) a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is in the Informal survey, (2) a dummy equal to 1 if the
firm is in the Informal survey and is registered, (3) a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is in the Micro survey, (4) a dummy equal to 1 if the firm is in the Micro survey and is
registered, (5) (logarithm) GDP per capita in purchasing power terms, (6) (logarithm) expenditure on raw materials per employee, (7) (logarithm) expenditure on energy
per employee, (8) (logarithm) expenditure on machines per employee, (9) an index of the firm’s top manager education, (10) (logarithm) sales, and (11) eight industry
dummies. Errors are clustered at the country level and reported in parentheses.
                                   Informal Survey                             ‐3.9489a    ‐3.9681a   ‐3.9265a    ‐1.6477a       ‐1.3877a       ‐1.3577a       ‐1.0464a       0.3713b
                                                                               (0.2373)    (0.1678)   (0.1992)    (0.2838)       (0.2387)       (0.2307)       (0.2412)       (0.1343)

                                   Informal Survey and Registered               1.1202a    0.7732a    0.7754a      0.0627         ‐0.1455       ‐0.1301         ‐0.2290        0.1083
                                                                                (0.3540)   (0.1764)   (0.1682)    (0.2821)       (0.2535)       (0.2387)       (0.2425)       (0.1122)

                                   Micro Survey                                ‐3.1495a    ‐3.1298a   ‐3.1033a    ‐1.9807a       ‐1.7847a       ‐1.6211a       ‐1.3948a       0.3514a
                                                                               (0.2743)    (0.1637)   (0.1765)    (0.1908)       (0.2106)       (0.2069)       (0.1814)       (0.0486)

                                   Micro Survey and Registered                  0.7682a    0.8279a    0.7794a     0.4588a        0.4130a        0.3911a        0.2974a        ‐0.0575b
                                                                                (0.0945)   (0.0786)   (0.0972)    (0.0585)       (0.0580)       (0.0643)       (0.0663)       (0.0243)

                                   Ln(GDP per capita)                                      0.7650a    0.7877a     0.5428a        0.5006a        0.4567a        0.4393a         0.0093
                                                                                           (0.1502)   (0.1856)    (0.1343)       (0.1311)       (0.0987)       (0.0945)       (0.0399)

                                   Ln(Raw Materials / Employee)                                                   0.7118a        0.5989a        0.5794a        0.5662a        0.2297a
                                                                                                                  (0.0820)       (0.0775)       (0.0769)       (0.0751)       (0.0459)

                                   Ln(Energy/Employee)                                                                           0.3117a        0.2848a        0.2671a        0.1144a
                                                                                                                                 (0.0538)       (0.0494)       (0.0515)       (0.0284)

                                   Ln(Expenditure Machines / Employee)                                                                          0.1032a        0.0973a         ‐0.0005
                                                                                                                                                (0.0147)       (0.0151)       (0.0097)

                                   Manager Education                                                                                                           0.2307a         ‐0.0224
                                                                                                                                                               (0.0595)       (0.0152)

                                   Ln(Sales)                                                                                                                                  0.8749a
                                                                                                                                                                              (0.0505)

                                   Industry dummies                               No          No            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes

                                   Constant                                    16.7985a 10.8838a 10.4597a         6.1889a        5.6246a        5.8843a        5.5221a        2.0591a
                                                                               (0.2667) (1.2225) (1.5417)         (1.1699)       (1.2260)       (1.0445)       (1.0103)       (0.3085)

                                   Observations                                  8,564      8,564      8,564       8,564          8,564          8,564          8,564          8,564
                                              2
                                   Adjusted R                                   28.95%     32.20%     34.72%      68.86%         70.06%         70.60%         70.94%         82.59%




Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                                   Table XV – Manager ability and self‐selection

                                                                             Panel A: Probit regressions

Panel A presents the marginal effects from Probit regressions for the sample of 27 countries covered by the Informal and Micro surveys. All regressions include: (1)
dummy equal to 1 if the firm’s top manager completed some secondary school, (2) a dummy equal to 1 if the firm’s top manager completed some vocational school, (3)
a dummy equal 1 if the firm’s top manager attended college, (4) (logarithm) GDP per capita in purchasing power terms, and (5) eight industry dummies. Standard errors
are clustered at the country level. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. The panel also reports the F‐statistics for the null hypothesis that all three top‐
manager education dummies are zero.
                                                                                  Independent Variables
                                                                      Top manager education
                                                                                                                 Industry
                                                               Secondary Vocational College Ln(GDP/POP)                       Obs      Pseudo R2    F‐test
                                                                                                                Dummies
             Firm is registered with central government         0.2064a     0.2090a     0.4096a       ‐0.0029
                                                                                                                   Yes       5,478      10.07%        96.54 a
                                                                (0.0420)    (0.0452)    (0.0449)     (0.0555)
             Firm has ever had a loan                            ‐0.0250     0.0115     ‐0.0521       0.0415
                                                                                                                   Yes       3,763       2.75%         2.81
                                                                (0.0254)    (0.0369)    (0.0548)     (0.0379)
             Main buyer are large firm                          0.0361a     0.0349a     0.0323b       0.0037
                                                                                                                   Yes       2,869       9.14%        78.08 a
                                                                (0.0060)    (0.0110)    (0.0152)     (0.0054)
             Firm occupies a permanent structure                 0.0397     0.0954b      0.0778      ‐0.0762a
                                                                                                                   Yes       1,429       4.22%         4.64
                                                                (0.0468)    (0.0434)   (0.0538)      (0.0265)
             Firm located in owner's house                      0.0561a     0.0868b      0.0076       ‐0.0258
                                                                                                                   Yes       1,439       2.31%        36.87 a
                                                                (0.0210)    (0.0355)   (0.0249)      (0.0253)
             Firm own building it occupies                        0.0847     0.0863     0.1118b       0.0167
                                                                                                                   Yes       5,682       3.03%         4.75
                                                                (0.0527)    (0.0691)   (0.0542)      (0.0466)
             Firm own the land it occupies                        0.0497     0.0352     0.0982b       0.0197
                                                                                                                   Yes      11,760       5.82%         6.11
                                                                (0.0453)    (0.0539)   (0.0490)      (0.0369)
             Firm uses its own transportation equipment           0.0031    0.1265b     0.1184a        0.0097
                                                                                                                   Yes       1,438       3.33%        78.56 a
                                                                (0.0510)    (0.0574)    (0.0284)     (0.0216)
             Firm owns a generator                              0.1280a     0.1390b     0.3675a      ‐0.1349a
                                                                                                                   Yes      12,794      13.01%        75.84 a
                                                                (0.0455)    (0.0550)   (0.0454)      (0.0464)
             Firm uses email to communicate with clients        0.1662a     0.2309a     0.4799a      0.1495b
                                                                                                                   Yes      11,081      21.62%      158.61 a
                                                                (0.0460)    (0.0453)    (0.0438)     (0.0736)
             Firm uses website to communicate with clients      0.1159a     0.1676a     0.2574a      0.1358b
                                                                                                                   Yes      11,044      16.91%        61.46 a
                                                                (0.0353)    (0.0361)    (0.0274)     (0.0648)
             Firm has electrical connection                     0.1837a     0.1901a     0.2833a       ‐0.0200
                                                                                                                   Yes       1,439      12.82%         33.1 a
                                                                (0.0503)    (0.0579)   (0.0597)      (0.0517)


Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                            Table XV – Manager ability and self‐selection (continued)

                                                                              Panel B: OLS regressions

Panel B presents results for OLS regressions for the sample of 27 countries covered by the Informal and Micro surveys. All regressions include: (1) dummy equal to 1 if
the firm’s top manager completed some secondary school, (2) a dummy equal to 1 if the firm’s top manager completed some vocational school, (3) a dummy equal 1 if
the firm’s top manager attended college, (4) (logarithm) GDP per capita in purchasing power terms, and (5) eight industry dummies. Standard errors are clustered at the
country level. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. The panel also reports the F‐statistics for the null hypothesis that all three top‐manager education
dummies are zero.

                                                                                      Independent Variables
                                                                   Top manager education
                                                                                                                     Industry
                                                           Secondary      Vocational      College      Ln(GDP/POP)              Constant     Obs     Adj R2   F‐test
                                                                                                                     Dummies
%Investment financed with internal funds                     0.9852         ‐2.9315      ‐10.1707a      ‐5.3383b                111.3720a   13,006   5.10%     35.06   a
                                                                                                                       Yes
                                                            (3.6083)       (1.9982)       (2.1024)      (1.9468)                (14.7773)
Expenditure on raw materials / Sales                        0.0378a        0.0338b        0.0874a        ‐0.0080                 0.4461a    11,966   3.83%     11.32   a
                                                                                                                       Yes
                                                            (0.0130)       (0.0147)       (0.0193)      (0.0154)                 (0.1340)
Expenditure on energy / Sales                               ‐0.0015         ‐0.0040        ‐0.0077       ‐0.0035                 0.0747b    12,546   1.72%      1.78
                                                                                                                       Yes
                                                            (0.0039)       (0.0041)       (0.0047)      (0.0040)                 (0.0302)
Expenditure on machines / Sales                             ‐0.0047        0.0162a          0.0019       ‐0.0023                  0.0432    12,577   3.26%      7.91   a
                                                                                                                       Yes
                                                            (0.0040)       (0.0052)       (0.0041)      (0.0046)                 (0.0361)
%Capacity utilization                                        0.6230         1.0456        5.4810a         1.5761                 57.7676a   9,380    4.18%      7.15   a
                                                                                                                       Yes
                                                            (1.0430)       (1.8476)       (1.3208)      (1.1737)                (10.6062)


Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
                                                                                                    Table XVI ‐‐ Obstacles to doing business

This table reports mean scores for a list of possible obstacles to doing business. All obstacles are reported on the 0‐4 scale for their perceived significance, with 0 being
“no obstacle”, 1 being “minor obstacle”, 2 being “moderate obstacle”, 3 being “major obstacle”, and 4 being “very severe obstacle”.

                                                                                                        Panel A: Informal Survey Sample
                                                                                                    Informal Survey                    Enterprise Survey                                    Differences
                                                                                                                                                                   Enterprise vs   Registered vs        Small vs      Big vs
                                                                                     Unregistered     Registered      All    Small   Medium          Big    All
                                                                                                                                                                     Informal      Unregistered       Unregistered    Small
            Obstacles (Scale from 0 to 4)
             Access to or availability of markets                                        2.05            2.38         2.07     .       .               .     .          .           0.33                      .           .
                                                                                                                                                                            b
             Tax rates                                                                   1.59            2.14         1.65   2.13     2.33           2.50   2.33    0.68            0.55                  0.54        0.37
                                                                                                                                                                            b               c                                  b
             Tax administration                                                          1.40            2.05         1.46   1.79     2.14           2.37   2.05    0.59            0.65                  0.39        0.58
             Cost of financing                                                           2.19            2.37         2.25   1.99     2.25           2.30   2.20   ‐0.05            0.17                  ‐0.20       0.31
                                                                                                                                                                            b
             Corruption                                                                  1.53            1.93         1.59   2.06     2.28           2.27   2.17    0.57            0.40                  0.53        0.21
             Macro‐economic instability (inflation, exchange rate)                       1.75            1.98         1.80   1.89     2.05           2.13   1.95    0.15            0.23                  0.14        0.23
             Electricity                                                                 1.74            1.70         1.74   1.85     1.94           2.12   1.92    0.18            ‐0.04                 0.11        0.27
                                                                                                                                                                                            c
             Anti‐competitive or unfair practices by other businesses                    1.74            2.16         1.78   1.74     1.98           2.11   1.94    0.16            0.42                  0.00        0.37
             Economic policy uncertainty                                                 1.72            1.96         1.75   2.08     2.20           2.10   2.07    0.33            0.24                  0.36        0.02
                                                                                                                                                                            b                                                  a
             Customs and trade regulations                                               1.00            1.51         1.06   1.24     1.61           2.09   1.53    0.46            0.51                  0.25        0.85
                                                                                                                                                                            b
             Access to financing                                                         2.29            2.46         2.32   1.95     1.92           1.83   1.83   ‐0.49            0.17                  ‐0.33       ‐0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b
             Legal system, conflict resolution                                           1.04            1.33         1.07   1.10     1.47           1.78   1.24    0.17            0.29                  0.06        0.67
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a
             Labor regulations                                                           0.84            1.20         0.91   0.99     1.27           1.75   1.17    0.26            0.36                  0.15        0.76
             Crime, theft and disorder                                                   1.48            1.61         1.49   1.59     1.76           1.71   1.57    0.07            0.12                  0.11        0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a
             Skills and education of available workers                                   1.15            1.46         1.23   1.15     1.44           1.67   1.30    0.07            0.31                  ‐0.01       0.52
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b
             Transportation (road quality, road blocks, finding ways to transport)       1.37            1.47         1.36   1.16     1.38           1.57   1.33   ‐0.04            0.11                  ‐0.20       0.41
             Procedures to register firms, formalities, patents, licences, etc.          1.26            1.64         1.49   1.20     1.21           1.42   1.12   ‐0.37            0.37                  ‐0.06       0.23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               b
             Telephone, fax, e‐mail                                                      1.00            0.84         0.99   0.85     0.94           1.32   0.99    0.00            ‐0.16                 ‐0.15       0.47
                                                                                                                                                                            b                                     c
             Access to land                                                              1.46            1.70         1.48   0.98     1.05           1.27   0.95   ‐0.53            0.24                  ‐0.47       0.28
             Postal                                                                      0.07            0.00         0.06     .       .               .     .          .           ‐0.07                     .           .


                                                                                                           Panel B: Micro Survey Sample
                                                                                                     Micro Survey                      Enterprise Survey                                 Differences
                                                                                                                                                                   Enterprise vs   Registered vs     Small vs         Big vs
                                                                                     Unregistered     Registered       All   Small   Medium           Big    All
                                                                                                                                                                      Micro        Unregistered    Unregistered       Small
            Obstacles (Scale from 0 to 4)
             Electricity                                                                 1.96            1.99         1.98   2.24     2.43           2.69   2.30     0.32            0.03                  0.27        0.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c
             Tax rates                                                                   1.35            1.69         1.59   1.75     1.90           1.84   1.78     0.19            0.34                  0.40        0.09
                                                                                                                                                                            b
             Access to financing                                                         2.40            2.33         2.37   2.02     1.91           1.73   1.98    ‐0.39           ‐0.06                 ‐0.37       ‐0.29
                                                                                                                                                                            a                                     a            a
             Skills and education of available workers                                   0.51            0.63         0.60   0.92     1.17           1.64   1.02     0.41            0.12                  0.41        0.72
             Macro‐economic instability (inflation, exchange rate)                       1.38            1.67         1.63   1.47     1.51           1.53   1.50    ‐0.14            0.28                  0.09        0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c
             Tax administration                                                          0.94            1.20         1.13   1.23     1.41           1.48   1.28     0.15            0.26                  0.30        0.25
             Anti‐competitive or unfair practices by other businesses                    1.54            1.43         1.47   1.40     1.46           1.48   1.41    ‐0.06           ‐0.12                 ‐0.14        0.08
             Transportation (road quality, road blocks, finding ways to transport)       1.34            1.30         1.31   1.23     1.25           1.40   1.25    ‐0.06           ‐0.04                 ‐0.11        0.18
             Corruption                                                                  1.09            1.06         1.07   1.20     1.46           1.37   1.27     0.20           ‐0.02                  0.11        0.17
             Crime, theft and disorder                                                   1.18            1.12         1.18   1.18     1.19           1.32   1.20     0.02           ‐0.06                  0.01        0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                            c                     c            a
             Customs and trade regulations                                               0.55            0.82         0.76   0.79     1.20           1.22   0.91     0.15            0.27                  0.24        0.43
             Cost of financing                                                             .               .            .    0.99     1.02           1.12   1.01        .               .                     .        0.14
             Procedures to register firms, formalities, patents, licences, etc.          1.22            1.11         1.10   1.00     1.08           1.00   1.01    ‐0.09           ‐0.12                 ‐0.23        0.01
                                                                                                                                                                            b                                     c            a
             Labor regulations                                                           0.34            0.33         0.34   0.49     0.74           0.99   0.57     0.24           ‐0.01                  0.15        0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a
             Legal system, conflict resolution                                           0.38            0.44         0.43   0.55     0.68           0.98   0.60     0.17            0.07                  0.17        0.43
             Economic policy uncertainty                                                 0.88            0.92         0.96   1.02     1.11           0.96   1.05     0.08            0.04                  0.14       ‐0.05
                                                                                                                                                                            c                                     b
             Access to land                                                              1.44            1.14         1.22   1.06     0.90           0.89   1.02    ‐0.20           ‐0.29                 ‐0.38       ‐0.17
             Telephone, fax, e‐mail                                                      0.56            0.71         0.67   0.70     0.81           0.86   0.74     0.08            0.15                  0.14        0.16
                                                      Table XVII – Costs and benefits of registering in Cape Verde

Panel A reports the fraction of respondents in Cape Verde that rate each of the listed items as a very important advantage of operating as a registered firm. Advantages
are rated on a 1 (minor advantage) through 4 (major advantage) scale. Panel B reports the fraction of respondents in Cape Verde that rate each of the listed items as
either a very important obstacle or an extremely important obstacle to registering. Obstacles are rated on a 1 (unimportant) through 5 (extremely important) scale.

                                                             Panel A: Benefits of registering in Cape Verde

                    Better access to markets                                                                                                44%
                    Better access to services                                                                                               39%
                    Better access to financing                                                                                              39%
                    Better access to raw materials                                                                                          34%
                    Easier to bargain with formal enterprises                                                                               25%
                    Easier to reduce theft by employees or others                                                                           23%
                    Better access to government subsidies                                                                                   20%
                    More solid legal basis for property rights regarding real estate                                                        20%
                    Less turnover of employees or better product market competition                                                         18%
                    Less need to pay bribes                                                                                                 15%

                                                            Panel B: Obstacles to registering in Cape Verde

                    Financial burden of taxes applicable to registered firms                                                                43%
                    Cost of registering                                                                                                     38%
                    Difficulties in obtaining information about how to register                                                             36%
                    Minimum capital legally required to register                                                                            32%
                    Administrative burden of complying with tax laws                                                                        32%
                    Time necessary to register                                                                                              19%
                    Labor regulations that are applicable to registered firms                                                               19%
                    Other administrative burdens (e.g. inspections and meetings with government bureaucrats)                                18%
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Appendix – Correlation Table

The table presents the correlations among the main variables in the paper.




                                      Informal (World Econ Forum)




                                                                                                                                                 Informal (multiple indicators)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Procedures to start business




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Time to comply with tax
                                                                                                                   Informal (Electricity)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Private Credit/GDP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Management time
                                                                                            Self employment




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Market Cap/GDP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Case A Efficiency
                                                                                                                                                                                       Registered firms




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Court formalism
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Nonwage costs




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Road density
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hiring index
                                                                         Tax evasion




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Firing index




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rule of law
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Corruption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Tax rate
                                                                    b
Tax evasion                           0.25
                                                                    a                  b
Self employment                       0.70                              0.25
                                                                    a                  b                      a
Informal (Electricity)                0.61                              0.35               0.61
                                                                    a                                         a                             a
Informal (multiple indicators)        0.70                              0.17               0.47                   0.71
                                                                    a                                         a                                                                   a
Registered firms                     ‐0.43                              ‐0.16              ‐0.46                  ‐0.21                         ‐0.38
                                                                    a                  a                      a                             b                                     a                        a
Procedures to start business          0.48                              0.32               0.37                   0.30                          0.37                                  ‐0.50
                                                                    c                  c                                                                                          c                        c                                   c
Tax rate                              0.16                              0.17               ‐0.04                  ‐0.13                         0.16                                  ‐0.19                    0.15
                                                                    a                                         a                             a                                     a                        a                                   a               a
Time to comply with tax               0.50                              ‐0.02              0.34                   0.42                          0.37                                  ‐0.42                    0.38                                0.22
                                                                    a                                         b                                                                   c                                                                                                           c
Management time                       0.43                              0.14               0.26                   0.24                          0.20                                  ‐0.06                    0.15                                0.00            0.20
                                                                    a                                                                                                             a                                                            a                                              a                      b
Hiring index                          0.32                              0.05               0.10                   0.13                          0.34                                  ‐0.10                    0.26                                0.11            0.26                           0.24
                                                                    b                                                                                                             b                        b                                   a               b                              a                      a                   a
Firing index                          0.23                              0.01               0.14                   0.08                          0.20                                  ‐0.25                    0.27                                0.20            0.32                           0.28                   0.36
                                                                                                              a                                                                                                                                                b                              a                                          a                   a
Nonwage costs                        ‐0.10                              ‐0.16              ‐0.26                  ‐0.20                         ‐0.08                                 0.05                     ‐0.01                               0.18            0.27                           0.02                   0.21                0.22
                                                                    a                                         b                             b                                     a                                                            a               a                              a                      a                   a                   a                    c
Court formalism                       0.36                              0.09               0.25                   0.30                          0.39                                  ‐0.18                    0.45                                0.27            0.36                           0.46                   0.47                0.38                0.21
                                                                    a                  b                      a                             a                                     a                        a                                   a                                              a                      a                   a                                                               a
Case A Efficiency                    ‐0.64                              ‐0.32              ‐0.59                  ‐0.46                         ‐0.57                                 0.35                     ‐0.54                               ‐0.15           ‐0.37                          ‐0.35                  ‐0.37               ‐0.15               ‐0.10                ‐0.56
                                                                    a                                         a                             c                                     b                        a                                   b                                              a                                                              c                                           c                       a
Road density                         ‐0.28                              ‐0.11              ‐0.24                  ‐0.22                         ‐0.20                                 0.29                     ‐0.18                               ‐0.09           ‐0.33                          ‐0.03                  ‐0.12               ‐0.15               ‐0.13                ‐0.26                  0.29
                                                                    a                  a                      a                             a                                     a                        a                                   a               a                              a                      c                   a                   a                                           a                       a                  a
Corruption                           ‐0.84                              ‐0.32              ‐0.67                  ‐0.58                         ‐0.71                                 0.48                     ‐0.57                               ‐0.23           ‐0.43                          ‐0.26                  ‐0.23               ‐0.21               0.08                 ‐0.37                  0.76                    0.29
                                                                    a                  a                      a                             a                                     a                        a                                   a               a                              a                      a                   a                   a                                           a                       a                  a                a
Rule of law                          ‐0.85                              ‐0.29              ‐0.68                  ‐0.58                         ‐0.72                                 0.49                     ‐0.59                               ‐0.26           ‐0.44                          ‐0.29                  ‐0.25               ‐0.25               0.08                 ‐0.39                  0.76                    0.31               0.96
                                                                    a                  a                      a                             a                                     a                        a                                   a               c                              a                      c                   a                   a                                           a                       a                  a                a                 a
Private Credit/GDP                   ‐0.67                              ‐0.28              ‐0.49                  ‐0.38                         ‐0.60                                 0.43                     ‐0.43                               ‐0.18           ‐0.31                          ‐0.25                  ‐0.26               ‐0.21               ‐0.03                ‐0.39                  0.61                    0.27               0.74             0.75
                                                                    a                                         a                             a                                     a                        c                                   a                                              a                                          c                   c                                           a                       a                  a                a                 a                        a
Market Cap/GDP                       ‐0.54                              ‐0.16              ‐0.39                  ‐0.37                         ‐0.51                                 0.21                     ‐0.38                               ‐0.09           ‐0.36                          ‐0.19                  ‐0.24               ‐0.17               ‐0.08                ‐0.51                  0.52                    0.46               0.62             0.59              0.71
                                                                    a                  a                      a                             a                                     a                        a                                   a               a                              a                                          a                   a                    a                      b                       a                  a                a                 a                        a                    a
Ln(GDP/POP)                          ‐0.77                              ‐0.34              ‐0.77                  ‐0.66                         ‐0.66                                 0.52                     ‐0.45                               ‐0.27           ‐0.30                          ‐0.13                  ‐0.25               ‐0.22               0.21                 ‐0.22                  0.73                    0.27               0.83             0.84              0.70                     0.52


Notes: a significant at the 1% level. b significant at the 5% level. c significant at the 10% level.
