NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DYNAMIC MERGER REVIEW
Volker Nocke
Michael D. Whinston
Working Paper 14526
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14526

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

We thank Pat DeGraba, Glenn Ellison, Peter Eso, Joe Farrell, Ramon Fauli-Oller, Chiara Fumagalli,
Tracy Lewis, Tore Nilsson, Patrick Rey, Carl Shapiro, Ron Siegel, Lucy White, members of the Toulouse
Network for Information Technology, and audiences at numerous conferences and research seminars
for their comments. Nocke gratefully acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation
and the University of Pennsylvania Research Foundation. Whinston thanks the National Science Foundation,
the Toulouse Network for Information Technology, and the Leverhulme Trust for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Volker Nocke and Michael D. Whinston. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Dynamic Merger Review
Volker Nocke and Michael D. Whinston
NBER Working Paper No. 14526
December 2008
JEL No. L0,L4
ABSTRACT
We analyze the optimal dynamic policy of an antitrust authority towards horizontal mergers when
merger proposals are endogenous and occur over time. Approving a currently proposed merger will
affect the profitability and welfare effects of potential future mergers, the characteristics of which
may not yet be known to the antitrust authority. We show that, in many cases, this apparently difficult
problem has a simple resolution: an antitrust authority can maximize discounted consumer surplus
by using a completely myopic merger review policy that approves a merger today if and only if it does
not lower consumer surplus given the current market structure.

Volker Nocke
Department of Economics
University of Oxford
Manor Road Building
Manor Road
Oxford OX1 3UQ
United Kingdom
volker.nocke@economics.ox.ac.uk
Michael D. Whinston
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60202
and NBER
mwhinston@northwestern.edu

Price

A

F

p′

c
c′

B

C
Demand
Function

D

E

Quantity

Figure 1: The Williamson tradeoﬀ in merger review: deadweight loss of market power (darkshaded triangle) vs. eﬃciency gain (light-shaded rectangle).

1

Introduction

The traditional approach to the review of horizontal mergers stresses the tradeoﬀ between
market power and eﬃciencies. Mergers, which cause firms to internalize pricing externalities
among former rivals, increase the exercise of market power, and therefore tend to reduce social
welfare. On the other hand, since they can create eﬃciencies, horizontal mergers may instead
increase welfare. This tradeoﬀ was first articulated by Williamson [1968] for the case of an
antitrust authority who wants to maximize aggregate surplus, using a diagram like Figure 1. In
the diagram, a competitive industry merges to become a monopolist that charges the price p0 ,
but lowers its marginal cost of production from c to c0 . Whether aggregate surplus increases or
not depends on whether the dark-grey deadweight loss triangle exceeds the light-grey eﬃciency
gain. A similar, though even more straightforward tradeoﬀ arises when an antitrust authority
instead applies a consumer surplus standard to merger approval decisions, as is (roughly) the
case in both the U.S. and EU legal regimes. In that case, the marginal cost reduction must
be large enough that the price does not increase for the merger to be approved.
More recently, Farrell and Shapiro [1990] (see also McAfee and Williams [1992]) have provided a more complete and formal analysis of this tradeoﬀ for settings with Cournot competition. Farrell and Shapiro provide a necessary and suﬃcient condition for a merger to increase
consumer surplus, as well as a suﬃcient condition for a merger to increase aggregate surplus.
With few exceptions, however, the literature on merger review has focused on the approval
decision for a single merger. Yet, in reality, mergers are usually not one-time events.1 That
1 Nilssen

and Sorgard [1998], Motta and Vasconcelos [2005], and Matushima [2001] study mergers and an-

1

is, one proposed merger in an industry may be followed by others. In that case, approval
of a merger today based on current conditions, as in the Farrell and Shapiro test, appears
inappropriate. Rather, an antitrust authority in general needs to determine the welfare eﬀect
of the current proposed merger given the potential for future merger approvals, and given the
fact that today’s merger approval decision may alter the set of mergers that are later proposed.
In this paper, we show that in many cases this apparently diﬃcult problem has a very simple
resolution: an antitrust authority who wants to maximize consumer surplus can accomplish
this objective by using a completely myopic merger review policy that approves a merger today
if and only if it does not lower consumer surplus given the current market structure.
We begin in Section 2 by establishing some preliminary characterizations of consumer
surplus-enhancing mergers and their interactions. Our central results focus on a model of
Cournot competition with constant returns to scale. Most importantly, we show in Section
2 that there is a form of complementarity between mergers in that setting. In particular,
mergers that enhance consumer surplus continue to be consumer-surplus enhancing if other
mergers that enhance consumer surplus take place. Similarly, mergers that reduce consumer
surplus continue to be consumer-surplus reducing if other mergers that reduce consumer surplus take place. That is, the sign of a merger’s consumer surplus eﬀect is unchanged if another
merger whose consumer surplus eﬀect has the same sign takes place. This result, which is of
independent interest, sets the stage for our main result, which is contained in Section 3.
In Section 3 we imbed our Cournot competition framework in a dynamic model in which
merger opportunities arise, and may be proposed, over time. We show that if the set of possible
mergers is disjoint, and if mergers that are not approved in a given period may be approved
at a later date, then a completely myopic consumer surplus-based approval policy maximizes
discounted consumer surplus for every possible realization of the set of feasible mergers.
In Section 4, we discuss extensions of this result, considering other models of competition
(homogeneous and diﬀerentiated product price competition), the presence of fixed costs and
exit, merger proposal costs, demand shifts, entry, continuing innovation, the use of an aggregate surplus criterion, more limited information possessed by firms about each other’s merger
possibilities, and breakups.
Section 5 concludes. There we note how our model naturally gives rise to the emergence
of endogenous merger waves, and also discuss one important limitation of our results, the
assumption that potential mergers are “disjoint.”

2
2.1

Mergers in the Cournot Model
Cournot Oligopoly

Consider an industry with n firms producing a homogeneous good and competing in quantities.
Let N ≡ {1, 2, ..., n} denote the set of firms. Firm i’s cost of producing qi units of output is
titrust review in a dynamic context. In these papers, two mergers between two nonoverlapping pairs of firms can
take place sequentially. We discuss these papers further in Section 4. Kamien and Zang [1990], Gowrisankaran
[1999], Fauli-Oller [2000], and Pesendorfer [2005] are among a much larger set of articles that study equilibrium
merger decisions in dynamic models but without considering merger policy (and sometimes without allowing
for eﬃciencies).

2

given by Ci (qi ) = ci qi , where ci > 0 is firm i’s marginal cost. Thus, for now, we restrict
attention to firms producing under constant returns to scale. The inverse market demand is
P
given by the twice diﬀerentiable function P (Q), where Q ≡ i∈N qi ≥ 0 is industry output.
We make the following (standard) assumption on demand.
Assumption 1 For any Q > 0 such that P (Q) > 0:
(i) P 0 (Q) < 0;
(ii) P 0 (Q) + QP 00 (Q) < 0.
Moreover,
(iii) limQ→∞ P (Q) = 0;
Part (i) of the assumption says that demand is downward-sloping, part (ii) implies that
quantities are strategic substitutes and that each firm’s profit maximization problem is strictly
concave, part (iii) in conjunction with ci > 0 for all i implies that the equilibrium aggregate
output is bounded.
P
Let Q−i ≡ j6=i qj denote the aggregate output of all firms other than i. Firm i’s bestresponse is
(1)
b(Q−i ; ci ) = arg max qi ≥0 [P (Q−i + qi ) − ci ]qi .
As is well known (see e.g., Farrell and Shapiro [1990]), Assumption 1 implies that each
firm’s best-response function b(·; ci ) satisfies ∂b(Q−i ; ci )/∂Q−i ∈ (−1, 0) at all Q−i such that
b(Q−i ; ci ) > 0.
Under Assumption 1, there is a unique Nash equilibrium. Let Q∗ and qi∗ denote industry
output and firm i’s output in equilibrium. From the first-order condition for problem (1),
output levels in this equilibrium satisfy
qi∗ = −

P (Q∗ ) − ci
P 0 (Q∗ )

(2)

if ci < P (Q∗ ), and qi∗ = 0 otherwise. Assumption 1 also implies that the equilibrium is
“stable,” so that comparative statics are “well behaved.” For example, we will make use of
two comparative statics properties: First, a reduction in an active firm’s marginal cost increases
its equilibrium output and profit, reduces the output of each of its active rivals, and increases
aggregate output. Second, following any change in the incentives of a subset of firms, the
equilibrium aggregate output increases [decreases] if and only if the equilibrium output of that
set of firms increases [decreases].2

2.2

The CS-Eﬀect of Mergers

Consider a merger between a subset M ⊆ N of firms. The post-merger marginal cost is denoted
∗
cM . Aggregate output before the merger is Q∗ , and after is Q . We are interested in the eﬀect
∗
of the merger on consumer surplus, CS(Q ) − CS(Q∗ ), where
Z Q
[P (s) − P (Q)] ds.
CS(Q) =
0

2 See

Farrell and Shapiro [1990]’s Lemma, p. 111.

3

Since CS 0 (Q) = −QP 0 (Q) > 0, a merger raises consumer surplus if and only if it induces an
increase in industry output. We will say that a merger is CS-neutral if the merger does not
aﬀect consumer surplus. Similarly, we will say that a merger is CS-increasing [CS-decreasing],
if consumer surplus following the merger is higher [lower] than before. Finally, a merger is
CS-nondecreasing [CS-nonincreasing] if it is not CS-decreasing [CS-increasing].
We will say that a merger involves active firms if at least one of the merging firms is
producing a positive quantity before the merger [and hence has ci < P (Q∗ )]. Observe that a
merger involving only inactive firms is always CS-nondecreasing and weakly profitable. The
following result catalogs some useful properties of CS-neutral mergers involving active firms.
Lemma 1 If a merger involving active firms is CS-neutral, then
1. it causes no changes in the output of any nonmerging firm nor in the total output of the
merging firms;
2. the merged firm’s margin at the pre- and post-merger price P (Q∗ ) equals the sum of the
active merging firms’ pre-merger margins:
X
max{0, P (Q∗ ) − ci };
(3)
P (Q∗ ) − cM =
i∈M

3. the merged firm’s marginal cost is no greater than the marginal cost of the most eﬃcient
merger partner: cM ≤ mini∈M {ci }, and it is strictly less if the merger involves at least
two active firms;
4. the merger is profitable (it weakly raises the joint profit of the merging firms), and is
strictly profitable if it involves at least two active firms.
Proof. To see Property 1, observe that under Assumption 1 there is a unique output level for
each non-merging firm i that is compatible with any given level of aggregate output Q [since
there is a unique Q−i such that Q−i + b(Q−i ; ci ) = Q]. Since aggregate output is unchanged
by a CS-neutral merger, all nonmerging firms’ outputs are unchanged. In turn, this implies
that the total output of the merging firms must be unchanged as well. For Property 2, a
central feature in Farrell and Shapiro [1990]’s analysis, note that the merged firm’s first-order
condition [using Property 1] is
Ã
!
X
∗
∗
qi P 0 (Q∗ ) = 0.
(4)
P (Q ) − cM +
i∈M

Summing up the pre-merger first-order conditions of the active merger partners yields
X
{P (Q∗ ) − ci + qi∗ P 0 (Q∗ )} = 0

(5)

i∈M+

where M+ = {i ∈ M : qi∗ > 0}. Since for all i ∈ M \M+ , we have P (Q∗ ) ≤ ci and qi∗ = 0, it
follows that
Ã
!
X
X
max{0, P (Q∗ ) − ci } +
qi∗ P 0 (Q∗ ) = 0.
(6)
i∈M

i∈M

4

Combining equations (4) and (6), yields (3). Property 3 follows directly from Property 2.
Property 4 holds since the merging firms’ joint output has not changed (Property 1), but its
margin has weakly increased, and has strictly increased if the merger involves at least two
active firms (Property 2).
The following useful corollary follows from Properties 2 and 4 of Lemma 1 plus the fact that
∗
the post-merger aggregate output, Q , and the profit of the merged firm are both decreasing
in the merged firm’s marginal cost, cM :
Corollary 1 A merger involving active firms is CS-neutral if
X
cM = b
cM (Q∗ ) ≡ P (Q∗ ) −
max{0, P (Q∗ ) − ci },
i∈M

CS-increasing if cM < b
cM (Q∗ ), and CS-decreasing if cM > b
cM (Q∗ ). Moreover, any CSnondecreasing merger is profitable for the merging firms, and is strictly profitable if it is CSincreasing or involves at least two active firms.
Thus, an antitrust authority concerned with maximizing consumer surplus and confronted
with a single merger involving active firms in set M would strictly prefer to approve the merger
cM (Q∗ ), and would be willing to if cM ≤ b
cM (Q∗ ). Moreover, any merger among active
if cM < b
firms that the antitrust authority would be willing to approve is profitable for the merging
parties.
Observe also that the threshold b
cM (Q∗ ) is nondecreasing in Q∗ and is strictly decreasing
if the merger involves at least two active firms. Thus, the larger is Q∗ (and the lower is the
pre-merger price), the more likely it is that a merger is CS-nondecreasing. This fact will play
a central role in the next subsection when we look at interactions among mergers, where one
merger may lead to a change in industry output prior to the proposal of another merger. To see
the intuition for this result, consider a proposed merger between symmetric firms, each of whom
has a pre-merger marginal cost c and produces q ∗ > 0 units. Since the firms are choosing
their outputs optimally before the merger, a lower pre-merger margin P (Q∗ ) − c (due to a
larger pre-merger aggregate output) implies a smaller pre-merger absolute value of P 0 (Q∗ )q ∗
[see (2)]. The incentives of the merged firm to raise price, however, depend on a comparison
of the merger’s marginal cost reduction ∆c = (c − cM ) to the market power eﬀect, P 0 (Q∗ )q ∗ ,
which reflects the internalization of the pricing externality between the merging firms. With
a CS-nondecreasing merger, the first eﬀect weakly exceeds the second. A smaller pre-merger
price preserves this relation and therefore the CS-nondecreasing eﬀect of the merger.
Figure 2 illustrates the cases of CS-neutral, CS-increasing, and CS-decreasing mergers. The
figure considers a merger involving the firms in set M1 , at least two of whom are active. The
complementary set of firms is denoted M2 ≡ N\M1 . The axes in the figure measure the
joint outputs of the two sets of firms. The curves labeled rM1 and rM2 depict what we call
the “group-reaction functions” of each set of firms prior to the merger. Specifically, Mi ’s
pre-merger group-reaction function gives the joint pre-merger Nash-equilibrium output of the
firms in Mi , rMi (qMj ), conditional on the firms in Mj , j 6= i, jointly producing qMj . It is
0
(qMj ) < 0.
routine to verify that these group-reaction functions satisfy −1 < rM
i
The equilibrium before the merger is point A, the intersection of the two pre-merger groupreaction curves. With a CS-neutral merger, the post-merger best-response curve of the merged
5

qM2

b ( ⋅ ; cˆM 1 (Q* ) )

b ( ⋅ ; c M′ )

rM ( ⋅ )
1

C
A

q ∗M 2

b ( ⋅ ; c M′′ 1 )

B

q ∗M 1

rM ( ⋅)
2

qM1

Figure 2: A merger involving the firms in M1 . Depending on the merged firm’s marginal cost,
the merger is CS-neutral [point A], CS-increasing [point B], or CS-decreasing [point C]. In the
cM1 (Q∗ ) > c0M1 .
figure, c00M1 > b

6

firm, b(·; b
cM1 (Q∗ )), intersects group M2 ’s group-reaction curve, rM2 (·), at point A.3 With a CSincreasing merger, the merged firm’s marginal cost is less than b
cM1 (Q∗ ), so its best-response
curve lies further to the right, shifting the equilibrium to point B, where there is a larger
aggregate output. In contrast, with a CS-decreasing merger, the merged firm’s marginal
cost is greater than b
cM1 (Q∗ ), so its best-response curve lies further to the left, shifting the
equilibrium to point C, where there is a smaller aggregate output.

2.3

Interactions between Mergers

We now turn to the interactions between mergers. In this subsection, we consider two potential
disjoint mergers, involving firms in sets M1 and M2 with M1 ∩ M2 = ∅. We will refer to
these simply as merger M1 and merger M2 . The set of firms not involved in either merger is
N c ≡ N \(M1 ∪ M2 ).
Our first result establishes a certain complementarity between mergers that change consumer surplus in the same direction:4
Proposition 1 The sign of the CS-eﬀect of two disjoint mergers is complementary:
(i) if a merger is CS-nondecreasing (and hence profitable) in isolation, it remains CS-nondecreasing
(and hence profitable) if another merger that is CS-nondecreasing in isolation takes place;
(ii) if a merger is CS-decreasing in isolation, it remains CS-decreasing if another merger that
is CS-nonincreasing in isolation takes place.
Proof. For part (i), suppose that mergers M1 and M2 are both CS-nondecreasing in isolation.
∗
Let Q∗ denote aggregate output in the absence of either merger and let Qi denote aggregate
∗
output if only merger Mi takes place. So Qi ≥ Q∗ for i = 1, 2. Without loss of generality,
consider merger M1 . Suppose, first, that merger M1 involves only inactive firms once merger
M2 takes place. Then, once merger M2 takes place, merger M1 must be CS-nondecreasing
and (weakly) profitable .
Suppose, instead, that merger M1 involves active firms once merger M2 takes place, which
∗
also means [since P (Q2 ) ≤ P (Q∗ )] that it involves active firms when done in isolation. Since
cM1 (Q∗ ). Moreover,
it is CS-nondecreasing in isolation, from Corollary 1 we know that cM1 ≤ b
post-merger best-response curve b(·; cM1 ) must cross the pre-merger group reaction curve rM1 (·) from
above since at qM2 > [<]qM2 such that rM1 (qM2 ) > 0, we have
3 The

b(qM2 ; cM1 )

=

∗
∗
b(qM2 ; 
cM1 (qM
+ rM1 (qM
)))
2
2

>

[<]b(qM2 ; 
cM1 (qM2 + rM1 (qM2 )))

=

rM1 (qM2 ),

where the inequality follows because 
cM1 (·) is a strictly increasing function and b(qM2 ; c) is strictly decreasing
cM1 (qM2 + rM1 (qM2 )) is the cost
in c at all qM2 such that b(qM2 ; c) > 0, and the last equality follows because 
level at which the merged firm’s best response to qM2 is exactly rM1 (qM2 ).
4 Proposition 1 focuses on properties needed later in this section and for Section 3. It is straightforward to
show as well that a CS-increasing merger Mi remains CS-increasing if a merger Mj that is CS-nondecreasing
takes place provided the merger Mi remains among active firms once merger Mj takes place, and that a merger
among active firms that is CS-nonincreasing remains CS-nonincreasing if a merger that is CS-nonincreasing
takes place; see the discussion in the Appendix of Remark 2.

7

qM 2

rM1 ( ⋅ )

b( ⋅ ; cM 1 )

C

D

b ( ⋅ ; cM 2 )
A

B

rM 2 ( ⋅ )

q M1

Figure 3: Each merger is CS-increasing in isolation and remains so if the other merger takes
place.
∗

cM1 (Q2 ). Hence, Corollary
because the threshold b
cM1 (Q) is nondecreasing in Q, we have cM1 ≤ b
1 implies that merger M1 is also CS-nondecreasing once merger M2 has taken place.
The argument for part (ii) follows similar lines (note that a CS-decreasing merger must
involve active firms, and must continue to do so after another CS-decreasing merger takes
place).
Figure 3 illustrates the complementarity between two mergers that are CS-increasing in
isolation when no other firms exist (N c = ∅). In isolation, merger M1 moves the equilibrium
from point A to point B, while merger M2 moves the equilibrium from point A to point C. But,
conditional on merger M1 taking place, merger M2 moves the equilibrium from point B to point
D along b(·; cM1 ). Since ∂b(·; cM1 )/∂Q−i ∈ (−1, 0), aggregate output must increase. That is,
conditional on merger M1 taking place, merger M2 remains CS-increasing. Moreover, we know
from Corollary 1 that it also remains profitable. Using the same type of argument, the reverse
is also true: conditional on merger M2 taking place, the merger M1 remains CS-increasing and
profitable.
We now turn to the interaction between mergers that have opposite eﬀects on consumer
surplus if implemented in isolation. Specifically, suppose that merger M1 is CS-nondecreasing
(and therefore profitable) in isolation, while merger M2 is CS-decreasing in isolation. Figure 4
illustrates that merger M2 can become CS-increasing (and therefore strictly profitable) conditional on merger M1 occurring. In isolation, merger M2 moves the equilibrium from point A
to point C along rM1 (·), and thus decreases industry output. But after merger M1 has taken
place, merger M2 moves the equilibrium from point B to point D along b(·; cM1 ), and thus

8

qM 2

b ( ⋅ ; cM 1 )

rM 1 ( ⋅ )

rM 2 ( ⋅ )
A
b ( ⋅ ; cM 2 )

D

C
B

qM1

Figure 4: A CS-decreasing merger M2 that becomes CS-increasing after a CS-increasing merger
M1 takes place.
increases industry output.
When this occurs, we can say the following:
Proposition 2 Suppose that merger M1 is CS-nondecreasing in isolation, while merger M2 is
CS-decreasing in isolation but CS-nondecreasing once merger M1 has taken place. Then:
(i) merger M1 is CS-increasing (and therefore strictly profitable) conditional on merger M2
taking place;
(ii) the joint profit of the firms involved in merger M1 is strictly larger if both mergers take
place than if neither merger takes place.
Proof. Consider implementing merger M1 first followed by merger M2 . By hypothesis, consumer surplus weakly increases after each step, so the combined eﬀect on consumer surplus
of the two mergers is nonnegative. Suppose we now reverse the order and implement merger
M2 first. Since the combined eﬀect of the two mergers on consumer surplus is nonnegative
while the eﬀect of merger M2 is strictly negative, consumer surplus must strictly increase when
merger M1 is implemented following merger M2 . Hence, part (i) must hold: merger M1 is
CS-increasing (and therefore strictly profitable) conditional on merger M2 taking place.
9

To see that part (ii) holds, suppose that merger M2 is implemented first. Since merger M2
is CS-decreasing in isolation, it must weakly increase the profit of each firm i ∈ M1 [the joint
output of all firms other than i must decrease, otherwise the fact that ∂b(·; ci )/∂Q−i ∈ (−1, 0)
would imply that aggregate output increases]. Since merger M1 is strictly profitable given
merger M2 , the sequence of mergers must strictly increase the joint profit of the firms in M1 .
The result is illustrated in Figure 4, where merger M1 is CS-increasing (and hence strictly
profitable) in isolation and remains so conditional on merger M2 taking place, at which point
it moves the equilibrium from point C to point D along b(·; cM2 ).
Remark 1 Observe that the logic of Proposition 2 can be extended to cases with a merger
M1 that is CS-nondecreasing in isolation and a collection of mergers M2 , ..., MK that are each
CS-decreasing in isolation but form a sequence that is CS-nondecreasing at each step after
merger M1 has taken place. In such cases, merger M1 is CS-increasing (and therefore strictly
profitable) given that mergers M2 , ..., MK have taken place, and the joint profit of the firms
involved in merger M1 is strictly larger if all of these mergers take place than if none do. We
will use this extension of Proposition 2 in Section 3.

3

CS-Maximizing Merger Review

In this section, we embed the Cournot model of Section 2 in a dynamic model where merger
opportunities arise stochastically over time, merger proposals are endogenous, and the antitrust
authority decides whether or not to approve proposed mergers. We consider the optimal merger
approval policy for an antitrust authority concerned with maximizing discounted consumer
surplus. We show that such an antitrust authority can achieve its optimal outcome using a
myopic policy that in each period approves a set of mergers that maximizes consumer surplus
given the current market structure, ignoring the possibility of any future mergers.
As before, we denote the set of n firms by N . The set of possible mergers are those in set
{M1 , ..., MK }, where Mk ⊆ N is a set of firms that may merge. We assume that these possible
mergers are disjoint; that is, Mj ∩ Mk = ∅ for j 6= k. Thus, no firm has the possibility of
being part of more than one merger.5 The assumption of disjointness is reasonable when each
firm belongs to at most a single set of “natural” merger partners who can generate significant
eﬃciencies by merging, perhaps because they use similar or complementary technologies. If all
other mergers both increase market power and fail to generate eﬃciencies, no other mergers
but these would ever optimally be approved by the antitrust authority.6 (We discuss the
disjointness assumption further in Section 5.)
The merger process lasts for T periods. Merger Mk first becomes feasible at the start of
P
period t with probability pkt ∈ [0, 1], where t pkt ≤ 1. Conditional on merger Mk becoming
feasible in period t, the firms in Mk receive and observe a random draw of their post-merger cost
5 Our results can be extended to allow for a given firm to be part of several diﬀerent possible mergers provided
that at most one of these mergers ever becomes feasible along any path.
6 Because it takes a strictly positive cost reduction to oﬀset the market power increase from a merger (recall
Lemma 1), it is frequently enough to justify the disjointness assumption if other mergers cannot generate large
enough cost reductions.

10

cMk . This cost is drawn from the set Ckt with distribution function Gkt (·).7 This formulation
embodies another form of disjointness in merger possibilities: merger Mk receives at most one
eﬃciency realization throughout the merger process.8 We denote the set of mergers that have
become feasible up to and including period t (including their cost realizations) by Ft .
In each period t, all firms with feasible but not-yet-approved mergers decide whether to
propose them or not. Previously proposed but rejected mergers can be proposed again, as can
previously unproposed feasible mergers. We denote by Pt the set of mergers proposed in period
t. The antitrust authority then responds by approving some subset of the proposed mergers.
We denote by At the set of mergers approved by the end of period t; that is, At is the market
structure at the end of the period after the merger review process has concluded. Note that
we must have At−1 ⊆ At ⊆ (At−1 ∪ Pt ) ⊆ Ft ; the first inclusion follows because the set of
approved mergers weakly grows over time, the second because only proposed mergers can be
approved, and the third because only feasible mergers that have not yet been approved can be
proposed.9
We assume that when a merger Mk becomes feasible in a period t, one of the firms in Mk
is designated as the “proposer” of the merger. To keep things simple, we treat bargaining in
a reduced-form manner, assuming that the proposer chooses whether to propose the merger to
the antitrust authority, and that if he chooses to do so, the firms in Mk split the profit gains
or losses from the merger in some fixed proportions (the proportions do not matter).10
The antitrust authority observes that a particular merger is feasible and its eﬃciency (postmerger marginal cost) once it is proposed. For simplicity, we assume that firms observe both
their own and their rivals’ merger possibilities, including their eﬃciencies, when they become
feasible. (We discuss in Section 4.9 how our results extend if firms possess less information
about rivals’ mergers, for example observing their feasibility only once they are proposed and
their eﬃciency only once they are approved.)
Payoﬀs in each period t depend only on the set of mergers At approved by the end of that
period, and are determined by a complete information Cournot game, as in Section 2. Each
agent i, whether the antitrust authority or a proposer firm, discounts future payoﬀs (consumer
surplus or profit) according to a discount factor δ i ≤ 1.11

3.1

Myopic Merger Policies

We are interested in the performance of “myopic” merger review policies, which in each period
maximize consumer surplus given the set of proposed mergers and current market structure,
ignoring the possibility of future mergers. Toward this end, we start by introducing the
following definitions:
7 Note that our assumptions allow the sequence of feasible mergers and their cost realizations to be deterministic.
8 We relax this assumption in Section 4.7.
9 In the model, we do not allow previously approved mergers to be dissolved. However, it follows from our
arguments that no (approved) merged firm would want to do so.
10 The only important feature of this assumption is that it implies that merger M is proposed if it raises the
k
joint expected discounted profit of the potential merger partners and will not be proposed if it lowers it.
11 Implicitly, to justify our profit-splitting assumption, we assume that each firm in a given merger M has the
same discount factor.

11

Definition 1 A set of approved mergers At ⊆ (At−1 ∪ Pt ) ⊆ Ft is myopically CS-maximizing
for Pt given market structure At−1 if it maximizes consumer surplus in the current period
(period t) given Pt and At−1 .
In our model with unchanging demand, maximizing current period consumer surplus is
equivalent to maximizing discounted consumer surplus assuming that there will be no subsequent changes in market structure.
Definition 2 A myopically CS-maximizing merger policy is a merger approval rule that
in each period t approves mergers as a function of the already-approved mergers At−1 , the
current set of proposed mergers Pt , and perhaps the period t, resulting in a new market structure
A∗t (Pt |At−1 ) that is myopically CS-maximizing for Pt given market structure At−1 .
While we note later in Remark 2 that our main result holds for any myopically CSmaximizing merger policy, for ease of exposition we focus on the performance of the most
lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy. In this policy, the antitrust authority resolves any indiﬀerence about mergers in favor of approval, selecting in each period the largest
possible set of mergers to approve among those sets that maximize consumer surplus. We call
such a set a “largest myopically CS-maximizing set”:
Definition 3 A set of approved mergers At ⊆ (At−1 ∪ Pt ) is a largest myopically CSmaximizing set for Pt given market structure At−1 if it is not contained in any other
set that is myopically CS-maximizing for Pt given At−1 .
Given the finiteness of the set of proposed mergers Pt , a largest myopically CS-maximizing
set must always exist. In fact, there is a unique such “largest” set for any existing market
∗
structure At−1 and set of proposed mergers Pt , which we denote by A (P t |At−1 ), and this set
contains every other myopically CS-maximizing set for At−1 and Pt . Moreover, this set grows
as the set of proposed mergers grows:
Lemma 2 For each set of proposed mergers Pt and current market structure At−1 , there is
∗
a unique largest myopically CS-maximizing set A (P t |At−1 ) and it contains every other myopi∗
∗
0
cally CS-maximizing set for At−1 and Pt . Moreover, if Pt ⊂ Pt0 then A (P t |At−1 )⊆ A (P t |At−1 ).
Proof. In the Appendix.
The most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy is therefore the one that approves in each period the largest myopically CS-maximizing set of mergers:
Definition 4 The most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy is the myopically CS-maximizing merger policy that in each period t implements the largest myopically
CS-maximizing set given the proposed mergers Pt and current market structure At−1 , resulting
∗
in new market structure A (P t |At−1 ).
Note that the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy is independent of the
period t, since it depends only on the payoﬀ-relevant variables Pt and At−1 .
Importantly, the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy can also be thought
of as the result of an antitrust policy that evaluates proposed mergers in an even more myopic
12

way, making decisions on mergers within each period in a step-by-step fashion and approving
a merger at each step if and only if it is CS-nondecreasing given the current market structure
(including any mergers that have already been approved in that period), and continuing until no
further CS-nondecreasing mergers can be identified (including mergers that may have already
been examined but rejected earlier in the period). Specifically:
Lemma 3 Suppose that the antitrust authority considers mergers within period t in a step-bystep fashion, approving mergers that are CS-nondecreasing given the current market structure
until no further CS-nondecreasing mergers can be identified. Then if Pt is the set of proposed
mergers and At−1 is the market structure at the start of the period, the set of approved mergers
∗
at the end of period t will be A (Pt |At−1 ).
Proof. In the Appendix.
Thus, our results will apply to any antitrust policy that considers mergers one at a time,
approving each merger if it is CS-nondecreasing given the current market conditions.

3.2

Optimality of Myopic Merger Policy

Our main result shows that the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy is a
dynamically optimal policy for the antitrust authority. The argument has two parts. First,
we show that if all feasible but not-yet-approved mergers are proposed in each period — so that
the antitrust authority need not worry about firms’ incentives to propose mergers — then the
most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy maximizes discounted consumer surplus
for every realized sequence of feasible mergers.
Lemma 4 If all feasible but not-yet-approved mergers are proposed in each period, the most
lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy, which induces the approval sequence A1 =
∗
∗
A (F1 |∅) and At = A (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) for all t > 1, maximizes discounted consumer surplus
for every realization of feasible mergers F = (F1 , ..., FT ).
Proof. Given the realized sequence of feasible mergers F = (F1 , ..., FT ), consider the problem
of maximizing discounted consumer surplus. If we ignore the monotonicity constraint that the
set of approved mergers cannot shrink over time, we can choose the approved set of mergers
(i.e., the market structure) in each period independently from the mergers approved in every
∗
∗
other period. It is evident that in that case the approval sequence {A (F1 |∅), ..., A (FT |∅)}
is optimal since it maximizes consumer surplus in every period.
Consider now the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy. We will show that
∗
∗
this policy induces the approval sequence {A (F1 |∅), ..., A (FT |∅)}, from which observation
the result follows. To do so we will actually establish a slightly stronger fact, which will also
be useful in the proof of Proposition 3: If the antitrust authority follows the most lenient
myopically CS-maximizing merger policy in periods 1, ..., t − 1 and if all feasible but not-yetapproved mergers are proposed in period t, the market structure at the end of period t will be
∗
A (Ft |∅) regardless of the merger proposals that firms have made in periods 1, ..., t − 1.
∗
To see this, consider an arbitrary period t and suppose that At−1 ⊆ A (Ft−1 |∅) regardless
of the history of previous merger proposals (which is true if t = 1). If all feasible but not-yet∗
approved mergers are proposed in period t, then At = A (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ). We will show that
13

∗

∗

A (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) = A (Ft |∅). Observe that the problem of myopically maximizing consumer
surplus given previously approved mergers At−1 and proposed mergers Ft \At−1 is a more
constrained problem than is the problem of myopically maximizing consumer surplus given no
∗
previously approved mergers and proposed mergers Ft . However, since At−1 ⊆ A (Ft−1 |∅) ⊆
∗
A (Ft |∅) (the first inclusion follows by hypothesis and the second by Lemma 2), the largest
solution to this latter, less constrained problem is feasible in the former, more constrained
problem. It must therefore also be the largest solution in the more constrained problem.
∗
∗
Hence, A (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) = A (Ft |∅), which implies that, if all mergers are proposed in period
∗
t, the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing policy induces the set At = A (Ft |∅) in period
t. Note also that since Pt ⊆ Ft , the monotonicity of the largest myopically CS-maximizing
∗
∗
set A (Pt |At−1 ) in Pt , established in Lemma 2, implies that At ⊆ A (Ft |∅), regardless of the
merger proposals made up through and including period t. Thus, our induction hypothesis
holds when we look at period t + 1. Applying induction, yields the result.
Lemma 4 shows that myopic behavior causes no problem for the antitrust agency when
it does not need to worry about firms’ proposal incentives. At its heart, the result follows
from two features: (i) the complementarity of CS-nondecreasing mergers — which implies that
the antitrust authority will never later regret approval of a CS-nondecreasing merger due to
the appearance of a new CS-nondecreasing merger, and (ii) the fact that since the antitrust
authority can always approve a merger at a later date, it will never later regret rejection of a
merger that is CS-decreasing given the current market structure.
The second part of the argument concerns firms’ incentives to propose mergers. Since the
antitrust agency is free to reject mergers it does not like, its only concern is that firms may not
propose mergers that it would like to approve. To establish our main result, we will show that
when the antitrust authority adopts the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy
the firms’ proposal incentives are aligned with the desires of the antitrust authority. More
specifically, there is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for the firms in which every feasible
merger is proposed in every period. Moreover, all subgame perfect Nash equilibria result in
the same (optimal) sequence of period-by-period consumer surpluses.
Proposition 3 Suppose the antitrust authority follows the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing
merger policy. Then:
(i) All feasible mergers being proposed in each period after any history is a subgame perfect
Nash equilibrium for the firms. In this equilibrium, the outcome maximizes discounted
consumer surplus for any realized sequence of feasible mergers F = (F1 , ..., FT ).
(ii) For each sequence F, every subgame perfect Nash equilibrium results in the same optimal
sequence of period-by-period consumer surpluses.
Proof. (i) The proof of the first claim is by induction. Consider, a period t and suppose
that starting in period t + 1 the joint expected continuation payoﬀ of the firms in each possible
feasible merger is independent of firms’ prior behavior. (Note that this is true in period T .)
We will establish that regardless of the previous history or rivals’ proposal strategies in period
t, it is optimal in period t for every proposer firm with a feasible but-not-yet approved merger

14

to propose it.12
To see this, consider a firm that is the proposer of a feasible but not-yet-approved merger
Mk . Note that since continuation payoﬀs are (by hypothesis) unaﬀected by period t play, it
is optimal to propose the merger if proposing it maximizes the joint expected period t payoﬀ
b denote a realization of the set of proposed mergers in period t
of the firms in Mk . Let P
if merger Mk is proposed (firms in other feasible but not-yet-approved mergers may be using
b k denote that realization without merger Mk included.
b−k ≡ P\M
mixed strategies) and let P
b−k is such that merger Mk is not approved when proposed. Then
Suppose, first, that P
the set of approved mergers, and hence the joint period-t expected payoﬀ of the firms in Mk ,
is unaﬀected by whether merger Mk is proposed. To see this, observe that we then have
∗
∗
b t−1 ) ⊆ (P
b−k ∪ At−1 ), where the first inclusion follows from Lemma 2
A (Pb−k |At−1 ) ⊆A (P|A
and the second from the fact that merger Mk is not approved when proposed. But approving
∗
b t−1 ) is therefore feasible and myopically CS-maximizing when mergers P
b−k are
set A (P|A
∗
13
b
b
proposed. Since A (P−k |At−1 ) is the largest myopically CS—maximizing set for P−k given
∗
b−k |At−1 ) =A∗ (P|A
b t−1 ).
At−1 , we must have A (P
b
Suppose, instead, that P−k is such that merger Mk is approved when proposed, but that
the merged firm Mk is inactive (produces zero output) in period t after its merger is approved.
Then, merger Mk is CS-neutral given the other mergers that are approved, which implies that
∗
b t−1 )\Mk is a myopically CS-maximizing set for P
b given At−1 . Moreover, in this case we
A (P|A
∗
∗
b−k |At−1 ) ⊆A (P|A
b t−1 )\Mk ⊆ (P
b−k ∪ At−1 ). The set A∗ (P|A
b t−1 )\Mk is therefore
have A (P
b
both feasible and myopically CS-maximizing for P−k given At−1 (recall footnote 13), which
∗
b t−1 )\Mk = A∗ (P
b−k |At−1 ); that is, proposal of merger Mk
implies that we must have A (P|A
does not aﬀect the set of other mergers that are approved in period t. As a result, proposal
of merger Mk has no eﬀect on the joint period-t profits of the firms in Mk , which are zero in
either case.
b−k is such that merger Mk is approved when proposed and that the
Finally, suppose that P
merged firm Mk is active in period t after its merger is approved. We distinguish between
∗
b−k |At−1 ) ∪ Mk = A∗ (P|A
b t−1 ). In this case, proposing
two cases. First, suppose that A (P
∗
b t−1 ),
merger Mk does not aﬀect the other mergers that will be approved. Since Mk ∈ A (P|A
the merger is CS-nondecreasing given the other mergers that will be approved, and is therefore
∗
b−k |At−1 ) ∪ Mk ⊂
[by Corollary 1] strictly profitable to propose. Second, suppose that A (P
∗
b t−1 ). Part (i) of Lemma 6 in the Appendix implies that there is a sequencing of the
A (P|A
∗
b t−1 )\A∗ (P
b−k |At−1 ) that is CS-nondecreasing at each step. However, since
mergers in A (P|A
all of the mergers in this set other than Mk must be CS-decreasing given that the mergers in
∗
∗
b−k |At−1 )], merger Mk
A (Pb−k |At−1 ) have taken place [otherwise they would have been in A (P
∗
b
must be CS-nondecreasing given that the mergers in A (P−k |At−1 ) have occurred and must
be the first merger in this sequence. By Remark 1, the firms in Mk have a strictly greater
∗
b t−1 )\A∗ (P
b−k |At−1 ) are approved than when none are.
profit when all of the mergers in A (P|A
12 The history prior to period t’s proposal stage consists of the sequences Ft = (F , ..., F ) of feasible mergers,
t
1
P t−1 = (P1 , ..., Pt−1 ) of proposed mergers, and At−1 = (A1 , ..., At−1 ) of approved mergers. This history,
which is observed by all firms, determines a subgame that starts in period t.
13 Note that if P ⊆ P 0 and A and A0 are myopically CS-maximizing for, respectively, P and P 0 given A
t
t
t
t−1 ,
t
t
t
then the level of consumer surplus under A0t must be at least as great as under At (with more mergers proposed,
it is a less constrained problem). Hence, if A0t is feasible for Pt given At−1 — that is, if A0t ⊆ (Pt ∪ At−1 ) —
then A0t must also be myopically CS-maximizing for Pt given At−1 .

15

Hence, it is strictly more profitable in this case as well to propose merger Mk .
In summary, it is an optimal strategy for every feasible but not-yet-approved merger Mk to
be proposed in period t regardless of the previous history and rivals’ period-t proposal strategies.
∗
The set of approved mergers at the end of period t will therefore be A (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ). By
∗
∗
the argument in the proof of Lemma 4, we know that A (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) = A (Ft |∅) for any
At−1 that can arise under the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy. Thus,
the market structure (and joint expected payoﬀs of the firms in each possible merger) at the
end of period t is independent of firms’ behavior prior to period t. Our induction hypothesis
therefore holds when we look at period t − 1. Applying induction starting in period T implies
that in every period proposing every feasible but not-yet-approved merger is optimal.
∗
(ii) To establish the second claim, we first define two sets that form a partition of A (Pt |At−1 ).
∗
∗
Let A0 (Pt |At−1 ) denote those mergers in Pt ∩ A (Pt |At−1 ) that result in merged firms that
∗
are inactive given the other mergers in A (Pt |At−1 ) and let
∗

∗

∗

A1 (Pt |At−1 ) =A (Pt |At−1 )\A0 (Pt |At−1 )
denote the complementary set. Note that approval of inactive mergers has no eﬀect on either
∗
consumer surplus or firms’ payoﬀs. This implies that if all mergers in A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1
∗
are proposed — i.e., if A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) ⊆ (Pt ∪ At−1 ) — then the largest myopically CS∗
∗
∗
∗
maximizing set A (Pt |At−1 ) will satisfy A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) ⊆ A (Pt |At−1 ) ⊆ A (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ),
so consumer surplus and all firms’ payoﬀs will be the same in period t as if all feasible but
not-yet-approved mergers were proposed.14
We now show that when the set of feasible but not-yet-approved mergers in period t is
∗
Ft \At−1 , every merger in A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 will be proposed. The proof is by induction.
The induction hypothesis for period t is that in all future periods τ > t, whenever the set of
∗
feasible but not-yet-approved mergers is Fτ \Aτ −1 , all mergers in A1 (Fτ \Aτ −1 |Aτ −1 )\Aτ −1
are proposed.
∗
∗
Consider a merger Mk ∈ A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 . Since A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) is a myopi∗
cally CS-maximizing set for Ft \At−1 given At−1 , every merger in A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) is CS∗
nondecreasing given every other merger in that set. Since At−1 ⊆ A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ), Lemma
6(i) (in the Appendix) implies that, starting from At−1 , there is an ordering of the merg∗
ers in A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 that is CS-nondecreasing at each step, which we denote by
(M1 , ..., MS ). Suppose that all mergers Ms for s < k are proposed when Ft \At−1 is the set of
feasible and not-yet-approved mergers in period t. (Note that this assumption is valid when
k = 1.) If Pbt = {M1 , ..., Mk }, then since the sequence (M1 , ..., Mk ) is CS-nondecreasing at each
∗
step, we will have A ({M1 , ..., Mk }|At−1 ) = {M1 , ..., Mk } ∪ At−1 ; that is, all of these mergers,
bt , then Lemma 2 implies
including merger Mk , will be approved.15 If, instead, {M1 , ..., Mk } ⊂ P
∗
bt |At−1 ), so merger Mk is still approved. Since merger Mk
that ({M1 , ..., Mk } ∪ At−1 ) ⊆ A (P
14 The

∗

first inclusion follows because A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) is myopically CS-maximizing for F t \At−1 given
∗
At−1 , and is feasible when the set of proposed mergers is A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 ⊆ F t \At−1 . Therefore, by
∗
∗
the logic in footnote 13, A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) is myopically CS-maximizing for A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 given
∗
At−1 . The inclusion then follows from Lemma 2, since A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 ⊆ Pt .
15 In particular, by Lemma 6(ii), every merger in set {M , ..., M } is CS-nondecreasing given every other
1
k
merger in the set. By Lemma 6(i), if a strict subset of {M1 , ..., Mk } were approved, there would be a proposed but unapproved merger that could be approved without lowering consumer surplus, so all mergers in
{M1 , ..., Mk } will be approved in the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy.

16

is certain to be approved if proposed, and results in an active firm, our argument in part (i)
implies that proposal of the merger Mk is strictly profitable. Applying induction starting at
k = 1, we see that if Ft \At−1 is the set of feasible and not-yet-approved mergers, all mergers
∗
in A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 will be proposed.
Applying induction starting in period T, we conclude that in every period t if the set of feasi∗
ble but not-yet-approved mergers in period t is Ft \At−1 , then every merger in A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1
will be proposed in that period. The result follows.
Proposition 3 shows that a myopic merger policy that in each period approves the largest set
of mergers that maximizes current consumer surplus (or, equivalently, maximizes discounted
consumer surplus ignoring the possibility of any further changes in market structure) is dynamically optimal for the antitrust authority in that it maximizes discounted consumer surplus.
Indeed, the proposition establishes an even stronger result: the antitrust authority could not
do better even if it knew at the start of the process what the entire sequence of feasible mergers
(F1 , ..., FT ) would be and could implement feasible but unproposed mergers.16
In addition, by Lemma 3, the result implies that an even more myopic policy in which the
antitrust authority considers mergers individually in a sequential fashion, myopically approving
each merger if it is CS-nondecreasing given the market structure at the time of its review, is
also dynamically optimal in this very strong sense.
Finally, we make the following observation:
Remark 2 While for ease of exposition we have restricted attention to the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy, dynamic optimality holds for any myopically CS-maximizing
merger policy. See the Appendix for a discussion.

4

Extensions

In this section, we discuss a number of extensions of our model. We defer the discussion of one
important limitation of our model, the disjointness of mergers, to Section 5.

4.1

Price competition

So far, we have assumed that firms compete in quantities. In this subsection, we discuss the
case where firms compete in prices rather than quantities. We show that our basic conclusion
continues to hold, albeit in a somewhat weaker form. Specifically, part (i) of Proposition 3
extends to the case of price competition, while part (ii) of that proposition does not. That is,
under the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy there is an equilibrium that
maximizes discounted consumer surplus for every realized sequence of feasible mergers, but
there may also be other equilibria that do not.
To proceed, suppose that, as before, there are n firms producing a homogeneous good at
constant returns to scale. Firm i’s marginal cost and price are denoted ci and pi . Market
demand is given by the nonincreasing function Q(p), where p is the lowest price oﬀered by any
16 Moreover, the fact that the largest myopically CS-maximizing set monotonically increases over time implies
that the antitrust authority also could not do better if it could undo previously approved mergers, which we
have assumed is not possible.

17

firm. Let ι(i|N ) ∈ N denote the firm with the ith lowest marginal cost when the set of firms is
N, i.e., cι(1|N ) ≤ cι(2|N) ≤ ... ≤ cι(n|N ) . (If a subset of firms have the same marginal cost, then
the firms in this subset are ordered arbitrarily.) Assuming that Q(cι(1|N ) ) > 0 and Assumption
1 holds, and restricting attention to the standard Bertrand pricing equilibrium17 , firm ι(i|N )’s
equilibrium price pι(i|N ) is given by
(
ci
if 2 ≤ i ≤ n,
pι(i|N ) =
(7)
if i = 1,
min{pm (cι(1|N ) ), cι(2|N ) }
where the nondecreasing function pm (c) ≡ arg maxp (p − c)Q(p) is the monopoly price of a firm
with marginal cost c. In equilibrium, all consumers purchase at price pι(1|N ) , and so consumer
surplus is given by
Z
CS(p1 , p2 , ..., pn ) =

∞

pι(1|N)

Q(p)dp.

(8)

Note that CS(p1 , p2 , ..., pn ) is independent of pι(i|N ) for i > 1, and nonincreasing in pι(1|N ) .
One important diﬀerence between the Cournot and Bertrand models is that with Bertrand
competition a merger that is CS-neutral in isolation can become CS-decreasing when another
merger takes place that is CS-increasing in isolation, as the following example demonstrates:
Example 1 Suppose there are four firms, N = {1, 2, 3, 4}, with initial costs c1 = 5, c2 = 10,
c3 = 15, c4 = 20, and suppose that there are two possible mergers M1 = {1, 3} and M2 = {2, 4}
with cM1 = 9 and cM2 = 8. If the monopoly price for a firm with marginal cost equal to
5 is greater than 10 [i.e., pm (5) > 10], then with no mergers firm 1 will set a price of 10
and make all the sales in the market. The cost-increasing merger M1 is then CS-neutral in
isolation since the post-merger price will still be 10. Merger M2 is CS-increasing in isolation
because it reduces firm 1’s price from 10 to 8. However, once merger M2 occurs, merger M1
is CS-decreasing since it raises the price from 8 to 9.
This problem can be traced to the fact that a merger involving the lowest-cost firm ι(1|N )
that increases cost can be CS-neutral in the Bertrand model. We will say that a merger of the
firms in set M is cost increasing if the post-merger marginal cost of the merged entity, cM , is
above the marginal cost of the most eﬃcient merger partner, i.e., cM > mini∈M ci . Intuitively,
an antitrust authority can without loss reject any cost-increasing merger, since any such merger
both worsens eﬃciency and the extent of market power.18 We shall henceforth focus on an
antitrust authority that never approves cost-increasing mergers. Formally, this is equivalent
to supposing that feasible mergers are never cost increasing, an assumption that will allow us
to fit the analysis into the same framework as the Cournot model.
The following result records some properties of mergers that do not increase cost:
Lemma 5 Consider a merger that does not increase cost among a subset M of firms in a
Bertrand market.
17 Specifically, the limit of undominated equilibria for games with a discrete pricing grid, as the grid becomes
fine.
18 Formally, given any set of feasible mergers in a period, observe that it is possible to weakly improve consumer
surplus starting from any set of approved mergers by instead rejecting all mergers that are cost-increasing. As a
result, in any period, given any set of feasible mergers, the largest CS-maximizing set from among those feasible
mergers that do not increase cost maximizes consumer surplus in that period.

18

1. It is profitable (it weakly increases the joint profit of the firms in M ).
2. The merger is CS-decreasing only if it involves all of the firms with cost cι(1|N ) , all of the
firms with cost cι(2|N) , and moreover pm (cM ) > cι(2|N ) .
Proof. In the Appendix.
Another important diﬀerence from the Cournot model is that a merger that is CS-increasing
may not be strictly profitable: for example, a cost-reducing merger of firms ι(2|N ) and ι(3|N )
that results in a cost above cι(1|N ) lowers the market price but leaves firms ι(2|N) and ι(3|N )
with zero profit after the merger. For this reason, part (ii) of Proposition 3 will not hold in
the Bertrand model [e.g., firms ι(2|N ) and ι(3|N) in this example can optimally decide not to
propose their merger even if it is CS-increasing].
Nevertheless, part (i) of Proposition 3 does hold: all feasible mergers being proposed in each
period after any history is a subgame perfect Nash equilibrium for the firms, and the equilibrium
outcome maximizes discounted consumer surplus for any realized sequence of feasible mergers
F. To see this, we first consider the interaction between two disjoint mergers, M1 and M2 . Let
N denote the set of firms if neither merger takes place, Ni the set of firms after merger Mi (but
not Mj , j 6= i) has taken place, and N12 the set of firms after both mergers have taken place.
The key fact is that in the Bertrand model, versions of Propositions 1 and 2 that are suﬃcient
to establish part (i) of Proposition 3 continue to hold for mergers that do not increase cost:
Proposition 4 In the Bertrand model:
(i) if a merger that does not increase cost is CS-nondecreasing in isolation, it remains CSnondecreasing if another merger that does not increase cost and is CS-nondecreasing in
isolation takes place.
(ii) there cannot be two distinct mergers that do not increase cost and are CS-decreasing in
isolation.
Proof. In the Appendix.
Proposition 5 Consider two mergers M1 and M2 that are not cost increasing. Suppose that
merger M1 is CS-nondecreasing in isolation, while merger M2 is CS-decreasing in isolation but
CS-nondecreasing once merger M1 has taken place. Then:
(i) Merger M1 is CS-increasing conditional on merger M2 taking place;
(ii) The joint profit of the firms involved in merger M1 is weakly larger if both mergers take
place than if neither merger takes place.
Proof. In the Appendix.
Proposition 5 diﬀers from Proposition 2 for the Cournot model only in that the profitability
conclusions are weak rather than strict. Given Propositions 4 and 5, the basic arguments
leading to part (i) of Proposition 3 (now for mergers that do not increase cost) parallel those
for the Cournot model.

19

4.2

Diﬀerentiated Products

The Cournot and Bertrand analyses so far assumed a homogeneous product market. Unfortunately, extending our main results to the case of diﬀerentiated products, and hence to multiproduct firms, is not straightforward. For example, think of the extreme case in which there are
two diﬀerentiated products in the market. A merger might leave overall consumer surplus unchanged while raising one price and lowering the other. Since in the extreme case in which the
two products are independent in demand there are two independent homogeneous goods markets, we are not able to extend our arguments about the complementarity of CS-nondecreasing
mergers. On the other hand, our main results do extend to the case of diﬀerentiated products
if “strong symmetry” is imposed on both demand and costs (in the sense that all firms that
are involved in the same merger have identical marginal costs for all of their products, both
pre-merger and post-merger). In that case, price eﬀects for all goods move in the same direction
and the complementarity results from our previous analyses carry over, as we now discuss. In
our discussion, we will focus on the case of price competition with diﬀerentiated products.
Let Qj (pN ) denote the demand for product j, where pN is the vector of prices, and suppose
that the demand system is symmetric across products. Moreover, assume that demand is
downward-sloping and strictly log-concave in own price, products are demand substitutes,
prices are strategic complements, and the own-price eﬀect dominates the cross-price eﬀects in
terms of both the level of demand and its slope.19
For simplicity, suppose that, prior to merging, all firms produce a single product so that
firm j ∈ N produces product j ∈ N . After merging, the firms in the set Mk produce all of
the products in Mk . We assume that, prior to merging, each firm j ∈ Mk faces the same
marginal cost cj = cMk while after the merger all products in Mk are produced at the same
marginal cost cMk . This assumption ensures that any equilibrium has the property that the
price of every product in the set Mk is always the same: p∗i = p∗Mk for i ∈ Mk (see Kühn and
Rimler [2006]). In particular, this means that we can think of each firm’s strategic variable
being one-dimensional, so the standard analysis of diﬀerentiated goods price competition with
single-product firms (see Vives [1999]) extends to our setting with multiproduct firms.
Consider a merger amongst active firms in set Mk , and let p∗N denote the vector of premerger equilibrium prices. Since prices are strategic complements, the merger is CS-neutral if
and only if it leaves all prices unchanged, so the threshold value of post-merger marginal cost
that makes this merger CS-neutral is given by
µ
¶
1
∗
∗
∗
(9)
, i ∈ Mk ,
b
cMk (pN ) ≡ pMk − [pMk − cMk ]
1 − Ψi
¶
µ
¤
£
Ψi
= cMk − p∗Mk − cMk
, i ∈ Mk ,
1 − Ψi
where

Ψi ≡ −

P

∂Qj (p∗
N)
j∈Mk ,j6=i
∂pi
∂Qi (p∗
N)
∂pi

19 The

.

own eﬀect of price change dominates the cross eﬀects in terms of the level of demand


(p )/∂pj ) < 0 and in terms of the slope of demand if ∂ 2 ln Qi (pN )/∂p2i  >
j∈N (∂Q
 2i N

j∈N,j6=i ∂ ln Qi (pN )/∂pj ∂pi , i ∈ N ; see Kühn and Rimler [2006].

if




20

The term Ψi is familiar from merger analysis: it is the “diversion ratio” from product i ∈ Mk to
other products in Mk , defined as the share of the lost sales of product i ∈ Mk that are captured
by the other products in Mk after an increase in the price of product i. Since (by assumption)
∂Qi (p∗N )/∂pi < 0 and ∂Qj (pN )/∂pi > 0 for j 6= i, and (from the first-order condition of
P
profit-maximization) j∈Mk ∂Qj (pN )/∂pi < 0, i ∈ Mk , we have Ψi ∈ (0, 1), which implies
that b
cMk < cMk . That is, for the merger to be CS-neutral, the merger must be cost-reducing,
and therefore profitable for the merging parties. Strategic complementarity implies that a
decrease in post-merger marginal cost cMk induces all prices to fall. Consequently, a merger
cMk , CS-neutral if and only
amongst active firms in Mk is CS-increasing if and only if cMk < b
cMk , and CS-decreasing if and only if cMk > b
cMk .
if cMk = b
While every CS-neutral merger is profitable, it is not straightforward to show that every CSnondecreasing merger is profitable. The complication arises because a reduction in marginal
cost cMk has two opposing eﬀects on the profits of the merged firm Mk : holding fixed the
prices of all other firms, the direct eﬀect of a decrease in cMk is to increase the merged firm’s
profit; but the strategic eﬀect of a decrease in cMk is to reduce the merged firm’s profit as all
other firms will decrease their prices in response. One therefore needs to impose conditions
on demand to ensure that the direct eﬀect outweighs the strategic eﬀect and a decrease in its
marginal cost raises that firm’s equilibrium profit. It is straightforward to check that this is
P
indeed the case, for example, when demand is linear, Qj (pN ) = αN − β N pj + γ N i6=j pi with
αN > 0 and β N > (n − 1)γ N > 0.
Let us now turn to the interaction between mergers. Our previous result on the complementarity of those mergers that change consumer surplus in the same direction (Proposition
2) carries over to the present setting if approving a CS-increasing merger Ml raises the threshcMk ). Since a
old b
cMk for merger Mk , k 6= l (and approving a CS-decreasing Ml reduces b
CS-increasing merger reduces all prices, this means that our complementarity result extends if
demand is such that b
cMk (p∗N ) is weakly decreasing in all prices. In the case of linear demand,
cMk (p∗N ) depends only on, and is strictly
for example, the diversion ratio Ψi is a constant, so b
∗
decreasing in, pMk . It follows that complementarity holds. More generally, a suﬃcient condition for b
cMk (p∗N ) to be nonincreasing in the prices of all products with positive sales is that
the diversion ratio Ψi is nondecreasing in all prices. Provided that this complementarity holds,
Proposition 3 extends to this setting.

4.3

Fixed Costs and Exit

So far, we have assumed that all fixed costs are sunk, and that mergers had no eﬀect on
these costs. Our Cournot results extend to cases in which fixed costs are present and possibly
aﬀected by mergers provided that (i) mergers that are CS-nondecreasing in isolation continue
to be profitable in isolation and (ii) mergers do not cause active firms to shut down.20
Regarding (i), recall from Corollary 1 that, in the absence of fixed costs, every CS-nondecreasing
merger is profitable in isolation. This result continues to hold in the presence of fixed costs,
provided that the post-merger fixed cost of a merged firm is not larger than the sum of the
pre-merger fixed costs of the merger partners. In particular, our result is unaﬀected if mergers
generate eﬃciencies in fixed costs as well as marginal costs.
20 In

the Bertrand model, all but one firm will exit if there are positive levels of fixed costs.

21

If (ii) is violated, Proposition 1 need not hold. For example, suppose both mergers M1 and
M2 are CS-increasing in isolation and do not induce any firm to exit. However, if both mergers
are approved, then some other firm j ∈ N \(M1 ∪ M2 ) might find it optimal to exit. (This
outcome is possible since, without exit, the market price after both mergers would be lower
than after only one merger.) Taking the endogenous exit of firm j into account, consumer
surplus after both mergers might therefore be lower than after merger M1 only, in which case
merger M2 would be CS-decreasing conditional on merger M1 . Thus, Proposition 1(i) may
fail to hold. In a similar vein, Motta and Vasconcelos [2005] allow for exit in a setting with
four symmetric firms and two possible disjoint cost-reducing mergers involving two firms each.
Each merger is CS-decreasing in isolation because it induces the other two, non-merging firms
to exit. But consumer surplus increases if both mergers are approved, implying that each
merger becomes CS-increasing once the other merger has taken place. Thus, Proposition 1(ii)
fails to hold in their model. As a result, a myopic policy need not be optimal.
While these observations suggest that in general our main results could break down in
the presence of fixed costs and endogenous exit, we can allow for exit among a competitive
fringe of price-taking firms that do not take part in any mergers. To do so, we construct the
competitive fringe’s (long-run) supply function, S F (p), which takes potential exit (and entry)
of these firms into account. The residual demand of the large, strategic firms in set N is then
given by R(p) ≡ D(p) − S F (p), where D(p) is market demand. As long as the inverse residual
market demand function P (·) ≡ R−1 (·) satisfies the conditions of Assumption 1, our analysis
and conclusions remain unchanged.

4.4

Merger Proposal Costs

In our analysis, we have assumed that there are no costs of proposing a merger to the antitrust
authority. Moreover, we have highlighted a subgame-perfect equilibrium in which all feasible
mergers are always proposed, including some that have no chance of being approved. One
might be concerned that firms would not propose such mergers if they had even the tiniest
cost of making a merger proposal. However, since every CS-nondecreasing merger is strictly
profitable (provided it results in an active firm), there is also a subgame-perfect equilibrium
in which, in every period and after any history, the mergers proposed are those that will be
approved in equilibrium (i.e., the mergers that are in the largest myopically CS-maximizing
set of mergers, given the current market structure) and result in an active firm. Since all of
these mergers are strictly profitable, our conclusion — that, if the antitrust authority adopts the
most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy, then every subgame-perfect equilibrium
outcome maximizes discounted consumer surplus for every realized F — would not change in
the presence of merger proposal costs, provided these are suﬃciently small.

4.5

Demand Shifts

While our model had a stationary demand function, Corollary 1 suggests that our main results
hold provided that demand is weakly declining over time. Specifically, suppose that inverse
demand in period t can be written as P (Q; θt ), where θt is the publicly observable demand
state realized at the beginning of period t (before mergers are proposed), which we assume is

22

increasing over time, i.e., θt ≥ θt−1 . For any tuple (Q; θ t ) such that P (Q; θt ) > 0, we continue
to assume that PQ < 0 and PQ + QPQQ < 0 (where subscripts denote partial derivatives);
moreover, we now assume that Pθ < 0 and PQθ ≥ 0. For example, these conditions hold
if inverse demand takes the form P (Q; θt ) ≡ P (Q)/θt and P (Q) satisfies the conditions of
Assumption 1.
Let Q∗ (At ; θt ) denote the equilibrium industry output when market structure is At and the
demand state is θ t . Since inverse demand is changing over time, it is more convenient to write
b
cM (the post-merger marginal cost threshold that makes a merger amongst active firms in set
M CS-neutral) as a function of equilibrium price rather than industry quantity:
X
max{0, P ∗ (At ; θt ) − ci },
cM (P ∗ (At ; θt )) ≡ P ∗ (At ; θt ) −
b
i∈M

where P ∗ (At ; θ t ) ≡ P (Q∗ (At ; θt ); θ t ). Our assumptions on demand ensure that, holding fixed
market structure At , an increase in the demand state θt will lead to a decrease in the equilibrium
price P ∗ (At ; θ t ).21 This, in turn, implies that, holding fixed market structure At , the postmerger marginal cost threshold b
cM (P ∗ (At ; θt )) weakly increases over time (as long as the
merger involves active firms). As before, the threshold strictly increases as P ∗ (At ; θt ) decreases
due to CS-increasing mergers in the rest of the industry. Hence, if the antitrust authority adopts
a myopically CS-maxmizing merger policy, then if merger M is CS-nondecreasing in period t,
it will remain CS-nondecreasing in every future period t0 > t. (By contrast, a merger M that
is CS-decreasing in period t may now become CS-nondecreasing in some later period t0 > t
even holding market structure fixed.)
The largest myopically CS-maximizing set of mergers now depends not only on the set
of proposed mergers Pt and current market structure At−1 , but also on the demand state
∗
∗
θt , and is denoted A (Pt ; θt |At−1 ). As the discussion above makes clear, A (Pt ; θt |At−1 ) is
¢
¢
∗¡
∗¡
increasing in θt : if θ00t > θ0t , then A Pt ; θ0t |At−1 ⊆ A Pt ; θ00t |At−1 . Since Ft ⊆ Ft+1 and
∗
∗
θt ≤ θt+1 , we therefore have A (Ft ; θ t |∅) ⊆ A (Ft+1 ; θ t+1 |∅). Hence, if all feasible but notyet-approved mergers are always proposed, then the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing
merger policy maximizes discounted consumer surplus for every realized sequence of feasible
mergers F (Lemma 4). Moreover, as before, if the antitrust authority adopts the most lenient
myopically CS-maximizing merger policy, the resulting equilibrium outcome is dynamically
optimal (Proposition 3).

4.6

Entry

In our analysis above, we assumed that the set of firms is fixed, except for mergers. Would
our conclusions change if we allowed for firm entry? Recall that our model implies that the
equilibrium price P (Q∗ ) falls weakly over time. This suggests that if a firm does not find it
profitable to enter the market at the beginning of the first period, before any mergers have
21 Summing

up the first-order conditions of profit maximization and applying the implicit function theorem,

we have

Pθ (PQ + Q∗ PQQ ) − Q∗ PQ PQθ
dP (Q∗ ; θt )
=
,
dθ
(n + 1)PQ + Q∗ PQQ
where Q∗ is industry output and n is the number of active firms when the market structure is At and the
demand state is θt . Under our assumptions on demand, the expression on the right-hand side is strictly negative.

23

become feasible, then this firm will not find it profitable to enter the market in any later period
(provided that its costs have not changed). That is, allowing for free entry of firms (with
unchanging costs) does not aﬀect our results.
Moreover, suppose that new firms periodically enter the market later, for example after
discovering how to make the product. (In our model, such an entry event is equivalent to
a suﬃcient reduction in the marginal cost of a hitherto inactive firm.) These (potentially
stochastic) entry events lower the market price, and leave our main result unchanged for reasons
that parallel those in our discussion above of demand shifts.

4.7

Continuing Innovation

In the analysis above, we assumed that when a merger, say Mk , becomes feasible, the firms
in Mk receive a (random) draw of their post-merger marginal cost cMk once and for all; if
merger Mk is implemented, the marginal cost of the merged entity is cMk forever after. But
it seems plausible that, over time, firms involved in a (potential) merger may have more than
one idea of how to create synergies amongst them, both pre-merger and post-merger. As we
now discuss, it is possible to extend our analysis to allow for continuing innovation.
Consider the following generalization of our previous setup: as before, we assume that
if merger Mk becomes feasible at the beginning of period t, then the firms in Mk receive a
random draw of their post-merger marginal cost from distribution function Gkt . Moreover,
we now assume that the post-merger marginal cost cMk follows a (discrete-time) stochastic
process from period t onward. The stochastic process governing these additional cost draws
(or “innovations”) is independent of whether the firms in Mk have already merged or not.
Crucially, we assume that the post-merger marginal cost cMk weakly decreases over time.
Our previous results carry over to this generalized setting. The arguments closely parallel
those in our discussion above of demand shifts. Since a reduction in merged firm Mk ’s marginal
cost reduces the equilibrium price (and thereby reduces the post-merger marginal cost threshold
b
cMl of every other merger Ml , l 6= k), the largest myopically CS-maximizing set of mergers
will weakly increase over time if the antitrust authority adopts the most lenient myopically
CS-maximizing merger policy. Hence, if all feasible but not-yet-approved mergers are always
proposed, then the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy maximizes discounted
consumer surplus for every realized sequence of feasible mergers F (Lemma 4). Moreover, the
induction argument in the proof of Proposition 3 continues to apply, showing that the resulting
equilibrium outcome is dynamically optimal.22

4.8

Aggregate Surplus Standard

In our analysis above, we have assumed that the antitrust authority’s objective is to maximize
discounted consumer surplus. Indeed, as pointed out in the Introduction, this is close to
being the legal standard in the U.S. and the EU. Nevertheless, it is interesting to ask whether
22 In our discussion, we have assumed that a merged firm’s post-merger marginal cost follows an exogenous
stochastic process that is weakly decreasing over time. It is straightforward to show that if the merged firm
has to make an active decision as to whether or not to implement a cost-reducing innovation, then it is indeed
profitable for the merged firm to implement it.

24

the antitrust authority can maximize aggregate surplus (AS) by adopting the most lenient
myopically AS-maximizing merger policy.
In the homogeneous-goods Bertrand model, the answer is, yes. One can prove that our
results on the interactions between mergers in the Bertrand model, Propositions 4 and 5,
continue to hold if we replace the consumer surplus criterion by the aggregate surplus criterion.
Consequently, under the most lenient myopically AS-maximizing merger policy there is an
equilibrium such that the resulting outcome maximizes discounted aggregate surplus for every
realized sequence of mergers F.
In the homogeneous-goods Cournot model, however, the complementarity of AS-increasing
mergers does not hold in general. To see this, recall that, in the Cournot model, a marginal
cost reduction by a highly ineﬃcient firm (one that produces almost no output, and thus
has a profit margin approximately equal to zero) necessarily reduces aggregate surplus. In
contrast, a cost-reducing merger between the two most eﬃcient firms in a market may increase
aggregate surplus. Thus, complementarity can fail when a cost-reducing, AS-increasing merger
by other firms in the market transforms these two firms from being the most eﬃcient firms in
the market to being the least eﬃcient. In addition, mergers that increase aggregate surplus
need not be profitable for the firms involved in them. The papers by Nilssen and Sorgard
[1998] and Matsushima [2001], for example, both focus on Cournot settings with linear demand
and constant marginal costs in which there are two possible mergers, each between a pair of
firms, and show that a myopic policy need not be optimal for an antitrust authority interested
in maximizing aggregate surplus.

4.9

Information of Firms

In our analysis, we have assumed that firms observe both their own and their rivals’ merger
possibilities, including their eﬃciencies, as soon as these become feasible. We now show that
the conclusion of Proposition 3 carries over to the case where firms observe the feasibility of
other mergers only when they are proposed, and observe the eﬃciency gains of other mergers
only when those mergers are approved. (We continue to assume that firms observe their own
merger possibility when it becomes feasible. We also continue to assume that each firm knows
the initial costs of all firms at the start of period 1, so that complete-information Cournot
competition in each period is justified.) To establish the result, we use the solution concept of
extensive-form trembling-hand perfect Nash equilibrium.23
Proposition 6 Assume firms observe the feasibility of other mergers only when they are proposed and the eﬃciency gains of other mergers only when they are approved, and that the
support of Gkt is finite for all k and t. Suppose the antitrust authority follows the most lenient
myopically CS-maximizing merger policy. Then:
(i) All feasible mergers being proposed in each period after any history is an extensive-form
trembling-hand perfect Nash equilibrium for the firms. In this equilibrium, the outcome
23 We use this solution concept rather than the weaker notion of sequential equilibrium to establish part (ii) of
the result. The trembles ensure that following any history, when the true set of feasible but not-yet-approved
mergers is Ft \At−1 , every proposer firm assigns a strictly positive probability to this set being the set of feasible
but not-yet-approved mergers.

25

maximizes discounted consumer surplus for any realized sequence of feasible mergers
F = (F1 , ..., FT ).
(ii) For each sequence F, every extensive-form trembling-hand perfect Nash equilibrium results
in the same optimal sequence of period-by-period consumer surpluses.
Proof. In the Appendix.

4.10

Breakups

Our results have implications not only for horizontal mergers but also for horizontal breakups
of companies into smaller firms. As we now discuss, the model of Section 2 can be applied to
the analysis of such breakups. Importantly, however, that application shows that a myopically
CS-maximizing breakup policy is not dynamically optimal.
To fit breakups in the framework of Section 2, we think of the breakup of (merged) firm M
as being the reverse operation to merger M , with cM being the pre-breakup marginal cost of
merged firm M and ci , i ∈ M , being the post-breakup marginal cost of firm i. Hence, breakup
of firm M is CS-neutral if and only if merger M is CS-neutral, and the breakup is CS-increasing
[CS-decreasing] if and only if the merger is CS-decreasing [CS-increasing].
Our dynamic optimality result for a myopically CS-maximizing merger policy does not
extend to breakups. Most importantly, a myopic breakup policy is, in general, path dependent,
and so may fail to be optimal even if if the antitrust authority does not need firms to propose
breakups. This path dependence arises because the complementarity result of Proposition 1
does not carry over to breakups. To see this point, consider the case in which there are two
firms, M1 and M2 , each of whose breakup is CS-increasing in isolation. (Note that a breakup “in
isolation” means that the other firm is still merged). Our results regarding mergers in Section
2 imply that these breakups may not each be CS-increasing once the other breakup has taken
place: Specifically, note that breakups M1 and M2 each being CS-increasing in isolation is
equivalent to saying that each merger Mi is CS-decreasing once the other merger Mj (j 6= i)
has taken place. If so, one possibility is that one of the mergers, say M1 , is CS-decreasing
in isolation, while the other merger, M2 , is CS-increasing in isolation but CS-decreasing once
merger M1 has taken place.24 This means that while the breakup of firm M1 is CS-increasing
once firm M2 is broken up, the breakup of firm M2 is CS-decreasing once firm M1 is broken
up. As a result, there is path dependence: if the breakup of firm M2 is considered first, both
breakups will be implemented, but if the breakup of firm M1 is considered first, only firm M1
will be broken up. So a myopic policy fails in general to be optimal, even if the antitrust
authority does not need firms to propose breakups.
Moreover, if breakups do need to be proposed, the incentives of firms to propose them
are not aligned with those of an antitrust authority seeking to maximize discounted consumer
surplus, as can be seen from the fact that a CS-neutral breakup of an active firm is strictly
unprofitable for the firm. (This is simply the flip-side of our result on the profitability of a
CS-neutral merger.)
24 The

other possibility is that both mergers are CS-decreasing in isolation.

26

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we have analyzed the antitrust authority’s optimal dynamic merger approval
policy in a model with Cournot competition in which merger opportunities arise stochastically
over time, firms decide whether or not to propose a feasible merger, and the antitrust authority
decides whether or not to approve proposed mergers. We first established that a form of
complementarity exists between mergers in this Cournot setting: specifically, the sign of a
merger’s consumer surplus eﬀect is unchanged if another merger whose consumer surplus eﬀect
has the same sign takes place. This result, which is of independent interest, set the stage for our
main result, which showed that, in our model, an antitrust authority who wishes to maximize
discounted consumer surplus can implement the dynamically optimal solution by adopting a
completely myopic policy according to which the antitrust authority approves a merger if and
only if it does not lower consumer surplus given the current market structure. In fact, the
antitrust authority cannot improve upon the outcome induced by the myopic policy even if it
has perfect foresight about potential future mergers.
The argument for this surprising conclusion came in two parts. First, ignoring firms’ proposal incentives and assuming that all feasible but not-yet-approved mergers are always proposed, a myopically CS-maximizing merger policy is dynamically optimal in that it maximizes
discounted consumer surplus for every realized sequence of feasible mergers. As we have shown,
this result is based on a fundamental complementarity in the consumer surplus eﬀect of mergers: if each of two mergers share the same sign of their consumer surplus eﬀect, then the sign
of each one’s consumer surplus eﬀect does not change if the other merger is implemented. This
complementarity result follows because an increase in the toughness of competition (due to
the approval of a price-reducing merger) does not aﬀect the “eﬃciency eﬀect” of a merger but
reduces its “market power eﬀect,” implying that the merger is more likely to be CS-increasing
the more competitive is the industry. It implies that the antitrust authority will never later
regret approval of a CS-nondecreasing merger. Moreover, the fact that rejected mergers can
always be proposed and approved later means that the antitrust authority will never later
regret rejection of a CS-decreasing merger.
Second, if the antitrust authority adopts a myopically CS-maximizing merger policy, then
firms’ proposal incentives are aligned with the interests of the antitrust authority: every merger
that the antitrust authority wishes to approve is indeed profitable for the merger partners even
if the approval of that merger induces the approval of other (price-reducing) mergers in the
same period or in subsequent periods.
One interesting side implication of our model is that it provides a novel theory of merger
waves (for example, see Fauli-Oller [2000]). In contrast to much of the existing literature
(e.g., Jovanovic and Rousseau [2002, 2008]), our explanation of merger waves does not rely on
aggregate shocks. Specifically, because of the complementarity of CS-nondecreasing mergers in
our model, the arrival of a CS-increasing merger opportunity for some firms may have a domino
eﬀect by turning other feasible but currently CS-decreasing mergers into CS-nondecreasing
mergers, and thereby triggering a merger wave. An interesting aspect of this result is the
way in which the antitrust authority’s CS-maximizing merger policy aﬀects the emergence of
merger waves, since complementarity of mergers does not hold in general absent this antitrust
review.

27

We have also shown that our main conclusion — the dynamic optimality of a myopic merger
approval policy — is robust in several dimensions. For instance, the conclusion does not depend
on firms’ and the antitrust authority’s information about potential future mergers nor on
whether firms compete in prices or quantities.
Perhaps the most important limitation of our model is that mergers are disjoint. This rules
out, for example, the possibility that a firm may have to choose between two merger partners,
or that a recently merged firm might consider merging with another still-independent firm.
While disjointness of possible mergers would hold when firms have natural merger partners (as
we noted earlier), and has been assumed throughout the small existing literature on antitrust
review of mergers in dynamic settings (Nilssen and Sorgard [1998], Matsushima [2001], Motta
and Vasconcelos [2005]), it is clearly a strong assumption.
Nondisjoint mergers can cause problems for myopic policies. A first problem is that myopic
approval of a CS-increasing merger today may preclude the possibility of approving an even
better merger tomorrow. A second problem relates to firms’ proposal incentives. With disjoint
mergers, we saw that firms’ proposal incentives were aligned with the desires of the antitrust
authority because any CS-nondecreasing merger was profitable. When firms must choose among
merger partners, however, they may propose the wrong merger from the antitrust authority’s
perspective (e.g., the most profitable merger may not be the one that is best for consumer
surplus). Another issue is that firms may face a disincentive to propose a merger that today
would be CS-increasing because of the eﬀect the merger’s approval would have on bargaining
with future merger partners.
Nonetheless, because the case of nondisjoint mergers leads to such a striking result — the
optimality of myopic merger policy — we feel that it is a natural starting point for understanding
the issues involved in optimal merger policy in dynamic environments. At the same time, in
our own future research, we hope to learn more about what can be said about optimal merger
policy in settings with nondisjoint mergers.

References
[1] Farrell, J. and C. Shapiro [1990], “Horizontal Mergers: An Equilibrium Analysis”, American Economic Review, 80(1), 107-126.
[2] Fauli-Oller, R. [2000], “Takeover Waves,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy,
9(3), 189-210.
[3] Gowrisankaran, G. [1999], “A Dynamic Model of Endogenous Horizontal Mergers,” RAND
Journal of Economics, 30(1), 56-83.
[4] Kamien, M.I. and I. Zang [1990], “The Limits to Monopolization,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 105(2), 465-99.
[5] Jovanovic, B. and P. L. Rousseau [2002], “The Q-Theory of Mergers,” American Economic
Review, Papers and Proceedings, 92(2), 198-204.
[6] Jovanovic, B. and P. L. Rousseau [2008], “Mergers as Reallocation,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 90(4), 765—776.
28

[7] Kühn, K.-U. and M. S. Rimler [2006], “The Comparative Statics of Collusion Models,”
CEPR Discussion Paper DP5742.
[8] Matsushima, N. [2001], “Horizontal Mergers and Merger Waves in a Location Model,”
Australian Economic Papers, 40(3), 263-286.
[9] McAfee, R. P. and M. A. Williams [1992], “Horizontal Mergers and Antitrust Policy,”
Journal of Industrial Economics, 40(2), 181-187.
[10] Motta, M. and H. Vasconcelos [2005] , “Eﬃciency Gains and Myopic Antitrust Authority
in a Dynamic Merger Game,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 23(9-10),
777-801.
[11] Nilssen, T. and L. Sorgard [1998], “Sequential Horizontal Mergers,” European Economic
Review, 42(9), 1683-1702.
[12] Pesendorfer, M. [2005], “Mergers Under Entry,” RAND Journal of Economics, 36(3), 661679.
[13] Vives, X. [1999], Oligopoly Pricing: Old Ideas and New Tools, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[14] Williamson, O.E. [1968], “Economies as an Antitrust Defense: The Welfare Tradeoﬀs,”
American Economic Review, 58(1), 18-36.

6
6.1

Appendix
Proofs

We begin by establishing two useful results concerning the interactions among sets of mergers. The first lemma focuses on the relationship between sequences of mergers that are
CS-nondecreasing at each step, and sets of mergers for which each merger is CS-nondecreasing
given all of the other mergers in the set. We call it the “Incremental Gain Lemma”:
Lemma 6 (Incremental Gain Lemma)
(i) Suppose that a set of mergers M ≡ {M1 , ..., MJ1 } has the property that every merger
M ∈ M is CS-nondecreasing if all of the other mergers in M (those in the set M\M )
have taken place. Then for any strict subset Y ⊂ M, there exists an M 0 ∈ M\Y that is
CS-nondecreasing if all of the mergers in Y have taken place. As a result, starting from
Y , there is a sequencing of the mergers in M\Y that is CS-nondecreasing at each step.
(ii) Suppose that a sequence of mergers M1 , ..., MJ1 is CS-nondecreasing at each step.
Then each merger M ∈ M ≡ {M1 , ..., MJ1 } is CS-nondecreasing if all of the other mergers
in M (those in the set M\M) have taken place.
Proof. (i) Suppose the result is not true, so that every M 0 ∈ M\Y is CS-decreasing if all of
the mergers in Y have taken place. Proposition 1(ii) implies that, taking the mergers in Y
as given, for any sequencing of the mergers in the set M\Y the merger implemented at each
step, including the last step, is CS-decreasing. But this contradicts the hypothesis that the last

29

merger in the sequence is CS-nondecreasing if all of the other mergers in the set M have taken
place.
Given the existence of M 0 ∈ M\Y that is CS-nondecreasing if all of the mergers in Y have
taken place, we can update the subset Y to Y ∪{M 0 } ⊂ M and apply the same argument again.
Continuing iteratively identifies a sequencing of the mergers in M\Y that is CS-nondecreasing
at each step starting from the subset Y .
(ii) Consider an arbitrary merger Mj in sequence M1 , ..., MJ1 . We will show that Mj is CSnondecreasing given that all of the mergers in M\Mj have taken place. For k ≥ j, define the
set Mk = {Mi : i ≤ k}. Suppose that (ak ) merger Mj is CS-nondecreasing given Mk \Mj and
that (bk ) merger Mk+1 is CS-nondecreasing given Mk . Observe that, by hypothesis, property
(ak ) is true for k = j, and that property (bk ) holds for all k. We claim that properties (ak ) and
(bk ) imply property (ak+1 ): Mj is CS-nondecreasing given Mk+1 \Mj . To see this, observe that
if merger Mk+1 is CS-nondecreasing given Mk \Mj , property (ak+1 ) follows from Proposition
1(i), while if merger Mk+1 is CS-decreasing given Mk \Mj then property (ak+1 ) follows from
Proposition 2(i) [and the fact that Mk+1 is CS-nondecreasing given Mk ]. Applying induction
we find that merger Mj is CS-nondecreasing given that all of the mergers in M\Mj have taken
place [property (aJ1 )].
Part (ii) of Lemma 6 implies that the set of mergers resulting from a merger policy in which
the antitrust authority considers mergers within period t in a step-by-step fashion, approving
mergers that are CS-nondecreasing given the current market structure until no further CSnondecreasing mergers can be identified, possesses the property that every merger in the set
is CS-nondecreasing given every other merger in the set. This is also a property possessed by
any myopically CS-maximizing set (if any approved merger M were CS-decreasing given the
other approved mergers, then consumer surplus could be increased by not approving merger
M while continuing to approve the others). The next lemma establishes two features of sets
possessing this property.
Lemma 7 Suppose that two distinct sets of mergers M1 ≡ {M1 , ..., MJ1 } and M2 ≡ {M1 , ..., MJ2 }
with M1 * M2 , not necessarily disjoint, each have the property that every merger M ∈ Mi is
CS-nondecreasing if all of the other mergers in Mi (those in the set Mi \M ) have taken place.
Then:
(i) there is a merger M10 ∈ M1 \ (M1 ∩ M2 ) that is CS-nondecreasing given that all of the
mergers in M2 have taken place;
(ii) the set of mergers M1 ∪ M2 results in a level of consumer surplus that is at least as
great as that of either set M1 or set M2 .
Proof. (i) Part (i) of the Incremental Gain Lemma [Lemma 6(i)] implies that there exists a
merger M10 ∈ M1 \(M1 ∩M2 ) that is CS-nondecreasing given that all of the mergers in M1 ∩M2
have taken place. It also implies that there is a sequencing of the mergers in M2 \(M1 ∩ M2 ),
say M21 , ..., M2J2 , that is CS-nondecreasing at each step, given that the mergers in M1 ∩ M2
have taken place. Let Mk = {M2i : i ≤ k}. Proposition 1(i) implies that if merger M10
is CS-nondecreasing given that all the mergers in (M1 ∩ M2 ) ∪ Mk have taken place, then
[since by hypothesis merger M2,k+1 is also CS-nondecreasing given that all of the mergers in
(M1 ∩ M2 ) ∪ Mk have taken place] M10 is also CS-nondecreasing given that all of the mergers
in (M1 ∩ M2 ) ∪ Mk+1 have taken place. Since merger M10 is CS-nondecreasing if all of the
30

mergers in (M1 ∩ M2 ) ∪ M0 = (M1 ∩ M2 ) have taken place, applying induction yields the
result (taking k = J1 ).
(ii) Let M10 be the merger identified in part (i). We argue first that every merger in
set M2 ∪ {M10 } is CS-nondecreasing if all of the other mergers in that set have taken place.
Part (i) implies that this is true for merger M10 . Now consider any merger M20 ∈ M2 . By
hypothesis, merger M20 is CS-nondecreasing given that all the mergers in set M2 \M20 have
taken place. If merger M10 is also CS-nondecreasing if all of the mergers in set M2 \M20 have
taken place, then Proposition 1(i) implies that merger M20 is CS-nondecreasing if all of the
mergers in (M2 \M20 ) ∪ {M10 } = (M2 ∪ {M10 })\M20 have taken place. If, instead, merger M10
is CS-decreasing if all of the mergers in set M2 \M20 have taken place, then Proposition 2(i)
implies that this same property holds. This establishes that every merger in M2 ∪ {M10 } is
CS-nondecreasing if all of the other mergers in that set have taken place. Moreover, the level
of consumer surplus with set M2 ∪ {M10 } is at least as large as with set M2 .
If M1 ⊆ M2 ∪ {M10 } then the result is proven. Suppose not. Then note that sets M1 and
M2 ∪ {M10 } satisfy the hypotheses of the Lemma. So we can apply the argument again for
these two sets. Continuing iteratively in this fashion we establish the result by adding to M2
a sequencing of the mergers in M1 \(M1 ∩ M2 ) that is CS-nondecreasing at each step. This
establishes that the level of consumer surplus is at least as high with set M1 ∪ M2 as with set
M2 . We also need to show that the level of consumer surplus in M1 ∪ M2 is at least as large
as in set M1 . If M1 ⊇ M2 , so that M1 ∪ M2 = M1 , this follows immediately. If instead
M1 + M2 , then we can repeat the argument above with the roles of M1 and M2 reversed to
establish the result.
We now use these results to prove Lemmas 2 and 3.
Proof of Lemma 2. Given proposed mergers Pt and market structure At−1 , let A0 be a
largest myopically CS-maximizing set and let A 6= A0 be a myopically CS-maximizing set. We
will show that A ⊂ A0 . Suppose otherwise, so that A0 ⊂ (A ∪ A0 ). The sets A and A0 satisfy
the hypothesis of Lemma 7. So, by Lemma 7(ii), A ∪ A0 is myopically CS-maximizing as well,
contradicting the assumption that A0 is a largest myopically CS-maximizing set for Pt given
market structure At−1 . Hence, A0 must contain every other myopically CS-maximizing set,
which also implies that A0 is the unique largest CS-maximizing set.
0
∗
∗
∗
For the second claim, suppose A (P t |At−1 )* A (P t |At−1 ). The sets A (P t |At−1 ) and
∗

0

∗

A (P t |At−1 ) satisfy the hypothesis of Lemma 7 and, since A (P t |At−1 ) ⊆ Pt ∪ At−1 ⊂ P 0t ∪
∗
At−1 , all mergers in set A (P t |At−1 ) are feasible when the set of proposed mergers is Pt0 .
∗
Thus, when the set of proposed mergers is Pt0 , approval of the mergers in set A (P t |At−1 ) ∪
0
∗
A (P t |At−1 ) is feasible and by Lemma 7(ii) is also myopically CS-maximizing, contradicting
0
∗
A (P t |At−1 ) being the largest myopically CS-maximizing set for Pt0 given market structure
At−1 .
Proof of Lemma 3. Suppose that the set of proposed mergers is Pt and the market structure
prior to period t is At−1 . Let A⊆Pt denote a set of mergers resulting from a merger policy
in which the antitrust authority considers mergers within period t in a step-by-step fashion,
approving mergers that are CS-nondecreasing given the current market structure until no
further CS-nondecreasing mergers can be identified. By part (ii) of Lemma 6 (the Incremental
Gain Lemma), every merger in A must be CS-nondecreasing given every other merger in the set.

31

∗

∗

If A * A (P t |At−1 ), then Lemma 7(ii) implies that the set A ∪ A (P t |At−1 ) is also myopically
∗
∗
CS-maximizing but strictly contains set A (P t |At−1 ), a contradiction to A (P t |At−1 ) being
the largest myopically CS-maximizing set for Pt given market structure At−1 . Hence, A ⊆
∗
∗
A (P t |At−1 ). If A ⊂ A (P t |At−1 ), Lemma 7(i) implies that once the mergers in A have been
∗
∗
∗
approved, there is a merger in A (P t |At−1 )\(A∩A (P t |At−1 )) = A (P t |At−1 )\A that is CSnondecreasing given that the mergers in A have taken place, contradicting A being the result
of a step-by-step merger policy that approves mergers that are CS-nondecreasing given the
current market structure until no further CS-nondecreasing mergers can be identified.
Proof of Lemma 5. To see Property 1, note that, in equilibrium, only a uniquely lowest-cost
firm (a firm that is the only one to have cost cι(1|N ) ) can make a positive profit before the
merger. Hence, Property 1 can fail to hold only if the merger involves a firm that is the unique
firm with cost cι(1|N ) . Suppose it involves such a firm. In that case, a merger that does not
increase cost will not aﬀect the equilibrium prices of the firms not involved in the merger (who
price at cost both before and after the merger), so the merger must be weakly profitable.
To see Property 2, let N denote the set of firms after the merger. Assume the merger is
CS-decreasing, i.e.,
pι(1|N ) = min{pm (cι(1|N ) ), cι(2|N) } > min{pm (cι(1|N ) ), cι(2|N ) } = pι(1|N) .

(10)

Since the merger is not cost increasing, cι(1|N ) ≤ cι(1|N ) , so that pm (cι(1|N ) ) ≤ pm (cι(1|N ) ).
Note, first, that the merger must involve at least one firm with cost cι(1|N ) : if not, then
since it is not cost increasing, cι(2|N ) ≤ cι(2|N ) , which would yield a contradiction.to (10)
Next, note that if the merger involves some but not all of the firms with cost cι(1|N ) , then
since it is not cost increasing, we have cι(2|N ) = cι(1|N) ≤ cι(2|N ) . This would imply that
min{pm (cι(1|N ) ), cι(2|N ) } ≤ min{pm (cι(1|N) ), cι(2|N ) }, which contradicts (10), so the merger
must involve all of the firms with cost cι(1|N ) . Next, if the merger does not involve all of
the firms with cost cι(2|N ) , then since it involves all of the firms with cost cι(1|N) and is not
cost increasing, it must again be that cι(2|N ) ≤ cι(2|N ) , which again yields a contradiction.
Hence, the merger must involve all of the firms with cost cι(1|N ) and all of the firms with
cost cι(2|N) . Finally, suppose that pm (cM ) ≤ cι(2|N ) , or equivalently, pm (cι(1|N ) ) ≤ cι(2|N ) .
Since the merger is not cost increasing, pm (cι(1|N) ) ≤ pm (cι(1|N ) ). But this implies that
pι(1|N ) = min{pm (cι(1|N ) ), cι(2|N ) } ≤ min{pm (cι(1|N ) ), cι(2|N ) } = pι(1|N ) , a contradiction.
Proof of Proposition 4. To see part (i), suppose to the contrary that the merger, say
M1 , becomes CS-decreasing if the other merger, say M2 , takes place. Since M1 is not cost
increasing, by Lemma 5 the merger must involve (after M2 has taken place) all of the firms
with cost cι(1|N2 ) and all of the firms with cost cι(2|N2 ) , and moreover pm (cM1 ) > cι(2|N2 ) .
Because mergers are disjoint and M2 does not increase cost, this implies that when done in
isolation, merger M1 involves all of the firms with costs of either cι(1|N ) or cι(2|N) . If so, then
cι(2|N ) = cι(2|N2 ) . But this implies that pm (cM1 ) > cι(2|N ) , so that merger M1 is CS-decreasing
in isolation, a contradiction.
To see part (ii), note that if a merger Mi is CS-decreasing in isolation, by Lemma 5 it must
involve (when done in isolation) all of the firms with costs of cι(1|N ) and all the firms with cost
cι(2|N ) . However, since mergers are disjoint, there cannot be two distinct mergers with this
property.
Proof of Proposition 5.
32

The proof of part (i) is identical to the proof of Proposition 2, except that in the Bertrand
model a CS-increasing merger, while profitable, need not be strictly so.
To see part (ii), consider implementing merger M2 first, followed by merger M1 . Note that
since M2 is CS-decreasing in isolation it involves all of the firms with costs equal to cι(1|N ) or
cι(2|N ) by Lemma 5. Since it is not cost increasing, the profit of all firms not involved in this
merger, including all of those in M1 , must be zero before and after merger M2 takes place.
Since merger M1 is profitable after merger M2 takes place [by part (i)], the sequence of mergers
cannot decrease the joint profit of the firms in M1 .
Proof of Proposition 6. To consider extensive-form trembling-hand perfect Nash equilibria
we perturb the game by introducing a minimum and a maximum probability of a merger
proposal at any information set of a proposer of a feasible but not-yet-approved merger. We
examine Nash equilibrium behavior in the agent normal form as these minimum and maximum
probabilities approach zero and one, respectively.
(i) We will first establish that all feasible mergers being proposed in each period after any
history is an extensive-form trembling-hand perfect Nash equilibrium for the firms. Combined
with Lemma 3, this yields part (i) of the proposition. To do so, it suﬃces to examine perturbed
games in which at every information set of a proposer of a feasible but not-yet-approved merger
the merger must be proposed with a probability of at least ε > 0 and not more than 1 − ε,
where ε → 0.
The proof is by induction and follows closely that of Proposition 3. Consider, a period t in
which the history prior to period t’s proposal stage consists of the sequences Ft = (F1 , ..., Ft )
of feasible mergers, P t−1 = (P1 , ..., Pt−1 ) of proposed mergers, and At−1 = (A1 , ..., At−1 ) of
approved mergers. Note that this history also determines exactly each firm i’s observed history,
which we denote by Iit . Formally, each Iit corresponds to an information set for firm i at the
proposal stage in period t. The most important diﬀerence to the proof of Proposition 3 is that
the induction hypothesis is now that for any period T < T , starting in period t + 1 all feasible
but not-yet-approved mergers will be proposed in every period with the maximum possible
probability 1 − ε.
To show that proposing its merger with the maximum possible probability is optimal in
period t for every proposer firm with a feasible but-not-yet approved merger, consider proposer
firm i at an information set Iit with a feasible but not-yet-approved merger Mk . Recall from
the proof of Proposition 3 that, for a given information set Iit and a given set of other proposed
b−k , either the merger Mk is not approved when proposed (and so proposing the
mergers P
merger has no eﬀect on current profits), or the merger is approved when proposed but the
merged firm is inactive (and so, again, proposing the merger has no eﬀect on current profits),
or the merger is approved and results in an active firm (in which case there is a strictly positive
eﬀect on current profits). In the first case (i.e., the merger is not approved when proposed),
there is also no eﬀect on future profits of proposing the merger given the induction hypothesis.
The same is true in the second case (when the merger is approved but results in an inactive
firm). In the third case (where the merger is approved and results in an active firm), however,
there might be an eﬀect on future profits if t < T . But this eﬀect is continuous in the size of
the tremble ε, and (as is clear from the proof of Proposition 3) is equal to zero if ε = 0. Since
b−k , there exists an
there are at most a finite number of such information sets Iit and sets P
εt > 0 such that for all ε ≤ εt , proposing a feasible and not-yet-approved merger that ends up
33

being approved and results in an active firm in period t is strictly profitable. Hence, for ε ≤ εt ,
proposing every feasible and not-yet-approved merger in period t is profitable. The same is
clearly true if t = T , where there is no eﬀect on future profits.
We conclude that our induction hypothesis — that all feasible and not-yet approved mergers
will be proposed in the future with the maximum possible probability — holds when we look
at period t − 1 provided that ε ≤ εt = minτ ≥t ετ . Applying induction starting in period T − 1
implies that proposing every feasible but not-yet-approved merger in every period with the
maximum possible probability is a Nash equilibrium of the agent normal form of any perturbed
game with ε ≤ ε1 . Hence, taking ε → 0, proposal of every feasible but not-yet-approved merger
in every period is an extensive-form trembling-hand perfect Nash equilibrium.
(ii) We next show that every extensive-form trembling-hand perfect Nash equilibrium maximizes discounted consumer surplus (and results in the same sequence of period-by-period
consumer surpluses) for each sequence of feasible mergers F. To establish this result, we restrict attention to small perturbations in which the minimum probability of a merger proposal
at any information set for a proposer of a feasible but not-yet-approved merger is no more than
ε1 > 0 (where ε1 is defined as above) and the maximum probability is no less than 1 − ε1 . We
examine Nash equilibrium behavior in the agent normal form as the minimum and maximum
probabilities approach zero and one, respectively.
We now show that if the perturbations are strictly positive but suﬃciently small (in the
sense defined above), then if the true set of feasible but not-yet-approved mergers in period
∗
t is Ft \At−1 , every merger in A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 will be proposed with the maximum
∗
possible probability in that period. [Recall that the set A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ), defined in the
∗
proof of Proposition 3(ii), is the set of mergers in A (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) that result in active firms
∗
given the market structure A (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ).] The result follows as we let the minimum and
maximum proposal probabilities go to zero and one, respectively.
The proof is by induction. The induction hypothesis for period t is that in all future periods
τ > t, whenever the set of feasible but not-yet-approved mergers is Fτ \Aτ −1 , then all mergers
∗
in A1 (Fτ \Aτ −1 |Aτ −1 )\Aτ −1 are proposed with the maximum possible probability.
Suppose that Ft \At−1 is indeed the true set of feasible and not-yet-approved mergers. Let
It (Ft \At−1 ) denote those information sets in period t that are consistent with Ft \At−1 ; that is,
these are the information sets that are reached for at least one sequence (Ft , P t−1 ) of feasible
mergers and merger proposals that, given the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger
policy, results in the set of feasible but not-yet-proposed mergers in period t being Ft \At−1 .
Consider any information set Iit ∈ It (Ft \At−1 ) that belongs to the proposer of a merger Mk ∈ (
∗
Ft \At−1 ) such that Mk ∈ A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 . From our earlier argument, if all minimum
proposal probabilities are less than or equal to ε1 and all maximum proposal probabilities are
larger than or equal to 1−ε1 , proposing merger Mk never reduces the expected joint discounted
profits of the firms in Mk . We now show that proposing merger Mk is in fact strictly profitable
in expectation.
Observe, first, that in any Nash equilibrium of the agent normal form of the perturbed
game, the information set Iit is reached with positive probability along the equilibrium path
when the set of feasible but not-yet-proposed mergers in period t is Ft \At−1 , so (in belief
language) the agent choosing at this information set must assign a strictly positive probability

34

to Ft \At−1 being the set of feasible but not-yet-approved mergers.25
Th erest of the argument follows closely, with some diﬀerences, the proof of Proposition
∗
3(ii): Starting from At−1 , there is an ordering of the mergers in A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1
that is CS-nondecreasing at each step, which we denote by (M1 , ..., MS ). As in the proof of
Proposition 3(ii), consider the proposal of merger Mk at Iit and suppose that all mergers Ms
for s < k are proposed with maximum probability when Ft \At−1 is the true set of feasible
and not-yet-approved mergers in period t. (Note that this assumption is valid when k = 1.)
Now, given the trembles, the proposer of Mk at Iit must assign a strictly positive probability
bt = {M1 , ..., Mk }. As in the proof
to the event that the realized set of proposed mergers is P
of Proposition 3(ii), in this case all of these mergers will be approved and will result in active
firms. Hence, the proposer of Mk at Iit must believe that, if proposed, merger Mk will be
approved and result in an active firm with strictly positive probability. But from our previous
argument, if merger Mk is approved and the merged firm Mk is active, proposal of the merger
is strictly profitable when the perturbations are small (in the sense described above). Applying
induction starting at k = 1, we see that any such merger Mk will be proposed in period t with
the maximum possible probability. Thus, if Ft \At−1 is the true set of feasible and not-yet∗
approved mergers, all mergers in A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 will be proposed with the maximum
possible probability.
Applying induction, we conclude that in any perturbed game if the true set of feasible but
∗
not-yet-approved mergers in period t is Ft \At−1 , then every merger in A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1
will be proposed with the maximum possible probability in that period. Taking the perturbations to zero yields the result.

6.2

Sketch of Arguments Underlying Remark 2

In the following, we briefly sketch the arguments leading to our claim in Remark 2. To do so,
we need to extend many of the results in the text. To refer to these additional results, we will
append a prime to the number of the result it extends. For example, the result that extends
Proposition 2 will be denoted Proposition 2’.
6.2.1

CS Eﬀects of and Interactions Between Mergers

Mirroring the statement of Proposition 1, Proposition 1’ states: (i) If a merger M1 is CSincreasing (and hence profitable) in isolation, it remains CS-increasing (and hence profitable)
if another merger M2 that is CS-nondecreasing in isolation takes place and the merged firm
M1 remains active after merger M2 has taken place. (ii) If a merger M1 is CS-nonincreasing
in isolation and results in an active firm, then the merger remains CS-nonincreasing if another
merger M2 that is CS-nonincreasing in isolation takes place. The proof of part (i) of the
proposition uses the fact for M1 to be CS-increasing after merger M2 takes place, the merged
firm M1 must also be active if merger M2 does not take place, and follows a similar argument
as in the proof of Proposition 1(i). The proof of part (ii) of the proposition uses the fact
25 This property — that any firm with a merger in F \A
t
t−1 must always assign a strictly positive probability
to Ft \At−1 being the set of feasible but not-yet-approved mergers — is a key step of the argument. It would
not be true without the perturbations and is the reason why perturbations are needed for ensuring the proposal
∗
of all mergers in A1 (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 .

35

that if the merged firm M1 is active in isolation, it must remain active after merger M2 has
taken place since the CS-nondecreasing merger M2 weakly increases the equilibrium price;
moreover, the CS-nondecreasing merger M2 weakly decreases the threshold value of postmerger marginal cost, b
cM1 , that makes merger M1 just CS-neutral, and so merger M1 must
remain CS-nondecreasing if M2 takes place.
In Proposition 2’, the hypothesis is that merger M1 is CS-increasing [rather than CSnondecreasing, as in Proposition 2] in isolation, while merger M2 is CS-nonincreasing [rather
than CS-decreasing] in isolation but CS-increasing once merger M1 has taken place. Under
this modified hypothesis, the statements of parts (i) and (ii) remain unchanged. The proof of
the proposition proceeds along the same lines as that of Proposition 2, except for some small
modifications. For instance, in the second sentence of the proof of part (i) “weakly increases”
is replaced by “strictly increases” and “nonnegative” by “strictly positive.”
Lemma 6’ (the modified Incremental Gain Lemma) diﬀers from Lemma 6 in that “CSnondecreasing” is replaced everywhere by “CS-increasing.” For instance, the set M in part (i)
has the property that every merger M ∈ M is CS-increasing if all of the other mergers in M
have taken place. As a result, starting from any strict subset Y ⊂ M, there exists a sequencing
of the mergers in M\Y that is CS-increasing at each step. The proof uses the fact that, under
the hypothesis of the lemma, every merger M ∈ M must result in an active firm, for any
set A ⊆ M of approved mergers.26 This means that we can apply part (i) of Proposition 1’
and use the same arguments as in the proof of Lemma 6 (but with “CS-decreasing” being
replaced by “CS-nonincreasing”, and so on). As for part (ii) of Lemma 6’, we need to add the
assumption that every merger in the sequence remains active when all of the other mergers in
the sequence have taken place. That is, the statement now reads: Suppose that a sequence of
mergers M1 , ..., MJ1 is CS-increasing at each step. Then each merger M ∈ M ≡ {M1 , ..., MJ1 }
is CS-increasing if all of the other mergers in M (those in the set M\M ) have taken place,
provided that each merged firm M remains active after the mergers in M\M .
To obtain Lemma 7’ from Lemma 7, the hypothesis is modified so that the set M1 has the
property that every merger in the set is CS-increasing if all of the other mergers in that set
have taken place, while the set M2 continues to have the property that every merger in the
set is CS-nondecreasing if all of the other mergers in that set have taken place. Lemma 7’
states that if M1 * M2 and if each of the mergers in set M1 \(M1 ∩ M2 ) (when done on its
own) results in an active firm once all of the mergers in set M2 have taken place, then there
exists a merger M10 ∈ M1 \(M1 ∩ M2 ) that is CS-increasing [rather than CS-nondecreasing, as
in Lemma 7(i)] given that all of the mergers in M2 have taken place. The proof first identifies
a merger M10 ∈ M1 \(M1 ∩ M2 ) that is CS-increasing given that the mergers in (M1 ∩ M2 )
have taken place. If M10 would be not be a merger among active firms once the mergers in
M2 have taken place, then it must be CS-increasing once the mergers in M2 have taken place
(since it results in an active firm). If, instead, M10 would be a merger among active firms once
the mergers in M2 have taken place, then an induction argument along the same lines as that
in the proof of part (i) of Lemma 7 (now using Proposition 1’) establishes the result. Note
that a suﬃcient condition for each of the mergers in set M1 \(M1 ∩ M2 ) to result in an active
firm once all of the mergers in set M2 have taken place is that consumer surplus under set M1
26 By Lemma 6(i), the price after the mergers in set A have taken place can be no higher than the price after
all of the mergers in set M have taken place.

36

is at least as large as under set M2 ; that is, letting p∗i denote the equilibrium price after all of
the mergers in set Mi , i = 1, 2, have taken place, if we have p∗2 ≥ p∗1 . To see this, note that
every merged firm M ∈ M1 must have a cost cM < p∗1 since, otherwise, the merger would not
be CS-increasing given the other mergers in set M1 . But then cM < p∗2 , which implies that
merger M results in an active firm once all of the mergers in set M2 have taken place. [A
counterpart to Lemma 7(ii) is not necessary for our purposes here.]
6.2.2

Myopically CS-maximizing Sets

In analog to the largest myopically CS-maximizing set, we can define a smallest myopically
CS-maximizing set for the set of proposed mergers Pt given current market structure At−1 , as
a myopically CS-maximizing set that does not contain any other myopically CS-maximizing
set.
Lemma 2’ makes the same uniqueness claim as Lemma 2, but for the smallest myopically
∗
CS-maximizing set rather than for A (P t |At−1 ): there is a unique smallest myopically CSmaximizing set, denoted A∗ (P t |At−1 ). (In contrast to Lemma 2, no monotonicity claim is
made.) The proof of the uniqueness property is by contradiction. Suppose there are two
smallest myopically CS-maximizing sets, say A and A0 , with A 6= A0 . Without loss of generality,
suppose that A * A0 . Since each one of the sets must have the property that every merger in
the set is CS-increasing given the other mergers in that set and since the two sets must induce
the same level of consumer surplus, we can apply Lemma 7’ to show that there exists a merger
M 0 ∈ A\(A ∩ A0 ) that is CS-increasing given that all of the mergers in A0 have taken place.
But then A0 cannot be a myopically CS-maximizing set, a contradiction.
The following result shows that the smallest myopically CS-maximizing set is contained
in any other myopically CS-maximizing set, and that any myopically CS-maximizing set is
contained in the largest myopically CS-maximizing set:
Lemma 8 For a given proposed set of mergers, Pt , and current market structure At−1 , the
following inclusion property holds for the myopically CS-maximizing sets:
∗

∗
A∗ (P t |At−1 ) ⊆ At (P t |At−1 ) ⊆A (P t |At−1 ).

Proof. We have already established the second inclusion property in Lemma 2. We therefore
turn to the first inclusion property, A∗ (P t |At−1 ) ⊆ A∗t (P t |At−1 ). Let A0 ⊆ A∗t (P t |At−1 )
denote the set of all those mergers in A∗t (P t |At−1 ) that are CS-neutral given the other mergers
in A∗t (P t |At−1 ), and let A+ ≡ A∗t (P t |At−1 )\A0 denote the complementary set, which has the
property that every merger M ∈ A+ is CS-increasing given the other mergers in A+ . We claim
that A∗ (P t |At−1 ) ⊆ A+ . [In fact, A+ = A∗ (P t |At−1 ), but we do not need to show this.] To
+
see this, suppose otherwise that A∗ (P t |At−1 ) * A . Since each set, A+ and A∗ (P t |At−1 ), is
myopically CS-maximizing and has the property that every merger in the set is CS-increasing
given the other mergers in that³ set, we can apply´Lemma 7’ to conclude that there exists
+
that is CS-increasing given that all of
a merger M 0 ∈ A∗ (P t |At−1 )\ A∗ (P t |At−1 ) ∩ A

the mergers in A+ have taken place. But then A+ cannot be myopically CS-maximizing, a
+
contradiction. Hence, we have A∗ (P t |At−1 ) ⊆ A , which implies A∗ (P t |At−1 ) ⊆ A∗t (P t |At−1 ).

37

An immediate implication of Lemma 8 is that we can think of set A∗t (P t |At−1 ) as consisting of the mergers in the smallest myopically CS-maximizing set A∗ (P t |At−1 ), plus a (potentially empty) set of mergers that are CS-neutral given A∗ (P t |At−1 ). Thus, all myopically
CS-maximizing merger policies diﬀer from one another only in their treatment of CS-neutral
mergers.27
6.2.3

Extension of Proposition 3

Establishing the claim of Remark 2 parallels the argument leading to Proposition 3 in the
text. We first establish a generalization of Lemma 4, Lemma 4’. Specifically, Lemma 4’ states:
If all feasible but not-yet-approved mergers are proposed in each period, any myopically CSmaximizing merger policy, which induces the approval sequence A1 = A∗1 (F1 |∅) and At =
A∗t (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) for all t > 1, maximizes discounted consumer surplus for every realization
of feasible mergers F = (F1 , ..., FT ). To establish this result, we use the following lemma, which
is also used to prove Proposition 3’:
∗

Lemma 9 Suppose Ft−1 ⊆ Ft . If the current market structure At−1 is such that At−1 ⊆A (Ft−1 |∅),
then
∗

∗

∗
A∗ (Ft |∅) ⊆A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) ⊆ At (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) ⊆A (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) =A (Ft |∅).

Proof. The second and third inclusion properties in the display follow from Lemma 8, while the
equality follows from the same induction argument as in the proof of Lemma 4. To see the first
∗
inclusion property, A∗ (Ft |∅) ⊆A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ), observe that since A (Ft |∅) is a solution to
the problem of myopically maximizing consumer surplus given that the set of proposed mergers
is Ft \At−1 and mergers At−1 have previously been approved, the solution set to that problem
must be a subset of the solution set of the less constrained problem of myopically maximizing
consumer surplus given that the set of proposed mergers is Ft and no mergers have previously
been approved.
Applying Lemma 9 iteratively, we see that if all feasible mergers are proposed in period t,
then regardless of firms’ previous behavior the market structure in period t will contain the
∗
set A∗ (Ft |∅) and be contained within the set A (Ft |∅), which implies that it is a solution to
the problem of maximizing consumer surplus in period t given that no mergers have previously
been approved. This implies that Lemma 4’ holds.
Note also that if in period t all mergers in A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 are proposed when
Ft \At−1 is the set of feasible but not-yet-approved mergers, then regardless of previous behavior by the firms the market structure in period t will again contain the set A∗ (Ft |∅)
∗
and be contained within the set A (Ft |∅). To see this, observe that if Pt is such that
∗
∗
A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 ⊆ Pt ⊆ Ft \At−1 , then Lemma 2 implies that A (P t |At−1 ) ⊆ A (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ),
while the fact that A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) — a set that myopically maximizes consumer surplus
when all mergers in Ft \At−1 are proposed — is feasible when Pt is proposed, implies that
27 Note

also that CS-neutral mergers are measure zero events in a model with a continuum of possible eﬃciency
realizations.

38

A∗ (P t |At−1 ) = A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ).28 Applying Lemma 9 then implies that
∗

∗

∗

A∗ (Ft |∅) ⊆A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) = A∗ (P t |At−1 ) ⊆ A (P t |At−1 ) ⊆ A (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )=A (Ft |∅).
Thus, if in all periods all mergers in A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) are proposed when Ft \At−1 is the set
of feasible but not-yet-approved mergers, then the outcome will yield optimal period-by-period
levels of consumer surplus.
These facts imply that dynamic optimality holds for any myopically CS-maximizing policy:
Proposition 3’ If the antitrust authority follows a myopically CS-maximizing merger policy,
then for each sequence F, every subgame perfect Nash equilibrium results in the same
optimal sequence of period-by-period consumer surpluses.
Proof. (Sketch) The proof follows very closely that of part (ii) of Proposition 3. It proceeds
by establishing, using an induction argument, that whenever Ft \At−1 is the set of feasible
but not-yet-approved mergers in period t, all mergers in set A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) will necessarily
be proposed, which establishes the claim (using the argument above). One important change
relative to the case of the most lenient myopically CS-maximizing merger policy is that, in
any period t, future market structures may be aﬀected by whether a given merger Mk ∈
A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 is proposed today. However, these future market structure eﬀects can
involve merger Mk only if the merged firm would be inactive and can involve mergers other
than Mk only in situations in which those mergers are CS-neutral given the other mergers
being approved. They therefore have no eﬀect on the joint profits of the firms in merger Mk ,
so we can again focus solely on current period profit eﬀects.
Consider the proposal of a merger Mk ∈ A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 in period t under the
assumption that future payoﬀs for the firms involved in that merger are independent of period
t behavior. Since A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) is the smallest myopically CS-maximizing set for Ft \At−1
given At−1 , every merger in A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 is CS-increasing given every other merger
in that set and results in an active firm. Part (i) of Lemma 6’ implies that there is an ordering
of the mergers in A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1 that is CS-increasing at each step, which we denote
by (M1 , ..., MS ). Suppose that all mergers Ms for s < k are proposed when Ft \At−1 is the set of
feasible and not-yet-approved mergers in period t (which is true when k = 1.) Consider the case
bt = {M1 , ..., Mk }. We claim that all of the mergers in {M1 , ..., Mk } will be approved. To
where P
see this, note first that all of the merged firms in {M1 , ..., Mk } will be active if all are approved
[since the price will be no less than if all of the mergers {M1 , ..., MS } = A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 )\At−1
bt is CS-increasing given the
are approved]. Hence, by part (ii) of Lemma 6’, every merger in P
other mergers in that set (and given the previously approved mergers At−1 ). If the antitrust
bt , part (i) of Lemma 6’ implies
authority were to approve only a (possibly empty) subset of P
that the antitrust authority could strictly increase consumer surplus by approving the other
bt as well. This proves the claim that all of the mergers in {M1 , ..., Mk } will be
mergers in P
bt = {M1 , ..., Mk }.
approved when P
28 The

argument in footnote 13 implies that the consumer surplus levels with approved mergers
and A∗ (P t |At−1 ) must be the same. Since each of these two sets has the property that
every merger in the set is CS-increasing given the other mergers in the set, we can apply Lemma 7’ to show
that the two sets must be the same.
A∗ (F

t \At−1 |At−1 )

39

bt . Using the same argument as above, the
Consider now the case where {M1 , ..., Mk } ⊂ P
set {M1 , ..., Mk } has the property that every merger in the set is CS-increasing given the other
mergers in that set, and so [by part (i) of Lemma 6’] for any strict subset Y ⊂ {M1 , ..., Mk },
there exists a merger M 0 ∈ {M1 , ..., Mk }\Y that is CS-increasing given Y . We claim that
{M1 , ..., Mk } ⊆ A∗t (Pbt |At−1 ) in any myopically CS-maximizing policy, so that all of the mergers in {M1 , ..., Mk } will be approved. To see this, suppose otherwise that {M1 , ..., Mk } *
bt |At−1 ) is CS-nondecreasing given the
A∗t (Pbt |At−1 ). Note first that every merger in A∗t (P
bt ⊆ Ft \At−1 , the equilibrium price under market strucother mergers in that set. Since P
∗ b
ture At (Pt |At−1 ) must be weakly higher than under market structure A∗t (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ), and
the equilibrium price under market structure A∗t (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) must be the same as under market structure A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) (by virtue of both sets being CS-maximizing given
the same set of proposed mergers and given the same market structure). Since all of the
merged firms in {M1 , ..., Mk } are active when market structure is A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ), this
bt |At−1 ). Let
implies that these firms will also be active when the market structure is A∗t (P
bt |At−1 ) ∩ {M1 , ..., Mk }. Since all of the merged firms in {M1 , ..., Mk } are acY = A∗t (P
bt |At−1 ), Lemma 7’ implies that there exists a merger
tive when market structure is A∗t (P
bt |At−1 ). But this
M 0 ∈ {M1 , ..., Mk }\Y that is CS-increasing given all of the mergers in A∗t (P
means that the antitrust authority can strictly increase consumer surplus by approving merger
bt |At−1 )\At−1 , a contradiction to A∗t (P
bt |At−1 ) beM 0 in addition to all of the mergers in A∗t (P
ing myopically CS-maximizing. This proves the claim that all of the mergers in {M1 , ..., Mk }
bt . Hence, using the same arguments as in the proof
will be approved when {M1 , ..., Mk } ⊂ P
of Proposition 3, proposal of merger Mk is strictly profitable. Applying induction starting at
k = 1, it follows that all mergers in A∗ (Ft \At−1 |At−1 ) will be proposed.

40

