NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNIONISM COMES TO THE PUBLIC SECTOR

Richard B. Freenan

Working

Paper No. 1452

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1984

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies and project in Government Budget. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1452
September 1984

Unionism Comes to the Public Sector
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that public sector labor relations is best understood in
a framework that focuses on unions' ability to shift demand curves rather than

to raise wages, as is the case in the private sector. It reviews the public
sector labor relations literature and finds that: (i) public sector unionism has
flourished as a result of changes in laws; (2) the effects of public sector
unions on wages are likely to have been underestimated; (3) public sector unions
have a somewhat different effect on wage structures than do private sector

unions; () compulsory arbitration reduces strikes with no clearcut impact on
the level of wage settlements; (5) public sector unions have diverse effects
on non—wage outcomes as do private sector unions.

In terms of evaluating public sector unionism, the paper argues that by
raising both the cost of'

public

public

services (taxes) and the amount of services

sector unionism involves a different welfare calculus than private sector

unionism.

Richard B. Freeman
National Bureau of
Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY

In

the 1950s only a small minority of public sector workers were

organized and even AFL—CIO President George Meany believed "It is impossible to

bargain collectively with the government."1vjrtually no states had laws permitting collective bargaining for public employees. Strikes were prohibited.
Analysts of unionism regarded most public sector employees as unorganizable.
In 1980 about 13 per cent of government employees were represented by
labor organizations and 32 per cent were covered by contractual agreements.'

Over three—quarters of the states had legislation authorizing collective

bargaining by public employees. Eight states permitted strikes by some public

workers. According to the Current Population Survey (oPs) 3% of government
employees compared to 22 %

of

private sector employees were "represented by

labor organizations" in May 198O.
What caused the sudden surge in public sector unionism in the United

States? What are its economic consequences? How have various states and localities dealt with the organization of their employees? Which laws and procedures have proven more/less successful in coping with the unionism of public

employees? In what ways does labor relations in the public sector parallel
labor relations in the private sector? In what ways has the public sector been
unique?
To answer these questions, I review the results of the past two or so

decades of research on public sector labor relations. The research represents a
significant and expanding effort by labor specialists. In 1960 relatively few
labor relations articles in the leading journals dealt with the public sector;
in 1983 not only were there numerous public sector articles in the labor jour—

2

nals but the field had grown sufficiently to produce two specialized journals,

as well as numerous books and research treatises.5
The review shows that while we have amassed considerable knowledge about
the nature of public sector labor relations, there are noticeable gaps in our

understanding of what public sector unions actually do. The following seven
propositions provide a general overview of the major findings and issues in
public sector labor relations:

1. A fundamental difference between public sector and private sector
collective bargaining is that public sector unions can affect the demand for
labor through the political process, as well as affect wages and work conditions

through collective bargaining. However, the intrinsic political aspect of
public sector bargaining does not necessarily make the demand for public sector
workers more inelastic than the demand for private sector workers, and thus does

not necessarily give public sector unions great economic power. While it is
true that public employers do not face competition in their locality, they are
subject to the discipline of a budget and, in the long run, to exit and entry of

residents and businesses (the Tiebout adjustment). Similarly, while public sector unions may

have

an advantage in bargaining because they can help elect the

political leaders against whom they negotiate, "legislative vetoes" of neo—
tiated settlements and taxpayers' referenda which limit taxes create potential

weaknesses for unions. Finally, in contrast to private sector unions which are
free to wield the strike threat as a weapon, union power in most public sector
jurisdictions is limited by restrictions on striking.

2. The growth of public sector unionism in the past two decades can be
traced, in large part, to the passage of laws (executive orders) which have

3

sought to bring the private sector industrial relations model to the public eec—

tor. In states with laws favorable to unionism, public sector unionism has
flourished; in states without such laws, it has not. General lack of management
opposition to public sector unionism, possibly due to the political power of
unions, has been important for union victories in representation elections in

the public sector. There is some indication that the spurt in public sector
unionism has ended, leaving the U.S. with about a 30—140% union coverage of

public sector labor.

3. Much of the literature concludes that public sector unions have had
relatively modest effects on wages compared to the effects of private sector

unions on wages. This result, if true, would resolve the debate over the relative strength of unions in public and private employment. A careful reading of
the evidence, however, shows the finding to be questionable on several grounds:
First, many public sector union wage studies looked at unions when they were

Just establishing themselves during a period of public sector expansion. If, as
seems reasonable, the wage effects in first contracts are smaller than in later
contracts and if union wage effects are smaller in booming than in declining
markets, much of the early literature has understated the long term

"equilibrium" impact of public sector unions on compensation. A second problem
with the generalization is that few studies have distinguished between the
effects of public employment

se versus effects from the type of occupations

organized in the public sector. Public sector unions include a relatively large
number of white collar workers, whose wages appear to be only moderately

affected by unionism in the private sector. They include protective service
workers, for whom it is difficult to find comparable occupational groups in the

4

private sector. The limited studies of union effects on blue collar workers in
the public sector show wage effects similar to those in the private sector. A

third

reason for questioning the conclusion that public sector unions have weak

wage effects is the likelihood that, because of "comparability" of wages across
cities, there are greater "spillovers" of wage settlements in the public sector
than in the private sector, biasing downward standard cross—section estimates of

the union effect. Finally, for some groups, public sector compensation packages
differ greatly in dimensions not captured in standard data sets. While these
considerations do not necessarily prove the conventional generalization to be
wrong, they suggest it should not be accepted without further investigation.

1. With respect to wage structure, public sector unions have quite different effects on some aspects of wage structure than private sector unions do,

and quite similar effects on other aspects. The teachers' unions appears to
widen educational wage differentials, while policemen and firefighters' unions

appear to have little effect on the range of salaries for their members. This
contrasts with the general equalizing effect of unionism on such differentials

in the private sector. On the other hand, nest studies find that in both the
public sector and the private sector the union impact on fringe benefits is
greater than the union effect on wages, and our analysis of overall inequality
of earnings shows less inequality among union than among nonunion public sector

workers.
5. Despite being illegal in all but eight states, strikes are part of
public sector labor relations. From the 1960s to the l980s, the number of strikes increased drastically until 1 of every 8 strikes occurred in the public sector.

Public sector strikes are generally of short duration. While injunctions

5

often fail to halt strikes, there is evidence that the nature of strike laws

affects their frequency. Public sector alternatives to the strike, in the form
of various types of compulsory arbitration, have been successful in reducing

strikes with no clearcut impact on the level of wage settlements. Arbitrators'
decisions show no apparent bias toward one side or the other, despite frequent

claims to the contrary. Final offer arbitration appears to have worked reasonably well, with less of a 'chilling effect' on negotiations than conventional
arbitration, consistent with theory.

6. The limited evidence available on the effects of public sector unions
on productivity shows that unionism is not inimical to productivity. Some studies find positive union effects, some find essentially nO effects, but few find

negative effects. However, problems of measuring output of public services
make any firm generalization difficult. With respect to public budgets, studies suggest that unionization does, indeed, increase the share of a
municipality's budget going to the workers in an organized function.

7. Several aspects of market performance have not, as yet, been exten-

sively explored by public sector researchers. These include: the effect of
public sector unions on turnover, which is known to be lower, in general, in

public employment; the net effect of unions on the dispersion of earnings;
the effect of unions on employment and wage responses to cyclical and other economic swings; and, most important of all, the effect of unions on the "price"
of output, taxes, property values, and municipal finances in total.

Succeeding sections of this essay provide detailed evaluation of the
research that underlies these seven propositions.

6

II.

THE NEW UNIONISM
Unions

typically grow in sudden spurts after years of stagnation. As can

be seen in Figure 1, this is true of public sector unions in the United States.
During the mid

uadrup1ed.

6

1960's —

The

sudden

early 1970's,

public sector union membership

growth of public sector

sore than

unions was remarkable

in that it

occurred during a period of noticeable decline in the organization of the private

sector. It came as a surprise to most observers, who had cited such factors as
the security of public sector work, the high proportion of female, black, and
white collar workers, adverse public attitudes, civil service laws and prohibi—

tions

7

on strikes as factors inhibiting organization. Indeed, as late as

February 1959, the AFL—CIO executive council stated that 'in terms of accepted
collective bargaining procedures, government workers have no right beyond the
authority to petition Congress——a right available to every citizen.'8
Table 1 shows that, while some of the newly organized public sector
workers are in unions that are predominantly in the private sector, the majority

of workers are in newly emergent public sector unions. These unions have certain distinct characteristics. First, in jurisdictional terms, many are more
like craft than like industrial unions, being organized along occupational
lines (i.e., the postal workers' unions, the teachers' unions, the police, the

firefighters, the sanitation workers, and the transit workers). Second, the new
unions have organized an exceptionally large number of "white collar" workers,

even if one excludes the teachers. As Table 2 shows, less than one third of
public sector organized workers are in units covering only blue collar

employees. The

comparable

figure for private sector workers is a bare 12%.9

Third, in addition to the unions which can and do negotiate and sign collective

7

Figure

1: The

Changing Proportion

of

Public Sector Workers Organized

Percentage of
workers in union
or Associations
50
BIS DATA

40
UNIONS & ASSOCIATIONS

25.

20.

(

/

15

UNIONS ONLY

10

-

5.
0

Percent

1958 60 62 614 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80

of state

and local govern
ment employees
covered by contr
actual agreement

10

1975

6

7 78

79

80

Department

of Commerce and Department of Labor,
Labor Management Relations in State and Local
Governments, Issues for 1975 — 1980 (BCDL).
Sources:

(1) Directory of National Unions & EE Association, 1979
U.S. Department of Labor, BLS Bulletin 2079.

(2) BLS Data — National Directory, 1979 and Statistical
Abstract, various years for employment.

8

Table 1: The Public Sector Unions, 1980

Meinbe rsh ip

Teachers
America Federation of Teachers
National Education Association
American Association of
University Professors

Public Safety
International Association
of Firefighters
International Conference of

of Police Associations
Fraternal Order of Police

551,000
1,68)4,000

66,000

178,000

50,000
150,000

State

and Local Government
American Nurses Association
American Federation of State,
County, and Municipal Employees
Service Employees International (1975)
Teamsters (1975)
Laborers (1975)
Assembly of Government Employees (1975)

180,000
1,098,000
180,000
100,000
80,000
600,000

Federal Non Postala
American Federation of
255,000
Government Employees
National Federation of
)4o,000
Federal Employees
National Treasury Employee's Union
53,000
National Association of
50,000
Government Employees (1982 Joined Service
Employment)
International Association of Machinists
7,500
Postal and Federal
29,000—30,000
Postal Unions
American Postal Workers Union
National Association of Letter Carriers

Note:

251,000
230,000

Rounded off to nearest thousand.

Source: Bureau of National Affairs, unless otherdse stated, pp.
13—)43. Service Employees International, Teamsters,
Laborers, and Assembly of Government Employees is from
Burton, 1975

aLevitan

and Noden, Table 1

9

Table 2:

Jurisdictional Coverage of Public Sector Unions

Percent Covered by Unions

Federal Workers, 1981
Federal Wage Systems (Blue Collar)
General Schedule (White Collar)

State

Local,

and Local, 1981

61%
86%
514%

149%

1976

52%

Teachers
Police
Fire
Sanitation
Hospitals

68
53%
71%
29%

In State and Local Contracts, 1976
White

Collar Only

Collar and Blue Collar
Blue Collar Only

White

142%

27%
31%

Sources: Sar Levitan and Alexandra Noden, p.l
State and Local, Tray Table C
Contracts, Mitchell, p. 130

10

agreements over wages and fringes and working conditions, there are the sizeable
federal employee unions which do not sign agreements over wages and fringes.
What caused the spurt of public sector unionism in the late 1960's —

1970's?
What changes led to the sudden organization of traditionally non—
unionizable public sector workers?
First and foremost were changes in the laws regulating public sector

unions. In the federal sector, Executive Order 10988 which President Kennedy
announced in 1962, and which was later strengthened by ensuing presidents, was

the principle cause of the rapid organization of federal employees. It provided
for the recognition of federal worker unions but limited the scope of bargaining.
Before 1962 unionization of federal employees was going nowhere; then suddenly,

it shot upward. At the state and local level there were a variety of changes in
the law occurring mostly in the l960's and 1970's (see Table 3), which were
followed by a rapid growth of unionization.

The laws favorable to collective

bargaining ranged from weak "meet and confer" laws, to requirements for
bargaining, to compulsory arbitration when resolving disputes.

While the

various laws differ among types of employees (i.e. police and firefighters have
different regulations than the teachers), states that have favorable collective
bargaining laws in one area also have them in others, permitting the broad
classification of states in Table 3.
As an example of the rapid change in state laws, consider Massachusetts.
In 1958 it passed a law allowing public employees to join unions but not to
bargain over economic matters. In 196)4, it passed a law requiring bargaining
over work conditions, which was extended in 1965 to include wages, but did not

11

Table 3: Changes in State Laws Regulating

1959

Public Sector Unionism

1969

1979

No Law

1,

11

Prohibit Collective
Bargaining

7

3

5

13

9

1

1

n.a

n.a

Bargaining that Permits

"Meet and Confer"

Targainfng Required

Arbitration/Other

Dispute
Resolution Mechanism

19

Source: Tabulated from U.S. Department of Labor State Profiles: Current State
of Public Sector Workers Relations, 1971, 1979.
Numbers for 1979 were calculated from p. 65 of 1979 profile.

12

contain any terminal mechanism for settling unresolved issues. In 1974 the
state legislature ordered final offer arbitration to settle impasses. Then,
responding to niinicipalities unhappy with final offer arbitration, the legisla-

ture developed a labor—management committee to resolve impasses through a

variety of mechanisms. In the span of a decade, the state moved from no legal
bargaining to bargaining with a dispute resolution mechanism guaranteeing a
10

contract.

In addition to passing laws which encouraged collective bargaining,
the majority of states instituted public employee relations boards (PERB's) to
hold representation elections among workers and to resolve charges of unfair labor
11

practices.
Studies of the spurt in public sector unionism (see Table 4) uniformly
show that these laws were a major factor in the growth of public sector unioni-

zation. States that enacted laws had rapid increases in unionization in ensuing

years. States that did not had no such growth. The more favorable the laws
were to unions the greater the growth of unionization. For instance, in states
where laws permit strong union security clauses, teachers unions appear to have

done better than in other states. This is not to say that public sector
bargaining does not exist in the absence of a law. Indeed, Ohio is a good
counter example. But one counter example does not disprove a social science
generalization. For the most part, the spurt in public sector unionism was
associated with changes in state laws regulating collective bargaining.
Finally, it should be noted that there is some indication in the growth
curves for public sector union organization that this spurt has come to an end.
From 1972 to 1980 the share of state and local full—time employees with employee

13

Table 4: Studies of Impact of Legal Environment
on Public Sector Union Growth and
Determinants of Favorable Laws

Study

Group

Result

UNION GROWTH

Moore

Teachers, cross—state
and time series, 1919—
1910

Mandatory bargaining
laws help AFT not NEA

Reid and Kurth

Public employee unionism,
1972—1980

Progressive state
labor law raises
iini cni sm

Dalton

Government employees,
1976

Mandatory bargaining
laws greatly raise
union density

Reid and Kurth

Teacher unionism,
1972—1980

Teachers union growth
spurred by provisions
allowing exclusive
representation,
checkoff of dues,
deterred by right—
to—strike laws

Moore

Public sector unionism,
1968

Comprehensive
collective
bargaining laws raise
unionism

Ichniowski; Lauer

Police unionism,
1960—1980

Collective bargaining
laws are a key factor
in police organization

DETERMINANTS OF LAWS

Faber and Martin

Laws on teacher collective
bargaining

Urbanized states and
those scoring high
(low) on ADA (ACA)
ratings passed laws
earlier

Kochan

State public employee
bargaining laws

Per capita change in
income 1960—TO, state
per capita expenditures of government,
and irinovativeness of
state leads to public
sector collective
bargaining laws

in

14

organization

representation was

virtually unchanged

Why Did the New Laws Induce the Spurt

in Public

at almost 50 per cent.12

Sector Unionism?

The various state public employee labor laws of the mid 1960's —
established

mechanisms for workers to vote for/against collective representation

and required public sector employees to bargain with them. Both of
innovations

1970's

these

legal

were already part of the National Labor Relations Act governing

private sector unionism. They can be viewed as making public employees more
like private employees. Yet unionism in the private sector declined during the
period. One possible reason for the different results is that there was
"pent—up" demand for unionization in the public sector, but not in the private

sector. Another reason, which I believe to be more important, is that public
sector employers have not fought union organization of their workers to the

extent that private sector employers have. As public officials, they cannot
break the spirit or letter of the law, as management can in the private sector.
Hence, the same nominal election procedures produce different results in the two
settings.

Finally, an important issue which must be addressed in any
impact

of laws on society

analysis of the

is whether the legal changes have a true independent

effect on social outcomes or whether they are simply an intervening or mediating

factor for more fundamental forces. Studies of the variables associated with
passage of laws favorable to public sector collective bargaining show that the
laws have come first in states with high income per capita and a history of

innovations in governmental activity. Some show that these laws are more likely
in states that are highly unionized in the private sector, but others do not.
While detailed analysis of' legislative votes and of the history of key legisla—

15

tion is required to determine full causal routes the available evidence suggests

that the laws had an independent effect. Without legislation favorable to
collective bargaining we would not have observed the extensive unionization of
the public sector in United States, at least not to the extent which actually
occurred.

16

III. THE NEW SETTING
The public sector differs in several important ways from the private sec-

tor (see Figure 2). Public employers have the sovereign powers of the state;
they generally are monopolies in their local area; they are ultimately responsible to the voting public, including public sector workers; and some produce
essential services (police, fire, and defense).
Do these differences make the private sector industrial relations system
essentially inapplicable to the public sector, or are these differences substantially no greater than the differences between various private industries such as

steel and construction, for example? Do the unique features of the public sector give unions of governmental employees particularly strong economic power, as
some have alleged?

The Sovereign Power Issue
Among the first objections to public sector unionism was the claim that such
unionism infringes on the sovereign power of the state in determining levels

of services and rules for the behavior of public employees. Surely, it was
argued, one cannot allow public employees, particularly the military, the
police, or fire fighters to have power independently of the elected government.1-3

The counter argument

is

that there is nothing special about employee—employer

relations for most public sector workers. Why

should

a worker employed in a

private firm under city contract operate under a drastically different labor law
than the equivalent worker in a city owned service?
The sovereignty issue has, for the most part, been resolved by allowing
public sector workers to organize, but

by forbidding

most,

particularly

those in

"essential services," from striking. For workers in "nonessential services,"

17

Figure

2: Industrial Relations System in Public Sector
Compared to Private Sector

Actors
1. Management

Public Sector
Elected officials
Legislative/City Council

Private Sector
Managers

voters, through referendum

2. Unions

Often white collar

Mostly blue
collar

3. Third Party

Compulsory arbitration
Police, military power
of state

Some mediation
some arbitration

4. Workers

Usually have some job
security, more likely to
be worse on blacks

Workers

Unpriced goods, hard—to-.
measure public goods

Priced goods and
services for private
consumption/investment

6. Competition

Monopoly in local market

Competitive markets
in nDst cases

T. Entry

Residents and businesses
can move across locales

New firms enter!
leave given locale

Budget constraint
Can change taxes
Intergovernmental grants
Short—term debt

Profits "buffer"
changes in wages
Raise/lower prices
to change revenues

Unions can help elect
political leaders

Unions have no
say in company
policy

10. Conflict tools

Strikes often prohibited

Free to strike
with only modest
Taft—Hartley
restrictions

11.

Management unfair labor
practices unlikely

Little penalty
for management
unfair labor
practices.
Illegal acts
frequent and
rising

Technolor /Market
5. Output Produced

&

exit

8. Budget Conditions

Power
9. Influence on other side

Illegal Acts

18

how-ever, actual penalties for strikes are often uxderate, effectively allowing short

strikes (see section v).
The federal government stands in a unique position with respect to

sovereignty. While federal employees are allowed to form unions and negotiate
over working conditions, they do not negotiate over wages and are not allowed to

strike. The high unionization in the federal sector thus provides evidence for
worker desire for representation in a large bureaucratic organization, exclusive
of the "monopoly" power of unions to raise wages through collective bargaining.
The Monopoly! Inelastic Demand Issue

The argument that the nnopoly power which governments have in their jurisdiction

creates such inelastic demand for public sector employees as to give

public employee unions great economic power was stressed by Wellington and
Winter

in their 19T1 book:
• .to the extent union power is delimited by market or other
forces in the public sector, these constraints do not come into

play nearly as quickly as in the private.
"...soine of these services are such that any prolonged disruption would entail an actual danger to health and safety.
the demand for numerous governmental services is relatively
Inelastic, that is relatively insensitive to changes In price.
Indeed, the lack of close substitutes is typical of many
governmental endeavors."

I reject this claim for three reasons:

1) In the short run governments face tax and budget constraints that

create a potentially nre rather than less elastic demand for labor. This is
because an employer operating under a budget constraint has no profit "residual"
from which to pay higher wages or in which to put savings from lower wages.
All of the adjustment to changes in wages take the form of an adjustment in

quantities. More broadly, the budget serves as a 'disciplinary' device in the

19

public sector as does market demand in the private sector, forcing a quantity

price

tradeoff on the employer.

2) In the long run, cities and states are not really monopolies, since
residents and businesses can move from one jurisdiction to another. Indeed, by
analogy

with the factor equalization theorem of trade theory, mobility should

compensate fully for the monopoly power governments have in their jurisdiction.
Citizens unhappy with level of public services can move elsewhere, reducing the

taxable population and thus the ability to pay public sector wages. Mobility
places great constraints on public sector union bargaining power as has been
stressed by Courant, Gram.lich, and Rubinfeld. Moreover, in jurisdictions where
taxation of property raises funds for operation of governments, the capitalization of taxes in property values is an additional constraint on public sector
budgets and thus on union ability to raise wages.

3) Where public sector workers are "essential" they are almost a1wars
forbidden to strike which greatly reduces their economic power, as noted
earlier.

The Political Context
The political dimension clearly creates a distinct environment for labor
relations which leads collective bargaining down different paths than in the

private sector. While private sector unions can occasionally alter the demand
for labor curve (through union label campaigns, or by bargaining over employment
as well as wages) the usual assumption is that they alter the cost of labor,
with firms responding by changing the level of employment (see Figure 3A).
Indeed, the standard model of private sector unionism evaluates the monopoly
loss due to unionism in terms of the lower national output because of the reduc—

20

Figure 3:

Differences Between Public Sector
and Private Sector Union Effects

A. Private Sector Union Wage Effects
Wages
Effect of Unionism is to raise
wage W0 to W1

Wi

Demand Curve

Employment

B. Public Sector Shift in Demand Effects

Case I: Perfectly elastic supply curve

Wages

,,

Effect of Unionism is to shift
demand D to D' and raise
wages above wo

Supply

'NN
E1

Employment

Case II: Upward—sloping Supply Curve

Wages

//

Effect of Unionism is to

shift
and

demand D to D'

raise wage above

Wo

Employment

21

tion

in employment and increased marginal product in the union sector. By

contrast, public sector unions can

be viewed

as using their political power

to

raise demand for public services, as well as using their bargaining power to

fight for higher wages (Figure 3B and 3C). A possible criticism of public sector
unions

is that they increase public goods production beyond the social optimum,

raising rather than lowering employment.

Politics,

however, is a two—edged sword, and it is by no means clear

whether collective bargaining in a political context increases or reduces union

power. On the one hand, public sector workers are an identifiable voting bloc
and potential activist group in local election campaigns.

payers. In

But so too are tax-

the private market consumers affect wages of workers only indirectly

through shifts in purchases when increased wages

lead firms to raise prices.

In

the public sector 'consumers' can affect wages directly by electing officials,
passing

referendum and the like which restrict settlements. In virtually every

state, so-called "legislative vetos" can vitiate bargains, as legislatures!

councils refuse to raise the iney to fund signed contracts. For example, in
the l9TOs, despite signed contracts college professors in the University of
Massachusetts system did not receive salary increases for several years because

the legislature did not allocate the funds)5Taxpayer revolts, as evidenced in
proposition 13 (California) or 2J. (Massachusetts), have also been used by opponents of public spending to limit potential union wage gains by capping tax
revenues or budgets.

In other circumstances unions have effectively used legislature or voter
support to win terms they could not gain at the negotiating table, as the
following case cited by the Labor Management Relations Service indicates:

22

A prime example of union use of the referendum to bypass a
municipal employer unreceptive to union demands Is that of the
St. Louis Fire Fighters Local 73, who sought by special election to obtain equal pay with policemen. They rang doorbells
and conducted an intensive campaign for votes in homes and
taverns and at barbecues and labor and political meetings. The
firemen also appealed for votes in newspaper, television, and
radio advertisements. It was estimated that the entire campaign, financed by assessments on members of Local 73, cost
between $35,000 and $50,000. This compared to the $6,000 spent
by the firemen's principal opponent, Mayor Alfonso J.
Cervantes, who campaigned against the raise claiming it would
cost the city $1.7 million for a full year and probably cause a
reduction in the number of fire companies. The firemen,
claiming that these were "scare tactics," prevailed, as the
voters gave the proposal a 61.7 percent majority; it needed
sixty percent to pass.]-6

The term 'multilateral bargaining' is commonly used to refer to the
situation in which public sector unions bargain not simply with those across the

table from them but with other interested public parties as well. In such
bargaining, need for public services, public expenditures, quality of services,

as well as wage packages are often at stake. Neither in theory nor in practice
does multilateral bargaining necessarily improve the union's ability to win wage
gains.

In sum, the unique features of the public sector do, indeed, make it different from the private sector, producing a different industrial relations

system. Careful examination of how these features affect the bargaining power of
the two sides suggests, however, that the relative strength of unions in the

public versus the private sector cannot be resolved by a priori logic. The
issue requires empirical analysis, to which we turn next.

23

IV. UNION COMPENSATION EFFECTS
The general tone of studies dealing with the effect of public sector

unionism on compensation is that the effects tend to be small. Indeed, most
survey articles have concluded that "The 'average' wage effect of unionism in
government.., is roughly on the order of five per cent...sinaller than the
average union wages impact in private industry."17"The general effects (of
18

public sector unions) which have been measured are not huge."
This generalization rests on extensive analysis of teachers unions, police
and firefighters organizations, and on studies of the Current Population

Surveys.

The studies vary substantially. Some analyze wages of public

sector

workers by state, city, or district at a moment in time, using the frac-

tion in a collective organization or having contracts as the "union variable."
Others analyze rates of change in wages over time, looking for an acceleration

in the rate of change after unionization. Some look at wages of individuals on
large data tapes. Others perform before/after comparisons of wage rates.
For the most part, the studies relate to the period from the mid 1960s to the

early or mid 1970s. In this section I review briefly the relevant studies and
examine the evidence and arguments that I believe question the existing
generalization.

The Studies of Teachers

Table 5

reports the results of diverse estimates of the effect of school

teachers unionization on wages, organized by

the

approach taken.

time

period, unit of

analysis,

and

The results for 1965—1968, which cover the beginnings of

teacher unionism, support the view that at that time teachers unionism

Notes:

1975— 82

5—9%

Brown t61_65b

1970—Tb

Finding

B/A

B/A

B/A

'66—67
'69—TO

'67—68

Holmes

Chambers

(big

'75

'TO—Ti

only)

Schmenner

cities

'69—TO
'67—TO

CS

CS

CS
CS
CS

CS

B/A

3—10%

6—12%

1%
12—114%

2%

168_69a

Frey

0%

'68—69

6%

Hall—Carroll

Zuelke—Frolhreich

'61—65 to '66—68

Rehnius/Wiiner

Lipskjr/Drotnlng

Thornton

Baird/Landon

Baugh

&

&

&

Baugh

Baugh

Baugh

&

21%
12%

Stone '77—78

the

for

7%

B/A

CS

B/A

CS

TYPE OF
EXPERIMENT

Stone 'TT

bFigures from Brown article were calculated by taking the difference between
teachers and %
per cent increase in salaries
negotiating
increase for other workers (Ti.6% — 99%) and subtracting from this number
difference between non—negotiating states' % increase in salaries for
teacher and % increase for other workers (50.5%—i03.8%) from Table 5, p. 61.

states'

'714

Stone 'T—75

Stone

TYPE OF
INDIVIDUAL STUDY
EXPERIMENT
CS
1%
CS
5%
CS
14%
CS
3%

aHall and Carroll figure calculated by dividing $i65, increase from unions,
by $9133, calculated mean salary, in the article.

Balfour '69—To 0%

Total '61—62
to '63—71

Smith, U.S.
0%

2%

Kasper '67—68

1965—TO

'66—Ti

The Wage Effect of Teachers Unionization

TYPE OF
DISTRICTS STUDY
EXPERIMENT
CS
Landon/Pierce '65—68

STATE STUDY

YEAR

to

5:

by Year, Study and Type of Experiment
(Cs = Cross—Section; B/A = Before/After)

Table

25

did not greatly affect compensation levels. Averaging across all the studies,

the union effect for the early period is a bare 3 per cent. The studies for
l969—l9T', by contrast, show larger positive union effects, of about 6 per cent
on average. The most recent Baugh and Stone analysis of individuals for 19TT
finds very large effects, of 21 per cent in a cross section and 12 per cent in a

before/after framework. Comparing 19Th—19T5 CPS results with 19T8—1979 results
they find a tripling in the union wage effect over time. As a check on this
finding, I estimated their cross—sectional model for 19T3 and 1981 and obtained

a similar result. As a further check, I have also examined the pay of teachers
across states by degree of unionization and also find evidence of a rising union
impact.

There are several possible causes for the increased wage effect of the

teachers union. One likely cause is changed economic conditions. In the
early period the market for teachers was strong, with consequent good wages for

non—union as well as union teachers; in the latter period the market was weak
with the teachers union using its power to offset some downward pressure on

wages. Another hypothesis is that modestly higher differentials in rates of
change of pay per settlement cumulated over time to a sizeable union effect. A
third possibility is that, in fact, the power of the teachers union has risen
because of increased willingness to strike and changes in state laws regulating

teachers collective bargaining. Which, if any, of these possibilities is
correct requires not only a careful analysis of the teachers union wage effect
using comparable data over time (along lines of Baugh-Stone) but also better

measures of union economic power than has been common in studies. Because of
differences in the legal treatment of teachers unions across states and over

26

time,

simple dichotomous or percentage organized variables are potentially

misleading: two areas with the same

"unionization"

outcomes because in one area the law

gives

may have different economic

the union of teachers greater power

than in the other, for instance, by requiring final offer arbitration or
allowing strikes.

Protective Service Workers

The second

most extensively studied group of

public

sector unions are the

police and firefighters, for whom the standard study has found moderate effects

in

the area of 5—10 percent (see Table 6). For both occupations, there is a

general finding that effects are larger on total compensation than on wages;
that effects are larger for larger cities; and that effects may vary over time.
The Feuille, Hendricks and Delaney estimates of police union effects over time
show a definite rise from the early 1970s to the rnid—l9TOs, followed by a
decline at the turn of the decade.
There are two possible problems with the studies of union effects among
protective service workers which suggest the 5—10 percent wage effects may

underestimate the actual impact of unionism. The first problem is the not—so
simple matter of measures for pay. All of the studies use reported salary rates
or average salary compensation from the Census of Governments or the

International City Management Association (ICMA) or comparable sources. These
sources value one of the components of compensation which unions appear to
raise——retirement pay—— at current employer cost rather than at the actuarial

value to workers. If, as some claim, the public sector has a bias toward
deferred compensation because politicians have a short time horizon this is

likely to understate the effect of public sector unions. In addition, standard

27

Table 6: The Wage Effect of the Protective Service Unions
Firefighters

Year

1. Ashenfelter

Estimated Effects
of Unions on Pay

'6i—'66

2. Ehrenburg

'69

8%—io%

3.

'66

0%

'76

3%— 1%

Ichnlowski

'66—'76
4•

Ehrenberg & Goldstein

5. Wayslenko
6. Schmenner

(Police and
Firefighters)

'67

7%

'68

12%_11%

'62—'70

15%

Police

1. Wayslenko

'68

2.

'67

Ehrenberg & Goldstein

3. Bartel and Lewin

'73

1. Hall & Vanderporten

'73

5. Feuille, Hendricks,

'71—'75

5%— 7%

Delaney

'76—'T8

9%—11%

'79—'81

6%— 7%

and

6. Kearney — Morgan
7.

Freeman, Ichniowski
and Lauer

'76
'76

3—12%

1%

CS 3%—7%
"Spillover" 18%

General Municipal and Other

1.

Schmenner

2. Freund

Note:

effect

'62—'70

no union

'65.-'71

no union effect

Hall and Vanderporten figures calculated by dividing coefficients for

mean salary by both minimum and maximum average annual salary scales ($9,925 and

$l2.3l2) in 1973 from Statistical Abstract of U.S. 1976, P. 166.

28

data

sets ignore other "extra compensation" (days worked at overtime) which are

important in the protective services.
Table '1

this

provides

a rough notion of the possible error in analysis due to

data problem. It compares the reported compensation from the Urban

Institute "Twelve City Studies" with the reported compensation from the ICMA in

the same year. The differences are large and suggestive of a sizeable problem

in empirical analysis.
The second potential problem with estimates of the effects of protective
service worker unionism is the possibility of sizeable "spillovers" from union

to

nonunion cities. Such spillovers are more likely for these occupations than

for others because of the lack of equivalent occupations in the private sector
and the consequent tendency for police and fire fighters to stress pay com-

parability across cities. One admittedly crude way to examine this idea is to

relate wages to unionism in a greater geographic area. Studies which have done
this suggest union wage effects are roughly twice as

the

large

as the 5—10 percent

standard cross—section analysis. 19

Additional Groups

In

addition to the studies of teachers and protective service unions,

there have been a few studies of union wage effects in particular blue—collar

occupations which are directly comparable to those in the private sector. As
Table S shows, these studies present a very different picture of the relative
economic impact of unionism in the public and private sectors than is indicated

in the earlier literature: even in the early 60s and TOs these studies show no
noticable difference in the wage impact of unions in the two sectors. For some
groups of workers (bus drivers, sanitation workers) the union effects have been

29

Table 7: Comparison of Pay of Police
Reported by ICMA and Reported in "Twelve City Study"

International City
Management Association

Total Compensation
Per Hour Worked

City

San Franciso

l9.1t5

"12 City Study"

Total Compensation per hour
worked (5 years experience)

21.99
21.T6

Los Angeles

Philadelphia

13.83

16.147

San Diego

11.37

114.10

apens ion

data not reported to ICMA

Sources: ICMA, tabulated from tapes.
"12 City Study," from E. Dickson and G. Peterson Public Employee
Compensation, The Urban Institute, Table 2.

30

Table 8: Effects of Unionism: Public vs. Private Sectors
by Occupation
Result
Unionized drivers in government owned
buslines do 3—6% better than those
in private owned lines.

1. Bus drivers, 1963—71
(Hamermesh)

2. Construction workers, 1970 — 19T2

(Hamermesh)
3.

Sanitation

workers, 19114

(Edwards and Edwards)
14•

Hospital workers, 1966,

(Fottler)

Unionism raises public sector wages
by 11—13% compared to 0—5% ifl private

sector.

69, 72

5. All Blue Collar and White
Collar Workers, 1967—77
(Moore and Raisian)

6. All Blue Collar and White
Collar Workers, 1911
(Shapiro)

Unions in the public sector raise wages
16—25% comparable to increases in the
private sector.

Unions in the public sector raise wages
by 10114% compared to 114—19% in the

private

sector.

Unionism raises blue collar wages by
23% in the public sector compared to 31%
in the private sector; unionism raises
white collar wages by 6% in the public
sector compared to 14% in the private
sector.
Unionism has no effect on white collar
wages in public sector or in private
sector but has a 20% effect on blue
collar wages in the public sector and a
25% effect in the private sector (some
differences for blacks).

31

larger in the public sector; in others (construction) they are about the
same in the two sectors; while in others (hospital workers), they are slightly

less in the public sector. Moore and Raisian found in the Michigan Panel Survey
that unionism raised blue collar wages significantly in the public sector and

raised white collar wages more in the public sector. Overall, the evidence in
Table 8 provides an important antidote to the claim that public sector unions
have smaller wage effects than private sector unions because the government is

the employer. If public sector unions have smaller wage effects, it could be
because of the occupations covered.

The Total Work Force
An alternative to the analysis of detailed occupations which occupies much
of public sector labor relations research is to examine the pay of all govern-

ment employees on large data sets. The most important such study, by Sharon
Smith, found that in 1975 government employees in general were paid more than
private sector employees, but that unionism raised wages less for public sector
than for private sector workers, controlling for a wide variety of additional

wage determinants. Using a slightly different model, with fewer controls, I
report in Table 9 similar union results for 1973 and 1981 with, however, evidence of increases in the union impact in some government sectors and decreases

in others. Moore and Raisian's analysis of the Michigan Panel Survey of Income
Dynamics shows greater variation in the public sector union effect over time,
with a drop from the late 1960s (when few were organized) to the early 1970s and
a rising effect thereafter.

In the absence of a comprehensive study of various

data sets, definitions of government employees, and different models, the safest
conclusions are that the union effects differ significantly over time and are

32

Table

Effects

9:

of Public

Sector

Unions

From Micro Individual Surveys

Current Population Survey
Regression Coefficients from Log—Linear Wage Equations

1973

1981

.13

.09

.00

.04

Union impts on
Government Workers
Federala
State Pub Ad.
Local Pub Ad
Other Non—pub Ad

.03

.17

.08

.11

.16

Michigan Panel Survey
(Moore and Raisian)

Averaged froni Moore and Raisian, Table 1
Percentage Union Wage Premium

Public Sector
(except education)

Econorrj as a whole

1967—69
1970—72
1973—75

12

23

6

22

17

21

1976—77

15

27

Source:

CPS, tabulated by author using standard log wage equations.
Michigan Panel Survey, Moore and Raisian

aFederal effect should be zero, and in 1981
not statistically different from zero.

is

the coefficient

33

generally

smaller than those in the private sector (for any of the reasons given

earlier but are far from negligible.

Composition

of Compensation

Private sector unions raise "fringe benefits," especially deferred compensation, more than they raise wages, and have sizeable impacts on the

structure of

wages,

reducing personal differentials and the overall inequality of

within

the union sector. Do public sector unions have the same effects?

With

respect to deferred compensation there is

good reason to

earnings

believe that

they should have larger effects. First, on the union side, the same arguments
that have been advanced to predict higher fringe spending under unionism in the

sector should also hold for the public sector. Second, as noted on the
employer side, it is argued that politicians with short time horizons should be

private

especially willing to pay fringes.
In fact, as Table 10 shows, all studies find that public sector unions
raise

fringe benefits by considerably more than they raise wages, except for

hospital workers. One important consequence of the increased pensions due to
public sector unions Is that public sector retirement funds had assets of 355
20
billion dollars in 1982. It is the size of these funds that underlies the

Rifkin—Barber argument that public sector assets should be invested in the states in which the workers live, "to make the north rise again."

What public sector unions do to the structure of wages is less clear. On
the one hand, there is Holmes' evidence that teacher unionism raises the premiums for education and for experience, which runs counter to the private sector

union effect in reducing these differentials. On the other hand, Gustman and
Segal have found that teacher unionism reduces the number of steps in the

34

Table 10: Effects of Public Sector Unions
on Composition of Compensation

Conclusion

Group

1. Firefighters
(Ichniowski)

Union raises spending on fringes by 7%
compared to 4% wage effect.

2. Police
a. Bartel and Lewin,

Union raises spending on fringes by 8—
17% compared to 6—12% wage effect.

b. Feuille

Union raises spending on fringes by 12%
compared to 5—10% wage effect.

c. Feuille, Hendricks,
and Delaney

Unionized cities have fringe benefits
20—30% higher than union cities,
compared to roughly 5—11% for wage
effect

3. Teachers
a. Holmes

b. Moore

Teachers union reduces secondary
school/elementary school premium by 6%.

c. Gustman & Segal

Teachers affect pension levels
substantially for those with less than
25 years of experience (48%) but not
those with imre experience.

4. Sanitation

5.

Teacher union raises premium for education and for experience

(Edwards

& Edwards)

Hospital

Workers

a. Becker

b. Feldman & Scheffler

c.

Cain

et.al.

Unions raise spending on fringes by 27
—43 % compared to 9—22% wage effect.

Unionization has moderately greater

effects

on fringes than on salaries.

Unionization increased fringes about 6%
while wages increased 8—12% in a hospi—
tal with 50% of employees unionized.

Unions had a large effect on fringes
but

a small and statistically
insignificant impact on wages.

35

salary structure, which reduces inequality, and Moore reports a reduction in the

secondary teacher—elementary teacher differential in Nebraska. The various studies of the effect of firefighters and police give a mixed picture of the union

impact on minimum versus maximum salaries. Some studies find larger effects on
minimums than on maximums but not by very much, while others find
smaller effects.
To get an overall picture of how public sector unions affect the structure
of personal differentials and inequality, I bave made a preliminary analysis of

Current Population Survey data in 1973 and 1981. Taking non—federal government
workers as a whole, I find a lower standard deviation of log wages among those
who are union members:

Union
NonUnion

In

1973

1981

.39
.55

.1l

•51

addition, I find that separate regressions for the wages of the two

groups show:

1. Smaller effects of education in the union setting, particularly in
1973;

2.

Smaller effects for sex in the union setting, especially in 1981,

implying a greater union impact on female than male wages; this result is
consistent with Sharon Smith's analysis, which showed larger union effects on
female than on male wages;

3. Slightly positive effects of being black in the union setting, compared to slightly negative effects of being black in the nonunion setting,
implying a larger union Impact for blacks than for whites;
14 A mixed pattern of age effects on wages, different from that found

36

in

the private sector.
The finding that public sector unionism reduced sex differentials is but

one indication of union efforts to equalize pay between the sexes. In what is

perhaps the nst important development in public sector wage determination in
decades, AFSCME has won, in federal court, increases in the wages of female
workers in the state of Washington of 31 per cent and upwards, to bring about
"comparable

worth."

According to the

ruling in District Court, from 1983 to

1985, the state nust bring wages for workers in predominantly female Job classi-

fications

up to levels paid to workers in predominantly male occupations that

require comparable skill, responsibility and working conditions. AFSCME brought
the original suit after ten years of trying to get the state to comply with the

findings of the states' own comparable worth studies. It has been estimated
that the raises will bring about $200 million to affected employees over the two
22

years arid $500 million in back pay to about 15,000 workers, mostly women.

Unless the decision is reversed on appeal the landmark pay equity ruling may
revolutionize pay practices in the public sector.
Wages and Employment in a Macro Context
With about 15% of the work force employed in the public sector, the extent
to which public sector wages and employment vary over business cycles and in

response to secular changes has important macro—economic implications. At one
point many analysts believed public sector labor markets to be less responsive
23
to economic conditions than private sector markets. The sharp increase in

relative wages and employment of public workers in 1960s and decreases in pay

(and incomes, employment) in the 1970s calls into question this generalization.
During the l9TOs—1980s the federal government broke from its stated corn—

37

para'bility policy to grant smaller pay increases than those in the private sec-

tor, raising the possibility that in times of stagflation public sector wages

are more responsive to conditions. I know of no significant study of the macroeconomics of public sector wage and employment responsiveness to inflation, nor-

mal business cycle swings, and abnOrmal changes. Such an investigation should
be clearly tied to public finance studies of cyclical/secular/abnormal changes
in federal, state and rarnicipal finances and to variations in sales/income and
property tax legislation across state rainiclpalities.

38

V. NON—WAGE EFFECTS
Analysis of the non—wage effects of private sector unions have followed

two lines of research. The classic Slichter, Healy & Livernash book, The
Impact of Collective Bargaining in Management presented the results of 100 or
so case studies concerned with changes in personnel practices, management and

productivity.

More recently, labor economists have used ndern quantitative

tools to estimate the effects of unions on turnover, job satisfaction, pro-.

ductivity, capital/labor ratios, and profits. 24
Is it reasonable to expect public sector unions to have as significant
effects on non wage outcomes as private sector unions have?
Because of the unique features of the public sector environment, the

answer varies depending on the outcome. Since turnover is often low in the
public sector in the absence of unions, one would expect only marginal

effects on quits and

layoffs.

As productivity is often said to be lower in

the public sector than in the private sector in the absence of unions, there may

be more room for positive union productivity effects. Because of civil service
rules, there may be less union impact on personal policies, but because of mana-

gerial inefficiency, there may be more. Finally, the effect of unions on the
public sector equivalents of profit and prices——taxes, bond ratings, and property values——will be large or small, depending on the power of the unions to
raise budgets, which can be determined only empirically.
Research on the effects of public sector unions on non—wage outcomes is
limited, but the topic is important and deserves as much

heavily researched topics of

compensation

respectively precede and succeed

attention

as

the more

and arbitration—strike issues

this section.

which

39

In this section I review the relevant findings on non—wage outcomes arid

what they suggest may result from a more complete analysis.
Etiployment and Budgets

In the private sector it is universally accepted that one of'

the

substan-

tial responses to union wage effects is a reduction of employment. As noted in
section 2, this is questionable for the public sector, as lobbying for higher
budgets could raise employment as well as wages. The empirical evidence sup-.

hiD
o'hr rr
collective

cities

1

vr+

mrsl

1

bargaining. In the most

comprehensive

f

4

study of ICMA data for 1400

over a decade, Zax has estimated that public sector unionism raises

employment by about io% Victor found essentially no change in employment for
police and increases in firefighters employment under unionism. Benecki found
increases in employment in small cities but reductions in very large cities, for
reasons that are not clear. In a highly sophisticated analysis, Iriman reports
higher employment for both police and firefighters under unionism, but a negative

union wage effect for police. As his model is a complex multi—equation system
with endogeneous unionism, it

data

is

unclear whether these results come from the

or from the particular structure imposed on the data.
If unions have a positive or non—negative effect on employment without

controlling for wages, and if

they

raise wages, then budgets in organized Juris-

dictions should be higher than in unorganized jurisdictions. Indeed, four stu—
26

dies of the impact of unionism on size of budgets show such effects. Moreover,
the evidence by Ebert for the impact of specific contract items on the allocation of dollars to use categories among New York school districts shows that the
effect of collective contracts on expenditures can be studied in terms of the

40

cost

of specific contractual points.

The analyses of the relation between unionism and employment and budgets,
while consistent with our general theme of public sector unions' raising demand

for labor, should not be viewed as complete. With the exception of Inman, who
estimates a complete structural model
estimates

with

endogenous unionism, and Zax, who

a demand curve for labor, uzich of the analysis of union impacts on

employment and budgets is unconnected to the analysis
None

of union

wage effects.

of th stndi derniat1v
____,______tI nod1 th budQt rrncas It intrr1trrn to
—--—--———

taxes,

—————————— ——

C————

inter—governmental grants, or debt financing. In contrast to the studies

of compensation, none of the studies provides a before/after test of findings.

What

is

lacking, and needed, is a consistent analysis of the full effects of

public sector unionism on labor costs, employment and finances.

Product

ivit

Despite

the difficulty of measuring the output of many-

public

goods, there

have been a surprisingly large number of studies on the relation between
unionization in the public sector and

productivity.

Some of the studies have

followed the Brown—Medoff production function methodolor for analyzing union
impacts on productivity. Others have used quite different methods, ranging
from case studies to analyses of manager (worker) perceptions of productivity
effects to simple comparisions (correlations) of productivity indices with
measures of unionism.

Table 11 presents a brief summary

of

the studies. It gives the group

covered, method of analysis, and finding. Rabid opponents of public sector
unionism will be surprised to find that there is little evidence that public

sector unions adversely affect productivity. Of the 11 studies in the table,

41

Table 11: Effects of Unionization of Productivity in Public

1. Stanley

2. Coulter

Sector

Method

Finding*

Case study of 19 state and
local governments. Analyzes
union impact on personnel
administration, work super—
vision, and financial manage
ment by reviewing interviews,
government reports, bargaining
outcomes, and press reactions
from 1968—69.

No net effect. Can

Discriminant analysis for
firefighters of 3214 munlcipa—
lities with populations
25,000 and over. Uses total
cost (property loss from
fires plus expenditures) per
capita as a measure of pro-

increase program effectiveness by exacting
safety programs, equal
levels of service
throughout a city, and
adequate staff organiza-

tion. Also provides
psychological security
for workers. However,
can decrease effIciency
by increasing costs and
impeding the use of
flexible management.
Unionism variable not
statistically significant.

duct ivity

3. Feuille,
Hendricks and

Delaney

1L Ehrenberg,
Schwarz

Regression equations for
police calculated for each
year from 1971—80 and for 8
types of crimes. Outputs were
measured as reported crime
rates and the rate of crimes
cleared by arrests.

Unions decrease crime
rate but effect is
unstable, depending on
the type of crime and
year. No systematic
association with
clearance rates.

Regressions for libraries,
1977 cross—section data.
Output is measured 8 ways such
as number of interlibrary loans

Ranges from zero
effect to positive
effect (33%) All
values, however, are
statistically

and number of borrowers.

insignificant or only

marginally

5. Perry,

Angle,
and Pittel

Regression analysis for
public transit in Western
U.S., 1917. Service
effectiveness is measured
by revenue passengers per
service area population and
revenue passengers per
revenue vehicle hour.

so.

Unionization did not
have significant
impact.

42

Table 11 continued

Method

FindingTM

6. Noam

Regressions for building
inspectors in 1970. Output is
measured as number of building
permits granted as well as the
total construction volume
supervised.

The effects were often
negative but not statistically significant.

7. Salkever

Regressions for hospitals
measuring the cost of hospital
services for 14 New England
States, 191).

Negative effect.
Production costs increased
5—9% with most of increase
from nonwage sources.

8. Gallagher

Management and local union
representatives assessment by
questionnaire for 117 hospitals in a Canadian province
during l9TOs. Measures of
impacts used fall into it categories: economic, employer
attitudes and behavior, mna—
gement policy and control and
quality care.

Positive effect

9. Wheeler and
Kochan

Job evaluation correlation for
firefighter officers by interviewing both officers and
chiefs. Used interviews,
questionnaire, and officer.

Slightly negative effect,
perhaps due to some
effects on discipline and
grievance handling.

10. Crane, Lentz,
and Shafritz

Regressions for state governments, 19714—75 using surveys,
interviews, and various secondary sources. Output is
measured as the level of state
productivity improvement effort.

Strong positive impact by
unions.

11. Eberts

Regression analysis of teachers
in mid—1970's for factors
believed to be determinants of'
student achievement.

Concludes that overall
effect is unclear.
Teachers covered by
collective bargaining spend
less time in instruction but
more time preparing for
claEs. Collective
bargaining increases
experience and education
level of teachers.

43

six

show essentially no union effect, three report positive effects of varying

strength while three report negative effects. Each study has

with

sizeable

problems.

output measures; for example, the Ehrenberg-Schwarz study, which concluded

that unionism had essentially no effect on productivity, found a positive effect
on output for one measure, interlibrary loans; and the Feullie et.al study,
which I categorize as showing positive productivity effects, found no effect on

crime clearance rates. Also, there were problems with the structure of the
models, especially concerning the control variables and the routes by which

unionism affects output. These results are therefore hardly strong enough to
warrant a firm generalization. They do, however, reject the presumption that
public sector unionism necessarily has adverse effects on productivity, and
suggests that, if there is a general effect, it n.y very well be positive. At
the least, the evidence backs the weak generalization offered by Methe and Perry
in the Public Administration Review that "collective bargaining has had no
(negative) impact on the effectiveness of local services."27

Personnel Practices
Perhaps the most important way unionism affects the operation of enterpri-

ses is to force firms to alter their personnel practices. Rules replace n.na—
gerial discretion in a wide variety of decision areas. Grievance and
arbitration procedures give workers "due process" at the work place.
A priori it is difficult to predict whether public sector unions would
have a larger or smaller effect on personnel practices than private sector

unions. On the one hand, civil service regulations, tenure laws for teachers,
and the like provide some protection for the majority of public sector workers,

thus limiting the scope for unionism. On the other hand, public sector manage—

44

ment is allegedly inefficient and full of political decision—making which
increases the need for explicit personnel practices and grievance machinery.
While there has been no definitive summary

of

personnel practices before/after

unionism or practices between union/nonunion areas, the available literature
suggests that unions have had a sizeable impact on personnel practices, with
contractual protection generally superceding civil service or other legal pro-

tection. The Carpenter and Ashworth study of personnel practices in Mississippi
found that many non—union cities diverged noticeably from the Civil Service

model, even to the extent of failing to have explicit job definitions. The
Beyer, Trice and Hunt study of supervisory policies in the federal government
found that unions have positively affected supervisors' use of management—

initiated policies regarding alcoholism. In his 19T2 study, Stanley found that
"most department heads interviewed——said that this union pressure is good for

both employees and management,"2 result consistent with Slichter, Healy and
Livernash's work on the private sector. In the federal government, where
contracts deal solely with work conditions, Levitari and Noden rejected "the myth

that worker rights and collective bargaining are contrary to efficiency."2n
his analysis of hospitals in Canada, Gallagher found that both management and
union agreed that unionization forced regular and professional personnel practices onto the institutions.
In terms of econometric research, several analysts have sought to evaluate
the effects of unionism on personnel practices by coding collective bargaining
contracts according to whether or not specific provisions favor the union or the

management. Kochan, Gerhart and Feullle et al. found that in states where
public sector labor laws are most favorable to unionism, contracts have been

45

titled

in favor of workers, as one would

expect.

Eberts

has analyzed the

cost

impact of personnel practices embodied in contracts in New York City schools,
and found that those relating to labor jurisprudence and grievance categories
were costly to management.
Each of the various public sector occupations have different personnel

practice issues. In teaching, one issue relates to the extent to which state

law on tenure can be overriden y collective bargaining contracts. Courts have

the issue differently in different states. Another important issue
relates to the power of principals to assign/layoff teachers. If and when
decided

school

administrations push for merit pay, that will certainly become a major

issue in bargaining. Among police and firefighters, key personnel issues have

included: parity, pay, and manning issues. For sanitation and various blue
collar

public sector workers, the issue

organizations

has been important and

the

of subcontracting to private sector

evidence suggests that

unions

have

managed to reduce contracting out.
No good estimates

exist of the extent to which contracts trade—off per-

sonnel practices and related non compensation conditions for compensation.

Revenue4 Ta xes, and Welfare
If unions raise public sector budgets, then they necessarily raise the

need for revenue and thus taxes, inter—governmental transfers, or debt. A con-

sistent ndel of union impacts on the public sector requires investigation of
these effects as well as those on wages, employment and budgets. Unfortunately,
until recently, there has been little investigation of the effect of public sector unions on budgets and taxes (one exception is Benecki's 19T8 study, another
is Levy's 19814 bachelor's degree thesis work) and none on the consistency bet—

46

veen the various estimates of union effects on compensation, budgets,

employment, and productivity.3This is a major

short

coming in the research for

both substantive and nthodological reasons. Substantively, failure to
demonstrate a union impact on "bottom line" issues like taxes and
municipal/state debt seriously hampers any

social

evaluation of public sector

unionism. Methodologically, failure to analyze union impacts on all of the
diverse outcome variables results in a loss of information and less efficient as
well as possibly biased estimates of key parameters.
Still, on the basis of the existing estimates of the effect of unions on
employment, wages and budgets described earlier, it is likely that public sector
unions raise both taxes and public services above what they would be in the
absence of the unions.

Does this mean that there is a social welfare loss due to excessive
public goods resulting from unionism?
In the absence of a generally accepted theory or empirical results on
whether a democratic government over—or under——produces public goods, no answer
can be given to the question.

In analysis of private sector unionism, second—

best considerations may weaken our belief in the standard welfare evaluation of
the output loss due to union wage effects, but does not lead us to reject it.
For the public sector, the problem of evaluating whether the average citizen
would be better/worse off in the absence of public sector union lobbying for

public goods is sufficiently complex to leave one agnostic. If, as Gaibraith
argued in The Affluent Society, there is a tendency to under produce public

goods, the union pressures may be socially beneficial. If, by contrast, the
conservative fear that there are inherent tendencies to over—produce public

47

goods are correct, public sector unions are on the wrong side of the social

welfare ledger. Perhaps theories of actual output decisions in the public sector, as opposed to the normative theory of public goods production, can help us
determine whether or not the potential expansion of output in the public sector
due

to public sector unionism is socially good or bad.
To sum up, just as private sector unions have significant non—wage

effects,

so too do public sector unions. In the private sector some of these

effects — — lower turnover, more professional management——help raise produc—

tivity to counter—balance union wage effects, at least in part. In the public
sector some of the effects of political lobbying seems to operate in the direc-

tion of increasing expenditures on output of public goods. Analysis of the non—
wage effect of public sector unions, particularly on taxes and overall municipal
finances has been relatively sparse, but offers some suggestions for evaluating
public sector labor relations and for future research.

48

VI. IMPASSE RESOLU'rION

A major policy and

research

issue in public sector labor relations con-

cerns which rules and institutions should be used to resolve disagreements about

terms of contracts, and concurrently how to treat strikes. The various state
legislatures and municipalities have experimented with a wide variety of mecha—

nisms for impasse resolution. Eight states have legalized strikes for some
public sector workers, thereby letting the traditional private sector battle of
economic strength or threat thereof serve as the ultimate pressure for

agreements. Many states make public sector strikes illegal, some with rather
severe penalties for strikers. In recent years a sizeable number of states have
opted for conventional or final offer binding arbitration as a means for
achieving settlements in the absence of strikes.
In this section I examine what we have learned about public sector strikes
and arbitration substitutes for the strike.

Public Sector Strikes

Strikes have a bad press. No one really likes them. But in a system of
free collective bargaining they serve an important function. Without the
strike, or some substitute form of economic weapon, labor might never be able to
force management to take its demands seriously, and management might never be
able to force workers to withdraw demands/give concessions.
Despite being outlawed in most jurisdictions, strikes in the public sector

are far from rare. As Table 12 shows, the country has experienced a sizeable
number of public sector strikes. Indeed, between 196O—64 and 1976—80, the
number of stoppages in the public sector rose from 32 per year to 500 per year.31
Public sector strikes differ in their basic dimensions from private sector

49

Table 12: Selected Work Stoppage Measures
All Industries arid Government, 1979

Item
Days of idleness as a
percent of estimate
total working time

Workers involved as a
percent of total
employment

Average number of workers
involved per stoppage
Average days of idleness
per worker

Total

State

Local

0.15

0.08

0.06

0.10

1.9

1.6

1.14

2.2

358

1428

853

383

20.1

11.7

10.6

12.0

All Industries

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Work Stoppages in Government, 1979. March
1981, Report 629, Table 2.

50

strikes. They are of much shorter duration but tend to involve re workers per
strike. According to Nelson, Stone and

Swint

they follow a different cyclical

pattern than private sector strikes, falling rather than rising in business
expansions.

Just as the various states have adopted different laws regulating collective bargaining in the public sector, so too have they developed different laws

regulating strikes. Eight states permit strikes (see Table 13). Some have no
explicit regulations but outlaw strikes under Judicial interpretation. Others
outlaw strikes with varying penalties for strike breakers—-penalties which are
sometimes not enforced.
Which of these legal treatments is most successful in limiting strikes?
Is it better to make strikes legal, to have harsh penalties, or to have moderate

penalties? What is the effect on states of a collective bargaining statute
which compels unresolved issues to be settled by conventional or last offer
arbitration?

There have been a sizeable number of studies of these questions (see Table
i1).

The most notable and consistent finding is that compulsory arbitration

does, indeed, serve as an effective deterrent to strikes. Several studies have
found a curvilinear relation between public sector labor laws and strike
incidence, with states having weak "meet and confer" laws being more strike
prone than states with no comprehensive public sector labor relations law and
those with compulsory arbitration having the fewest number of strikes.

32

Whatever good or ill effects compulsory arbitration has on bargaining and

settlements, it does, nevertheless, limit strikes.
By contrast, studies which fail to distinguish between types of public

51

Table 13: Statutory- Regulation of Strikes by State, 19T9

Strikes are legal for some public sector workers (8

Alaska
Hawaii
Minnesota
Montana

states)

Oregon
Pennsylvania
Vermont
Wisconsin

Strikes of some public sector workers not treated in law but regarded as illegal
by courts (12 states)

Arizona
Colorado
Idaho

Illinois

Louisiana

Mississippi
New Mexico

Carolina
South Carolina
North

None

Silent for teachers, firefighters prohibited
Strikes are illegal and striking employees may
be fired.

Police officers can't strike; labor organizations
violating may be fined $500; otherwise silent
None
Silent; state employees prohibited and may lose
deduction privileges and certification

Silent
Silent

Utah

None

West Virginia

None
Silent

Wyoming

Strikes prohibited, with rio sanction or with no specific penalties provided (ii
states)

Alabama
Arkansas
California
Connecticut
D.C.

Kansas

Kentucky
Maine

Massachusetts
Michigan
Missouri
North Dakota

New Hampshire

New Jersey
Rhode Island
Washington

Prohibited
Prohibited
Prohibited
Prohibited
Prohibited

Prohibited
Prohibited
Prohibited
Prohibited
Prohibited
Prohibited

Prohibited
Prohibited
Prohibited
Prohibited

Prohibited; uniformed employees fined up to $250
per day.

52

Table 13 (Continued)

Heavy Penalties (15 States)

Delaware

Prohibited; union recognition revoked for two
years, dues deduction for one. Penalties are
mandatory

Florida

Prohibited; court may enjoin and may fine
union up to $5,000 for contempt and union
officers $50—$100 per day; employer may
recover damages. Employee may be dismissed or
put on probation for six nnths. Union may
lose certification or dues deduction and nay
be fined up to $20,000 per day for each day of
strike.

Georgia

Prohibited; dismissal with 3 year ban on
rehiring; no salary increase for 3 years and 5
year probation; inciting a strike is a mis—
demeanor punishable by up to 1 year imprisonment, a fine of $100—bOO, or both.

Indiana

Prohibited; employer may sue for injury or

damage. Union loses dues deduction privilege
for one year. Employee may not be paid for
days on strike.

Iowa

Prohibited; court may enjoin and fine up to
$500 per individual or $10,000 for union for
each day or violation and/or six nxnths imprisonment. Individual may he fired and not
rehired for one year.

Maryland

Prohibited; recognition revoked for two years.
Dues deduction suspended one year. Penalty
mandatory.

Nebraska

Prohibited; violators guilty of class 1 misdemeanor.

Nevada

Prohibited; strike may be enjoined. Union may
be fined $50,000 per day, union leader $1,000
per day or jailed. Employer can dismiss, or
suspend, or demote worker, cancel collective
bargaining agreement and/or withhold wages for
period of strike.

53

Table 13 (Continued)

Heavy Penalties Continued

State

Year of Statute

Statutory Sanctions

New York

Prohibited; one year probation and loss of two
days pay for each day on strike. Union loses
dues deduction. Employer may seek injunction.

Ohio

Prohibited; termination possible. One year
freeze on salary if rehired plus two year probationary period.

Oklahoma

Prohibited; union loses recognition. Employee
man not be paid for strike. Police and fire
may be fixed or dismissed.

South Dakota

Prohibited; union fined to $50,000, employee
$1,000 or jailed up to one year or both.
Employer can seek injunction.

Tennessee

Prohibited; employer may seek injunction; employees
may be dismissed or forfeit tenure for 3 years.

Texas

Prohibited; employee dismissed, loses
reemployment or other benefit rights. Fines
for police and fire. No wage increase for 1
year.

Virginia

Prohibited; employee dismissed, no rehirement
possible for one year.

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Summary of Public Sector Labor Relations
Policies, 1979.

54

Table 114: Findings in Empirical Studies
Of Public Sector Strikes

Grip

Finding

19714 — 1977

or harsh penalties
have more strikes
than those with
moderate penalties;
low salaries induce
more strikes

2. Klauser

Hawaii impasse procedures
1971 — 1977

Only one strike;
legalization limits
strikes

3. Stern & Olson

teachers, police, and
firefighters
1975 — 1977

Propensity

firefighters strikes
1969 — 1972

Compulsory arbitra—
tion laws reduce
strikes

cross-state
1968—1971

Prohibiting or
penalizing strikes,
third party procedure
laws, and type of
bargaining law have
no discernible
effects on strikes

same as Burton & Krider
19714—1975

making strikes ille—
gal and third
party procedures
reduce strike

Study (year)
1. Balfour & Holmes

14.

Wheeler

5. Burton & Krider

6.

Rodgers

teachers across states

States with permitted

to strike
during negotiations
is lowest with compulsory
arbitration, highest
with no bargaining law

7.

Ichniowski

police
1972—1973, 1976—1978

compulsory arbitra—
tion reduces strikes

8.

Horn,

teachers stikes across
states, 1977

Districts that engage
in collective
bargaining have fewer
strikes than those
with no bargaining
required or with
meet and confer procedures; higher wages
reduce strikes

McGuire
and Tomkiewicz

55

Table 14 (continued)

9.

Fallon

all state public sector
strikes 1972

Compulsory arbitration
procedures have no sigriif 1-.

cant effects or very
minor ones.

10. Colton

11. Weintraub and
Thornton

teachers strikes 1960-.
1975, cross-states

teachers strikes over time
1946—1973

no relation between

strikes and
bargaining statute
Districts with

permIssive bargaining
legislation have more
strikes.

56

sector bargaining laws yield mixed results, possibly because of the existence
of cases where bargaining laws without compulsory arbitration increase strikes
and partly because of cases where compulsory arbitration laws reduce them
(for example, Colton versus Weintraub and Thornton among teachers).

The findings with respect to strike laws

se are also less clear.

Balfour and Holmes found strikes most frequent in states with very harsh
penalties and in those with no penalties, and least in those with moderate

penalties. Fallon found strikes less frequent in those with no penalties.
Klauser

cited the HawaIi

reduces

them,

experience as showIng that legalizatIon of strIkes

presumably because of the greater pressure on management to reach

agreement with workers.

Douglas' study of New York's Taylor law shows that public officials are
loathe

in many

instances

to impose the penalties of the law, which includes a

two—for—one pay penalty for each day on strike, loss of checkoff of dues,

and

which requires workers to go back to their jobs immediately. From 196T—78

2T2

illegal work stoppages produced only 1T3 charges of illegal activity, and 136

injunctions.

In several instances the disputes produced exceedingly bitter

labor—management relations which might have been avoided under a different

collective bargaining law. In this regard the Zimmer—Jacobs study of New York
prison guard strikes suggests that the greatest problem of a punitive strike law
is the danger that it exacerbates disputes, rather than helps resolve them.
Finally, in light of the longstanding sovereignty issue in public sector
labor relations, one mist not forget that in a number of cases, governors and
the President have used the National Guard or the arrr to break illegal public

sector strikes. The most notable such recent case was President Reagan's use of

57

Air Force traffic controllers to defeat PATCO and ultimately crush that union.
In the l970s, the National Guard was used to temporarily replace striking public

sector workers by both liberal and conservative governors. The likelihood of
such force being used may be an important deterrent to protective service strikes, which may be rendered largely ineffective as a result.

Binding Arbitration
A major research effort has been devoted to the consequences of compulsory

either conventional or final offer, on public sector labor relatheory of conventional arbitration has focused on the "chilling"

arbitration,

tions.

The

effect that such third party resolution can have on negotiations. In the most
often argued analysis, if two parties operating under a conventional arbitration
statute believe the arbitrator will "split—the—difference," negotiations will be
chilled, as each side will refuse to make concessions for fear they will lower

its award in arbitration. By contrast, final offer arbitration——under which the
arbitrator must pick one of the two offers——is claimed to have less of a

chilling effect. In a rigorous model Crawford has shown that in fact in a world
without uncertainty, but with multiple issues in which parties expect
arbitrators to split the difference, the two forms of arbitration may yield the
same result, and are unlikely to be Pareto efficient.
The major criticism leveled against final offer arbitration is that it

provides identifiable winners and losers which Is bad for labor relations. In
New Jersey and Massachusetts——two extensively studied states——unions have tended
to win approximately 2/3rds of the arbitration awards, leading to considerable
complaint by cities. 331f employers and unions had equally realistic final
offers, and arbitrators make decisions close to union offers most of the time,

58

the cities would

have

a legitimate gripe. In fact, however, Ashenfelter and

Bloom have found that the reason unions win more in New Jersey is that union
offers are more realistic perhaps because union leaders are more risk—averse
than municipal officials, they even find that final offer arbitration produces
smaller settlement than conventional arbitration.
Finally, as noted in our previous discussion of strikes, there has been
considerable concern about the extent to which compulsory arbitration laws

reduce

strikes, particularly compared to laws that make collective bargaining

illegal or that simply penalize public sector strikes.
When the issue of binding arbitration initially surfaced in the public
sector literature, there was a notable lack of empirical evidence on its
effects. As Table 15 shows, by- 1981, 18 states had some form of

binding

arbitration, 8 of whom relied exclusively on conventional arbitration, and 10

of whom experimented with some form of final offer arbitration. While binding
arbitration has been invoked for nearly all workers, it has been most widely

used to deal with the problems of protective

Analysis

service employees.

of the effects of the laws on negotiations and wages has taken

various forms: before/after studies within states; cross—section comparisons
between groups that are covered by the arbitration provision with those that are
not; comparisons of arbitration awards with negotiated settlements; and laboratory experiments designed to evaluate how various dispute resolution mechanisms
affect negotiations.
Because the presence of compulsory arbitration dispute resolution
may affect negotiations, the most problematic of the approaches is to compare

the wages deterained by arbitration with those set in negotiations. This is

59

Alaska

Table 15: Compulsory- Arbitration Laws, 1980
Arbitration
Covered Employees
Law enforcement, fire—
Conventional
fighters, prison, hospital

Connecticut

Municipal employees and
teachers

Final offer,
Issue by issue

Hawaii

Firefighters

Final offer

Iowa

All

Final offer, issue
by issue

Maine

State

Conventional

Massachusetts

Police and firefighter

Final offer

Michigan

Police and firefighter

Final offer on economic issues, con—
ventional on others

Minnesota

All (with some minor
exceptions

Final offer, issue by

Nebraska

All except teachers

Conventional

Nevada

Firefighters
All

Final offer
Conventional or final
offer

New Jersey

Police, firefighters, prison

Final offer or
conventional

New York

Police and firefighters

Conventional

All

Conventional

Police, firefighters, retail
hospital, prison

Conventional

Public safety

Final offer by
issue

Pennsylvania

Guards, courts, police
and firefighters

Conventional

Rhode Island

State

Police and firefighters
Teachers

Conventional, not
binding on wages
Conventional
Conventional

Police and firefighters

Conventional

New York City

Oregon

Eugene, Oregon

Washington

issue

60

Table 15 continued

Wisconsin

Wyoming

Police and

firefighters

Conventional or
final offer

Municipal

Conventional

Firefighters

Conventional

Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Labor Management Services Administration.
Summary of Public Sector Labor Relations Policies, 1981.

61

because, as Farber and Katz point out, the presence of a binding arbitration
provision n.y change negotiations as well, depending on the nature of the

arbitrator's preference function. In addition, the selection of jurisdictions
into arbitration creates potential "selectivity bias" problems.
Table 16 summarizes current findings of the effects of compulsory- arbitra-

tion on economic outcomes. First, as noted earlier, binding arbitration definitely- reduces strikes. With respect to bargaining, the issue is unresolved.
Some analysts conclude that conventional arbitration has harmed bargaining.

Others claim that it does not. Some have argued that once two parties get
involved with arbitration, there is a "narcotic effect," in which they- keep

coming back for more arbitration rather that proceeding to bargain. Others have
argued that the effect is illusory rather than real. As the Butler and
Ehrenberg and Kochan—Baderschneider debate in the ILRR makes clear, it is difficult to isolate "true" state dependence from unobserved characteristics that

cause this behavior. While the overall impact of arbitration on bargaining is
unclear, the general expectation that "final offer" arbitration will be less
chilling than conventional arbitration seems, for the most part, to be supported
in the data.
There is no clear conclusion in the literature regarding the impact of
compulsory arbitration on wages. Several studies of varying quality- conclude

that compulsory arbitration raises ges while others, also of varying quality,
conclude it does not. The most sophisticated study, by Ashenfelter and Bloom
finds final offer arbitration does not produce higher wage settlements than does
conventional arbitration, despite rainicipal complaints to the contrary (ir

any-thing,

the data show slightly lower settlements in New Jersey.

62

Table 16: Effects of Compulsory Arbitration
on Economic Outcomes

A. Effects on Bargaining
Compulsory Arbitration Reduces Bargaining

1. Wheeler — Conventional, firefighters. Management bargainers are less
likely- to change positions on starting wages when compulsory arbitration
laws exist. Also, there is a greater gap between party and impasse
positions.

2. Kochan and Baderschneider — Conventional, New York firefighters and
Police. Parties have a high and increasing rate of dependence on 3rd
party- arbitration.

3. Lipsky- and Barocci — Final Offer, Massachusetts firefighters, police and
teachers. Measured as proportion of negotiations that resulted in
impasses.
14•

Somers — Final offer, Massachusetts firefighters and police. Final
offer arbitration led to increased reliance on 3rd party arbitration.
Didn't lead to increase of pre—impasse bargaining.

Compulsory Arbitration Does Not Reduce Bargaining

1. Grodin — conventional, Nevada
2. Loewenberg — Conventional, Pennsylvania police and firefighters. Two—
thirds of municipalities that negotiated arrived at negotiated
settlement.

3. Gallagher and Pegnetter —
encourages negotiations.
liP.

Final

offer, Iowa. Final offer arbitration

Long and Feuille — Final offer, Eugene Oregon. Case study of 7
negotiation—arbitration experiences since 1911. Moderate encouragement
of bargaining.

5. Lipsky and Barocci — Final offer, Massachusetts firefighters, police and
teachers. Measured by number of cases settled by arbitration.
B. Effects on Wages
Compulsory Arbitration Raises Wages
1. Loewenberg — Conventional, Pennsylvania police arbitration resulted in
larger increases than in negotiations or employer determinations.
2. Stern, Rehrnus, et. al. — Final offer, Wisconsin and Michigan.
Regression analysis shows weak evidence of a positive relation for
firefighters and police inOboth states from 1 — 5%.

63

Table 16 (continued)

3. Olson — Conventional, firefighters for population of 100,00 and over.
14 Kochan and Jick — Police and firefighters in New York state. The
of the impasse procedure — factfinding or arbitration — had a
nature
positive impact for management salary but no movement for union
salaries.

Compulsory Arbitration Does Not Raise Wages

Final offer, Massachusetts. Final offer arbitration leads to
excessive percentage wage increases.

1. Somers —

2. Bloom — New Jersey. None of coefficients for arbitration was significantly different from zero in regression analysis with salary changes as
dependent variable.

3. Ashenfelter and Bloom — New Jersey, Final offer arbitration has less effect
than conventional.

Firefighters median increase in salary is similar to that
for negotiated settlements or for decisions determined by an arbitration
award.

4. Loewenberg —

64

Finally, in addition to the statistical analysis of the effects of actual

arbitration and other dispute resolution ichanisms, there have been several
laboratory experiments of how the various mechanisms affect behavior (see Table

17). These studies, while by no means conclusive, have tended to support the
claim that final offer arbitration has less of a chilling effect on negotiations
than does conventional arbitration and gives some evidence that both have some
similar effects.

65

Table 17: Results of Laboratory Experiments
of Impasse Resolution Procedures

Study

Finding

1. Johnson and Tullar

Expected third—party resolution leads
to bargaining when "Need to save face" is
high.

2. Bigoness

Expected compulsory arbitration impedes
bargaining if high conflict between
sides.

3. Urban

Expected conventional arbitration leads
to nre time to reach agreement.

4.

Johnson and Pruitt

Less time to reach agreement.

5. DeNisi and Dworkin

More information about final offer procedures leads to closer agreements.

6. Notz and Starke

Final offer reduces difference in
negotiations. Conventional
arbitration increases differences.

7. Subbarao

Final offer leads to smaller differences in negotiating than
conventional arbitration does.

8. Magenau

Allowing strikes is more effective than
arbitration in producing voluntary
agreements. Final offer leads to
greater narrowing of differences than
conventional arbitration.

66

VII. CONCLUSION:

UNANSWERED QUESTIONS

As the preceding review and summary of findings shows, much has been

learned

about public sector labor relations. Much also remains to be learned.

Wage studies covering nre recent periods of time are likely to produce different estimates than those covering earlier periods, leading to different

overall conclusions about the power of public sector unions. Additional analysis of the legal and political environment under which unionism operates should
illuminate the unique aspects of public sector labor relations.
Perhaps what is most sorely needed in this area of research is a general
analytic framework around which the diverse research studies can be organized to
answer questions regarding the unique aspects of public sector labor relations.
For the most part, researchers have applied the same basic analytic framework
used in the private sector, concentrating on wage and other compensation effects

of collective bargaining. If the analysis in this review essay is correct, this
misses much that is unique about the public sector in terms of both positive and

normative economics. Whereas in the private sector one can infer employment
declines from union—induced wage increases, this does not appear to be valid in
the public sector because of union potential to shift demand outward through the

political process.
As a general guide, models in which public sector unions affect demand for
labor rather than just wages, and influence the entire budget and tax position
of cities and states appear to offer the best hope for understanding what public
sector unions do and of allowing a social evaluation of what the advent of

unionism to the public sector nans for the United States econony.

67

Appendix A: The Measurement of the Extent of Collective Bargaining
Because public sector unions operate under different state laws, the

definition of "unionism" is by- no ians clear. Existing data provide several
widely used sets of figures, which are described below:
(i)

Membership in a Bargaining Organization
The term "bargaining organization" was coined by Burton (in Aaron, Grodin,

and Stern) to include unions and bargaining associations (or what BLS calls

employee associations). Burton divides public sector organizations into three
classes: unions, bargaining associations, and nonbargaining organizations.
Unions are characterized by strike endorsement, emphasis on collective
bargaining, exclusion of supervisors from membership, and AFL—CIO affiliation.
Bargaining associations also rely on collective bargaining, but are generally
averse to strikes, are more likely to emphasize political action instead,

usually include supervisors, and are affiliated with AFL—CIO. The National
Education Association (NEA) is an example. Finally, non—bargaining organizations don't bargain as a group, don't strike, are not affiliated with AFL—CIO,

but generally include supervisors as members. An example is the American Bar
Association (ABA). Bureau of Labor Statistics data was used by Burton to esti—
mate this figure. According to Burton, a shortcoming of the BLS data is that it
underestimates coverage by excluding municipal public employee associations.
Other problems are that BLS includes msmbership outside the US as well as

retired and unemployed workers. Post 19T9 the Bureau of National Affairs has
kept this series.

(2) Membership in an Employee Organization
The Bureau of the Census, Department of Labor (BCDL) defines an employee

68

organization as "an organization (e.g., union, association, federation, or council) that exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with the
employer concerning personnel policies and practices, employee grievaces, labor
disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours of employment, and other conditions of

work." The data is available only as the percent of full—time employees and
exists from l9T1 to the present.

(3) Employees Represented by Bargaining Units
The BCDL defines a bargaining unit as a group recognized as appropriate for
representation by an employee organization for the purpose of collective and/or

meet and confer discussions. Units commonly include both member and nonmembers
of the organization.

(1) Employees Covered by Contractual Agreement
The BCDL defines a contractual agreement as "a written document developed
by collective negotiations between representatives of the employer and employee
organizations that describes the conditions of employment (e.g., wages, hours,
fringe benefits, etc.) and the methods by which disputes or grievances arising
during the term of the contract shall be resolved.
(5)

Employees Represented by Labor Organizations (CPS)
CPS includes both members of unions and employer associations engaged in

collective bargaining as well as those covered by a union or employee association

contract. No retirees, unemployed union members, or persons in the armed forces

are included. Moreover, it includes members only in the United States. A njor
problem, however, is that while the CPS reports "government" workers as part of
its "Class of Worker" question, it breaks up the government into state, federal,
and local only for those workers in public administration.

69

The

following figures provide some notion of the range of figures one gets

from different surveys:
State and Local Employees

1. % of employees with bargaining
organization

1976
37%

1980
——

membership (ELS)

2. % of

149.8

148.8

3. % of

all employees represented
by bargaining units (BCDL)

35.8

38.14

% of employees covered by contra—
ctual agreement (BCDL)

27.7

32.1

full—time employees
with employee organization
membership (BcDL)

14.

5. % represented
tions (cPs)

by labor organiza-

70

Notes
1.

The Meany quote is from Leo Kramer, Labor's Paradox — the American
Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, AFL—CIO (Wiley,
1962), p. 141. One estimate for the percent of yorkers organized in unions
in the government sector is 13 percent. Burton, "The Extent of Collective
Bargaining in the Public Sector," pp. 2—3. However, few of these workers
had contracts.

2.

See Appendix A for other estimates of collective bargaining coverage.

3.

39 states have such legislation. U.S. Department of Labor,
Labor—Management Services Administration, Summary of Public Sector Labor
Relations Policies, 1980, p. V.

14.

5.

Bureau of Labor Statisics, Earnings and Other Characteristics of Organized
Workers, Ma 1980 (Bulletin 2105), table IT.
The two specialized journals are the Government Union Review, and the
Journal of Collective Negotiations." The bibliography to this paper shows
the growth of research articles.

6.

Because of differences in the data and in the fine line between
associations and unions, these and other statements about the growth of
public sector unions are approximations.

7.

See Burton, p.8.

8.

See

9.

See Mitchell, p. 130

Steiber, p. 117.

10. Jonathan Brock, Bargaining Beyond Impasse, pp. 27—29.
11.

314 states (including Washington, D.C.) have some kind of employee
relations board. Calculated from "Sunimary of Public Sector Labor Relations
Policies," 1981.

12. See U.S. Bureau of Census.
13. Wellington and Winter, The Unions and the Cities, p. 15 and 30.
114. Wellington and Winter, p. 15 and 30.

15. According to the Massachusetts Teachers Association, the years were
January 19T9 to July 1976.

i6.

Labor Management Relations Service, The Role of Politics in Local Labor
Relations,

p. 8.

17. Lewin, D. "Public Sector Labor Relations," Labor History, Winter 1977, p.
138.

71

18. Mitchell, D.J.B., Public Personnel Management, March—April 1978, p. 89.

19.

See Freeman, Ichniowski, and Lauer; Ehrenberg and Goldstein; Chambers.

20. Munnell, "Who Should Manage the Assets of Collectively Bargained Pension
Plans?" p. 19.
21. For example, studies which show large effects on the minimum are Feulile,
Hendricks, and Delaney; Wasylenko; Kearney—Morgan; and Ichniowski. Studies
which find larger effects on the maximum are Hall—Vanderporten and
Bartel-Lewin.

22. AFL—CIO News,
23. These beliefs were based on Depression and World War II experiences.

+. X.D. rreeman
—

,. ,.
anu J.i.

an yn v._n ,- rieuoII, wnat cio Unions iiO basic
-

-

-,

1300Kb, JQL4•

25.

Zax, pp. l1ii4_1T

26.

Benecki, for general municipal services in all but the very largest cities.
Gallagher, on teacher's budgets. Feuille et.al. for police budgets; Zax,
for all municipal groups.

27. Methe and Perry-, p. 368.

28.

Stanley, p. 3.

29. Levitan and Noden, p.

138.

Benecki's limited calculations, a complete analysis of
union effects might be expected to show greater revenue per capita, higher property taxes, higher sales taxes, but lower user charge revenue in unionized
municipalities and lower debt. Because Benecki finds different patterns for
large cities than for other, does not obtain internally consistent results in
all cases and includes "three institutional bargaining variables"
likely to have affected his estimates of union impacts, I regard his findings as
only suggestive. They are, however, valuable in raising
major research payoff could come from the proper analysis of union impacts on
broadly defined municipal finances.

30. On the basis of

the possibility that a

31.

Calculated

32.

Wheeler, Stern, and Olson; Rodgers; Ichniowski; Fallon; Horn; McGuire and
Tomkiewicz.

33.

For New Jersey, see Bloom or Ashenfelter and Bloom. For Massachusetts, see
Lipsky and Barocci or Somers.

from Handbook of Labor Statistics, 1971 and 1983.

72

REFERENCES

Aaron,

B., J.R. Grodin and J.L. Stern (eds.) Public Sector Bargaining, Madison,
Wisconsin: Industrial Relations Research Association, 1979.

Adler, J. and D.L. Rosenthal, "Fact Finders and the Resolution of Issues at
Impasse: A Survey of New York State Perb Neutrals," Journal of Collective
Negotiations, Vol. 14(14), 1975, pp. 381—1407.

Allen, S.G., "An Empirical Model of Work Attendence," The Review of Economic
Statistics, Vol. 63(1), 1981, pp. 77—87.
Alutto, J.A. and J.A. Belasco, "Determinants of Attitudinal Militancy Among Nurses
and Teachers," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January 19714, pp. 216—227.
Ashenfelter, 0. and D. Bloom, "The Pitfalls in Judging Arbitrator Impartiality
by Win—Loss Tallies Under Final Offer Arbitration," Labor Law Journal,
August 1983, pp. 5314...539.

Ashenuelter, 0. and D.E. Bloom, "Models of Arbitrator Behavior: Theory and
Evidence," American Economic Review, March 19814, pp. 111—1214.
Ashenfelter, 0. and E.G. Ehrenberg, "The Demand for Labor in the Public
Sector," in Labor in Public and Nonprofit Sectors, D.S. Hamermesh, ed., New
Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1975.

Ashenfelter, 0. "The Effect of Unionization on Wages in the Public Sector: The
Case of Fire Fighters," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January
1971, pp.l9l—2O2.
Aussieker, B., "The Incidence and Impact of Faculty Union Strikes," Labor Law
Journal, 1977, pp. 777—7814.
Aussieker, B., "Multilateralism and Faculty Unionism," Industrial arid Labor Relations
Review, 28th Annual Winter Proceedings, 19T5, pp. 93—101.

Baderschneider, J., "Collective Bargaining Pressure on Municipal Fiscal Capacity
and Fiscal Effort," Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the National
Acadenr of Management, Atlanta, August 1979.

Baird, Robert N. and John H. Landon, "Communication: The Effects of Collective
Bargaining on Public School Teachers' Salaries," Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, Vol. 25, (3), April 1972, pp. 1410—1417.
Balfour, G.A., "More Evidence that Unions Do Not Achieve Higher Salaries for
Teachers," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 3(14), 19714, pp.
289—303.
Balfour, A. and A.B. Holmes, "The Effectiveness of No Strike Laws for Public
School Teachers," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 10 (2), 1981,
pp. l33_11414.

73

Barnum, D.T., and I.E. Helburn, "Influencing the Electorate: Experience with
Referenda on Public Employee Bargaining," Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, Vol. 35(3), 1982, pp. 330—3142.
Barnum, D.T., "From Private to Public: Labor Relations in Urban Transit," Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, October 1971, pp. 95—115.

Bartel, A. and D. Lewin, "Wages and Unionism in the Public Sector: The Case of
Police," The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 63(1), 1981, pp.
53—59.
Baugh, W.H. and J.A. Stone, "Teachers, Unions, and Wages in the 1970s: Unionism
Now Pays," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 35(3), 1982, pp.
368— 376.
Bazerman, M.H. and H.S. Farber, "Arbitrator DecIsIon Making: When are Final
Offers Important?" National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper no.
1183, August 1983.
Becker, E.B., "Union Impact on Wages and Fringe Benefits of Hospital
Nonprofessionals," Quarterly Review of Economics and Business, Vol. 19(14),
1979, pp. 27—1414.

Bellante, D. and J. Long, "The Political Econoxtr of the Rent—Seeking Society:
The Case of Public Employees and Their Unions," Journal of Labor Research,
Vol. 2(1), 1981, pp. 1—114.

Benecki, S., "Municipal Expenditure Levels and Collective Bargaining,"
Industrial Relations, Vol. 17(2), 1978, pp. 216—230.
Bent, A.E. and T.Z. Reeves, Collective Bargaining in the Public Sector, Menlo
Park, California: The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Company, Inc., 1978.

Bernstein, M.C., "Alternatives to the Strike in Public Labor Relations," Harvard
Law Review, Vol. 85(1459), 1971, pp. 1459—1475.

Beyer, J.M., Trice, H.M. and R.E. Hunt, "The Impact of Federal Sector Unions on
Supervisors' Use of Personnel Policies," Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, Vol. 33(2), 1980, pp. 212—231.
Bloom, D.E., "Theoretical and Empirical Research on Arbitration," A proposal to
the National Science Foundation, February 1, 1983
Bloom, D.E., "Collective Bargaining, Compulsory Arbitration, and Salary
Settlements in the Public Sector: The Case of New Jersey's Municipal
Police Officers." Journal of Labor Research, Fall 1981, pp. 369_3814.
Blumberg, A., Brannigan, M. and D. Nason, "Administrative Power and Collective
Bargaining in the Schools," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 10(14),
1981, pp. 327—335.
Bornstein, T., "Legacies of Local Government Collective Bargaining in the
1970s," Labor Law Journal, March 1980, pp. 165—172.

74

Bowers, M.H., "Legislated Arbitration: Legality, Enforceability, and
Face—Saving," Public Policy Management, July-August 19Th, pp. 270—278.
Brock, J. Bargaining Beyond Impasse, Joint Resolution of Public Sector Labor
Disputes, Boston: Auburn House Publishing Co., 1982.

Brookshire, M.L. and M.D. Rogers, "Productivity and Collective Bargaining in the
Public Sector," Labor Law Journal, August 1981, pp. l73.J479.
Brown, T.A., "Have Collective Negotiations Increased Teachers' Salaries? A
Comparison of Teachers' Salaries in States With and Without Collective
Bargaining Laws for Public School Personnel, 1961—1971," Journal of
Collective Negotiations, Vol. i(i), 1975, pp. 53—65.

Bruce, C.J., "The Compatibility of Arbitration and Bargaining," Criticism and
Comment, Industrial Relations, Vol. 21(3), pp. 398_1O1.
Burton, J.F., Jr., "The Extent of Collective Bargaining in the Public Sector,"
in B. Aaron, J.R. Grodin and J.L. Stern (eds.) Public Sector Bargaining,
Madison, Wisconsin: Industrial Relations Research Association, 1979

Burton, J.F., Jr., "Public Sector Strikes: Legal, Ethical, and Practical
Considerations," in Ethics, Free Enterprise, and Public Policy, R.T.
DeGeorge and J.A. Pichier, eds., Oxford University Press: New York, 1978.
Burton, J.F., Jr., and C.E. Krider, "The Incidence of Strikes in Public
Employment," in Labor in Public and Nonprofit Sectors, D.S. Hamermesh, ed.,
New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1975.
Butler, R.J. and R.G. Ehrenberg, "Estimating the Narcotic Effect of Public
Sector Impasse Procedures," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Oct.
1981, Vol. 35(1), pp. 3—20.
Cain, G.C., B.E. Becker, C.G. McLaughlin and A.E. Schwenk, "The Effect of Unions
on Wages in Hospitals," in Research in Labor Economics, Ronald G.
Ehrenberg (ed.) Vol. 1, (1981), Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press, pp.
191—320.
Caidwell, W.E. and L.M. Jeffreys, "The Effect of Teacher Strikes on Student
Achievement: New Evidence," Government Union Review, Winter 1983, Vol.
14(1) pp. 140—58.

Carpenter, R.E. and D.N. Ashworth, "An Examination of Personnel Practices in
Mississippi Municipalities," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 11(3),
1982, pp. 267—273.

Chambers, J.G., "The Impact of Collective Bargaining for Teachers on Resource
Allocation in Public School Districts," Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 14,
1977, pp. 3214—339.

Chauhan, D.S., "The Political and Legal Issues of Binding Arbitration in
Government," MonthlyLabor Review, September 1979, pp. 314—141.

75

Coffinberger, R.L., "An Investigation of the Intensity of Traditional Unionization
Motives In A NonBargaining Environment," Journal of Collective Negotiations,
Vol. 11(2, 1982., PP. 113—118.

Coffinberger, R.L., "Why Public Employees Join Unions in a NonBargaining
Environment," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 10(3), 1981, pp. 209—215.
Colton, David L. "Collective Bargaining Laws and Teachers Strikes," Journal of
Collective Negotiations, Vol. 7(3), 1978, pp. 201—212.

Cook, A.H., "Comparable Worth: Recent Developments in Selected States,"
Industrial Relations Research Association, Spring Meeting 1983, pp. 4914_

503.
Corcoran, K.J. and D. Kutell, "Binding Arbitration Laws for State and
Workers," Monthly Labor Review, October 1978, pp. 36i0.

Municipal

Coulter, P.B. "Organizational Effectiveness in the Public Sector: The Example
of Municipal Fire Protection," Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 21,
March 1979, pp. 65—81.
Courant, P.N., E.M. Gramlich, and D.L. Rubinfeld, "Public Employee Market Power
and the Level of Government Spending," American Economic Review, Vol.
69(5), pp. 806—817.
Craft, J.A., "Fire Fighter Strategy in Wage Negotiations," Quarterly Review of
Economics and Business, Vol. 11(3), 1971, pp. 65—75.

Craft, J.A., "Public Employee Budget Negotiations: Budget Search and
Behavior," Public Personnel Review, October 1970, pp. 2l_249.

Bargaining

Crane, E.G., B.F. Lentz, and J.M. Shafritz, State Government Productivity: The
Environment for Improvement, New York: Praeger Special Studies in U.S.
Economic, Social and Political Issues, 1976.
Crawford, V.P., "On Compulsory—Arbitration Schemes," Journal of Political
Economy, February 1979, pp. 131—160.
Dalton, A., "A Theory of the Organization of State and Local Government
Employees," Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 3(2), 1982, pp. 163—177.
Decker, K.H., "The Importance of Impasse for Pennsylvania's Public Employees and
Employers," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 9(3), 1980, pp.
275—280.
DeNisi, A.S. and J.B. Dworkin, "Final—Offer Arbitration and The Naive
Negotiator," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 35(1), 1981, pp.
78—87.
Derber, M., Jennings, K., McAndrew, I., and M. Wagner, "Bargaining and Budget
Making in Illinois Public Institutions," Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, October 1973, pp. 1l9_61.

76

Dickson, E. and G.E. Peterson, Public Employee Compensation: A Twelve City
Comparison, Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press, 1980.
Donn, C.B., "Games Final—Offer Arbitrators Might Pay," Industrial Relations,
Vol. 16(3), 1977, pp. 306—3114.

Douglas, J.M., "Injunctions Under New York's Taylor Law: An Occupational
Analysis," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 10 (3), 1981, pp.
2149—265.

Dunn, F. and C.T. Bailey, "Identifiable Trends in Teacher Attitudes Toward Collective
Negotiation," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 2(2), 1973, pp. 113—1214.
Eberts, R.W., "Union Effects on Teacher Productivity," Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, April 19814, Vol. 37 (3), pp. 3146358.

Eberts, R.W., "How Unions Affect Management Decisions: Evidence From Public
Schools," Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 14(3), 1983, pp. 239—2147.

Edwards, L.N. and F.R. Edwards, "Wellington—Winter Revisited: The Case of
Municipal Sanitation Collection," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
Vol. 35(3), 1982, pp. 307—318.
Edwards, L.N. and F.R. Edwards, "The Effect of Unionism on the Money and Fringe
Compensation of Public Employees: The Case of Municipal Sanitation
Workers," Unpublished.
Ehrenberg, R.G., "Heterogeneous Labor, Minimum Hiring Standards, and Job
Vacancies in Public Employment," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81,
1973, pp. 114142l1450.

Ehrenberg, R.G., "The Demand for State and Local Government Employees," The
American Economic Review, Vol. 63, (3), 1973, pp. 366—379.

Ehrenberg,

R.G. "Municipal Government Stucture, Unionization, and the Wages of
Fire Fighters," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, October 1973, pp.
36—148.

Ehrenberg,

R.G., and G.S. Goldstein, "A Model of Public Sector Wage
Determination," Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 2, 1975, pp. 223—245.

Ehrenberg, R.G. and J.L. Schwarz, "Public Sector Labor Markets," National Bureau
of Economic Research, Working Paper 1179, August 1983.
Ehrenberg, R.G., Sherman, D.R. and J.L. Schwarz, "Unions and Productivity in
the Public Sector: A Study of Municipal Libraries," National Bureau of
Economic Research, Reprint No. 370, 1983.
Ehrenberg, R.G. and R. Smith, "Comparable Worth in the Public Sector," Paper in
Progress, May 19814.
Faber, C.F. and D.L. Martin, Jr., "Two Factors Affecting Enactment of Collective
Bargaining Legislation in Public Education," Journal of Collective
Negotiations, Vol. 8(2), 1979, pp. 151—159.

77

Fabiano, M.Aa and J.W. Adams, "Attitudes of State Clerical Employees Toward Unions,"
Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 9R), 1980, pp. 329_3142.
Fallon, R., "The Effects of Public Policy on the Incidence of Public Sector
Strikes," Unpublished, 1977.
Farber, H.S., "Splitting—the—Difference in Interest Arbitration," Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, Vol. 35(1), 1981, pp. 70—77.
Farber, H.S. and H.C. Katz, "Interest Arbitration, Outcomes, and the Incentive
to Bargain," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 33(1), 1979, pp.
55—63.
Feldman, R. and R. Scheffler, "The Union Impact on Hospital Wages and Fringe
Benefits," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January 1982 Vol. 35
(2), pp. l962O6.

Feuille, P. and J.C. Anderson, "Public Sector Bargaining: Policy and Practice,"
Industrial Relations, Vol. 19(3), 1980, pp. 3O9—324.
Feuille, P., "Selected Benefits and Costs of Compulsory Arbitration," Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 33(1), 1979, pp. 614—76.

Feuille, P., "Public Sector Impasses: Symposium Introduction," Industrial
Relations, Vol. 16(3), 1977, pp. 2614—272.
Feuille, P., "Police Labor Relations and Multilateralism," Industrial Relations
Research Association, 1973, pp. 170—177.
Feuille, P., Hendricks, W., and J.T. Delaney, "The Impact of Collective
Bargaining and Interest Arbiration on Policing," Final Report to the
National Institute of Justice, U.S. Department of Justice, December 1983.
Fogel, W. and D. Lewin, "Wage Determination in the Public Sector," Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, April 19714, pp. 4lO—1431.
Fording, T.E., "The Market for Public School Teachers and the Effect of Unionism
and Collective Bargaining on Teacher Salaries," A thesis presented to the
Departments of Economics and Government, Harvard University, March 214,
1982.
Fottler, M.D., "The Union Impact on Hospital Wages," Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, Vol. 30(3), 1977, pp. 3142—355.
Fox, M.S. and M.H. Wince, "The Structure and Determinants of Occupational Militancy
Among Public School Teachers," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, October
1976, pp. 147—58.

Frank, G.B. and H.E. Graham, "The Serendipitious Effect of Accounting Data
Disclosure on Municipal Collective Bargaining," Journal of Collective
Negotiations, Vol. 10(3), 1981, pp. 217—230.

78

Freeman, R-.B., "Demand for Labor in a Nonprofit Market: University Faculty," in
Labor in Public and Nonprofit Sectors, D.S. Hamermesh, ed., New Jersey:
Princeton University Press, 1975.

Freeman, R.B., C. Ichniowski, and I-I. Lauer, "Inter—Municipal Bargaining
Spillovers in the Determination of Police Compensation," September 1982,
unpublished.
Freund, J.L., "Market and Union Influences on Municipal Employee Wages,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, April l971i, pp. 39l_1&O.
Frey, D.E. "Wage Determination in Public Schools and the Effects on Unionization, in Labor in Public and Nonprofit Sectors, D.S. Hamerinesh, ed., New
Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1975.

Gaibraith, J.K. The Affluent Society, Boston: Houghton Miff lin 1969.
Gallagher, D.G. and R. Pegnetter, "Impasse Resolution Under the Iowa Multistep
Procedure," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 32(3), 1979, pp.
327—338.
Gallagher, D.G., "Teacher Bargaining and School District Expenditures,"
Industrial Relations, Vol. 17(2), 1978, pp. 231—237.
Gallagher, D.G., "Perceptual Measures of Union and Collective Bargaining
Impacts," Unpublished.

Gatewood, L.B., "Factfinding in Teacher Disputes: The Wisconsin Experience,"
Monthly Labor Review, October 19T1, pp. 147_5l.
Gentile, J.F., "Arbitration in the Federal Sector: Selected Problem Areas,"
Industrial Relations Research Association, Spring Meeting 1983, pp.
I87.
Gerhart, P.F., "Determinants of Bargaining Outcomes in Local Government Labor
Negotiations," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 29(3), 1976, pp.
331—351.
Gerhart P.F. and J.E. Drotning, "Dispute Settlement and the Intensity of
Mediation," Industrial Relations, Vol. 19(3), 1980, pp. 352—359.
Gerhart, P.F. and J.E. Drotning, "Is Fact Finding Useful in the Public Sector?"
Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 10(3), 1981, pp. 279—286.
Gifford, C.D., (ed.), Directory of U.S. Labor Organizations, 1982—83 Edition, The
Bureau of National Affairs, Inc. Washington, D.C. 1982.
Gilmore, C.B., "The Impact of Faculty Collective Bargaining on the Management of
Public Higher Educational Institutions," Journal of Collective
Negotiations, Vol. 10(2), 1981, pp. 1)45—151.
Glasser, J., "Some Suggested Impasse Resolution Procedures," Journal of
Collective Negotiations, Vol. 8(3), 1979, pp. 209—221.

79

Gold, C., Rodney, E.D., and J. Graham, "Reinstatement After Termination: Public
School Teachers," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 31(3),
April 1978, pp.310—321.

Grodin, J.R., "Arbitration of Public Sector Labor Disputes: The Nevada
Experiment," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, October 19Th, pp.
89—102.

Gustman, A.L. and M. Segal, "Interstate Variations in Teachers' Pensions,"
Industrial Relations, Vol. 16(3), 1977, pp. 335_31,

Gustman, A.L. and M. Segal, "Teachers' Salary Structures: Some Analytical and
Empirical Aspects of the Impact of Collective Bargaining," Industrial
Relations Research Association, 1977, pp. I37.1)45.
Haber, H.L., "Alternatives in Public Sector: Factfinding with binding
Recommendations," Monthly Labor Review, p. i3 _L4,

Hall,

W.C., and N.E. Carroll, "The Effect of Teachers' Organizations on Salaries
and Class Size," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January 1973, pp.
83lL—81l.

Hall, W.C. and B. Vanderporten, "Unionization, Monopsony Power, and Police
Salaries," Industrial Relations, Vol. i6(i), 1977, pp. 9Ii.1OO.

Hamermesh, D.S., Labor in the Public and Nonprofit Sectors, Princeton, New
Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1975.
Hamermesh, D.S., "The Effect of Government Ownership on Union Wages," in Labor
in Public and Nonprofit Sectors, D.S. Hamermesh, ed., New Jersey:
Princeton University Press, 1975.

Hartman, R.W., Pay and Pensions for Federal Workers, Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution, 1983.
Haskell, M.A., "Centralization or Decentralization of Bargaining Among State
Government Employees: An Examination of the Options," Journal of Collective
Negotiations, Vol. 10(1), 1981, pp. 19—31,
Helburn, I.B. and J.I. Matthews, "The Referendum as an Alternative to
Bargaining," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol 9(2), 1980, pp.
93—105.

Heliriegel, D. and R.B. Peterson, "Collective Negotiations: A Behavioral Analysis,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January 1971, pp. 249—264.
Heliriegel, D., French, W. and LB. Peterson, "Collective Negotiations and
Teachers: A Behavioral Analysis," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1970,
pp. 380—396.
Henkel, J.W., "Collective Bargaining in Higher Education: State Legislatures
Still Hold the Purse Strings," Labor Law Journal, June 1980, pp, 353—367.

80

Henkel, J.W. and N.J. Wood, "Collective Bargaining by State Workers:
Legislatures Have the Final Voice in the Appropriation of Funds," Journal
of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 11(3), 1982, pp. 215—223.

Hill, M.D., "Variations in Job Satisfaction Among Higher Education Faculty In
Unionized and NonUnionized Institutions In Pennsylvania," Journal of Collective
Negotiations, Vol. 11(2), 1982, pp. 165—178.
Holmes, A.B., "Union Activity and Teacher Salary Structure," Industrial
Relations, Vol. 18(1), 1979, pp. 79—85.
Holmes, A.B., "Effects of Union Activity on Teachers' Earnings," Industrial
Relations, Vol. 15(3), 1976, pp. 328—332.
Honadle, B.W., "A Model of the Public Sector Wage Determination Process With Special
Reference to Institutional Factors," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol.

io(), 1901, pp. iu5—ii.
Honadle, B.W., "Wage Determination in the Public Sector: A Critical Review of
the Literature," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. iQ(14), 1981, pp.
309—325.
Horn, R.N., McGuire, W.J., and J. TomkIewicz, "Work Stoppages by Teachers: An
Empirical Analysis," Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 3(14), 1982,
pp.1487—1496.

Horn, R.N., McGuire, W.J., and J. Tomkiewicz, "An Empirical Model of Strike
Activity by Teachers," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 11 (2),
1982, pp. 155—1614.

Horton, R.D., "Arbitration, Arbitrators, and the Public Interest," Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, July 1975, pp. 1497_507.
Horton, R.D., Lewin, D. and J.W. Kuhn, "Some Impacts of Collective Bargaining on
Local Government," Administration and Society, Vol. 7(14), 1976, pp.
497—516.

Huettner, D.A. and T.L. Watkins, "Public Sector Bargaining: An Investigation of
Possible Environmental Influences," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 26th
Annual Winter Proceedings, 1973, pp. 178—187.
Hulpke, J.F. and D.A. Watne, "Budgeting Behavior: If, When, and How Selected
School Districts Hide Money," Public Administration Review, November!
December 1976, pp. 667—6714.

Ichniowski,

C., "Arbitration and Police Bargaining: Prescriptions for the Blue
Flu," Industrial Relations, Vol. 21 (2), pp. l149_l66.

Ichniowski, C., "Economic Effects of the Firefighters' Union," Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, Vol. 33(2), 1980, pp. 198—211.
Ichniowski, C., "The Impact of Bargaining Legislation on Police Union Growth
Estimation With Variable—Knot Logistic Splines," Unpublished.

81

Inimerinan, R.J., "Administrative Attitudes Toward Labor Conflict Resolution in

the Public Sector: An Empirical Investigation," Journal of Collective
Negotiations, Vol. 2(1), 1973, pp. 97—112.
Iriman, R.P., "Wages, Pensions, and Employment in the Local Public Sector," in
Public Sector Labor Markets, P. Mieszkowski and G.E. Peterson (eds.)
Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press, COUPE Papers on Public
Economics, 1981.

Jacobs, J.B., "The Role of Military Forces in Public Sector Labor Relations,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 35(2), 1982, pp. 163—180.
Johnson, D.F. and D.G. Pruitt "Preintervention Effects of Mediation vs.
Arbitration," Journal of Applied Psycholor, Vol. 56 (i), 1972, pp. 1—10.
Johnson, D.F. and W. Tullar, "Style of Third Party Intervention, Face—Saving and

Bargaining Behavior," Journal of Experimental Social Psychoio, 1972, Vol.
8 (14), pp. 319—330.

Kasper,

H., "The Effects of Collective Bargaining on Public School Teachers'
Salaries," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 25, 1972, pp.
)410—1423.

Katz, H.C., "Municipal Pay Determination: The Case of San Francisco,"
Industrial Relations, Vol. 18(i), 1979, pp.

Katz, H.C., "The Municipal Budgetary Response to Changing Labor Costs: The Case
of San Francisco," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 32(14), 19T9,
pp. 506—519.
Katz, H.C., and D. Lewin, "Efficiency and Equity Considerations in State and
Local Government Wage Determination," Industrial Relations Research
Association, 1980, pp. 90—98.

Katz, W.D., "Public Referendums and Public Employee Collective Bargaining: Are
They Compatible?" Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 8(2), 1979, pp.
183—195.
Kearney, R.C., "The Impacts of Police Unionization on Municipal Budgetary
Outcomes," Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of the Midwest Political
Science Association, Chicago, April 1978.

Kearney, R.C. and D. Morgan, "The Effect of Employee Organizations on the
Compensation of Police Officers," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol.
9(1), 1980, pp. 17—31.
Keller, B.K., "Impasse Procedures and Strikes in the Public Sector: The Cases of the
USA and West Germany," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 8(i), 1979, pp.
61—66.
Klauser, J.E., "Public Sector Impasse Resolution in Hawaii," Industrial
Relations, Vol. 16 (3), October 1977, pp. 283—289.

82

Kleiner, M.M. and C.E. Krider, "Determinants of Negotiated Agreements for Public
School Teachers," Educational Administration Quarterly, Vol. 15(13), pp.
66—82
Kochan, T.A., "A Theory of Multilateral Collective Bargaining in City Governments,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol. 2T(3), l974, pp. 525—512.
Kochan, T.A., "Correlates of State Public Employee Bargaining Laws," Industrial
Relations, Vol. 322, October 1973, pp. 322—336.
Kochan, T.A. and J. Baderschrieider, "Estimating the Narcotic Effect: Choosing
Techniques That Fit the Problem," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
Vol.35(l), 1981, pp. 21—28.

Kochan, T.A. and J. Baderschneider, "Dependence on Impasse Procedures: Police
and Firefighters in New York State," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
Vol. 31(14), 1978, pp. 1431_14149.

Kochan, T.A., Huber, G.P., and L.L. Cummings, "Determinants of Intra—
organizational Conflict in Collective Bargaining in the Public Sector,"
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 20, March 1975, pp. 10—23.
Kochan, T.A., and T. Jick, "The Public Sector Mediation Process," Journal of
Conflict Resolution, Vol. 22(2), 1978, pp. 209—238.

Kochan T.A. and H.N. Wheeler, "Municipal Collective Bargaining: A Model and
Analysis of Bargaining Outcomes," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
Vol. 29(1), 1975, pp. 146_66.
Koib, D.M., "Roles Mediators Play: State and Federal Practice," Industrial
Relations, Vol. 20(1), 1981, pp. 1—17.
Kramer, L., Labor's Paradox —- The American Federation of State, County, and
Municipal Employees, AFL—CIO (Wiley, 1962).
Krislov, J., "Arbitration, Arbitrators, and the Public Interest," Comment,
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 31(1), 1977, pp. 71—77.

Kruger, D.H. and H.E. Jones, "Compulsory Interest Arbitration in The Public
Sector: An Overview," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 10(14),
1981, pp. 355—373.
Labor—Management Relations Service, "The Role of' Politics in Local Labor
Relations——A Special Report Based on a Survey of 78 U.S. Cities," 1972.

Lafranchise, P.A., and M.T. Leibig, "Collective Bargaining for Parity in the
Public Sector," Labor Law Journal, September 1981, pp. 598—608.
Landon, J.H., and R.N. Baird, "Monopsony in the Market for Public School
Teachers," American Economic Review, Vol. 51(5), 1971, pp. 966—971.
Lauer, H. S., "The Effect of Collective Bargaining in Municipal Police Forces on
Wages, Salaries, and Fringe Benefits," Undergraduate Thesis for Department
of Economics, Harvard College, March 1979.

83

Lawler, J.J., "Faculty Unionism in Higher Education: The Public Sector Experience,"
Labor Law Journal, August 1982, pp. 147518O.
Lehr, T., Caidwell, W., and D. Di Lucchio, "Consultant Effectiveness During
Collective Bargaining Activity in Pennsylvania Schools," Journal of Collective
Negotiations, Vol. 11(3), 1982, pp. 259—266.
Levitan, S.A. and A.B. Noden, Working for the Sovereign, Employee Relations in
the Federal Government, Baltimore and London: John Hopkins University
Press, 1983.
Levy, A., "Collective Bargaining and its Effects on Municipal Finances," Harvard
University Senior thesis, March l984.
Lewin, D., "Public Sector Labor Relations," Labor History, Winter, 1977, pp.

133—l3.
Lewin, D., "The Prevailing—Wage Principle and Public Wage Decisions," Public
Personnel Management, November—December 197k, pp. 473_185.

Lewin, D., Feuille, P. and T.A. Kochan, Public Sector Labor Relations: Analysis
and Readings, Second Edition, Sun Lakes, Arizona: Thomas Horton and
Daughters, 1981.
Lewin, D. and J. H. Keith, Jr., "Managerial Responses to Perceived Labor
Shortages," Criminology, Vol. i1, May 1976, pp. 65—93
Lieberman, M., "The Role and Responsibilities of the Parties in School District
Bargaining," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 10(1), 1981, pp.
95—103.
Lindman, E.L., "Are Teachers' Salaries Improving?" Phi Delta Kappan, April 1970,

pp. 12022.
Lipsky, D.B., and T.A. Barocci, "Final—Offer Arbitration and Public—Safety
Employees: The Massachusetts Experience," Industrial Relations Research
Association, 1977, pp. 65—77.
Lipsicy, D.B. and J.E. Drotning, "The Influence of Collective Bargaining on
Teachers' Salaries in New York State," Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, October 1973, pp. 18—33.

Loewenberg, J.J., "The Effect of Compulsory Arbitration on Collective
Negotiations," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 1(2), 1972, pp.
177—190.
Loewenberg, J.J., "Compulsory Arbitration for Police and Firefighters in
Pennsylvania in 1968," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 23
(April 1970), pp. 367—379.
'Sudden Death' in Eugene,"
Long, G. and P. Feuille, "Final—Offer Arbitration:
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January 19Th, pp. 186—203.

Magenau, J.M. "The Impact of Alternative Impasse Procedures on Bargaining: A
Laboratory Experiment," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 36(3),
pp. 361—388.

1983,

Marmo, M., "Public Employee Unions: The Political Imperative," Journal of
Collective Negotiations, Vol. 4R), 1975, pp.369—379.
Martin, J.E., Barclay, L.A., and L.L. Biasatti, "Attitudes and Public Sector
Union—Management Relationships," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol.
8(2), 1979, pp. 171—181.
McCollum, J.K., "Decertification of the Northern Virginia Public Sector Local Unions:
A Study of Its Effect," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. io(), 1981.

pp. 3I5_353
Mellow, W., "Unionism and Wages:
fl
_. flL_S.i_S.i__
reonoiiiies
iuu

A Longitudinal Analysis," The Review of

,rQ, pp.
voi. £n(-,
Oi),\ .LU1,

IT_I

'4)—7.

Mellow, W., "Worker Differences in the Receipt of Health and Pension Benefits:
Extending the Analysis of Compensation Differentials," Industrial
Relations Research Association, 34th Annual Proceedings, pp. 16—23.
Methe, D.T. and J.L. Perry, "The Impacts of Collective Bargaining on Local Government
Services: A Review of Research," Public Administration Review, July/August
1980, pp. 359—371.
Miller, R.U., Becker, B.B., and E.B. Krinsky, "Union Effects on Hospital
Administration: Preliminary Results from a Three—State Study," Labor Law
Journal, August 1977, pp. 512—519.

Mitchell, D.J.B., "The New Climate: Implications for Research on Public Sector
Wage Determination and Labor Relations," Industrial Relations Research
Association, Spring Meeting, 1983, pp. 473_79
Mitchell, D.J.B., "The Impact of Collective Bargaining on Compensation in the
Public Sector," in B. Aaron, J. R. Grodin and J.L. Stern (eds.) Public
Sector Bargaining, Madison Wisconsin: Industrial Relations Research
Association, 1979, pp. 118_l149.
Mitchell, D.J.B., "Collective Bargaining and Wage Determination in the Public
Sector: Is Armageddon Really at Hand?" Public Personnel Management, Vol.
7(2), March—April 1978, pp. 80—95.
Mitchell, D.J.B., "The General Effects (Or Public Sector Unions) Which Have Been
Reviewed are Not Huge," Public Personnel Management, March—April 1918.
Moore, G.A., "The Effect of Collective Bargaining on Internal Salary Structures
in the Public Schools," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 29(3),
1976, pp. 352—362.
Moore, W.J., "An Analysis of Teacher Union Growth," Industrial Relations, Vol.
17(2), 1978, pp. 204—2l5.

85

Moore, W.J, "Factors Affecting Growth in Public and Private Sector Unions,"
Journal of Collective Negotiations," Vol. 6(i), 1977, pp. 3713.
Moore, W.J. and J. Raisian, "A Time Series Analysis of Union/NonUnion Relative
Wage Effects in the Public Sector," Industrial Relations Research Association
Series, 34th Annual Meeting, Dec 28—30, 1981.
Moskow, M.H., J.J. Loewenberg and E.C. Koziara, Collective Bargaining in Public
Employment, New York: Random House, 1970.

Moskow, M.H. and K. McLennan, "The Impact of Decentralization on Collective
Bargaining in Urban Education," Industrial Relations Research Association, Vol.
22, 1969, pp. 236_2147.
Munnell, Alicia H., "Who Should Manage the Assets of Collectively Bargained
Pension Plans?" New England Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of
T...1_..

UUJ.)f j4tU,UbI.

iQ
.LL)J pp. .iL)JU.
,rQD

Najita,

J.M., "State Government Employee Bargaining: Selected Characteristics,"
Labor Law Journal, August 1982, pp. 167_175.

Nelson,

C.R., Kang, H., "Pitfalls in the Use of Time as an Explanatory Variable
in Regression," National Bureau of Economic Research, Technical Working
Paper No. 30, November 1983.

Nelson, N.E., "Final Offer Arbitration: Some Problems," The Arbitration
Journal, Vol. 30, 1975, pp. 50—58.
Nelson, W. B., Stone, G.W.,Jr., and J.M. Swint, "An Economic Analysis of Public
Sector Collective Bargaining and Strike Activity," Journal of Labor
Research, Vol. 2(1), 1981, pp. 77—98.

Noam, E.M., "The Effect of Unionization and Civil Service on the Salaries and
Productivity of Regulators," in New Approaches to Labor Unions, Research in
Labor Economics, J.D. Reid, Jr. (ed.), supplement 2, 1983.
Notz, W.W. and F.A. Starke, "Final—Offer Versus Conventional Arbitration as
Means of Conflict Management," Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 23,
June 1978, pp. 189—203.
Olson, C.A., "The Impact of Arbitration on the Wages of Firefighters,"
Industrial Relations, Vol. 19(3), 1980, pp. 325—339.

Pegnetter, R., "Fact Finding and Teacher Salary Disputes: The 1969 Experience
in New York State," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January 1971, pp.
226_2142.

Perry, C.R., "Teacher Bargaining: The Experience in Nine Systems," Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 33(1), 1979, pp. 3—17.
Perry, J.L. and C.H. Levine, "An Interorganizational Analysis of Power, Conflict
and Settlements in Public Sector Collective Bargaining," American Political
Science Review, Vol. 70, December 1976, pp. 1185—1201.

86

J.L., H.L. Angle, and M.E. Pittel, The Impact of Labor—Management
Relations on Productivity and Efficiency in Urban Mass Transit, Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Department of Transportation, Research and Special Programs
Administration, Office of University Reserach, 1979.

Perry,

R. B., "A Cross—Cultural Study of Secondary
Regarding Job Satisfaction, Professionalism, and

Peterson.,

and

State of Washington)," Journal of Collective

pp.

ll3—l24.

School Teachers' Attitudes
Collective Negotiations (Sweden
Negotiations, Vol. 5(2), 1976,

Peterson,

R.B. and H.D. Smith, "Making Sense Out of Teacher Professonalism, Job
Satisfaction, and Attitudes Toward Collective Negotiations," Journal of
Collective Negotiations, Vol. 3(3), l97, pp. 227—239.

Reder, MW., "The Theory of Employment and wages in the Public Sector," in Labor
in the Public and Nonprofit Sectors, D.S. Hamermesh, ed., New Jersey:
i'rinceton university rress,

Reed, A., "Local Labor Negotiations and the Urban Mass Transit Industry,"
Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 8(3), 1979, pp. 253—266.
Rehnus, C.M., "New Developments in Public Sector Arbitration," Industrial
Relations Research Association, 19714, pp. 307—323.
Rehmus, C.M., "Constraints on Local Governments in Public Employee Bargaining,"
Michigan Law Review, Vol. 67, 1969, pp. 919—930.

Rehmus, C.M., and B.A. Kerner, "The Agency Shop After Abood: No Free Ride, But
What's the Fare?," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 314(1), 1980,
pp. 90—100.
Behmus, C.M. and E. Wilner, The Economic Results of Teacher Bargaining:
Michigan's First Two Years, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan and Wayne
State University Research Papers in Industrial Relations and Human
Resources, No. 6, 1968.
Reid, J.D., Jr. and M. Kurth, "The Organization of State and Local Government
Employees: A Comment on Dalton," Unpublished.
Reid, J.D.,Jr. and M. Kurth, "The Importance of Union Security to the Growth of
Unionism," Unpublished.

Reynolds, M., "Cause and Effect in Public Sector Unionism: An Economic
Analysis," Government Union Review, Winter 1983, Vol. 14 (1), pp. 3—22.
Rifkin, J. and R. Barber, The North Will Rise Again: Pensions, Politics, and
Power in the 1980's, Boston: Beacon Press, 1978.
Rodgers, B.C., "A Replication of the Burton—Krider Model of Public—Employee
Strike Activity," Industrial Relations Research Association Series, 33rd
Annual Proceedings, 1980, pp. 2141_251.

87

Rosen, H.S., "An Alternative: Meet and Confer——The Experience in Santa Clara
County," Labor—Management Relations Service, Paper No. 12, 1972.
Ross, D.B., "The Arbitration of Public Employee Wage Disputes," Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, Vol. 23(1), 1969, pp. 3—l4.
Salkever, D.S., "Unionization and the Cost of Producing Hospital Services,"
Journal of Labor Research, Vol. 3(3), 1982, pp. 31l—33.
Sarthory, J.A., "The Collective Bargaining in Public Education in the 1980s,"
Industrial Relations Research Association, 33rd Annual Proceedings, pp.

28—289.
Schmenner, R.W., "The Determination of Municipal Employee Wages," Review of
Economics and Statistics," Vol. 55, 19T3, pp. 83—90.
1.1 T
s
iLL.1UU L..U

.t
.LI £%LIL UI

t?mi..._.

Bargaining,"

'..1_ ULd.L1L1 A_...Z.
UUJ.L Ub
L1.Le .1.U

JVe

Labor Law Journal, August, 1977, pp. 519—525.

Schramm, L.R.H., "Is Teacher Tenure Negotiable: A Review of Court Decisions,"
Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 6(3), 1977, pp. 2i5—256.
Schutt, R.K., "Models of Militancy: Support for Strikes and Work Actions Among
Public Employees," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 35(3), 1982,

Shapiro, D., "Relative Wage Effects of Unions in the Public and Private Sectors,"
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 31(2), January, 1918, pp. l93—204.
Shaw, L.C. and R.T. Clark, Jr., "The Practical Differences Between Public and
Private Sector Collective Bargaining," UCLA Law Review, Vol 19(867), 1972,
pp. 867—886.

Shaw, L.C. and R.T. Clark, Jr., "Public Sector Strikes: An Empirical Analysis,"
Journal of Law——Education, Vol. 2(2), 1973, pp. 2lT_231.
Slichter, S. H., J.J. Healy, and E.R. Livernash, The Impact of Collective
Bargaining on Management, The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1960.
Smith, A.W., "Have Collective Negotiations Increased Teachers' Salaries?" Phi
Delta Kappan, December 1912, pp. 268—269.

Smith, R.L. and A.H. Hopkins, "Public Employee Attitudes Toward Unions," Industrial
and Labor Relations Review, July 1979, pp.

Smith, R.L. and W. Lyons, "Public Sector Unionization and Municipal Wages: The
Case of Fire Fighters," Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Midwest
Political Science Association, Chicago, April 1978.
Smith, S.F., Equal Pay in the Public Sector: Fact or Fantasy, Princeton, New
Jersey: Princeton University, Industrial Relations Section, 1977.

88

Smith,
14,

S.?., "Government Wage Differentials," Journal of Urban Economics, Vol.

1977, pp. 2)48—271.

Smith,

S.P., "Pay Differentials Between Federal Government and Private Sector
Workers," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 29(2), 1976, pp.
179—197.

Somers, P.C., "An Evaluation of Final—Offer Arbitration in Massachusetts,"
Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 6(3), 1977, pp. 193—228.
Stanley, D.T. and C.L. Cooper, Managing Local Government Under Union Pressure,
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1972.

Stanley, D.T., "Change: The Impact of Unions on Local Government," Labor
Management Relations Service of The League of Cities, March 1972.
itauaonar, i-'.D., buDcontracting in state an tiocal Uovernment 1mp1oyment,"
Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 9(3), 1980, pp. 245—251.

Staudohar, P.D., "Negotiation and Grievance Arbitration of Teacher Tenure
Issues," Labor Law Journal, July, 1978, pp. '413—1419.
Staudohar, P.D., "Quasi—Strikes by Public Employees," Journal of Collective
Negotiations, Vol. 3(14), 19714, pp. 363—371.
Staudohar, P.D., "Fact—Finding for Settlement of Teacher Labor Disputes," Phi
Delta Kappan, April 1970, pp. '422—1423.
Stern, D. and K. Bagley, "How Participants in Collective Bargaining for Public School
Teachers in California Perceive the Interests of Teachers in Relation to Other
Groups," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 10(1), 1981, pp. 63—73.
Stern, J.L., "A Look Ahead at Public Employee Unionism," in The Annals of the
American Academy of Political and Social Science, Louis A. Ferman, special
ed., May 19814, Vol. 1473, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, pp. 165—176.
Stern, J.L. and C. Olson, "The Propensity to Strike of Local Government
Employees," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 11 (3), 1982, pp.
201—2114.

Stern, J., C. Rehmus, J. J. Lowenberg, H. Kasper, and B. Dennis, Final Offer
Arbitration. Lexington, Massachusetts, Lexington Books, 1975.

Stern, R.N., "Intermetropolitan Patterns of Strike Frequency," Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, Vol. 29(2), 1976.

Stieber, J., Public Employee Unionism: Structure, Growth Policy, Washington,
D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1973.
Subbarao, A.V., "The Impact of Binding Interest Arbitration on Negotiation and
Process Outcome," Journal of Conflict Resolution, Vol. 22(1), 1978, pp.
79—103.

89

Sulzner,

G.T., "The Impact of Impasse Procedures in Public Sector Labor: An
Overview," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. (i), 1975, pp. 3—21.

Summers, C.W., "Public Employee Bargaining: A Political Perspective," Yale Law
Journal, Vol. 83, l971, pp. 1156—1199.
Sundermann, J.D., "Ascertaining Attitudes of Union Members in Public and Private
Employment," Public Personnel Review, April 1966, pp. 115—120.
Thornton, R.J., "The Elasticity of Demand for Public School Teachers,"
Industrial Relations Vol. 18(1), 1979, pp. 86—91.

Thornton, R.J., "Monopsony and Teachers' Salaries: Some Contrary Evidence,
Comment," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1975, pp. 5714_575.
Thornton, R.J., "The Effects of Collective Negotiations on Teachers' Salaries,"
.
—
—, If
review 01 rconomics, vo'. iij, iii, pp. ii+o.

uarteriy

Troy, L., "The Agenda of Public Sector Unions and Associations," Government
Union Review, Spring 1983, pp. 15—35.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Labor Management Relations in State and Local
Government: 1980, Series GSS no. 102, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Handbook of Labor
Statistics, December 1983, Table 132 Bulletin 2175 and 1911, Bulletin 1705.
U.S. Deparment of Labor, Labor Management Services Administration, Summary of
Public Sector Labor Relations Policies, 1971 and 1919.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Work Stoppages in
Government, 1915," U.S. Government Printing Office, 1976.

U.S. Department of Labor, "Municipal Government Wage Surveys: New Orleans,
Louisiana, June 1975," Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1976.
U.S. Department of Labor, Labor Management Service Administration, State
Profiles: Current Status of Public Sector Labor Relations, November 1971.

Vehorn, C.L. "Market Interaction Between Public and Private Goods: The Demand
for Fire Protection," National Tax Journal, Vol. 32(1), 1979, pp.29—39.
Victor, R.B., The Effects of Unionism on Wage and Employment Levels of Police
and Firefighters, Santa Monica, California: The Rand Corporation, 1977, p.
5921.
Wagner, T.E., "Public Employee Collective Bargaining in the Absence of Enabling
State Legislation," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. i0(1), 1981,

pp 337_313
Wasylenko, M.J., "Some Evidence of the Elasticity of Supply of Policemen and
Firefighters," Urban Affairs Quarterly, Vol. 12 (3), 1977, pp. 365—382.

90

Watkins, T.L., "The Effects of Community Environment on Negotiations," Journal
of Collective Negotiations, Vol. i(I), 1972, pp. 317—327.
Weber, A.R., "Paradise Lost; or Whatever Happened to the Chicago Social
Workers?" Industrial and Labor Relations Review, April 1969, pp. 323—338.

Weber, C.T., "The Ability to Pay Criterion: Some Recent Evidence," Journal of
Collective Negotiations," Vol. 9(3), 1980, pp. 213—221.
Weintraub, A.R. and R.J. Thornton, "Why Teachers Strike: The Economic and Legal
Determinants," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol. 5(3), 1976, pp.
193—206.
Wellington, H.H. and Winter, R.K., The Unions and the Cities, Washington, D.C.:
The Brookings Institution, 1971.
- -' a
— -yr yr
, ,-, yr r ya a. —
wei.1ir1gion, n.n. anu n.r.. winter, ur.,
--

Public

ui.
ieei.iv Darga.Lru.Jlg
Employment," Yale Law Journal, Vol. 78(7), 1969, pp. 1107—1127.
—

in

t .2 __i .1.. — — Lb fl _1 1 — — S .1 —— — tb — — —— — .2 — — .2

.iJrie Li.LW.Lb

-—

Wheeler, H.N., "How Compulsory Arbitration Affects Compromise Activity,"
Industrial Relations, Vol. 17(1), 1978, pp. 8o—81-.

Wheeler, H.N., "Public Sector Impasses: Symposium Introduction," Criticism and
Comment, Industrial Relations, Vol. 17(2), 1978, pp. 252_251.
Wheeler, H.N., "Closed Offer Alternative to Final Offer Selection," Industrial
Relations, Vol. 16(3), 1977, pp. 298—305.
Wheeler, H.N., "An Analysis of Fire Fighter Strikes," Labor Law Journal, January
1975, pp. 17—20.
Wheeler, H.N. and F. Owen, "Impasse Resolution Preferences of Fire Fighters and
Municipal Negotiators," Journal of Collective Organizations, Vol. 5(3),
1976, pp. 215—22'.

Wheeler, H.N. and T.A. Kochan, "Unions and Public Sector Supervisors: The Case
of Fire Fighters," Monthly Labor Review, U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of
Labor Statistics, December 1977.
Wilson, A.P. and E.F. Moon, "The Importance of Selected Categories of Employee
Benefits to Public School Teachers," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol.
8(1), 1979, pp. 31—38.

Witney, F., "Final—Offer Arbitration: The Indianapolis Experience," Monthly
Labor Review, May 1973, pp. 20—25.
Word, W.R., "Factfinding in Public Employee Negotiations," Monthly Labor Review,
February 1972, pp. 6O6I.
Wortman, M.S..,Jr., Overton, C.E., and R. Johnson, "The Structure of Management
Rights Clauses in Major Metropolitan Firefighter Contracts," Labor Law
Journal, October 1978, pp. 621_582.

91

Yaffee, B., "Political Activities of New York State Public Sector Employee and
Employer Interest Groups," Journal of Collective Negotiations, Vol.2(3),
Summer, 1973, pp. 317—331.
Zax, Jeffrey, Compensation and Employment in American City Governments, Ph.D.
Thesis at Harvard University, unpublished, 19814.

Zagoria, S., "Resolving Impasses by Public Referendum," Monthly Labor Review,
May 1973, pp. 36—38.

Zimmer, L. and J.J. Jacobs, "Challenging the Taylor Law: Prison Guards on
Strike," Industrial Labor Relations Review, July 1981, Vol. 314 (14), pp.
531—51414.

Zuelke, D.C., and L.E. Frohreich, "The Impact of Comprehensive Collective
Negotiations on Teachers' Salaries: Some Evidence From Wisconsin," Journal
,.4
1J,1
l / , 1Ci77
LI
a- s.i J SS U a- V
U a-U. U a- JLL C
.1 a-'' J.
V .#S 'J(1
V-1S7 I I ,

11+4,

