                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE CAUSES OF INFLATION


                       Frederic S. Mishkin



                      Working Paper No. 1)53




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 198)4




Prepared for "Price Stability and Public Policy," A Symposium
Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole,
Wyoming: August 1—3, 198)4. I thank Bob Cuinby and participants at
the Symposium for their helpful comments. This research has been
supported by the Sloan Foundation. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                        The Causes of Inflation


                                 ABSTRACT



     This paper attempts to provide a perspective on the causes of

inflation by exploring why eustained inflations occur and the role of

monetary policy in the inflation process. The conclusion reached in this

paper is that in the last ten years there has been a convergence of

views in the economics profession on the causes of inflation. As long as

inflation is appropriately defined to be a sustained inflation, nacro—

economic analysis, whether of the monetarist or Keynesian persuasion,

leads to agreement with Milton Friedman's famous dictum, "Inflation is

always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon."

     However, the conclusion that inflation is   a monetary phenomenon
does not settle the issue of what causes inflation because we also need

to understand why inflationary monetary policy occurs1 This paper also

examines this issue and it finds that the underlying cause of inflation

in the United States has been accommodating monetary policy geared to

achieving a high employment target. The role of expectations has been

important in the inflationary process so that to prevent the resurgence

of inflation at a minimum cost in terms of unemployment and output loss,

monetary policy must be both non—accommodating and credible.



Professor Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 619
Columbia University
New York., New York 10027
(212) —280—3488
                                   I.


                             Introduction




    The problem of inflation has been of central concern to American

policy makers since the mid 19Os. Of particular concern has been the

rise in the core (or sustained) inflation rate from below the 2'h   level
in the early 1960s to near the double digit level by the late 1970s.

Since 1981 a rapid disinflation has occurred, bringing the current

inflation rate down to below h. The recent decline in inflation has not

been achieved without substantial costs: in 1982 unemployment reached

the highest level in the postwar period, peaking at tQ.7'., and is cur-

rently still above the 7X level. At the present time we are at a crucial

juncture: the inflationary fire has abated, but there remains a persist-

ent worry that it might reignite. What should be the stance of

policymakers, and in particular the monetary authorities, in the current

economic environment?

     This paper attempts to provide some answers to this question by

exploring why sustained inflations occur and the role of monetary policy

in the inflation process.1 The conclusion reached in this paper is that

in the the last ten years there has been a convergence of views in the

economics profession on the causes of inflation. As long as inflation is

appropriately defined to be a sustained inflation,         macroeconomic



    Temporary movements of the inflation rate have been substantial in
    the 1970s because of the external supply shocks due to the increase
    in oil prices in 1973 and 1979. This paper does not focus on these
    temporary movements of inflation because they are strongly in-
    fluenced by external factors that are not under the control of the
    monetary authorities. See Blinder (1979) for a discussion of how
    supply shocks temporarily raised inflation in the 1970s.
    The last section of this paper wa deleted because it
    contained a policy prescription.
                                       -2—


analysis, whether of the monetarist or Keynesian persuasion, leads to

agreement with Milton Friedman's famous dictum, 'Inflation is always and

everywhere a monetary phenomenon.'2 However, the conclusion that infla-

tion is a monetary phenomenon does not settle the issue of what causes

inflation because we also need to understand why inflationary monetary

policy occurs. This paper will also examine this issue and by so doing

provide some suggestions as to how monetary policy should be conducted

in order to prevent the resurgence of inflation at a minimum cost in

terms of unemployment and output loss.



                                      II.

                       Inflation As a Monetary Phenomenon



      The most persuasive evidence that Friedman cites to support his

proposition     that     inflation is always and everywhere a monetary

phenomenon is the fact that in every case where a country's inflation'

rate is high for any sustained period of time, its rate of money supply

growth is also high. This evidence for the decade spanning 1972—82 is

shown in the scatter diagram in Figure 1 which plots the average rate of

inflation for 52 countries against the average rate of money growth in

this period.3 The well known relation between money growth and inflation




  2
      Friedman (1963).

      These are the 52 countries for which money supply, price level and
      real output data were available in the IMF's International Financial
      Statistics. A quantity theory view of money growth and inflation
      would make use of a money growth variable that is adjusted for real
      output growth by subtracting real output growth from money growth.
      As is expected, the adjusted money growth measure is more highly
      correlated with inflation than is the unadjusted money growth vari-
      able used in the texts the correlation of the adjusted money growth
      variable with inflation for the 52 countries is .99.
                                 Figure 1

               Inflation and Money Growth in 52 countries:
                                  197 2-82




              U/O
                               average money growth rate
                             (MG: annual rate, continuously compounded)

Source: The data used in constructing the inflation and money growth
         numbers were obtained from the IMF's International Financial
         Statistics Annual Yearbook 1983. Consumerprice indices
         were used to calculate the inflation rates and narrowly defined
         money were used to construct the money growth rates. The average
         growth rates were calculated by taking the log of the 1982 value
         of the CPI or money supply, subtracting off the log of the 1972
         value, and then dividing by 10.
                                   —3—


is illustrated by the regression line plotted in the figure and the

correlation between inflation and money growth is found to be .9.        The

country with the highest rate of inflation in this period, Argentina, is

also found to have the highest rate of money growthj while the country

with the lowest rate of inflation, Switzerland, is also the country with

the lowest rate of money growth.

     An important feature of this evidence is that it focuses on sus-

tained or core inflation, that is, a situation where the price level is

continually rising. Friedman's sweeping statement that inflation             is


always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon thus focuses on the long—run

phenomenon of inflation and is not concerned with temporary inflations

in which the upward movement in the price level     is not a continuing

process.   If Friedman's proposition did refer to temporary inflations

then it could be easily refuted by numerous counter examples.

     The distinction between sustained and temporary inflations is an
                                                                             in
important one in evaluating Friedman's proposition. Although articles

the popt.ilar press seem to indicate that monetarists and Keynesians have

a completely different view of the inflation process, this     is not the

case. Keynesian macro theory as    it    is currently practiced, as   well   as


monetarist analysis (and its offshoot, the new classical macroeconomics

advocated by Lucas and Sargent), all support Friedman's proposition that

sustained inflations are monetary phenomena.

     The best way to see the wide theoretical support behind the Fried-

man proposition is to make use of the aggregate supply          and demand

framework to see how each of the three major paradigms in macroeconomic

analysis (monetarist, Keynesian and new classical macroeconomics)        view

the inflationary process. Figure 2 contains the aggregate supply and

demand diagram that shows the response of prices and output to a con—
                                   —4—


tinually rising money supply, Let us first consider how this diagram

works in the context of the monetarist model. Suppose that initially we

are at Point    1   where the price level is P1 and real output is at the

natural rate level of output, V, which is the level of real output that

corresponds to the natural rate of unemployment. The initial aggregate

demand curve AD1 is downward sloping in the monetarist model because

nominal income is fixed by the level of the money supply and any decline

in the price level means that there must be a corresponding rise in
                                                            sr
output. The initial short—run aggregate supply curve AS1 is upward

sloping because a rise in nominal income yields both a rise in real

output and the price level in the short run. In the long run, however,

real output will be at its natural rate level, Y: hence the long—run

aggregate supply curve is the vertical line AS1r at the real output

level of V. The diagram has been drawn so that initially the aggregate

demand and short—run aggregate supply curves intersect at Paint 1 which

is also an the long—run aggregate supply curve.

    When the money supply increases, the monetarist model predicts that

nominal income will rise, thus shifting out the aggregate demand curve

to AD2.    At first we might have an increase of real output above the

natural rate level, but the resulting decline in unemployment below the

natural rate will create upward pressure on wages and prices, thus

leading to a continuing shift up in the short—run aggregate supply curve

until it reaches AS where the economy is again back at the natural

rate level of output. The price level has now increased to P2 where the

aggregate demand and supply curves intersect at Point 2.         A further

increase in the money supply next period shifts the aggregate demand

curve out to AD3 and the economy moves to Point 3   and a higher price
level of   P3. Continuing increases in the money supply send the economy
                                Figure 2
                   The Response of Prices and Output
                 to a Continually Rising Money Supply




   Aggregate                         AS1r
Price Level (P




            P4




            P3




            P2



            P1




                                 Y
                                     n
                                                    Aggregate Real Output (Y)
                                    —5—


 to Point 4 and beyond. The net result of this process is that a continu-

 ing rise in the price level, that is a sustained inflation, results from

a   growing money supply. In the monetarist model, the aggregate demand

curve only shifts as a result of changes in the money supply and so in

the absence of a high rate of money growth a sustained inflation cannot

develop. Friedmans proposition that Inflation is a monetary phenomenon

then follows1

      The Keynesian analysis of the response of output and prices to a

continually rising money supply is almost identical to the scenario just

described for the monetarist model. The Keynesian model also has a

downward sloping aggregate demand curve because for .a given money

supply, a decline in prices raises real money balances, lowers interest

rates and thereby raises aggregate demand.   In addition this downward

slope in the aggregate demand curve can result from real balance effects

in which the decline in the price level raises the real value of wealth,

thereby increasing aggregate demand. The upward sloping short—run ag-

gregate supply curve and the vertical long—run aggregate supply curve

AS is also      a feature of the Keynesian model. The Keynesian model

differs in its treatment of aggregate supply from the monetarist model

in that it views the speed of adjustment of the short—run aggregate

supply curve to its long—run position as being slower than in. the

monetarist model. While monetarists see the economy as inherently stable

with a rapid adjustment to the natural rate level of output, Keynesians

see the economy as inherently unstable with a much slower adjustment to

the natural rate level of output.

     A rise in the money supply in the Keynesian model also leads to the

aggregate demand curve shifting out to AD2 because at a given price

level real money balances rise, leading to both a decline in interest
                                      -o-

rates     and a rise in the real value f wealth, thus Causing aggregate

demand to rise. The economy will again head to Point 2 because the

short—run aggregate supply curve will continue to rise until it reaches

ASsr where output is at its natural rate level. Further increases in     the

money supply will move us to Point 3, 4 and so on. The Keynesian model

thus also reaches the conclusion obtained from the monetarist model: a

continuing rise in the price level, that is, a sustained inflation, will

result from a rapid growth of the money supply.

        The Keynesian model, in contrast to the monetarist model, does

allow other factors besides the money supply to affect the aggregate

demand curve, specifically fiscal policy. Thus, at first glance,          it


would seem that a sustained Lnflation might occur as a result of expan-

sionary fiscal policy such as increased real government spending or

decreases in taxes and that the Friedman proposition would be refuted.

However, this is not the case, Even in the Keynesian model, a sustained

inflation cannot result unless there is a rapid growth in the money

supply.

        Suppose that the economy is initially at Point 1 in Figure 2     and

government spending is permanently increased, shifting out the aggregate

demand curve to AD2. Initially output will rise above the natural rate

level, leading to a rise in the short—run aggregate supply curve to ASr

where output is again at V     and the price level haS risen to P2. The net

result from the permanent increase in government spending is a one—shot,

permanent increase in the price level. While the economy is moving from

Point     I   to Point 2, the inflation rate will be high. Once Point 2 is

reached, however, the inflation rate will return to zero.        Thus,   the

permanent increase in government expenditure leads to only a temporary

increase in inflation.
                                    —7-.




      In the absence of rapid money growth,      a permanent increase in

government expenditure cannot lead to a continually rising price level

and hence to a sustained inflation. Only a continuing rise in government

expenditure can lead to further shifts in the aggregate demand curve1

moving the economy to Points 3, 4 etc. and yielding a sustained infla-

tion. Such a policy, however, is not a feasible one because there is a

limit on the total amount of government expenditure possible: the

government cannot spend more than 100% of SNP. In fact, well before this

limit is reached, the political process would stop the increase in

government expenditure. As is visible in recent debates about the budget

in Congress, the public and politicians have a particular target level

of government spending that they think is appropriate for our society.

Although small deviations from this level might be tolerated, large

deviations will not be, imposing even tighter limits on the degree to

which government expenditure can be increased.

      By   a similar argument, lowering taxes also cannot lead to a sus-

tained inflation in the absence of rapid money growth.       A permanent

decline in taxes can shift the aggregate demand curve from AD1 to AD2.

But further outward shifts in the aggregate demand curve can only occur

if   tax'es are continually reduced. This process will obviously have to

stop when tax collections are zero. The outward movements of the ag-

gregate demand curve will thus eventually also have to come to a stop

and the resulting inflation will necessarily be temporary. The conclu-

sion we have reached is the following. Even in a Keynesian model, fiscal

policy cannot by itself be the source of a sustained inflation. The

Keynesian framework therefore also supports the Friedman proposition.

     The new classical macroeconomics also can be cast in the aggregate

demand and supply framework of Figure 2. The advocates of new classical
                                     —B—


macroeconomics lean to Milton Friedmans position that money is all that

matters to changes in nominal income, although they are willing to

entertain the possibility that other factors influence the aggregate

demand curve. The principal difference between them and monetarist or

Keynesian economists is in their views of aggregate supply. The new

classical macroeconomics combines the assumption of market clearing

(because wages and prices respond completely flexibly to the appearance

of new information) with the assumption of rational expectations. Any

changes in the aggregate demand curve that are anticipated will lead to

changes in the short—run aggregate supply curve that leave real output

unchanged. The resulting neutrality of anticipated policy does not

affect any of the conclusions reached above. The new classical macro-

economics is also consistent with the view that inflation is always and

everywhere a monetary phenomenon.



                                    I II.


               The Causes of Inflationary Monetary Policy



     To understand the process generating sustained inflation, it is not

enough to know that a sustained inflation will not occur without a high

rate of money growth. We also must understand why governments pursue

inflationary monetary policies. Because politicians and government

policy makers never advocate inflation as a desirable outcome, it must

be that in trying to achieve other goals, governments end up with a high

money growth rate and thus a higher inflation rate. There are two goals

that may lead to inflationary monetary policy: high employment and the

desire to have high government spending with low taxes.
                                          —9—



High Employment Targets and Inflation



        The U.S. government is required by law in the Employment Act o+

1946,     as well as the more recent Humphrey—Hawkins Bill, to        promote high

employment. It is true that both of these laws state that a high employ-
ment level is      to be achieved which is consistent with a stable price
level, but in practice this has often meant that our government has

pursued a full employment target with less concern about the inflation-

ary consequences of its policies.

        One result of pursuing a full employment target is that the govern-

ment will engage in          an   activist stabilization policy to promote high
employment, using monetary and fiscal policy to raise          real   output and

2mployment when they fall below their natural rate levels.                   How this

activist policy can lead to a high rate o4 money growth and inflation is

again illustrated with the aggregate supply and demand aDparatus in

Figure 3. Consider a situation in which initially output in the economy
is at    the   natural rate level at Point 1 where the aggregate demand curve
AD1 and the short—run aggregate supply curve ASr intersect.             If     unions

and firms decide that they want to obtain higher wages and prices and so
raise    them,   the short—run aggregate supply curve will rise to a position
such     as ASSr With government monetary and fiscal policy unchanged, the

economy    would move to Point A and output would decline to below its
natural    rate level, When unemployment rises as a      result, activist policy
makers with a high employment        target would accommodate the higher wages

and    prices by implementing expansionary monetary or fiscal policy that
would raise the aggregate         demand curve t   AD2, thus raising output back
up to its natural rate level.
        The consequences for the workers and firms is that they have
                                 Figure 3

                 A Cost-Push Inflation With an Activist Policy
                           to Promote High Employment




                                 AS1r'
   Aggregate
Price Level (P




            P4




            P3




            P2




            P1




                                                        Aggregate Real Output ()
                                  —10—


achieved their goal of higher wages and prices without the appearance of

too much unemployment. As a result they might want to try and raise

their wages and prices again. In addition, other workers and firms might

also raise their wages and prices in order not to be left behind and

suffer a decline in their relative wages and prices, The net result will

be that the short—run aggregate supply curve will shift up again, say to

AS. Unemployment would rise again when the economy moves to Point B,

and accommodating, activist policy will now again be used to shift the

economy to Point 3 by shifting the aggregate demand curve out to AD.,.

     The above process can keep on continuing and the price level will

keep on rising sending us to Point 4 and beyond. The sustained inflation

that results is known as a "cost—push inflation' because it has been

triggered by the push of workers and firms to raise their wages and

prices.

     At first glance it might appear as though the cost—push inflation

provides a counterexample to the Friedman proposition that inflation is

a monetary phenomenon. This is not the case because in order for a

sustained inflation to occur, the aggregate demand curve has to shift

out continually, and as the earlier discussion indicates, this can only

occur if the money supply is continually rising. If a non—accommodating

monetary policy is followed because the government is not bound to a

high employment target, then the upward push of wages and prices that

raises the short—run aggregate supply curve from AS to         will not

be followed by expansionary policy to shift the aggregate demand curve

outward; instead the aggregate demand curve will remain at AD1. Now when

the economy moves to Point A and unemployment develops there will be

pressure on wages and prices to fall. The aggregate supply curve will
                             sr
begin to hi4t back down to AS1 and eventually the economy will return
                                       —11—


to Point 1 where output is at the natural rate level and the price level

has returned to its initial value of P1. A continuing rise in the price

level does not occur.

        The conclusion of this analysis is that an attempt by workers and

firms to push up their wages and prices cannot by itself trigger a

sustained inflation. Policy makers have to lend a hand by pursuing an

accommodating, activist policy of eliminating high unemployment with

expansionary monetary policy. Another way of stating this is the follow-

ing. A sustained cost—push inflation is also a monetary phenomenon

because it cannot occur without the acquiescence of the monetary

authorities to a hiher rate of money growth.

        There is a second way that pursuing the goal of high employment can

lead to inflationary monetary policy: policy makers can set a target for

unemployment that is too low becau5e it is below the natural rate of

unemployment. The consequences of a policy of too low an unemployment

target is depicted in Figure 4.

        Because the policy makers target on a level of unemployment below

the natural rate level, the targeted level of real output, marked as

Y
    target
             in the figure 4, is above the natural rate level of   output, V n
If the economy is initially in long—run equilibrium at Point 1, the

policy authorities will feel that there is too much unemployment because

output is less than the target level.         In order to hit their output

target, the policy makers will conduct an expansionary policy that will

shift the aggregate demand curve out to AD2 and the economy will move to

Point A. Because unemployment is now below the natural rate level, wages

and prices will begin t rise, shifting the short—run aggregate supply

curve up to ASer and sending the economy to Point 2. The price level has

now risen from P1 to P2, but the process will not stop there, The
                                       Figure 4

                 A Demand—Pull Inflation as a Consequence of Setting Too Low
                               An Unemployment Target




                                       ASlr
    Aggregate
Price Level  P




            P4




            P3
                                                                       r
                                                                 AS

                                                                 AD4
           P2



           P1




                                                                      Aggregate Output (Y)
                                                  'target
                                     —12—


economy is still operating at an output level below the target and so

the policy makers will shift the aggregate demand curve out again, this

time to AD3. The economy will eventually head to    Point   3 and policy
makers   will again shift the aggregate demand curve outward, sending the

economy to Point 4 and beyond.

     Our discussion above indicates that the aggregate demand curve can

only be continually shifted outward by a higher rate of money growth and

so the sustained inflation that results from too low an unemployment

target (or equivalently too high an employment target)       is again   a


monetary phenomenon. This type of inflation is characterized as a

"demand—pull inflation" because it   arises from the conscious effort to
shift out the aggregate demand curve. Clearly, policy makers do not

intend to start demand—pull inflations because they do not gain a per-

manently higher level      of output.4 Demand—pull inflations can be ex-

plained, however, by the fact that policy makers may mistakenly think

that the target level      of output is not above the natural rate level,

Before they realize their mistake, they would have started the process

that we see in Figure 4.

     Although theoretically we can distinguish between demand—pull and

cost—push inflations, it is much harder to label particular episodes of

inflation as demand—pull     or cost—push. Both types of inflation are

associated with high rates of money growth so they cannot be distin-

guished on this basis. However, as Figures 3 and 4 indicate, the demand—

pull inflation will be associated with periods when output is above the




   In the aggregate supply and demand diagram above, it might appear as
   though a higher level of output can be achieved at the cost of a
   higher rate of inflation. Recent evidence which finds that the long—
   run Phillips curve is vertical rules out such a long—run trade—off
   between inflation and unemployment.
natural rate level, while the cost—push inflation is associated with

periods when output is below the natural rate level. It would then be

quite easy to distinguish which type of inflation is occurring if     we

knew what the value of the natural rate of unemployment or output is.

Unfortunately, the economics profession has not been able to ascertain

the value of the natural rate of unemployment or output with a high

degree of confidence.

     In any case, the distinction between demand—pull     and cost—push

inflations is not important. Whether it is the government that initiates

the inflation or workers and firms is irrelevant; the ultimate source of

either type of inflation is the commitment of the government to a high

employment target.



Budget Deficits and Inflation



     Frequently a government cannot or does not find it politically

feasible to raisetaxes when it needs to increase government spending.

This appears to be the situation for such Latin American countries as

Argentina and this was clearly the- situation that occurred during the

1921—23 German hyperinflation. Similarly, during war time, the need to

rapidly increase military spending results in government expenditure

rising faster than tax revenues. Alternatively, the desire to reduce

taxes in the face of a continuing high level of government spending can

also lead to large budget deficits as currently is the case in the
United States.

     Large budget deficits can also be the source of inflationary

monetary policy. When a government is running a budget deficit it must

finance it   in either of two ways 1) it can issue bonds, or 2) it can
                                   —14—


resort to the printing press by expanding the amount of high—powered

money. The first method of financing the deficit does not have an inde-

pendent effect on the aggregate demand curve separate from any direct

tax or government spending effects, and so it should not have any infla-

tionary consequences. The second method does lead to a continually

growing money supply if the budget deficit persists for   a   substantial

period of    time.   In the first period, the rise in high—powered money

leads to a rise in the money supply that shifts the aggregate demand

curve out to the right as in Figure 2. In subsequent periods if the

budget deficit is still present, then it has to be financed again,

leading to a rise in high—powered money, a rise in the money supply, and

another outward shift in the aggregate demand curve. A sustained infla—

tion will thus occur if a large budget deficit is persistent and it    is

financed by issuing high—powered money.

     The key question that requires an answer in order to understand the

link between budget deficits arid inflation is why do governments with

budget deficits finance them by creating high—powered money rather then

by issuing bonds? If      a government does not have access to a capital

market that can absorb its bonds in substantial quantities, then the

answer is straightforward. The only way the budget deficit can be

financed is by printing money. This appears to be the situation in Latin

American and many other developing countries, and in these countries the

link between budget deficits and inflationary monetary policy is quite
         5
clear.

     ven in a country where well developed capital markets exist that

can absorb substantial quantities of bonds, if the budget deficit is a




    For example, see Arnold Harberger (1981).
                                  —15—


sufficiently large fraction of GNP and is permanent, a policy of pure

bond financing will be dynamically unstable, leading to an explosion in

the stock of debt. Once the public recognizes that this will occur, then

the government will not be able to sell enough of its bonds to com-

pletely finance the deficit and will be forced to issue high—powered
         6
money.

     The case for an important role of budget deficits in the inflation-

ary process is much less clear cut when the economy has a well developed

bond market in which the government can sell its bonds and when the size

of the budget deficit is small relative to SNP. Although a government

may not have to finance its deficit by increasing the amount of high—

powered money, it still may end up doing so because its it has a goal of

preventing rises in interest rates. A common view is that budget

deficits, which require the issuing of   a large amount of government

bonds, raise the level of interest rates. This view has intuitive appeal

because in a usual supply and demand analysis of the band market the

increased supply of bonds resulting from a deficit leads to a decline in

bond prices and hence a rise in interest rates. If this rise in interest

rates is considered undesirable, the monetary authorities might try to

prevent it by purchasing bonds to prop up their price and by so doing

increase the amount of high—powered money. This monetization of the debt

will then lead to a continuing rise of the money supply if the deficit

persists and so will lead to inflation through the mechanism depicted in

the aggregate supply and demand diagram of Figure 2.

     The evidence that budget deficits have led to higher interest rates

in the U.S. is not strong. This might be the result, however, of map—




   See Sargent and Wallace (1981) and McCallum (1982).
                                    —to—


propriate measurement of the budget deficit. The National     Income Ac-

counts deficit, which is the deficit number that is most widely cited in

the popular press is a particularly flawed measure of the government

budget deficit because it does not make any correction for inflation,

Although in the period 1946 to i980 there were some substantial deficits

on   a National Income Accounts basis, when corrected for inflation these

deficits disappear.7 This is reflected in the fact that the real per

capita level of net federal debt has fallen steadily from 1946 to 1980.

Only in the last few years have we begun to see large budget deficits

(correctly measured) and a rise in the level of federal dect as a frac-

tion of GNP. Thus it is not surprising that the past search for higher

interest rates as a result of budget deficits in the United States has

not found strong supporting econometric evidence.

      The current Reagan budget deficits, even when measured correctly,

are unprecedentedly high for the postwar period. If these deficits

persist, we then may find stronger evidence in the future that budget

deficits do matter to the level of interest rates and therefore have a

potential stimulative effect on monetary policy.8 The evidence on the

link between budget deficits and inflationary monetary policy is,

however, inconclusive at the present time,




 7
     See Eisner and Pieper(1984),

     Blanchard and Summers (1984) make the case that when viewed in an
     international context, the currently high budget deficits in the
     U.S. are not the source of the current high levels of real interest
     rates. Thus, their analysis casts some doubt on the position that
     the current U.S. budget deficits will ultimately prove to be infla—
     ti anary.
                                    —17—


The Rise in Core Inflation in the U.S.



     The analysis above provides us with some clues at to why the core

inflation rate rose from the early 1960s to the late 1970s. Because the

inflation—adjusted budget deficit was never substantial during this

period, there is little support, either on a theoretical or empirical

basis, for budget deficits as the source of the rise in the core infla-

tion rate. This leaves high employment targets as the other candidate

for the underlying cause of   the higher rate of money growth and the rise
in core inflation.

     A likely scenario for what triggered the rise in core inflation in

the 1965—73 period is that policy makers pursued an overly high employ-

ment target. In the mid 1960s, policy makers, economists and politicians

became committed to a target unemployment rate of 47. because they

thought that this level   of unemployment was consistent with price

stability, In hindsight, most economists now agree that the natural rate

of unemployment was above this figure and was steadily rising in the

late 1960s and 1970s to above 6'!. because of demographic shifts in the

composition o4 the labor force and increased coverage of unemployment

insurance programs. The activist policy during the Johnson and Nixon

administrations which pursued unemployment targets that were too low

(and thus employment targets which were too high) might then be the

primary reason why a temporary inflation resulting from the Vietnam war

buildup in the mid 1960s was converted into a sustained rise in infla-

tion along the lines of Figure 4.

     The attempt of workers and firms to obtain higher wages and prices

could also have been a factor in the rise of the core inflation rate,

but it is important to remember that these cost—push elements of infla—
                                    -18-


tion could not have occurred without the accommodating high employment

policy of the monetary authorities shown in Figure 3. The persistence of

the high core inflation rate into the late 1970s can be attributed to

workers and firms knowledge that government policy continued to be

concerned with achieving high employment; they thus continued to raise

their wages and prices because they expected accommodating policy. This

raises the issue that expectations are an important element in the

inflationary process and leads us to the role of credibility of policy

makers in eliminating and preventing inflation.



                                    Iv.


       Credibility   and Expectations in the anti—Inflation Process



     Monetarists have always been leery of activist policy because they

see the economy as inherently stable and because there is some uncer-

tainty about the timing of monetary policy effects (long and variable

lags). They thus see activist policy as likely to do more harm than

good. Keynesians on the other hand are much less sanguine about the

stability of the economy because they view price and wage adjustment as

proceeding quite slowly because of rigidities such as long—term con-

tracts. Does this mean that an activist policy of preventing high

employment is desirable' The answer depends crucially on whether expec-

tations are important in the wage and price setting process.

     Figure 5 depicts a situation where the economy has moved to exces—

sive unemployment at Point         as a result of an upward shift in the

short—run aggregate supply curve from AS to AS. This upward shift

could arise from an attempt by workers and firms to raise their wages

and prices or could arise from a supply shock of the type we experienced
                                       Figure 5

                       An Activist Response to Unemployment




 Aggregate                                  AS1r
Price Level (P)



                                                                    AS




                  P2
                                                                    AS
                  P




                                                                    AD2
                  P1




                                                              AD1


                                        Y                      Aggregate Real Output (Y)
                                    —19—


in 1973 ar     1979. A non—activist policy that left the aggregate demand

curve at AD1 and allowed high unemployment would eventually drive the

short—run aggregate supply curve back down to AS and real output would

be restored to the natural rate level, In the monetarist or new classi-

cal macroeconomics view of the world, this adjustment would take place

quickly and so the non—activist policy would have low cost.         To a
Keynesian the adjustment process would be very slow and substantial

output loss would result from the non—activist policy. Since the ten-

dency to return to the natural rate of output is too slow, the only way

to eliminate the excessive unemployment quickly is too shift out the

aggregate demand curve to AD2 to move the economy to Point 2.

     In     an economy where expectations do not matter to wage and price

setting behavior, this accommodating, activist policy is optimal if the

adjustment to the natural rate of output is slow. In an economy where

expectations do matter to wage and price setting, however, we must ask

two questionsi Will the economy remain at Point 2 after the accommodat-

ing policy has been executed, and will the economy be any more likely to

move from Point 1 to Point A in the first place if workers and firms

expect this high employment policy?

     As we have seen in Figure 3, the accommodating policy that moves

the economy from Point A to Point 2 may encourage workers and firms to

raise wages and prices further thus leading to a 5ustained inflation. In

addition,    if workers and firms know that an accommodating policy is

going to be pursued they will be more likely to try and raise their

wages and prices in the first place, thus moving the economy to a situa-

tion like Point A with high unemployment. Because o4 these two pos-

sibilities there is a hidden cost to the activist high employment

policy.
                                  —20—


     The problem with the accommodating, activist policy is the dynamic

inconsistency of such a policy described by Kydland and Prescott (1977).

Although the first time that unemployment develops eliminating it with

an activist policy may be optimal, the expectations that this activist

policy creates leads to a suboptimal outcome of higher inflation and

even possibly higher unemployment as well. A hidden benefit of a non—

activist, non—accommodating policy is that movements to Point A        in

Figure 5 may occur less often because workers and firms recognize that

their will be substantial costs in terms of persistent high unemployment

as a result of any attempts to raise wages and prices.

     Two non—economic examples illustrate why non—accommodating policies

may be optimal as a result of dynamic inconsistency of accommodating

policy. First is a problem that I have recently experienced as a new

father with a two year old son, I have an office in my house where I   do

much of   my work. Whenever I went into this office, my son would come,

bang on the door and cry. The first time he did this, it was optimal for

me to pursue an accommodating policy of going out to him. Unfortunately,

he would keep on coming back to the door and disrupting my work, Having

read Kydland and Prescott's paper, I recognized that I would be better

off pursuing a non—accommodating policy. (Who says that economics isn't

useful?) Sure enough, after not going out to him several times when he

came to the door——a wrenching experience because of his crying——he

stopped coming back. Now as a result of my non—accommodating policy, I

can work in peace in my office.

     A second example is relevant to the appropriate way to conduct

foreign policy. When Hitler threatened war if he were unable to dismem-

ber Czechoslovakia, it may have appeared optimal to pursue the accom-

modating policy of obtaining peace at any price. Unfortunately, this
                                   —21—


 just whetted Hitler's appetite for more territorial acquisitions and

 encouraged him to invade Poland. In hindsight, the world would have been

 better off if the allies had pursued a non—accommodating policy of

 stopping Hitler earlier,

      4 non—accommodating policy will   be most successful   if   economic

 agents expect it, that is, if the non—accommodating policy is credible.

 In the case of Figure 5, knowing that the aggregate demand curve will

not be shifted out if the economy is pushed to Point A will make it less

likely that the economy will end up at Point 4; workers and firms now

recognize that pushing up the aggregate supply curve will    entail sub-
stantial costs.   If   credibility of a non—accommodating policy is not

achieved and is then actually pursued we have the unhappy outcome of

stagflation in which both prices and unemployment rise because movement

to Point A in Figure 5 is a likely possibility. The undesirable outcome

of a non—credible, non—accommodating policy had even more serious conse-

quences in 1939 when World War II began.

     What if we are already experiencing a rapid inflation? What role

does credibility play in the success of an anti—inflation policy?   Again

we can use the aggregate supply and demand framework to analyze the

response to an anti—inflation policy. Figure 6 depicts a sustained

inflation in which the economy is moving from Point I to Point 2 each

period and the inflation rate is built in to wage and price contracts so

that the short—run aggregate supply curve is rising at the same rate   as

the aggregate demand curve. Consider the announcement of a cold turkey,

anti—inflation policy where money growth will be reduced sufficiently so

that the aggregate demand curve will remain at AD1 and will not shift

out to AD2. If this anti—inflation policy is not credible, the short—run

aggregate supply curve will continue to rise to 49r when the policy is
                                     Figure 6

                       Anti-Inflation Policy and Credibility




                                       ASlr

Aggregate
Price Level (P)


                                                                AS


                                                                       r
                                                                 AS


                  P2




                  P1                                                 AD2




                                                               AD1
                                       Y                  Aggregate Real Output (Y)
                                           n
                                        —22—


implemented. The result is that the economy will move to Point A where

there is some slowing of inflation (the price level does not rise all

the way to P2) ,      but there is substantial output loss.

          If, on the other hand, the announced cold turkey policy were

believed because the policy makers had credibility, a much more

desirable outcome can result. If expectations of future policy do enter

into workers and firms wage and price setting decisions, then the an-

nouncement of the credible cold turkey policy will cause the short—run

aggregate demand curve to rise less than it otherwise would, In an

economy where expectations of future policy do matter but wage and price

contracts impose some wage and price rigidity on the economy, the         ag-

gregate supply curve will not rise toAS but instead will rise only to

      .     Here   the economy moves to Point B and does experience a loss in
ASB

output, but this loss is less than is experienced when the policy is not

credible; in addition, the decline in inflation is more rapid (the price

level only rises to         rather than to      Credibility is thus an impor-

tant element to a successful anti—inflation policy.9

          This conclusion is even stronger in the context of the new classi-

cal macroeconomics model.         In this model, there is sufficient wage and

price flexibility so that the short—run aggregate supply curve responds

fully to changes in expectations about future policy: the announcement

of the credible cold turkey policy will cause the short—run aggregate

supply curve to remain at AS. Thus, when the cold turkey policy is

implemented, the economy will remain at Point I with the happy outcome




      Taylor (1982) has shown that a more gradual approach to reducing
      inflation may be able to eliminate inflation without producing any
      output loss. One criticism of his conclusion, however, is that
      establishing credibility with such a gradual approach may be in-
      feasible.
                                    -23—


of an inflation rate that has returned to zero which is achieved with no

output loss.

       The crucial element required for credibility to matter to the

success of anti—inflation policy is that expectations of policy affect

the position of the short—run aggregate supply curve. The notorious

instability of the Phillips curve provides indirect evidence that expec-

tations about future policy matter to aggregate supply. More direct

tests such as Lucas (1973) also support the importance of expectations

to aggregate supply. The evidence on whether short-run aggregate supply

responds fully to changes in expectations about future policy is more

mixed however.10

       Strong direct evidence supporting the icnportance of credibility to

a successful anti—inflation program has been provided by Sargent (1982)

which studies the end of four hypirinflatlons.    In   thm hypmrn41tions
that Sargent studies, inflation was eliminated quickly with little

apparent output loss. A key characteristic of these successful cases of

anti—inflation policy is their credibility. The threat of Intervention

by foreign powers made credible the fiscal reforms that eliminated the

huge budget deficits and ended rapid money growth. In a related but

somewhat more controversial paper,'1 Sargent contends that the Poincare

anti—inflation program in France in the 1920s was more successful than

the Thatcher program because Poincare's program established credibility

by pursuing budget reforms while Thatcher's program did not.

       Does evidence from the recent disinflationary experience in the

United States shed light on whether credibility is an important factor




 10
      For example see Barro (1977), Gordon (1982), and Mishkin (1983).
 11
      Sargent (1981)
                                  —24—


to the success of an anti—inflation program? If one assumes as in Perry

(1983) that a shift to an anti—inflationary monetary policy regime did

occur with the change in the Federal Reserve operating procedures in

October 1979, then a believer in the importance of credibility might

expect to see a more rapid decline in wage and price inflation since

1979 than would be predicted by traditional Phillips curves estimated

from pre—1979 data. Several recent papers CPerry (1983), Eckstein

(1984), and Blanchard (1984)] have found no evidence that traditional

Phillips curve equations have undergone structural shifts in the 1979—83

period, while Cagan and Fellner (1983) and Fisher (1984) do find that

wage inflation has declined more rapidly than would be predicted by    a


traditional Phillips curve. Does evidence which tends to show that large

overpredictions by traditional Phillips curves do not occur in the 1979—

83 period cast doubt on the importance of credibility to the behavior of

aggregate supply? The answer is no.

     An important point raised by Taylor (1984) is that the switch from

interest rate targeting to reserve targeting by the Federal Reserve

starting in October 1979 does not imply that there was a significant

change to an anti—inflation policy regime. Talor (1984) finds that

there was some shift to a less accommodative policy regime, but the

change was not dramatic. Blanchard (1984) looks at an equation describ-

ing the term structure of interest rates and he finds that there is no

evidence that the financial markets believed that a change to an anti—

inflation policy regime had occurred. The conclusion that arises from

this evidence is that the recent disinflationary experience cannot

provide a   test of the importance of credibility to anti—inflationary

policy because a credible, anti—inflation policy never occurred. This

should not be very surprising considering the budgetary policy pursued
by the Reagan administrationt the hi4t to large budget de4i:its ae   a



result o4 the Reagan tax cuts would rot help promote confidence      a



continuing anti—inflation monetary policy.
                                  —26—


                                REFERENCES



Barro, Robert 3. (1977) 'Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in

the United States,' American Economic Review, vol. 67, pp. 1.01—115.



Blanchard, Olivier 3.    (1984), "The Lucas Critique and the Voicker

Deflation,' American Economic Review, vol. 74 (May), pp. 211—15.



Blinder, Alan S. (1979), Economic Policy and the Great Stagflation, (New

york; Academic Press).



Cagan, Phillip, and Fellner, William (1983), "Tentative Lessons 4rom the

Disinflationary Eort," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1983:2,

pp. 603—08.



Eckstein, Otto (1984), "Foundations of Aggregate Supply Price," American

Economic Review, vol. 74 (May), pp. 216—20.



Eisner, Robert, and Pieper, Paul 3., "A New View of the Federal Debt and

Budget Deficits," American Economic Review, vol. 74 (March), pp. 11—29.



Fischer, Stanley (1984), "Contracts, Credibility, and Disinflation,"

NBER Working Paper No. 1.339 (April).



Friedman, Milton (1963), Inflation: Causes and Consequences (Bombay:

Asia Publishing Rouse), reprinted in Friedman, Dollars and Deficits

(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice—Rail, 1.968), p. 39.
                                   —27—


Gordon, Robert J. (1982), 'Price Inertia and Policy Effectiveness in the

United States, 1890—1980," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 90 (Decem-

ber)




Kydland, Finn E. ,    and   Prescott, Edward C. (1977), 'Rules Rather Than

Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political

Economy, vol. B (June), pp.473—91.



Lucas, Robert E.,     Jr. (1973), "Some International Evidence on Output—

Inflation Tradeoffs," American Economic Review, vol. 63 (June), pp. 326—

34,




McCallum, Bennett T. (1982), "Are Bond—Financed Deficits Inflationary? A

Ricardian Analysis," NBER Working Paper No, 90 (June).



______________________ (1984), "Monetarist Rules in the Light of Recent

Experience," American Economic Review, vol. 74 (May), pp. 388—391.



Mishkin, Frederic S. (1983), A Rational Expectations Approach to Macro—

econometrics: Testing Policy Ineffectiveness and Efficient Markets

Models, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of

Economic Research).



Perry, George L.      (1983), "What Have We Learned about Disinflation?"

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1983:2, pp. 87—ó02,



Sargent, Thomas J. (1981), "Stopping Moderate Inflations: The Methods of

Poincare' and Thatcher," manuscript, University of Minnesota hay).
                                         —28--




__________________      (1982), 'The Ends o Four Big Inflation;,' in Robert
E.   Hall, ed. ,       Inflation;   Causes and E44ect;, (Chicago: University of

Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research) , pp. 41—99.




__________________ and Wallace, Neil (1981), 'Some Unpleasant Monetarist

Arithmetic,' Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review,

(Fall), pp •   1—17.




Taylor, John B. (1q92), 'The Role of Expectations in the Choice of

Monetary Policy,          in Monetary Policy Issues in the 1990; (Federal

Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp.47—76.




________________   (1984), "Recent Changes in Macro Policy and its Effects:
Some Time—Series Evidence," American Economic Review, vol. 74 (May), pp.

206—210.
