                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          ASSESSING THE EMERGING GLOBAL FINANCIAL ARCHITECTURE:
           MEASURING THE TRILEMMA'S CONFIGURATIONS OVER TIME

                                          Joshua Aizenman
                                          Menzie D. Chinn
                                              Hiro Ito

                                        Working Paper 14533
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14533


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008




The financial support of faculty research funds of the UCSC and PSU is gratefully acknowledged.
This paper encompasses the results in two shorter papers: “Mundell-Fleming’s Impossible Trinity:
Testing the Stability and Fitness of Trilemma’s Linear Specification” and “The Emerging Global Financial
Architecture – Tracing and Evaluating the New Patterns of the Trilemma’s Configurations”. We would
like to thank Eduardo Borensztein, Eduardo Cavallo, Camilo Tavor, Mathijs van Dijk, and the participants
at the BIS-LACEA 2008 Rio meeting and the 4th Tinbergen Conference for their useful comments
and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Joshua Aizenman, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Assessing the Emerging Global Financial Architecture: Measuring the Trilemma's Configurations
over Time
Joshua Aizenman, Menzie D. Chinn, and Hiro Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 14533
December 2008, Revised April 2009
JEL No. F15,F21,F31,F36,F41,O24

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a methodology that intuitively characterizes the choices countries have made with respect
to the trilemma during the post Bretton-Woods period. The paper first outlines the new metrics for
measuring the degree of exchange rate flexibility, monetary independence, and capital account openness
while taking into account the recent development of substantial international reserve accumulation.
The evolution of our “trilemma indexes” illustrates that, after the early 1990s, industrialized countries
accelerated financial openness, but reduced the extent of monetary independence while sharply increasing
exchange rate stability, all reflecting the introduction of the euro. In contrast, emerging market countries
pursued exchange rate stability as their key priority up to the late 1980s while non-emerging market
developing countries has pursued it throughout the period since 1970. As a stark difference from the
latter group of countries, emerging market countries have converged towards intermediate levels of
all three indexes, characterizing managed flexibility while retaining some degree of monetary autonomy
and accelerating financial openness. This recent trend appears to be sustained by using sizable international
reserves as a buffer. We also confirm that the weighted sum of the three indexes adds up to a constant,
validating the notion that a rise in one trilemma variable should be traded-off with a drop of the weighted
sum of the other two. The second part of the paper deals with normative aspects of the trilemma, relating
the policy choices to macroeconomic outcomes such as the volatility of output growth and inflation,
and medium term inflation rates. Some key findings for developing countries include: (i) greater monetary
independence can dampen output volatility while greater exchange rate stability implies greater output
volatility, which can be mitigated by reserve accumulation; (ii) greater monetary autonomy is associated
with a higher level of inflation while greater exchange rate stability and greater financial openness
could lower the inflation level; (iii) a policy pursuit of stable exchange rate while financial development
is at the medium level can increase output volatility, (iv) greater financial openness with a high level
of financial development can reduce output volatility, though greater financial openness with a low
level of financial development can be volatility-increasing; (v) net inflow of portfolio investment and
bank lending can increase output volatility and higher levels of short-term debt or total debt services
can increase both the level and the volatility of inflation.
Joshua Aizenman                                       Hiro Ito
Department of Economics; E2                           Portland State University
1156 High St.                                         1721 SW Broadway, Suite 241
University of California, Santa Cruz                  Portland, Oregon 97201
Santa Cruz, CA 95064                                  ito@pdx.edu
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu

Menzie D. Chinn
Dept. of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu
1.       Introduction
         A fundamental contribution of the Mundell-Fleming framework is the impossible trinity,
or the trilemma, which states that a country simultaneously may choose any two, but not all, of
the following three goals: monetary independence, exchange rate stability and financial
integration. The trilemma is illustrated in Figure 1; each of the three sides – representing
monetary independence, exchange rate stability, and financial integration – depicts a potentially
desirable goal, yet it is not possible to be simultaneously on all three sides of the triangle. The
top vertex – labeled “closed capital markets” – is, for example, associated with monetary policy
autonomy and a fixed exchange rate regime, but not financial integration, the preferred choice of
most developing countries in the mid to late 1980s.1
         Over the last 20 years, most developing countries have opted for increasing financial
integration. The trilemma implies that a country choosing this path must either forego exchange
rate stability if it wishes to preserve a degree of monetary independence, or forego monetary
independence if it wishes to preserve exchange rate stability.
         The purpose of this paper is to outline a methodology that will allow us to easily and
characterize in an intuitive manner the choices countries have made with respect to the trilemma
during the post Bretton-Woods period. The first part of our study deals with positive aspects of
the trilemma, outlining new ways of tracing the evolving financial configurations. The second
part deals with normative aspects of the trilemma, relating the policy decisions chosen to
macroeconomic outcomes, such as the volatility of output growth and inflation, and medium
term inflation rates.
         We begin by observing that over the last two decades, a growing number of developing
countries, especially emerging market ones, have opted for hybrid exchange rate regimes – e.g.,
managed float buffered by increasing accumulation of international reserves [IR henceforth].
Despite the proliferation of greater exchange rate flexibility, IR/GDP ratios increased
dramatically, especially in the wake of the East Asian crises. Practically, all the increase in
IR/GDP holding has taken place in emerging market countries [see Figure 2]. The magnitude of
the changes during recent years is staggering: global reserves increased from about USD 1
trillion to more than USD 5 trillion between 1990 and 2006.
         The dramatic accumulation of international reserves has been uneven: while the IR/GDP
ratio of industrial countries was relatively stable at approximately 4%, the IR/GDP ratio of
developing countries increased from about 5% to about 27%. Today, about three quarters of the
global international reserves are held by developing countries. Most of the accumulation has
been in Asia, where reserves increased from about 5% in 1980 to about 37% in 2006 (32% in
Asia excluding China). The most dramatic changes occurred in China, increasing its IR/GDP
1
    See Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2005) for further discussion and references dealing with the trilemma.

                                                           1
ratio from about 1% in 1980, to about 41% in 2006 (and approaching 50% by 2008). Empirical
studies suggest several structural changes in the patterns of reserves hoarding (Cheung and Ito,
2007; Obstfeld, et al. 2008). A drastic change occurred in the 1990s in terms of reserve
management among developing countries. The IR/GDP ratios shifted upwards; the ratios
increased dramatically immediately after the East Asian crisis of 1997-98, but subsided by 2000.
Another structural change took place in the early 2000s, mostly driven by an unprecedented
increase in the accumulation of international reserves by China.
        The globalization of financial markets is evident in the growing financial integration of
all groups of countries. While the original framing of the trilemma was silent regarding the role
of reserves, recent trends suggest that reserve accumulation may be closely related to changing
patterns of the trilemma for developing countries. The earlier literature focused on the role of
international reserves as a buffer stock critical to the management of an adjustable-peg or
managed-floating exchange-rate regime.2 While useful, the buffer stock model has limited
capacity to account for the recent development in international reserves hoarding – the greater
flexibility of the exchange rates exhibited in recent decades should help reduce reserve
accumulation, in contrast to the trends reported above.
        The recent literature has focused on the adverse side effects of deeper financial
integration of developing countries – the increased exposure to volatile short-term inflows of
capital (dubbed “hot money”), subject to frequent sudden stops and reversals (see Calvo, 1998).
The empirical evidence suggests that international reserves can reduce both the probability of a
sudden stop and the depth of the resulting output collapse when the sudden stop occurs.3
Aizenman and Lee (2007) link the large increase in reserves holding to the deepening financial
integration of developing countries and find evidence that international reserves hoarding serves
as a means of self-insurance against exposure to sudden stops. In extensive empirical analysis of
the shifting determinants of international reserve holdings for more than 100 economies over the
1975-2004 period, Cheung and Ito (2007) find that while trade openness is the only factor that is
significant in most of the specifications and samples under consideration, its explanatory power
has been declining over time. In contrast, the explanatory power of financial variables has been
increasing over time.
        The increasing importance of financial integration as a determinant for international
reserves hoarding suggests a link between the changing configurations of the trilemma and the
level of international reserves. Indeed, Obstfeld, et al. (2008) find that the size of domestic
financial liabilities that could potentially be converted into foreign currency (M2), financial

2
  Accordingly, optimal reserves balance the macroeconomic adjustment costs incurred in the absence of reserves
with the opportunity cost of holding reserves (Frenkel and Jovanovic, 1981).
3
  See Ben-Bassat and Gottlieb (1992), Rodrik and Velasco (1999), and Aizenman and Marion (2004) for papers
viewing international reserves as output and consumption stabilizers.

                                                        2
openness, the ability to access foreign currency through debt markets, and exchange rate policy
are all significant predictors of international reserve stocks.
         We begin by constructing an easy and intuitive way to summarize these trends in the
form of a “Diamond chart.” Applying the methodology outlined in the next section, we construct
for each country a vector of trilemma and IR configurations that measures each country’s
monetary independence, exchange rate stability, international reserves, and financial integration.
These measures are normalized between zero and one. Each country’s configuration at a given
instant is summarized by a “generalized diamond,” whose four vertices measure the three
trilemma dimensions and IR holding (as a ratio to GDP).
         Figures 3 and 4 provide a concise summary of the recent history of trilemma
configurations for different income groups and regional groups.4 Figure 3 reveals that, over time,
both industrialized countries and emerging market countries have moved towards deeper
financial integration and losing monetary independence, a stark contrast from non-emerging
market developing countries. Furthermore, emerging market countries have pursued greater
financial integration while non-emerging market developing countries barely have. As of the
2000s, emerging market countries distinctly differ from other groups with its balanced
combination of the three macroeconomic policy goals as well as substantial amount of IR
holding.
         In Figure 4, we can see that Latin American economies have liberalized their financial
markets rapidly since the 1990s after some retrenchment during the 1980s. Emerging markets in
Latin America reduced the extent of monetary independence in recent years and maintained a
lower level of exchange rate stability. Emerging Asian economies have achieved comparable
levels of exchange rate stability and financial openness while consistently reducing monetary
independence. This group of economies differ from the other ones the most with their relatively
balanced achievement of the three macroeconomic policy goals and their high levels of
international reserves holding.
         Figure 5 presents the development of trilemma indexes for 50 countries (32 of which are
developing countries) during the 1970-2006 period for which we can construct a balanced data
set. Focusing on developing countries, we can observe an interesting trend. Comparing Figure 3b
and 3c reveals the distinctly different trilemma patterns between emerging (EMG) and non-
emerging (non-EMG) market countries.5 EMGs moved towards relatively more flexible
exchange rate than Non-EMGs, buffering it by holding much higher IR/GDP, as well as towards

4
  In each diamond chart, the origin is normalized so as to represent zero monetary independence, pure float, zero
international reserves and financial autarky.
5
  Table 1 shows that the differences of the Trilemma indexes for monetary independence, exchange rate stability,
and financial openness as well as international reserves holding (as a ratio to GDP) between EMGs and non-EMG
developing countries are statistically significant.

                                                         3
higher financial integration and lower monetary independence. The figure shows that EMGs
have experienced convergence to some middle ground among all three indexes. In contrast, non-
EMGs, on average, have not exhibited such convergence. For both groups, while the degree of
exchange rate stability declined from the early 1970s to the early 1990s, it increased during the
last fifteen years – though one could expect that the present crisis would induce these countries
to move toward higher exchange rate flexibility. Currently, non-EMGs exhibit a greater degree
of exchange rate stability and monetary independence, but a lower degree of financial integration
compared to EMGs.
         Despite the cross-country and over-time variations in the trilemma configures, one key
message of the trilemma is instrument scarcity – policy makers face a tradeoff, where increasing
one trilemma variable (such as higher financial integration) would induce a drop in the weighted
average of the other two variables (lower exchange rate stability, or lower monetary
independence, or a combination of the two). Yet, to our knowledge, the validity of this tradeoff
among the three trilemma variables has not been tested properly. A possible concern is that the
trilemma framework does not impose an exact functional restriction on the association between
the three trilemma policy variables.
         We conduct a regression analysis to test the validity of the simplest functional
specification for the trilemma: whether the three trilemma policy goals are linearly related. For
this purpose, we also examine and validate that the weighted sum of the three trilemma policy
variables adds up to a constant (see Figure 7). This result confirms the notion that a rise in one
trilemma variable should be traded-off with a drop of a linear weighted sum of the other two.
The regression results also provide another diagnostic tool, allowing a simple description of the
changing ranking among the three trilemma policy goals over time.
         In the second half of the paper, we investigate the normative questions pertaining to the
trilemma. More specifically, we examine how the policy choices among the three trilemma
policies affect output growth volatility, inflation rates, and the volatility of inflation, with focus
on developing economies. Given that EMGs collectively have outperformed non-EMGs in terms
of average economic growth rates, it can be the middle ground configuration of the trilemma
policies that have contributed to the recent rapid and better development and high economic
growth among the emerging markets. Yet, without controlling for the macroeconomic
environment, one cannot be definitive about the causality since the middle-ground convergence
may also be the outcome of successful take offs and prolonged growth. Our paper attempts to
verify these issues through regression analyses, looking more systematically at the association
between trilemma choices and economic performance. Upon investigating the link between the
trilemma policy configurations and macroeconomic performance of the countries of our focus,



                                                  4
we also pay close attention to three other factors, namely, international reserves (IR) holding,
financial development, and external finance.
        As has been intensively investigated in the literature, for the last decade since the Asian
crisis of 1997-98, developing countries, especially those in East Asia and the Middle East, are
rapidly increasing the amount of international reserves hoarding. China, the world’s largest
holder of international reserves, currently holds about $2 trillion of reserves, accounting for 30%
of the world’s total. As of the end of 2008, the top 10 biggest holders are all developing countries
except for Japan, and the nine developing countries, including China, Russia, Taiwan, and Korea
hold over 55% of international reserves available in the world. Against this backdrop, it has been
argued that one of the main reasons for the rapid IR accumulation is countries’ desire to stabilize
exchange rate movement. Hypothetically, one could argue that countries hold massive
international reserves to have balanced combinations of exchange rate stability, monetary policy
autonomy, and financial openness. Thus, evidently, one cannot discuss the issue of the trilemma
without incorporating the effect of IR holding, which we will do in this paper.
        Secondly, the ongoing crisis has made it clear that financial development can be a
double-edged sword. While it can enable more efficient allocation of capital, it also embraces the
possibility of amplifying shocks to the economy. As a country may incorporate financial
development into its decision-making process for the trilemma configurations, as China has been
alleged to pursue closed financial markets with exchange rate stability as precautionary measures
to protect its underdeveloped financial system, the degree of financial development could affect
the macroeconomic performance of the economy.6 Some also argue that countries with newly
liberalized financial system tend to experience financial fragility (Demirguc-Kent and
Detragiache, 1998). Thus, trilemma policy configurations need to be investigated while
incorporating the level of financial development.
        Thirdly, as globalization proceeds with an unprecedented speed, and more countries are
abolishing capital controls, policy makers in countries, especially developing ones, cannot ignore
the effect of capital flows from other countries. As Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) show, the
type, volume, and direction of capital flows has been changing over time, thus policy makers
have to aim at moving targets in their policy decision making. Especially, considering that the
present crisis has shown that the speed and the volume of tsunami of capital flows can be
enormous, we must be abreast of the cost and benefit of trilemma configurations in tandem with
those of external financing such as FDI flows, portfolio flows, and banking lending across
countries.


6
 See Prasad (2008) for the argument that China’s policy of exchange rate stability and closed financial markets is
impairing the country’s macroeconomic management.

                                                         5
        In the remaining of the paper, Section 2 outlines the methodology for the construction of
our “trilemma indexes.” This section also presents summary statistics of the indexes and
examines whether the indexes entail any structural breaks corresponding to major global
economic events. Furthermore, in this section, we test the validity of a linear specification of the
trilemma indexes to examine whether the notion of the trilemma can be considered to be a trade-
off and binding. Section 3 conducts more formal analysis on how the policy choices affect output
growth volatility, inflation rates, and the volatility of inflation, with focus on developing
economies. In Section 4, we extend our empirical investigation and examine the impact of other
important economic variables related to the current crisis such as financial development and
various forms of external financing. In Section 5, we make casual observations to see whether
our empirical findings are consistent with the occurrence of the ongoing severe crises in some
countries. We present our concluding remarks in Section 6.


2.      Measures of the Trilemma Dimensions
        The empirical analysis of the tradeoffs being made requires measures of the policies.
Unfortunately, there is a paucity of good measures; in this paper we attempt to remedy this
deficiency by creating several indices.


2.1 Construction of the Trilemma Measures

Monetary Independence (MI)
        The extent of monetary independence is measured as the reciprocal of the annual
correlation of the monthly interest rates between the home country and the base country. Money
market rates are used.7
        The index for the extent of monetary independence is defined as:

                     corr (ii , i j ) − (−1)
          MI = 1 −
                           1 − (−1)

where i refers to home countries and j to the base country. By construction, the maximum and
minimum values are 1 and 0, respectively. Higher values of the index mean more monetary
policy independence.8,9


7
  The data are extracted from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics (60B..ZF...). For the countries whose
money market rates are unavailable or extremely limited, the money market data are supplemented by those from
the Bloomberg terminal and also by the discount rates (60...ZF...) and the deposit rates (60L..ZF...) series from IFS.
8
  The index is smoothed out by applying the three-year moving averages encompassing the preceding, concurrent,
and following years (t – 1, t, t+1) of observations.

                                                          6
        Here, the base country is defined as the country that a home country’s monetary policy is
most closely linked with as in Shambaugh (2004). The base countries are Australia, Belgium,
France, Germany, India, Malaysia, South Africa, the U.K., and the U.S. For the countries and
years for which Shambaugh’s data are available, the base countries from his work are used, and
for the others, the base countries are assigned based on IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER) and CIA Factbook.


Exchange Rate Stability (ERS)
        To measure exchange rate stability, annual standard deviations of the monthly exchange
rate between the home country and the base country are calculated and included in the following
formula to normalize the index between zero and one:

                                  0.01
           ERS =
                    0.01 + stdev(Δ(log(exch _ rate))

Merely applying this formula can easily create a downward bias in the index, that is, it would
exaggerate the “flexibility” of the exchange rate especially when the rate usually follows a
narrow band, but is de- or revalued infrequently.10 To avoid such downward bias, we also apply
a threshold to the exchange rate movement as has been done in the literature. That is, if the rate
of monthly change in the exchange rate stayed within +/-0.33 percent bands, we consider the
exchange rate is “fixed” and assign the value of one for the ERS index. Furthermore, single year
pegs are dropped because they are quite possibly not intentional ones.11 Higher values of this



9
  We note one important caveat about this index. For some countries and some years, especially early in the sample,
the interest rate used for the calculation of the MI index is often constant throughout a year, making the annual
correlation of the interest rates between the home and base countries (corr(ii, ij) in the formula) undefined. Since we
treat the undefined corr the same as zero, it makes the MI index value 0.5. One might think that the policy interest
rate being constant (regardless of the base country's interest rate) is a sign of monetary independence. However, it
could reflect the possibility that the home country uses other tools to implement monetary policy, rather than
manipulating the interest rates (e.g., manipulation of required reserve ratios and providing window guidance; or
financial repression). To complicate matters, some countries have used reserves manipulation and financial
repression to gain monetary independence while others have used both while strictly following the base country's
monetary policy. The bottom line is that it is impossible to fully account for these issues in the calculation of MI.
Therefore, assigning an MI value of 0.5 for such a case appears to be a reasonable compromise. However, we also
undertake robustness checks on the index.
10
   In such a case, the average of the monthly change in the exchange rate would be so small that even small changes
could make the standard deviation big and thereby the ERS value small.
11
    The choice of the +/-0.33 percent bands is based on the +/-2% band based on the annual rate, that is often used in
the literature. Also, to prevent breaks in the peg status due to one-time realignments, any exchange rate that had a
percentage change of zero in eleven out of twelve months is considered fixed. When there are two re/devaluations in
three months, then they are considered to be one re/devaluation event, and if the remaining 10 months experience no
exchange rate movement, then that year is considered to be the year of fixed exchange rate. This way of defining the
threshold for the exchange rate is in line with the one adopted by Shambaugh (2004).

                                                          7
index indicate more stable movement of the exchange rate against the currency of the base
country.

Financial Openness/Integration (KAOPEN)
       Without question, it is extremely difficult to measure the extent of capital account
controls.12 Although many measures exist to describe the extent and intensity of capital account
controls, it is generally agreed that such measures fail to capture fully the complexity of real-
world capital controls. Nonetheless, for the measure of financial openness, we use the index of
capital account openness, or KAOPEN, by Chinn and Ito (2006, 2008). KAOPEN is based on
information regarding restrictions in the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and
Exchange Restrictions (AREAER). Specifically, KAOPEN is the first standardized principal
component of the variables that indicate the presence of multiple exchange rates, restrictions on
current account transactions, on capital account transactions, and the requirement of the
surrender of export proceeds.13 Since KAOPEN is based upon reported restrictions, it is
necessarily a de jure index of capital account openness (in contrast to de facto measures such as
those in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006)). The choice of a de jure measure of capital account
openness is driven by the motivation to look into policy intentions of the countries; de facto
measures are more susceptible to other macroeconomic effects than solely policy decisions with
respect to capital controls.14
        The Chinn-Ito index is normalized between zero and one. Higher values of this index
indicate that a country is more open to cross-border capital transactions. The index is originally
available for 181 countries for the period of 1970 through 2006.15 The data set we examine does
not include the United States. The Appendix presents data availability in more details.


2.2 Tracking the Indexes
Variations across Country Groupings
       Comparing theses indexes provides some interesting insights into how the international
financial architecture has evolved over time. For this purpose, the “diamond charts” are most
useful. In each diamond chart, the origin is normalized so as to represent zero monetary

12
    See Chinn and Ito (2008), Edison and Warnock (2001), Edwards (2001), Edison et al. (2002), and Kose et al.
(2006) for discussions and comparisons of various measures on capital restrictions.
13
   This index is described in greater detail in Chinn and Ito (2008).
14
   De jure measures of financial openness also face their own limitations. As Edwards (1999) discusses, it is often
the case that the private sector circumvents capital account restrictions, nullifying the expected effect of regulatory
capital controls. Also, IMF-based variables are too aggregated to capture the subtleties of actual capital controls, that
is, the direction of capital flows (i.e., inflows or outflows) as well as the type of financial transactions targeted.
15
   The original dataset covers 181 countries, but data availability is uneven among the three indexes. MI is available
for 172 countries; ERS for 182; and KAOPEN for 178. Both MI and ERS start in 1960 whereas KAOPEN in 1970.
For the data availability of the trilemma indexes, refer to Appendix.

                                                           8
independence, pure float, zero international reserves and financial autarky. Figure 3 summarizes
the trends for industrialized countries, those excluding the 12 euro countries, emerging market
countries, and non-emerging market developing countries.16
        That figure reveals that, over time, while both industrialized countries and emerging
market countries have moved towards deeper financial integration and losing monetary
independence, non-emerging market developing countries have only inched toward financial
integration and have not changed the level of monetary independence. Emerging market
countries, after giving up some exchange rate stability during the 1980s, have not changed their
stance on the exchange rate stability whereas non-emerging market developing countries seem to
be remaining at or slightly oscillating around a relatively high level of exchange rate stability.
The pursuit of greater financial integration is much more pronounced among industrialized
countries than developing countries while emerging market countries have been increasingly
becoming more financial open. Interestingly, emerging market countries stand out from other
groups by achieving a relatively balanced combination of the three macroeconomic goals by the
2000s, i.e., middle-range levels of exchange rate stability and financial integration while not
losing as much of monetary independently as industrialized countries. The recent policy
combination has been matched by a substantial increase in IR/GDP at a level that is not observed
in any other groups.
        To confirm the different development paths of the trilemma indexes for the groups of
EMGs and non-EMG developing countries for the last four decades, we conduct mean-equality
tests on the three trilemma indexes and the IR holding ratios between EMGs and non-EMG
developing countries. We report the test results in Table 1 and statistically confirm that the
development path of the trilemma configurations has been different between these two groups of
developing countries.
        Figure 4 compares developing countries across different geographical groups.
Developing countries in both Asia and Latin America (LATAM) have moved toward exchange
rate flexibility, but LATAM countries have rapidly increased financial openness while Asian
counterparts haven not. Asian emerging market economies have moved further toward financial
openness on a level comparable with LATAM emerging market countries, yet one key difference
between the two groups is that the former holds much more international reserves than the latter.
More importantly, Asian emerging market countries have achieved a balanced combination of
the three policy goals while the other groups have not, which can easily make one suspect it is
the high volume of IR holding that may have allowed this group of countries to achieve such a
trilemma configuration. We will revisit this issue later on. Lastly, Sub-Saharan African countries

16
  The emerging market countries are defined as the countries classified as either emerging or frontier during the
period of 1980-1997 by the International Financial Corporation plus Hong Kong and Singapore.

                                                          9
appear to have pursued the policy combination of exchange rate stability and monetary
independence while lagging considerably in financial liberalization behind the other regions.

Patterns in a Balanced Panel
       Figure 5 again presents the development of trilemma indexes for different subsamples
while focusing on the time dimension of the development, but also restricts the entire sample to
include only the countries for which all three indexes are available for the entire time period. By
balancing the dataset, the number of countries included in the sample reduces to 50 countries out
of which 32 countries are developing countries including 18 emerging market countries. Each
panel presents the full sample (i.e., cross-country) average of the trilemma index of concern and
also its one-standard deviation band. There is a striking differences between industrialized and
developing countries as well as between emerging market and non-emerging market countries.
         The top-left panel shows that, between the late 1970s and the late 1980s, the levels of
monetary independence are closer to each other between industrialized countries and developing
ones. However, since the early 1990s, these two groups have been diverging from each other.
While developing countries have been hovering around the medium levels of monetary
independence and slightly deviating from the cross-country average, industrialized countries
have steadily become much less monetary independent and moved farther away from the cross-
country average, reflecting the efforts made by the euro member countries.17 In the case of the
exchange rate stability index, after the breakup of the Bretton Woods system, industrialized
countries significantly reduced the extent of exchange rate stability until the early 1980s. After
the 1980s, these countries gradually, but steadily increased the extent of exchange rate stability
to the present – though they experienced some intermittent in the early 1990s due to the EMS
crisis.18 Developing countries, on the other hand, maintained relatively high levels of exchange
rate stability until the 1980s. Although these countries seem to have adopted some exchange rate
flexibility in the early 1980s, they have since maintained constant levels of exchange rate
stability through the early 2000s, which seems to reflect the “fear of floating.” In the last few
years, these countries even gradually increased the level of exchange rate stability. Not
surprisingly, industrialized countries have achieved higher levels of financial openness
throughout the period. The acceleration of financial openness in the mid-1990s remained
significantly high compared to the cross-country average of both the full sample and LDC
subsample. On the other hand, developing countries also accelerated financial openness in the

17
   When the euro countries are removed from the IDC sample, the extent of the divergence from the average
becomes less marked although there is still a tendency among the non-euro countries to move toward lower levels of
monetary independence.
18
   The ERS index for the non-euro industrialized countries, persistently hovers around the value of .40 throughout
the time period after rapidly dropping in the early 1970s.

                                                       10
early 1990s after some retrenchment during the 1980s. Overall, LDC countries have been in
parallel with the global trend of financial liberalization throughout the sample period, but the
difference from the industrialized countries has been moderately rising in the last decade.
         Broadly speaking, the difference between emerging market countries and non-emerging
market developing countries is smaller than that between IDC and LDC subsamples (shown in
the bottom row of Figure 5). However, the divergence between the two groups seems to be
becoming wider gradually since the mid-1990s. While non-EMG countries have retained
relatively constant levels of monetary independence, EMG countries have become less monetary
independent. As for exchange rate stability, EMG countries are persistently more flexible than
non-emerging ones since 1980 and the difference is wider since the early 1990s. EMG countries
have also become more financially open compared with non-EMG countries since the mid-1990s.
         Figure 6 shows the development paths of these indexes altogether, making the differences
between IDCs and LDCs and those between EMGs and non-EMGs appear more clearly. For the
industrialized countries, financial openness accelerated after the beginning of the 1990s and
exchange rate stability rose after the end of the 1990s, reflecting the introduction of the euro in
1999. The extent of monetary independence has experienced a declining trend, especially after
the early 1990s.19
         When we look at the group of developing countries, we can see that not only do these
countries differ from industrialized ones, but also they differ between emerging and non-
emerging market developing countries. Up to the mid-1980s, exchange rate stability was the
most pervasive policy among the three, though it has been on a declining trend since the early
1970s, followed by monetary independence that has been relatively constant during the period.
Between the mid-1980s and 2000, monetary independence and exchange rate stability became
the most pursued policies while the level of financial openness kept rising rapidly. During the
1990s, the level of monetary independence went up on average while more countries adopted
floating exchange rates and liberalized financial markets. Most interestingly, since 2000, all three
indexes have been converged to the middle ground, which we have already observed as the
balanced achievement of the three policy goals in Figure 4. This result suggests that developing
countries may have been trying to cling to moderate levels of both monetary independence and
financial openness while maintaining higher levels of exchange rate stability – leaning against
the trilemma in other words – which may explain the reason why some of these economies hold
sizable international reserves, potentially to buffer the trade-off arising from the trilemma.
Willett (2003) has called this compulsion by countries with a mediocre level of exchange rate

19
  If the euro countries are removed from the sample (not reported), financial openness evolves similarly to the IDC
group that includes the euro countries, but exchange rate stability hovers around the line for monetary independence,
though at a bit higher levels, after the early 1990s. The difference between exchange rate stability and monetary
independence has been slightly diverging after the end of the 1990s.

                                                         11
fixity to hoard reserves the “unstable middle” hypothesis (as opposed to the “disappearing
middle” view).
         None of these observations are applicable to non-emerging developing market countries.
For this group of countries, exchange rate stability has been the most pervasive policy
throughout the period, though there is some variation, followed by monetary independence.
There is no discernable trend in financial openness for this subsample.


2.3 Identifying Structural Breaks
       To shed more light on the evolution of the index values, we investigate whether major
international economic events have been associated with structural breaks in the index series. We
conjecture that major events – such as the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in 1973, the
Mexican debt crisis of 1982 (indicating the beginning of 1980’s debt crises of developing
countries), and the Asian Crisis of 1997-98 (the onset of sudden stop crises affecting high-
performing Asian economies (HPAEs), Russia and other emerging countries) – may have
affected economies in such significant ways that they opted to alter their policy choices.
        We identify the years of 1973, 1982, 1997-98, and 2001 as candidate structural breaks,
and test the equality of the group mean of the indexes over the candidate break points for each of
the subsample groups.20 The results are reported in Table 2 (a). The first and second columns of
the top panel indicate that after the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system, the mean of the
exchange rate stability index for the industrialized country group fell statistically significantly
from 0.69 to 0.43, while the mean of financial openness slightly increase from 0.44 to 0.47. Non-
emerging market developing countries, however, did not significantly decrease the level of fixity
of their exchange rates over the same time period while they became less monetarily independent
and more financially open. Although the same changes in monetary independence and financial
openness are also observed among emerging market economies, they did move toward more
flexible exchange rates.
        Even after the Mexican debt crisis, industrialized countries slightly, but significantly
increased the level of exchange rate stability and significantly increased the level of financial
openness, while holding constant the level of monetary independence. In contrast, the debt crisis
led all developing countries to pursue further exchange rate flexibility, most likely reflecting the
fact that crisis countries could not sustain fixed exchange rate arrangements. However, these
countries also simultaneously pursued more monetary independence. Interestingly, non-emerging



20
   The data for the candidate structural break years are not included in the group means either for pre- or post-
structural break years. For the Asian crisis, we assume the years of 1997 and 1998 are the break years and therefore
remove observations for these two years.

                                                         12
developing market countries tightened capital controls as a result of the debt crisis while
emerging market countries did not follow the suit.
        The Asian crisis also appears to be a significant event in the evolution of the trilemma
indexes. The level of industrialized countries’ monetary independence dropped significantly
while their exchange rates became much more stable and their efforts of capital account
liberalization continued, all reflecting the European countries’ movement toward economic and
monetary union. Non-emerging market developing countries on the other hand increased the
level of all three indexes. Emerging market countries also started liberalizing financial markets
but much more significantly, though they lost monetary independence and slightly gained
exchange rate stability.
        Several other major events are candidates for inducing structural breaks identified. For
example, anecdotal accounts date globalization at the beginning of the 1990s, when many
developing countries began to liberalize financial markets. Also, China’s entry to the World
Trade Organization in 2001 was, in retrospect, the beginning of the country’s rise as the world’s
manufacturer. Because the effect of these events may have often been conflated with that of the
Asian crisis we also test whether the years of 1990 and 2001 can be structural breaks.
        The results are reported in Table 2 (b); the first two columns show the results of the mean
equality test for the trilemma indexes with the year of 1990 as the candidate structural break
whereas the last two columns report those with the year of 2001 as the structural break. The top
panel shows that for industrialized countries, 1990 can be a structural break for all three indexes.
However, when we compare the statistical magnitude of the change in the index for monetary
independence across different candidate structural breaks (i.e., compare the t-statistics for
monetary independence in column 4 of Table 2 (a), in column 2 of Table 2 (b), and in column 4
of Table 2 (b)), the mean equality test is most strongly rejected for the no structural break of
1997-98 hypothesis. We obtain the same result for exchange rate stability, though for financial
openness, the structural break of 1990 rejects the null hypothesis the most significantly.21 For the
group of non-emerging market developing countries, the structural break of 1990 is the most
significant for monetary independence and financial openness while it is the year of 2001 for
exchange rate stability. For emerging market countries, however, the most significant structural
break is found to have occurred in 2001 for monetary independence and exchange rate stability,
and in 1997-98 for financial openness.


21
   The finding that both monetary independence and exchange rate stability entail structural breaks around the Asian
crisis can be driven merely by the countries that adopted the euro in 1999. We repeat the same exercise using the
industrial countries sample without the euro countries, and find that the structural breaks for monetary independence
and financial opens remain the same as in the full IDC sample (1997-98 and 1990, respectively), but that the
exchange rate stability series is found to have a structural break in 2001. Also, the change in the exchange rate
stability series is negative (i.e., further exchange rate flexibility) in both 1990 and 2001.

                                                         13
         Lastly, we compare the t-statistics across different structural breaks for each of the
indexes and subsamples. Given that the balanced dataset is used in this exercise, the largest t-
statistics should indicate the most significant structural break for the series. For example,
industrial countries’ monetary independence and exchange rate stability series have the largest t-
statistics when the structural break of 1997-98 is tested.22 For financial openness, however, the
year of 1990 is identified with the largest structural break. The results for other variables and
subsamples are shown in Table 2 (c). For non-emerging LDC and EMG countries, the debt crisis
is found to be the most significant structural break for exchange rate stability. The year of 1990
is the most significant structural break for monetary independence and financial openness for
non-emerging developing market countries, whereas the year of 2001 and the Asian crisis of
1997-98 are, respectively, for emerging market countries.


2.4 The Linear Relationships between the Trilemma Indexes
       While the preceding analyses are quite informative on the evolution of international
macroeconomic policy orientation, we have not shown whether these three macroeconomic
policy goals are “binding” in the context of the impossible trinity. That is, it is important for us to
confirm that countries have faced the trade-offs based on the trilemma. A challenge facing a full
test of the trilemma tradeoff is that the trilemma framework does not impose any obvious
functional form on the nature of the tradeoffs between the three trilemma variables. To illustrate
this concern, we note that the instrument scarcity associated with the trilemma implies that
increasing one trilemma variable, say higher financial integration, should induce lower exchange
rate stability, or lower monetary independence, or a combination of these two policy
adjustments.23 Yet, the nature of the trade-off is not specified. Hence, we test the validity of a
simplest possible trilemma specification – a linear tradeoff. Specifically, we test that the
weighted sum of the three trilemma policy variables adds up to a constant. This reduces to
examining the goodness of fit of this linear regression:


1 = a j MI i,t + b j ERSi,t + c j KAOPENi,t + ε t      where j can be either IDC, ERM, or LDC.                     (1)


Because we have shown that different subsample groups of countries have experienced different
development paths, we allow the coefficients on all the variables to vary across different groups

22
   When the sample is restricted to non-euro IDCs, the most significant structural break for exchange rate stability is
found to be 1973, the year when the Bretton Woods system collapsed, while those for monetary independence and
financial openness are unchanged.
23
   More generally, increasing of one Trilemma variable should induce a drop of the second Trilemma variable, or a
drop in the third Trilemma variable, or a combination of the two.

                                                          14
of countries – industrialized countries, the countries that have been in the European Exchange
Rate Mechanism (ERM), and developing countries – allowing for interactions between the
explanatory variables and the dummies for these subsamples.24 The regression is run for the full
sample period as well as the subsample periods identified in the preceding subsection. The
results are reported in Table 3.
        The rationale behind this exercise is that policy makers of an economy must choose a
weighted average of the three policies in order to achieve a best combination of the two. Hence,
if we can find the goodness of fit for the above regression model is high, it would suggest a
linear specification is rich enough to explain the trade off among the three policy dimensions. In
other words, the lower the goodness of fit, the weaker the support for the existence of the trade-
off, suggesting either that the theory of the trilemma is wrong, or that the relationship is non-
linear.
        Secondly, the estimated coefficients in the above regression model should give us some
approximate estimates of the weights countries put on the three policy goals. However, the
estimated coefficients alone will not provide sufficient information about “how much of” the
policy choice countries have actually implemented. Hence, looking into the predictions using the
estimated coefficients and the actual values for the variables (such as âMI , b̂ERS , and
 ĉKAOPEN ) will be more informative.
        Thirdly, by comparing the predicted values based on the above regression, i.e.,
aˆMI + bˆERS + cˆKAOPEN , over a time horizon, we can obtain some inferences regarding how
“binding” the trilemma is. If the trilemma is found to be linear, the predicted values should hover
around the value of 1, and the prediction errors should indicate how much of the three policy
choices have been “not fully used” or to what extent the trilemma is “not binding.”
        Table 3 presents the regression results. The results from the regression with the full
sample data are reported in the first column, and the others for different subsample periods are in
the following columns. First of all, the adjusted R-squared for the full sample model as well as
for the subsample periods is found to be above 94%, which indicates that the three policy goals
are linearly related to each other, that is, countries face the trade-off among the three policy
options. Across different time periods, the estimated coefficients vary, suggesting that countries
alter over time the weights on the three policy goals.
        Figure 7 illustrates the goodness of fit from a different angle. In the top panels, the solid
lines show the means of the predicted values (i.e., aˆMI + bˆERS + cˆKAOPEN ) based on the full
sample model in the first column of Table 3 for the groups of industrial countries (left) and

24
  The dummy for ERM countries is assigned for the countries and years that corresponds to participation in the
ERM (i.e., Belgium, Denmark, Germany, France, Ireland, and Italy from 1979 on, Spain from 1989, U.K. only for
1990-91, Portugal from 1992, Austria from 1995, Finland from 1996, and Greece from 1999).

                                                      15
developing countries (right).25 To incorporate the time variation of the predictions, the subsample
mean of the prediction values as well as their 95% confidence intervals (that are shown as the
shaded areas) are calculated using five-year rolling windows.26 The panels also display the
rolling means of the predictions using the coefficients and actual values of only two of the three
trilemma terms – aˆMI + bˆERS (brown line with diamond nodes), aˆMI + cˆKAOPEN (green line
with circles), bˆERS + cˆKAOPEN (orange line with “x”).
         From these panels of figures, we can first see that the predicted values based on the
model hover around the value of one closely for both subsamples. For the group of industrial
countries, the prediction average is statistically below the value of one in the late 1970s through
the beginning of the 1990s. However, since then, one cannot reject the null hypothesis that the
mean of the prediction values is one, indicating that the trilemma is “binding” for industrialized
countries. For developing countries, the model is under-predicting from the end of the 1970s
through the mid-1990s. However, unlike the IDC group, the mean of the predictions has become
statistically smaller than one since 2000. At the very least, for both subsamples, the mean of the
predictions never rises above the value of one in statistical sense, implying that, despite some
years when the trilemma is not binding, the three macroeconomic policies are linearly related
with each other.27
         The top panels also show that, among industrialized countries, the policy combination of
increasing exchange rate stability and more financial openness rapidly became prevalent after the
beginning of the mid-1990s. Among developing countries, the policy combinations of monetary
independence and exchange rate stability has been quite dominant throughout the sample period
while the policy combination of exchange rate stability and financial openness has been the least
prevalent over, most probably reflecting the bitter experiences of currency crises.



25
     For this exercise, predictions also incorporate the interactions with the dummy variables shown in Table 3.
26
     Both the mean and the standard errors of the predicted values are calculated using the rolling five-year windows.
                                                                                                    t −4    n

                                                                                                    ∑∑ xˆ         it
The formula for the mean and the standard errors can be shown as xt|t − 4 =                          t     i =1              and
                                                                                                                       n×5
               t −4

              ∑∑ (xˆ              − xt|t − 4 )
                       n
                                             2
                             it
                t     i =1

SE ( xˆ ) =                n × 5 −1                    , respectively, where n refers to the number of countries in a subsample (i.e., IDC and
                                                 n×5
LDC),         x̂it to the prediction values, and xt|t −4 to the mean of x̂it in the rolling five-year window.
Because of the use of rolling five-year windows, the lines in the figures only start in 1974.
27
   One may question the uniqueness of this regression exercise by pointing at the left-hand side variable being an
identity scalar. As a robustness check, we ran a regression of MIi,t on ERSi,t and KAOPENi,t, recovered the estimated
coefficients for aj, bj, and cj.in equation (1), and recreated panels of figures comparable to those in Figure 7. These
alternative figures appeared to be very much comparable to Figure 7 and therefore confirmed our conclusions about
the linearity of the trilemma indexes as well as the development of the subsample mean of prediction values based
on equation (1).

                                                                                   16
        In the lower panels, we can observe the contributions of each policy orientation (i.e.,
âMI , b̂ERS , and ĉKAOPEN ) for the IDC and LDC groups.28 While less developed countries
maintained high, though fluctuating, levels of monetary independence, both exchange rate
stability and financial integration remained at much lower levels throughout the period with the
former moderately declining and the latter slightly increasing. In the last decade or so, while
monetary independence is on a declining trend, the gap between the predictions based on
exchange rate stability and financial openness has been somewhat shrinking. This may indicate
that more countries tend to try to achieve certain levels of exchange rate stability and financial
openness together while maintaining high levels of monetary independence. This kind of effort
can be done only when the countries accumulate high levels of international reserves that allow
them to intervene in foreign exchange markets, consistent with the fact that many developing
countries increased international reserves in the aftermath of the Asian crisis of 1997-98.
However, as the concept of the trilemma predicts, this sort of environment must involve a rise in
the costs of sterilized intervention especially when the actual volume of cross-border transactions
of financial assets increase and when there is no reversal in the three policies.29 This seems to
explain the drop in the level of monetary independence after 2000 for this group of countries.30
         The experience of the industrialized countries casts a stark contrast. Although monetary
independence was also IDC’s top priority until the 1990s, it yielded to financial integration in the
late 1990s and to exchange rate stability in the early 2000s. The trend of financial liberalization
and exchange rate stability correspond to declines in the level of monetary independence, which
persistently kept falling and became the lowest priority in the 2000s. Such changes in the relative
weights of the three policy goals do not require the countries to accumulate international reserves
as was the case with developing countries.31



3. Regression Analyses

        Although the above characterization of the trilemma indexes allows us to observe the
development of policy orientation among countries, it fails to identify countries’ motivations for
policy changes. Hence, we examine econometrically how various choices regarding the three

28
   They are again the means based on five-year rolling windows.
29
   Refer to Aizenman and Glick (2008) and Glick and Hutchison (2008) for more analysis on the limit of sterilized
intervention.
30
   When this exercise is repeated for both the emerging market country (EMG) group and the non-emerging market
developing country group (Non-EMG LDC), the results remain about the same, only except for that the financial
liberalization is more evident for the EMG group; the drop in the level of monetary independence is larger; and the
gap between the predictions based on exchange rate stability and financial openness has been shrinking further.
31
   We also repeat the exercise using the regression models (whose results shown in Table 3) for each of the
subsample period (excluding the break years). The results (not reported) are qualitatively the same as in Figure 7.

                                                        17
policies affect final policy goals, namely, output growth stability, low inflation, and inflation
stability.
         The basic model we estimate is given by:

         yit = α 0 + α1TLM it + α 2TRit + α 3 (TLM it × TRit ) + X it Β + Z t Γ + Di Φ + ε it                (2)

yit is the measure for macro policy performance for country i in year t. More specifically, yit is
either output volatility measured as the five-year standard deviations of the growth rate of per
capita real output (using Penn World Table 6.2); inflation volatility as the five-year standard
deviations of the monthly rate of inflation; or the five-year average of the monthly rate of
inflation. TLMit is a vector of any two of the three trilemma indexes, namely, MI, ERS, and
KAOPEN.32 TRit is the level of international reserves (excluding gold) as a ratio to GDP, and
(TLMit x TRit) is an interaction term between the trilemma indexes and the level of international
reserves. We are particularly interested in the effect of the interaction terms because we suspect
that international reserves may complement or substitute for other policy stances.
          Xit is a vector of macroeconomic control variables that include the variables most used in
the literature, namely, relative income (to the U.S. based on PWT per capita real income); its
quadratic term; trade openness (=(EX+IM)/GDP); the TOT shock as defined as the five-year
standard deviation of trade openness times TOT growth; fiscal procyclicality (as the correlations
between HP-detrended government spending series and HP-detrended real GDP series); M2
growth volatility (as five-year standard deviations of M2 growth); private credit creation as a
ratio to GDP as a measure of financial development; the inflation rate; and inflation volatility. Zt
is a vector of global shocks that includes change in U.S. real interest rate; world output gap; and
relative oil price shocks (measured as the log of the ratio of oil price index to the world’s CPI).
Di is a set of characteristic dummies that includes a dummy for oil exporting countries and
regional dummies. Explanatory variables that persistently appear to be statistically insignificant
are dropped from the estimation. ε it is an i.i.d. error term.
        The data set is organized into five-year panels of 1972-1976, 1977-81, 1982-1986, 1987-
91, 1992-96, 1997-2001, 2002-06. All time-varying variables are included as five-year averages.
The full sample is divided into the groups of industrialized countries (IDC) and developing
countries (LDC) which also includes a subgroup of commodity exporters (COMMOD-LDC), i.e.,
developing countries that are either exporters of fuel or those of non-fuel primary products as
defined by the World Bank, and a subgroup of emerging market countries (EMG). We report the
results only for the last three groups, i.e., only subsamples related to developing countries.


32
  In Table 3, we have shown that these three measures of the trilemma are linearly related. Therefore, it is most
reasonable to include two of the indexes concurrently, not just individually nor all three collectively.

                                                         18
        Since inflation volatility turned out to be a significant explanatory variable for the
regressions for output volatility and the level of inflation, and also the inflation level for the
regressions for inflation volatility, we need to implement an estimation method that handles
outliers properly. Hence, we decide to use the robust regression method which downweights
outliers.33 Also, we remove the observations if their values of inflation volatility are greater than
a value of 30 or the rate of inflation (as an explanatory variable) is greater than 100%.
Furthermore, for comparison purposes, the same set of explanatory variables is used for the three
subsamples except for the regional dummies.

3.1 Estimation of the Basic Model
3.1.1 Output Volatility
        The regression results for the estimation on output volatility are shown in Tables 4-1
through 4-3 for the three subsamples of developing countries, i.e., developing countries,
developing commodity exporters, and emerging market countries. Different specifications are
tested using different combinations of the trilemma indexes as well as their interaction terms.
The results are presented in columns 1 through 6 in each table.34 The variables that consistently
appear to be statistically insignificant are dropped from the estimations.
        The model explains well the output volatility for the developing countries subsample
(Table 4-1). Across different model specifications, the following is true for the group of
developing countries: The higher the level of income is (relative to the U.S.), the more reduced
output volatility is, though the effect is nonlinear. The bigger change occurs on U.S. real interest
rate, the higher output volatility of developing countries may become, indicating that the U.S.
real interest rate may represent the debt payment burden on these countries. The higher TOT
shock there is, the higher output volatility countries experience, consistent with Rodrik (1998)
and Easterly, Islam and Stiglitz (2001) who argue that volatility in world goods through trade
openness can raise output volatility.35 Countries with procyclical fiscal policy tend to experience
more output volatility while oil exporters also experience more output volatility.36

33
   The robust regression procedure conducts iterative weighted least squares regressions while downweighting
observations that have larger residuals until the coefficients converge.
34
   The dummies for “East Asia and Pacific” and “Sub-Saharan Africa” are included in the model for developing
countries, but not reported to conserve space.
35
   The effect of trade openness is found to have insignificant effects for all subgroups of countries and is therefore
dropped from the estimations. This finding reflects the debate in the literature, in which both positive (i.e., volatility
enhancing) and negative (i.e., volatility reducing) effects of trade openness has been evidenced. The volatility
enhancing effect in the sense of Easterly et al. (2001) and Rodrik (1998) is captured by the term for (TOT*Trade
Openness) volatility. For the volatility reducing effect of trade openness, refer to Calvo et al. (2004), Cavallo (2005,
2007), and Cavallo and Frankel (2004). The impact of trade openness on output volatility also depends on the type
of trade, i.e., whether it is inter-industry trade (Krugman, 1993) or intra-industry trade (Razin and Rose,1994).
36
   Countries in East Asia and Pacific as well as in Sub Sahara Africa tend to experience more output volatility
(results not reported).

                                                           19
         Countries with more developed financial markets tend to experience lower output
volatility, a result consistent with the theoretical predictions by Aghion, et al. (1999) and
Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001) as well as past empirical findings such as Blankenau, et al.
(2001) and Kose et al. (2003). This result indicates that economies armed with more developed
financial markets are able to mitigate output volatility, perhaps by allocating capital more
efficiently, lowering the cost of capital, and/or ameliorating information asymmetries (King and
Levine, 1993, Rajan and Zingales, 1998, Wurgler, 2000). We will revisit this issue later on.
         Among the trilemma indexes, only the monetary independence variable is found to have a
significant effect on output volatility; the greater monetary independence one embraces, the less
output volatility the country tends to experience. This finding is no surprise, considering that
stabilization measures should reduce output volatility, especially more so under higher degree of
monetary independence.37 Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2007) find that countries that adopt
inflation targeting – one form of increasing monetary independence – are found to reduce output
volatility, and that the effect is bigger among emerging market countries.38 This volatility
reducing effect of monetary independence may explain the tendency that developing countries,
especially, non-emerging market ones, try not to reduce the extent of monetary independence
over years.
         Like other developing countries, less developed commodity exporting countries are also
susceptible to changes in U.S. real interest rates and TOT shocks, but other variables do not
exhibit the same effects (Table 4-2). Again, countries with greater monetary independence tend
to experience lower output volatility. Interestingly, more exchange rate stability per se does not
have any significant impact on output volatility, but if it is coupled with higher levels of
international reserves holding, then countries can reduce output volatility, which may help
explain the recent buildup of international reserves by developing, especially oil exporting,
countries. Additionally, more financially open commodity exporters seem able to reduce output
volatility, though, interestingly, the coefficient on the interaction term between KAOPEN and
international reserve holding is significantly positive in one of the models. This result indicates
that countries with higher levels of reserves holding than 27% of GDP can experience more
output volatility. This result is somewhat counterintuitive.


37
   This finding can be surprising to some if the concept of monetary independence is taken synonymously to central
bank independence because many authors, most typically Alesina and Summers (1993), have found more
independent central banks would have no or little at most impact on output variability. However, in this literature,
the extent of central bank independence is usually measured by the legal definition of the central bankers and/or the
turnover ratios of bank governors, which can bring about different inferences compared to our measure of monetary
independence.
38
   The link is not always predicted to be negative theoretically. When monetary authorities react to negative supply
shocks, that can amplify the shocks and exacerbate output volatility. Cechetti and Ehrmann (1999) find the positive
association between adoption of inflation targeting and output volatility.

                                                         20
        While emerging market countries share many of the same traits in macroeconomic
variables as those in the LDC sample, the results on the trilemma indexes are a little different.
Countries with more stable exchange rate tend to experience higher output volatility, which
conversely implies that countries with more flexible exchange rates will experience lower levels
of output volatility, as was found in Edwards and Levy-Yeyati (2005) and Haruka (2007).
However, the interaction term is found to have a statistically negative effect, suggesting that
countries holding high levels of international reserves are able to reduce output volatility. The
threshold level of international reserves holding is 21-24% of GDP. Singapore, a country with a
middle level of exchange rate stability (0.50 in the 2002-06 period) and a very high level of
international reserves holding (100% as a ratio of GDP), is able to reduce the output volatility by
2.65-3.2 percentage points.39 China, whose exchange rate stability index is as high as 0.97 and
whose ratio of reserves holding to GDP is 40% in 2006, is able to reduce volatility by 1.1-1.5
percentage points. The estimation results on the trilemma variables are summarized in Table 7.40
        Figure 8 graphically shows the marginal interactive effects between ERS and IR based on
the estimates from Column 2 of Table 4-3. For presentation purposes, in the figure, the EMG
group of countries is divided into (a) the Asian group, (b) the Latin American group, and (c) the
other EMG countries. In all the panels of figures, the contours are drawn to present different
levels of the effect of ERS on output volatility conditional on the level of IR. Also, the solid
horizontal line refers to the threshold of IR at 21% of GDP, above which higher levels of ERS
will have a negative impact on output volatility.41 For example, the solid line of contour above
the threshold shows the combinations of ERS and IR that leads to a one percentage point
reduction in the output volatility. In the figure, we can see that the further toward the northeast
corner in the panel, i.e., the higher level of ERS and IR a country pursues, the more negative
impact it can have on output volatility. Below the threshold, however, it is true that the further
toward the southeast corner, i.e., the higher level of ERS and the lower level of IR a country
pursues, the more positive impact it can have on output volatility. In each of the panels, the
scatter diagrams of ERS and IR are superimposed. The black circles indicate ERS and IR for the
period of 2002-06 and the red “x’s” for the 1992-96 period.


39
   See Moreno and Spiegel (1997) for earlier study of trilemma configurations in Singapore.
40
   Following Acemoglu (2003), we also suspect institutional development plays a role in reducing output volatility.
To measure the level of institutional development, we use the variable LEGAL, which is the first principal
component of law and order (LAO), anti-corruption measures (CORRUPT), and bureaucracy quality (BQ). However,
it turns out that the LEGAL variable is statistically insignificant and sometimes with the wrong sign (not reported).
Given small variations in the time series of the variable, this result is not surprising.
41
   We also note that the estimated coefficient on IR (level) is significantly positive in Columns (2) and (6) of Table
4-3, which indicates that, while a higher level of IR holding can lessen the positive effect of ERS, a higher level of
IR holding itself is volatility-enhancing. This is not captured in Figure 8 since we focused on the effect of ERS and
how it changes depending on the level of IR.

                                                         21
        Using these diagrams, we can make several interesting observations. First, between the
1992-96 and 2002-06 periods, a period which encompasses the last wave of global crises, i.e., the
Asian crisis of 1997-98, the Russian crisis of 1998, and the Argentina crisis of 2001-02, many
countries, especially those in East Asia and Eastern Europe, increased their IR holding above the
threshold. Secondly, the movement is not necessarily toward the northeast direction. Rather, it is
around the threshold level where the effect of ERS is neutral (i.e., zero percentage point impact),
unless they move much higher toward output volatility-reducing territory (such as China and
Bulgaria). Thirdly, while we observe a moderately positive association between ERS and IR,
none of these observations are applicable to Latin American countries. Lastly, there are not many
countries that have achieved combinations of ERS and IR to reduce output volatility significantly.
Countries such as Botswana, China, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Jordan, and Singapore are more of
exceptions. However, at the very least, these estimation results should explain why many
countries, especially those with the intention of pursuing greater exchange rate stability, are
motivated to hold a massive amount of international reserves.

3.1.2 Inflation Volatility
        We repeat the exercise for inflation volatility. The results for subsamples of developing
countries are reported in Tables 5-1 through 5-3 and summarized in Table 7.
        Across different subsamples, countries with higher relative income tend to experience
lower inflation volatility, and naturally, those with higher levels of inflation are expected to
experience higher inflation volatility. The TOT shock is found to increase inflation volatility.
Furthermore, for commodity exporters, oil price increases would lead to higher inflation
volatility.
         The performance of the trilemma indexes appears to be the weakest for this group of
estimations overall. Monetary independence is found to be an inflation volatility decreasing
factor for commodity exporters. However, given that it is also an output volatility decreasing
factor for this group of countries, this finding is somewhat counterintuitive.
         Emerging market countries, on the other hand, tend to experience higher inflation
volatility if they are more open to capital account transactions. This significantly positive effect
of financial openness may be capturing financial turbulence that can arise as a result of financial
liberalization policy. In fact, when we include the interaction term between the crisis dummy and
the financial openness variable, the statistical significance of the financial openness variable
declines while the interaction term enters the estimation marginally significantly.42

42
  The currency crisis dummy variable is derived from the conventional exchange rate market pressure (EMP) index
pioneered by Eichengreen et al. (1996). The EMP index is defined as a weighted average of monthly changes in the
nominal exchange rate, the international reserve loss in percentage, and the nominal interest rate. The weights are
inversely related to the pooled variance of changes in each component over the sample countries, and adjustment is

                                                        22
3.1.3. Medium-run Level of Inflation
        Tables 6-1 through 6-3 show the results for the regressions on the level of inflation.
These three tables report that countries with higher inflation volatility, M2 growth volatility, and
oil price shocks tend to experience higher output volatility. Also, when the world economy is
experiencing a boom, developing countries tend to experience higher inflation, which
presumably reflects strong demand for goods produced and exported by developing countries.
        Countries with more monetary autonomy tend to experience higher inflation. From the
perspective that greater monetary independence should be synonymous with a more independent
central bank, most typically exemplified by the literature of time-inconsistency in monetary
policy, a country with greater monetary independence should be able to lower inflation.43 One
possible explanation would be that countries with higher levels of monetary independence
attempt to monetize their debt and cause higher inflation. Such countries may be better off if they
are not monetarily independent and just import monetary policy from other countries through
fixed exchange rate arrangements.
         As a matter of fact, in all three subsamples, higher exchange rate stability is found to lead
countries to experience lower inflation, a result consistent with the literature (such as Ghosh et
al., 1997). This finding and the previously found positive association between exchange rate
stability and output volatility are in line with the theoretical prediction that establishing stable
exchange rates is a trade-off issue for policy makers; it will help the country to achieve lower
inflation by showing a higher level of credibility and commitment, but at the same time, the
efforts of maintaining stable exchange rates will rid the policy makers of an important
adjustment mechanism through fluctuating exchange rates – which would explain the negative
coefficient on monetary independence in the output volatility regressions.
         Furthermore, for the LDC group, the interaction term between ERS and international
reserves holding is found to have a positive impact on the rate of inflation. Models 2 and 6 in
Table 6-1 show that if the ratio of reserves holding to GDP is greater than 53% or 65%,
respectively, the efforts of pursuing exchange rate stability can help increase the level of
inflation. Although these levels of reserves holding are very high, this means that countries with
excess levels of reserves holding will eventually face the limit in the efforts of fully sterilizing




made for the countries that experienced hyperinflation following Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999). For countries
without data to compute the EMP index, the currency crisis classifications in Glick and Hutchison (2001) and
Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) are used.
43
   In other words, more independent central bankers should be able to remove the inflation bias (Kydland and
Prescott, 1977 and Barro and Gordon, 1983).

                                                       23
foreign exchange intervention to maintain exchange rate stability, thereby experiencing higher
inflation.44
        Lastly, models (3) through (6) in all subsamples show that the more financially open a
developing country is, the lower inflation it will experience. Interestingly, the more open to trade
a country is, the more likely it is to experience lower inflation, though this effect is weakly
significant only for the LDC group.
        As globalization became actively debated, the negative association between “openness”
and inflation was more frequently remarked upon.45 Romer (1993), extending the Barro-Gordon
(1983) model, theorized and empirically verified that the more open to trade a country becomes,
the less motivated its monetary authorities are to inflate, suggesting a negative link between trade
openness and inflation. Razin and Binyamini (2007) predicted that both trade and financial
liberalization will flatten the Phillips curve, so that policy makers will become less responsive to
output gaps and more aggressive in fighting inflation.46 Here, across different subsamples of
developing countries, we present evidence consistent with the negative openness-inflation
relationship.

3.2. How Does a Policy Orientation Affect Macroeconomic Performance?
Composite Indexes for Policy Orientation
        As we have already seen, decisions on which two of the three policy goals – monetary
independence, exchange rate stability, and financial integration – to retain, or which one to give
up, characterizes the international financial regime a country decides to implement. For example,
currency unions such as the Euro countries and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) or countries
with currency boards like Argentina before 2001 require member countries to abandon monetary
independence, but retain exchange rate stability and financial openness. The Bretton Woods
system kept countries financially closed, but let them exercise an independent monetary policy
and to stabilize their currency values. Thus, measures constructed by two of the above three
indexes can allow one to summarize the policy orientations of countries. In other words,
measures composed of two of the three indexes should be able to show how close countries are
to the “vertex” of the trilemma triangle.
        For this purpose, we construct composite indexes based on two of the above three
measures. The principal component of MI and ERS measures how close countries (MI_ERS) are


44
   Aizenman and Glick (2008) and Glick and Hutchison (2008) show that China, whose ratio of reserves holding to
GDP is estimated to be 50%, has started facing more inflationary pressure in 2007 as a result of intensive market
interventions to sustain exchange rate stability (though the onset of global crisis has reversed these trends).
45
   Rogoff (2003) argues that globalization contributes to dwindling mark-ups, and thereby, disinflation.
46
   Loungani et al. (2001) provides empirical evidence that countries with greater restrictions on capital mobility face
steeper Phillips curves.

                                                          24
toward the vertex of “closed economy” whereas that of ERS and KAOPEN (ERS_KAO) refers to
the vertex of currency union or currency board, and that of MI and KAOPEN (MI_KAO) to
“floating exchange rate.” Again, all three indexes are normalized between zero and one. Higher
values indicate a country is closer toward the vertex of the trilemma triangle.

Estimation with Composite Indexes
         Columns 7 though 12 in Tables 4-1 through 6-3 show the estimation results for different
models each of which include one composite index and its interaction with reserves holding.
Tables 4-1 and 4-2 show that countries with higher MI_KAO, i.e., countries with more flexible
exchange rates, tend to experience lower output volatility, which is in line with the oft-argued
automatic stabilizing role of flexible exchange rates. For developing countries, the more
financially closed an economy is (the higher its MI_ERS is), output volatility tends to be lower.
Given that monetary independence is found to have a volatility reducing effect in the estimations
with individual trilemma indexes, it is monetary independence that leads to lower output
volatility whether financially closed economies with more stable exchange rates or financially
open but with more flexible exchange rates. Emerging market economies (Table 4-3), on the
other hand, seem to follow different dynamics. Economies with higher MI_ERS, i.e., more
closed financial markets, are able to reduce output volatility only when they hold ample reserves.
         In Tables 5-1 through 5-3, we see that developing countries or emerging market
economies with higher exchange rate stability and more financial openness (ERS and KAO), or
those with weaker monetary independence, tend to experience higher inflation volatility.
Commodity exporters that pursue greater monetary independence and financial openness (MI
and KAO) tend to experience less inflation volatility (Table 5-2).
         The level of inflation can be lowered if a developing or commodity-exporting country
pursues greater monetary independence and more stable exchange rates (Columns 7 and 8 in
Tables 6-1 and 6-2). Or, if developing countries, whether commodity-exporting or emerging
market ones, pursue a policy combination of greater exchange rate stability and more financial
openness, these economies should be able to lower the level of inflation. This finding can be
disappointing news for monetary authorities because it implies that, to implement disinflationary
policy, policy makers should yield monetary policy making to another country and invite more
policy discipline by opening financial markets.

4.     Further Analyses of the Trilemma Configurations on Macro-Performance
       While the above analysis sheds important light on how the trilemma configurations affect
macroeconomic performance of the economies, other important questions, especially those
which have emerged out of the ongoing financial crisis, are not directly addressed. In this section,


                                                25
we further investigate the following two more issues. First, we take a closer look at the effect of
financial development on output volatility. Secondly, we examine the impacts of external
financing on output volatility, inflation volatility, and the medium-term level of inflation.

4.1 Interactions Between the Trilemma Configurations and Financial Development
         The ongoing global financial crisis has illustrated that financial development can be a
double-edged sword. While further financial development may enhance output growth and
stability by ameliorating information asymmetry, enabling more efficient capital allocation, and
allowing for further risk sharing, it can also expose economies to high-risk, high-return financial
instruments, thereby involving the possibility of amplifying real shocks and/or falling into the
boom-burst cycles. Naturally, the effect of financial development deserves further investigation,
which we are about to conduct.
         In Tables 4-1 through 4-3, we have seen that more financial development can lead to less
output volatility, but its effect is significant only for the LDC subsample. One may also wonder
how trilemma configurations can interact with the level of financial development. There is no
question that monetary policy with high levels of authorities’ independence, which is found to be
volatility-reducing, should work better with more developed financial markets. Exchange rate
stability, which can lead to higher output volatility, may be less disturbing if financial markets
handle capital allocation more efficiently. Financial liberalization can easily be expected to work
hand in hand with financial development to reduce economic volatility.
         With these assumptions, we test to see if there is any interaction between the trilemma
indexes and financial development which we measure using private credit creation as a ratio to
GDP (PCGDP). The results turn out to be simply futile; when the previous output volatility
regressions from Tables 4-1 through 4-3 are repeated, including interaction terms between the
trilemma indexes and PCGDP, none of the interaction terms turn out to be significant (not
reported). These results are not surprising or discouraging, because, as we already mentioned, we
suspect that the effect of financial development can be ambiguous.
         The weakness of using interaction terms is that we must assume that the effect of
PCGDP on the link between the trilemma indexes and output volatility is monotonic; a higher
level of PCGDP must either enhance, have no impact on, or lessen the link. Given the
insignificance of the interaction terms from the initial investigation, we suspect the nonlinearity
of PCGDP. As such, we decide to use the dummies for different level groups of PCGDP.47 That
is, PCGDP_HI is assigned a value of one for a country if the country’s PCGDP is above the 75th
percentile in the distribution of five-year averages of PCGDP within a five-year window, and

47
  This investigation is motivated by Hnatkovska and Loayza (2005), who examines the nonlinear effect of structural
variables, including financial development, on the output volatility-growth link.

                                                       26
zero, otherwise. PCGDP_LO takes a value of one if the country’s PCGDP is below the 25th
percentile, and zero, otherwise. PCGDP_MD takes a value of one if the country’s PCGDP lies
between the 25th and 75th percentiles in a five-year period. We interact these level category
dummies with the trilemma indexes and include the interaction terms in the output volatility
regressions, hoping to capture the nonlinear effect of financial development on the link between
the trilemma configurations and output volatility.
         Table 8 reports the estimation results only for the PCGDP variable and the interaction
terms for the developing countries subsample (Columns 1-3) and the emerging market countries
subsample (Columns 4-6) in order to conserve space. At the bottom of the tables, we also report
the Wald test statistics for the tests on the differences in the estimated coefficients of the
interaction terms between the trilemma indexes and different PCGDP groups.
         In Columns 1-3, we can see that this analysis does not yield any significant results for the
group of developing countries. Exchange rate stability may contribute to higher output volatility
if the country is equipped with medium (or higher) levels of financial development while the low
level of financial development may contribute to reducing output volatility, though none of the
estimated coefficients are significant.
         Among EMGs (Columns 4-6), we see more interesting results. The estimated coefficient
on the term “ERS x Medium PCGDP” is significant in Columns 4 and 5. In Column 5, the
coefficient on “ERS x High PCGDP” is also significant, and both “ERS x Medium PCGDP” and
“ERS x High PCGDP” are greater than “ERS x Low PCGDP” in the estimates’ magnitude
although they are not statistically significantly different. At least, we can surmise that for
countries with underdeveloped financial markets, higher levels of exchange rate stability do not
lead to higher output volatility. Those with medium levels of financial development do seem to
experience higher output volatility when they pursue a more stable exchange rate, suggesting that
countries with newly developed financial markets can be volatile when they pursue greater
exchange rate stability. Furthermore, in both Columns 4 and 5, the estimated coefficients on the
interaction term between ERS and IR are found to be significantly negative. Using the estimates,
we can estimate that to cancel or lessen the volatility-enhancing effect of ERS, EMGs with
medium (or higher) levels of financial development need to hold at least 22-25% of GDP of
international reserves. However, this rule is not applicable to those with underdeveloped
financial markets.
         Financial development and financial openness seem to have interesting interactive effects
on output volatility as well. While those EMGs with medium or higher levels of financial
development tend to experience less output volatility when they decide to pursue more stable
exchange rates, those with underdeveloped financial markets are expected to experience greater
output volatility if they pursue greater financial openness. When the coefficient of “KAOPEN x


                                                 27
Medium PCGDP” and “KAOPEN x High PCGDP” are compared to that of “KAOPEN x Low
PCGDP,” the difference is found to be statistically significant. These results indicate that
emerging market economies need to be equipped with highly developed financial markets if they
want to reap the benefit of financial liberalization on their output volatility.
         These findings suggest that a policy management leaning more toward exchange rate
stability is most likely to exacerbate output volatility when the economy is equipped with
medium levels of financial development. Having a higher level of financial openness and
financial development can yield a synergistic impact to dampen output volatility, presumably by
facilitating allocation of capital, ameliorating information asymmetry, and thereby reducing the
cost of capital.48 The worst and more significant case is that a country with underdeveloped
financial markets can exacerbate output volatility caused by financial liberalization.

4.2 The Effects of External Financing
        Financial liberalization has increased its pace over the last two decades. This, however,
does not mean that countries suddenly became more financially linked with others. In the 1980s,
developing countries received external financing in the form of sovereign debt, but the debt crisis
experience spurred many of these countries to shy away from sovereign debt. After the 1990s,
the role of FDI became more important and more recent waves of financial liberalization have
contributed to a rise in portfolio flows across borders as well. As Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006)
note, the type, volume, and direction of capital flows have changed over time.

4.2.1 Incorporation of External Financing
         Against this backdrop, we extend our investigation by incorporating the effect of external
financing. More specifically, we include the variables that capture net FDI inflows, net portfolio
inflows, net ‘other’ inflows (which mostly include bank lending in IFS), short-term debt, and
total debt service. For net capital flows, we use the IFS data and define them as external
liabilities (= capital inflows with a positive sign) minus assets (= capital inflows with a negative
sign) for each type of flows – negative values mean that a country experiences a net outflow
capital of the type of concern. Short-term debt is included as the ratio of total external debt and
total debt service as is that of Gross National Income (GNI). Both variables are retrieved from
WDI. Because the debt-related variables are limited, we only deal with one subsample that is
composed of developing countries for which the debt-related variables are available. Also, to



48
   See Bekaert et al., (2000, 2001), Henry (2000), Stultz (1999) among others for the link between financial
liberalization and the cost of capital. Chinn and Ito (2006) show that financial openness can exogenously lead to
more financial development.

                                                         28
isolate the effect of external financing from currency crises, we include a dummy for currency
crises.
         The results are reported in Table 9 for all three dependent variables, output volatility in
columns 1 through 3, inflation volatility in columns 4 through 6, and inflation level in columns 7
through 9. We present the estimated coefficients only for the variables of interest.49 Table 9
shows that the more ‘other’ capital inflows, i.e., banking lending or more net portfolio inflows, a
country receives, the more likely it is to experience higher output volatility, reflecting the fact
that countries that experience macroeconomic turmoil often experience an increase in inflows of
banking lending or “hot money” such as portfolio investment. FDI inflows appear to contribute
to lowering inflation volatility, which is somewhat counterintuitive. One possible explanation is
that countries tend to stabilize inflation movement to attract FDI, and this may also explain the
negative, but less significant, coefficients on the net FDI inflow variables in the inflation level
regressions. Other types of capital flows do not seem to matter for either inflation volatility or
inflation levels.
         Both short-term debt and total debt service are positive and significant contributors to
both inflation volatility and inflation level, supporting our previous argument that countries do
tend to monetize their debt especially when their monetary authorities embrace more
independence – the estimated coefficient on monetary independence continues to be significantly
positive in the inflation level regressions.
         Among the trilemma indexes, greater monetary independence continues to be a negative
contributor to output volatility though it is also a positive contributor to the level of inflation.
More financial openness is now a negative contributor to output volatility for this sample of
countries while its negative impact on the level of inflation remains. Higher exchange rate
stability continues to dampen the level of inflation, but holding too much of international
reserves (more than 45% of GDP) can cancel the negative effect and contribute to higher
inflation.

4.2.2 External Financing and Policy Orientation
       Given that the combination of two out of three policy stances is what matters to the
macro outcomes, when we estimate the effect of external financing, it is important to condition
on what kind of policy combination is being pursued by the recipient countries.50 The best way
for us to do that is to examine the interactive effect between the type of external financing and
that of the policy combination. For that purpose, we create dummy variables for the types of

49
   Overall, other macroeconomic variables retain the characteristics found in the previous regressions, though they
tend to be less statistically significant.
50
   See IMF (2007) for an examination of the relationship between how countries manage capital inflows and
subsequent macroeconomic outcomes.

                                                         29
policy orientation using the composite trilemma indexes we have been using. That is, if the
composite index MI_ERS turns out to be the highest compared to the other two, MI_KAO and
ERS_KAO, then a value of one is assigned for D_MI_ERS and zero for the other two,
D_MI_KAO and D_ERS_KAO. In the results shown in Table 10, the external financing
variables are interacted with the dummy for one particular type of policy combination. For
example, in columns 1 and 2 of Table 10 we use in the estimation of output volatility the dummy
for the policy orientation of greater monetary independence and exchange rate stability (MI_ERS;
or “financially closed” policy option) and interact it with the external financing variables.
Columns 3 and 4 use the dummy for the policy orientation of greater monetary independence and
further financial opening (“more flexible exchange rate” policy), and columns 5 and 6 use that of
greater exchange rate stability and further financial opening (“currency union” or currency
board). The following six columns report the results for the estimation of inflation volatility and
the next six for the level of inflation.
         For output volatility, we find different types of external financing can have different
impacts on output volatility depending on the policy regime in place. Net FDI inflows, for
example, tend to dampen output volatility in general, but it can enhance the volatility in a regime
that has pursued greater monetary independence and more stable exchange rates (i.e., less
financial openness). Net portfolio inflows seem to have a positive impact on output volatility, but
its volatility increasing impact is especially higher for the countries with the ERS-KAO
(“currency union”) regimes, in line with what has been found in the crisis literature. Countries
with more flexible exchange rates (or monetary independence and financial openness), on the
other hand, may be able to dampen the volatility-increasing effect, though its effect for this
policy orientation is not found to be statistically significant. Positive net inflows of bank lending
can be volatility increasing, but that effect can be dampened, though only marginally
significantly, if the country adopts the policy combination of exchange rate stability and financial
openness.
         The greater the debt service is, the more likely a country is to experience higher levels of
output volatility, especially when the country pursues a combination of greater exchange rate
stability and financial openness. This result appears to be consistent with the “original sin”
argument; countries that are indebted in a foreign currency and that try to maintain both
exchange rate stability and capital account openness often experience sudden capital flow
reversal and consequently higher output volatility.
         In the inflation volatility regressions, it seems that net inflow of FDI contributes to lower
inflation volatility across different policy regimes in general. However, the volatility-reducing
effect is even higher for countries with flexible exchange rates. The table also shows that, for
countries with flexible exchange systems, portfolio inflows can lower inflation volatility. These


                                                 30
results imply that if a country is considering to allow more influx of FDI or portfolio flows while
wanting to lower inflation volatility, it would be best to adopt a flexible exchange rate system or
keep the overall level of financial openness at low levels. Lastly, total debt services can make
countries with monetary independence and financial openness experience higher inflation
volatility while financially closed regimes would experience a slight drop in inflation volatility.
This may be because rapid currency depreciation could enlarge the size of total debt which could
encourage countries to monetize away the debt.
         Different types of policy combinations seem to matter only for ‘other’ (i.e., bank lending)
inflows in the estimation for the level of inflation; a net recipient of bank lending flows tends to
experience lower inflation if it adopts a policy combination of monetary independence and
financial openness, but it could experience higher inflation if it adopts a financially closed
system. One merit of a country with currency union-like regime is that it can dampen the
inflation pressure of total debt services. A country with closed financial markets on the other
hand may experience higher output volatility as a result of higher levels of debt services.

5.      Implications for the Current Crisis
5.1     International Reserve Holdings: Is the Trilemma Still Binding?
        It has been argued that one of the main causes of the financial crisis of 2008-09 is the
ample liquidity provided by the global imbalances; current account surplus countries hoard
international reserves in an attempt to stabilize their exchange rates, export liquidity to the global
markets, and finance profligacy in the advanced countries, especially the United States.51 In
Figure 8, we have seen that some, but not many, countries pursue higher levels of ERS and IR
concurrently. Figure 9 updates Figure 8 by using the updated Trilemma indexes and IR data for
2007 and compare with the data from the 2002-06 period. In the panels of figures, we can
observe that countries’ positions do not change much. The only noticeable change would be that
countries continue to increase their IR holding, but they are not necessarily moving toward the
northeast corner. Why do these countries continue to increase their IR holding?
         One possible conjecture is that countries holding a massive amount of foreign reserves
might allow the relaxation of the trilemma, i.e., achieve all three goals at the same time. Figure
10 displays a scatter diagram for EMG countries’ ERS and MI_KAO (composite index of MI
and KAOPEN), which the concept of the trilemma predicts should be negatively correlated.
There are two groups of country-years shown in the diagram; one is a group of country-years
with the IR holding greater than 21% of GDP, the threshold above which ERS can have output
volatility-reducing effect as shown in Figures 8 and 9, and the other is those with the IR holding
less than 21% of GDP. If the above speculation is right, the (green) triangles – country-years
51
     See Roubini (2008) as one example.

                                                 31
with >21% IR – in the diagram should be scattered above the circles – country-years with <21%
IR.
         Theoretically, these two variables should be negatively correlated – the higher level of
ERS a country pursues, the lower level of MI-KAO, which is a proxy to the weighted average of
MI and KAO it has to choose as we formally confirmed in Section 2.4. In the figure, however,
the fitted lines for both groups are barely negatively sloped – the estimated coefficients for both
are statistically insignificantly negative. We test whether the slopes and intercepts of these two
fitted lines are statistically different. If the conjecture that higher levels of IR holding could relax
the trilemma, a country should be able to pursue higher levels of MI-KAO with the same level of
ERS, which would either make the slope flatter or raise the intercept, i.e., the conditional mean
of MI-KAO. Simple coefficient equality tests reveal that the slopes of the two fitted lines are not
statistically different from each other, but that the intercept for the fitted line for the country-
years with >21% IR is significantly higher than that for the <21% IR group. This is in line with
the conjecture that higher levels of IR holding can allow a country to pursue a higher weighted
average of MI and KAOPEN, i.e., relax the trilemma.
         Given the findings from the output volatility regressions in Table 4, for the EMG
countries, having greater monetary independence could lead a country to reduce output volatility.
If a country holds a higher level of IR than 21% of its GDP, it may be able to relax the trilemma,
so that it may decide to pursue greater monetary independence and financial openness while
maintaining exchange rate stability. One easy candidate that fits this category is China. Figure 11
shows the trilemma configurations and IR holding for emerging market countries in East Asia
and China. We can observe that while it does not give up its exchange rate stability and monetary
independence, China’s IR holding has been increasing and financial openness has inched up.
Although we have not tested formally, we find evidence consistent with the view that countries’
efforts to “relax the trilemma” can involve an increase in IR holding, which may have
contributed to the global expansion of liquidity prior to the financial crisis of 2008-09. We leave
testing this argument as one of our future research agendas.

5.2 Is the Current Crisis Consistent with Our Models?
        As the IMF has revised the GDP estimates downward for many developing countries
several times since the fall of 2008, it has become clear that the ongoing crisis is not just an
American problem or the one in the industrial world, but a major challenge for the global
economy. In other words, the concept of “de-coupling” is no longer applicable.
        Given that we can identify the countries that are experiencing more severe economic
situations than others as the time of this writing, we examine whether the current crisis situations
are consistent with what we have found from our previous findings. That is, we use the data from


                                                  32
2007 for the variables upon which we have focused in this paper and see whether the conditions
of these variables as of the eve of the crisis present any signals for the ongoing crisis. For this
purpose, Table 11 presents the variables of our focus for a group of emerging market countries.
Namely, the table reports PCGDP, IR (both as% of GDP), the three trilemma indexes, and the
external finance variables. dX refers to the change of the variable X compared to the 2002-06
period.52 In the table, we also report swap lines provided by the U.S. Federal Reserve and rescue
loans provided by the IMF (as of March 2009). The swap lines and rescue loans are reported to
identify which countries are experiencing more severe situations than others although countries
without these arrangements can be also experiencing dire situations.
        Before making observations of these countries, it is noteworthy to point out that the size
of the swap lines or the IMF rescue loans is not so big for most of the countries. For Brazil,
Mexico, and Korea, it is about 2-3% of GDP and 7% for Pakistan. It is only for Singapore and
Hungary that the size of the additionally available IR is relatively substantial, around 18% of
GDP. Based on what we found in Figures 8 and 9, we can see that, except for Singapore and
Hungary, the effect of these swap lines or IMF rescue loans can be quite minimal at most to
reduce output volatility. Obstfeld et al. (2009) also mention the smallness of the additional IR
provided for developing countries, especially compared to industrialized countries, and argue
that these additional reserves would merely have signaling effects, unlike industrial countries’
that can have real effects to relax liquidity constraints.53 Our results are consistent with their
observation.
        Let us now make observations about the conditions pertaining to trilemma configurations
and both internal and external financing of the concerned countries. Among the countries with
the swap or rescue loan arrangements, Hungary, Korea, and Pakistan experienced a relatively
rapid increase in net inflows of bank lending (‘Other’). In Table 9, we see that countries with
positive net inflow of ‘other’ investment tend to experience higher output volatility. Among the
three countries, Hungary appears to have pursued the combination of MI and KAOPEN whereas
Pakistan did that of MI and ERS. Both combinations, MI-KAO or MI-ERS, are found to lead
bank lending flows to have a bigger impact on output volatility (Table 10). The Pakistani
economy is also subject to higher output volatility because its financial development level is not
high although it pursues greater exchange rate stability. Interestingly, several other East
European countries, such as Lithuania, Poland, and Slovak Republic, and Russia also
experienced large increases in net inflow of bank lending, which suggest that these economies


52
  PCGDP is as of 2006 (or 2005 if the figure for 2006 is unavailable) because it is unavailable for 2007.
53
  They also argue that the fact that a more substantial amount of rescue reserves can be readily available for
industrialized countries should be the reason why industrialized countries do not (have to) hold a massive amount of
IR.

                                                        33
can be subject to higher output volatility.54 In Table 9, we also found that the higher level of net
inflow of portfolio investment it receives, the greater output volatility a country would have to
face. The impact can be greater especially when the country pursues a policy combination of
ERS and KAO. Both Brazil and Argentina experienced a rapid increase in net inflow of portfolio
investment although neither of them pursued the policy combination of ERS and KAO. The table
also shows that Venezuela may be exposed to higher output volatility; it pursued fixed exchange
rate though its IR fell significantly while portfolio inflow increased. Thus, our casual
observations confirm that the inferences we obtained from our estimations seem to be consistent
with the economic conditions that led to severe crisis situations.

6.      Concluding Remarks
        Our paper outlined a methodology to trace the changing patterns of the trilemma
configurations. Taking a longer-run view, it reveals striking differences between the choices of
industrialized and developing countries during 1970-2006. The recent trend suggests that among
emerging market countries, the three dimensions of the trilemma configurations: monetary
independence, exchange rate stability, and financial openness, are converging towards a “middle
ground” with managed exchange rate flexibility, which they attempted to buffer by holding
sizable international reserves, while maintaining medium levels of monetary independence and
financial integration. Industrialized countries, on the other hand, have been experiencing
divergence of the three dimensions of the trilemma and moved toward the configuration of high
exchange rate stability and financial openness and low monetary independence as most
distinctively exemplified by the euro countries’ experience.
        This configuration of the three macroeconomic policies is an outcome of the evolution of
different system arrangements. Over years, external shocks have affected the policy arrangement
across countries. In this regard, we have shown that major crises in the last four decades, namely,
the collapse of the Bretton Woods system, the debt crisis of 1982, and the Asian crisis of 1997-
98, caused structural breaks in the trilemma configurations. For both industrialized and
developing countries, the major events in the last decade, such as the emergence of rapid
globalization and the rise of China, have also impacted the policy arrangements significantly.
With these results, we can safely expect that the present turbulence in the global financial
markets could challenge the stability of the current trilemma configuration.
        We also tested whether the three macroeconomic policy goals are “binding” in the
context of the impossible trinity. That is, we attempted to provide evidence that countries have
faced the trade-offs based on the trilemma. Because there is no specific functional form of the

54
  Latvia, though not categorized as an EMG country in the dataset, also experienced an influx of bank lending in
this year and is experiencing a severe economic crisis in 2008-09.

                                                        34
trade-offs or the linkage of these three policy goals, we tested a simplest linear specification for
the three trilemma indexes and examined whether the weighted sum of the three trilemma policy
variables adds up to a constant. Our results confirmed that countries do face the binding trilemma.
That is, a change in one of the trilemma variables would induce a change with the opposite sign
in the weighted average of the other two.
         While external forces could impact countries’ decisions on the trilemma configurations,
policy makers decide on the specifics of the combination of the three policies depending on the
goals they would like to achieve. Hence, we also tested how each one of the three policy choices
as well as the combination of the two could affect the economic outcomes policy makers pay
close attention to, such as output volatility, inflation volatility, and medium-term inflation rates,
with a particular focus on developing countries.
         We found countries with higher levels of monetary independence tend to experience
lower output volatility. When we restrict our sample to emerging market economies, we also
found that countries with higher levels of exchange rate fixity tend to experience higher output
volatility. However, this effect can be mitigated by holding international reserves if the level of
international reserves is higher than 19-22% of GDP. This result motivates the reason why so
many emerging market countries want to hold massive amounts of international reserves.
         We also found that countries with more monetary autonomy tend to experience higher
inflation, which may reflect countries’ motives to monetize their debt. Countries with higher
exchange rate stability tend to experience lower inflation as has been found in the literature.
Furthermore, financial openness helps a country to experience lower inflation, possibly
indicating that globalization gives more discipline than monetary autonomy to a country’s
macroeconomic management.
         We also extended our estimation model to investigate the following two questions
relevant to the current crisis: 1) Can financial development affect the link between trilemma
policy configurations and output volatility?; and 2) How can external financing affect
macroeconomic performances interactively with the trilemma configurations?
         Regarding the effect of financial development on the link between the trilemma
configurations and output volatility, we found a nonlinear effect among emerging market
economies that medium-levels of financial development can raise the volatility-enhancing impact
of exchange rate stability. Highly developed financial markets can help financial liberalization
policy to reduce output volatility while underdeveloped financial markets could exacerbate
output volatility, signifying the synergistic effects between financial development and financial
opening.
         In the estimations with the variables for external financing, we find the following: net
recipients of cross-border bank lending or portfolio flows – or the “hot money” – tend to


                                                35
experience higher output volatility, a result consistent with the literature. We also took a closer
look at the effect of policy orientations on the effect of external financing and found that the
effect of different types of external financing can depend upon the policy regime adopted by a
country. First, net FDI inflows tend to dampen output volatility in general, but it can increase the
volatility in a “financially closed” regime, i.e., one with greater monetary independence and
more stable exchange rates. Net portfolio inflows can be volatility-increasing, and its effect is
greater for the countries with currency union or alike regimes. This type of regimes, however,
can dampen the volatility-enhancing effect of bank lending. Among the variables related to
sovereignty debt, the greater the debt service is, the more likely a country could experience
higher levels of output volatility, especially when combined with greater exchange rate stability
and financial openness, a result consistent with the “original sin” literature.
         Our results also help answer why many countries have been hoarding massive amount of
IR, which has been claimed to be one of the causes of the current global financial crisis. A
motive for countries to hold massive IR is its desire to relax the trilemma; voluminous IR
holding allows countries to pursue both a higher level of exchange rate stability and a higher
weighted average of the other two trilemma policies through active foreign exchange
interventions. Given our finding that holding a higher level of IR than 21-24% of GDP can
dampen or even reverse the volatility-increasing effect of exchange rate stability, this finding is
plausible.
         Lastly, our empirical findings are consistent with the conditions of the countries that are
currently experiencing macroeconomic turmoil; countries in turmoil do seem to be the ones with
the trilemma variables and those related to both internal and external financing at the levels that
lead to higher output volatility. In other words, our model could predict higher output volatility
for countries experiencing or at the brink of financial crises. This bolsters the validity of our
empirical analyses.




                                                 36
                                                    References


Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, J. Robinson, and Y. Thaicharoen. 2003. “Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic
         Symptoms: Volatility, Crises, and Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50, No. 1, pp. 49–123.
Aghion, P., A. Banerjee, and T. Piketty, 1999, “Dualism and Macroeconomic Volatility,” Quarterly Journal of
         Economics, Vol. 114, pp. 1359–97.
Aizenman, J. and R. Glick. 2008. “Sterilization, Monetary Policy, and Global Financial Integration,” mimeo,
         University of California, Santa Cruz. Forthcoming in Review of International Economics.
Aizenman, J. and Marion, N. 2004. “International reserves holdings with sovereign risk and costly tax collection.”
         Economic Journal 114, pp. 569–91.
Aizenman, J. and Lee, J. 2007. “International reserves: precautionary versus mercantilist views, theory and
         evidence,” Open Economies Review, 2007, 18 (2), pp. 191-214.
Alesina, A. and Summers, L., 1993. “Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance. Journal of
         Money, Credit and Banking 25, pp. 151–162
Barro, R. and Gordon, D. 1983. “A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model,” Journal of
         Political Economy, 91: 589-610.
Bekaert, G., C. Harvey, and C. Lundblad. 2001. “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?” NBER Working
    Paper #8245.
Bekaert, G., C. Harvey, and C. Lundblad. 2000. “Emerging Equity Market and Economic Development,” NBER
    Working Paper No. 7763 (April).
Ben-Bassat A. and Gottlieb, D. 1992. “Optimal international reserves and sovereign risk.” Journal of International
         Economics 33, pp. 345–62.
Blankenau,W.,M.A. Kose, and K. Yi, 2001, “Can World Real Interest Rates Explain Business Cycles in a Small
         Open Economy?” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 25, pp. 867–89.
Caballero, R.J., and A. Krishnamurthy, 2001, “International and Domestic Collateral Constraints in a Model of
         Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 48, pp. 513–48.
Calvo, G. 1998. “Capital Flows and Capital-market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops.” Journal of
         Applied Economics 1: 35–54.
Calvo, G.A., A. Izquierdo and L.F. Mejía. 2004. “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-
         Sheet Effects.” Research Department Working Paper 509. Washington, DC, United States: Inter-American
         Development Bank.
Cavallo, E.A. 2007. “Output Volatility and Openness to Trade: A Reassessment” Inter-American Development
         Bank Working Paper #604 (April).
Cavallo, E.A. 2005. “Trade, Gravity and Sudden Stops: On How Commercial Trade Openness Can Increase the
         Stability of Capital Flows.” Cambridge, United States: Harvard University. Mimeographed document.




                                                         37
Cavallo, E.A., and J.A. Frankel. 2004. “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries More Vulnerable to Sudden Stops,
         or Less?” NBER Working Paper 10957. Cambridge, United States: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cecchetti, S.G. and M. Ehrmann. 1999. “Does Inflation Targeting Increase Output Volatility? An International
         Comparison Of Policymakers’ Preferences And Outcomes” NBER Working Paper #7426. Cambridge, MA :
         National Bureau of Economic Research (December).
Cheung, Y-W and H. Ito. 2007. “Cross-sectional analysis on the determinants of international reserves
         accumulation,” mimeo, University of California, Santa Cruz.
Chinn, M. D. and H. Ito. 2008 “A New Measure of Financial Openness.” Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis,
         Volume 10, Issue 3 (September), p. 309 - 322.
Chinn, M. D. and H. Ito, 2006. “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls, Institutions, and
         Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics, Volume 81, Issue 1, Pages 163-192 (October).
Demirguc-Kent, A. and E. Detragiache. 1998. “Financial liberalization and financial fragility,” Policy Research
         Working Paper Series 1917, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Easterly, W., R. Islam and J. Stiglitz. 2001. “Shaken and Stirred: Explaining Growth Volatility.” In: B. Plesokovic
         and N. Stern, editors. Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics. Washington, DC,
         United States: World Bank.
Edison, Hali J., M. W. Klein, L. Ricci, and T. Sløk, 2002. “Capital Account Liberalization and Economic
         Performance: A Review of the Literature,” IMF Working Paper (May).
Edison, Hali J. and F. E. Warnock, 2001. “A simple measure of the intensity of capital controls,” International
         Finance Discussion Paper #708 (Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
         September).
Edwards, S., 2001. “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging Economies Different?” NBER
         Working Paper No. 8076.
Edwards, S., 1999. “How effective are capital controls?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13, 65–84.
Edwards, S. & Levy-Yeyati, E. 2005. “Flexible exchange rates as shock absorbers,” European Economic Review,
         Elsevier, vol. 49(8), pages 2079-2105, November.
Eichengreen, B., Rose, A. K., and Wyplosz, C. 1996. “Contagious Currency Crises,” NBER Working Paper 5681.
Frenkel, J. and Jovanovic, B. 1981. “Optimal international reserves: a stochastic framework. Economic Journal 91,
         507–14.
Glick, R. and Hutchison, M. 2008. “Are Capital Controls Effective? Duration of Capital Controls and the Survival
         of Pegged Exchange Rate Regimes with Special Reference to the People’s Republic of China,” mimeo,
         University of California, Santa Cruz.
Glick, R. and Hutchison, M. 2001. “Banking and Currency Crises: How Common Are Twins?” 35-69, In R. Glick,
         R. Moreno, and M. Spiegel, eds. Financial Crises in Emerging Markets. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
         University Press.




                                                         38
Ghosh, A., A. Gulde and J. Ostry. 1997. “Does the Nominal Exchange Rate Regime Matter?”. NBER Working
        Paper No 5874.
Haruka, D. S. 2007. “Output Volatility and Large Output Drops in Emerging Market and Developing Countries,”
        IMF Working Paper WP/07/114 (May). Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Henry, P. B. 2006. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation,” NBER Working Paper No.
        12698.
Hnatkovska, V. and N. Loayza. 2005. “Volatility and Growth” in J. Aizenman and B. Pinto eds. Managing
        Economic Volatility and Crises: A Practitioner’s Guide (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, October).
IMF. 2007. “Managing Large Capital Inflows,” World Economic Outlook. Washington, D.C.: International
        Monetary Fund, October.
Kaminsky, G. and Reinhart, C. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Currency Balance-of-Payments
        Problems,” American Economic Review 89, 473-500.
King, R. G. and Levine, R., 1993. Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right, Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 108: 717 – 738.
Kose, M. A., E. Prasad, K. Rogoff, and S. J. Wei, 2006, “Financial Globalization: A Reappraisal,” IMF Working
        Paper, WP/06/189.
Kose, M.A., E. Prasad and M. Terrones. 2003. “Financial Integration and Macroeconomic Volatility.” IMF Working
        Paper WP/03/50. Washington, DC, United States: International Monetary Fund.
Krugman, P., 1993. “Lessons of Massachusetts for EMU,” in The Transition to Economic and Monetary Union in
        Europe, ed. by F. Giavazzi and F. Torres (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 241–61.
Kydland, F. and Prescott, E. 1977. “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of
        Political Economy, 85: 473-490.
Lane, P. R. and Milesi-Ferretti, G. M. 2006. “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and Extended
        Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,” IMF Working Paper 06/69.
Loungani, P., A. Razin, C. W. Yuen. 2001. “Capital Mobility and the Output–Inflation Tradeoff,” Journal of
        Development Economics Vol. 64. 255–274.
Mishkin, F. S. and K. Schmidt-Hebbel. 2007. “Does Inflation Targeting Make a Difference?” NBER Working
        Paper #12876. Cambridge, MA : National Bureau of Economic Research (January).
Moreno R. and M. M. Spiegel. 1997. “Are Asian economies exempt from the "impossible trinity?": evidence from
        Singapore,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Pacific Basin Working Paper Series, 97-01.
Obstfeld, M., J.C. Shambaugh, & A.M. Taylor. 2009. “Financial Instability, Reserves, and Central Bank Swap Lines
        in the Panic of 2008,” NBER Working Papers 14826, Cambridge, MA : National Bureau of Economic
        Research (March).
Obstfeld, M., J. C. Shambaugh, and A. M. Taylor. 2008. “Financial Stability, The Trilemma, and International
        Reserves.” NBER Working Paper 14217 (August).




                                                       39
Obstfeld, M., J. C. Shambaugh, and A. M. Taylor, 2005. “The Trilemma in History: Tradeoffs among Exchange
        Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility." Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (August): 423-38.
Prasad, E. S., 2008. “Monetary Policy Independence, the Currency Regime, and the Capital Account in China. In
        Goldstein, M. and N. R. Lardy, Eds. Debating China’s Exchange Rate Policy, Washington, D.C.: Peterson
        Institute for International Economics.
Rajan, R.G., and Zingales, L., 1998. Financial Dependence and Growth, American Economic Review, 88: 559 – 586.
Razin, A. and Binyamini, A., 2007. “Flattening the Short-Run Trade-Off Between Inflation and Domestic Activity:
        The Analytics of the Effects of Globalization.” Kiel Working Paper No. 1363 (June). Kiel: Kiel Institute for
        World Economics.
Razin, A., and Rose, A. K. 1994. “Business Cycle Volatility and Openness: An Exploratory Cross-Sectional
        Analysis.” In L. Leiderman and A. Razin (Ed.), Capital Mobility: the Impact on Consumption, Investment,
        and Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rodrik, D. 1998. “Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?” Journal of Political Economy
        106(5): 997-1032.
Rodrik, D., and A. Velasco. 1999. "Short-Term Capital Flows." NBER Working Paper No. 7364. Cambridge, MA :
        National Bureau of Economic Research.
Rogoff, K. 2003. Globalization and global disinflation. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, 4th
        quarter issue, 45-78.
Romer, D. 1993. “Openness and Inflation: Theory and Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 869–903.
Roubini, Nouriel. 2008. “Will the Bretton Woods (BW2) Regime Collapse Like the Original Bretton Woods Regime
       Did? The Coming End Game of BW2. mimeo. RGE Monitor (July 6).
Shambaugh, Jay C. 2004. “The Effects of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy.” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 119 (February): 301-52.
Stultz, R. 1999. “Globalization, Corporate Finance and the Cost of Capital,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance,
    v12(3), 8-25.
Willett, T. 2003. “Fear of Floating Need Not Imply Fixed Exchange Rates,” Open Economies Review 14, 77 – 91.
Wurgler, J., 2000. Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital, Journal of Financial Economics, 58, 187 – 214.




                                                        40
     Appendix: Data Availability of the Trilemma measures
     Country                                                          Monetary         Exchange rate
                                                                                                       KA Openness
      code     Country Name            Base Country                 Independence          stability
                                                                                                        (KAOPEN)
      (cn)                                                               (MI)              (ERS)
                                                                        (172)              (181)           (178)
 1     512     Afghanistan (C)         U.S.                           -           -    1961     2005   1970     2004
 2     914     Albania (C)             U.S.                         1992        2006   1993     2006   1996     2006
 3     612     Algeria (C)             France                       1974        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
 4     614     Angola (C)              U.S.                         1995        2006   1961     2006   1993     2006
 5     311     Antigua and Barbuda     U.S.                         1981        2006   1961     2006   1985     2006
 6     213     Argentina (E) (C)       U.S.                         1977        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
 7     911     Armenia                 U.S.                         1995        2006   1993     2006   1996     2006
 8     314     Aruba                   U.S.                         1986        2006   1987     2006   1992     2006
 9     193     Australia               U.S.                         1969        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
10     122     Austria                 Germany                      1960        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
11     912     Azerbaijan              U.S.                         1993        2006   1993     2006   2000     2006
12     313     Bahamas, The            U.S.                         1970        2006   1961     2006   1977     2006
13     419     Bahrain (C)             U.S.                         1975        2006   1967     2006   1976     2006
14     513     Bangladesh (E)          U.S.                         1972        2006   1972     2006   1976     2006
15     316     Barbados                1960-74 U.K.; 1975-U.S.      1967        2006   1961     2006   1974     2006
16     913     Belarus                 U.S.                         1993        2006   1993     2006   1996     2006
17     124     Belgium                 Germany                      1960        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
18     339     Belize                  U.S.                         1979        2006   1961     2006   1985     2006
19     638     Benin                   France                       1964        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
20     514     Bhutan                  Rupee                        1982        2006   1961     2006   1985     2006
21     218     Bolivia (C)             U.S.                         1960        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
22     616     Botswana (E) (C)        South Africa                 1976        2006   1961     2006   1972     2006
23     223     Brazil (E)              U.S.                         1964        2006   1965     2006   1970     2006
24     918     Bulgaria (E)            Germany                      1991        2006   1961     2006   1996     2006
25     748     Burkina Faso            France                       1964        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
26     618     Burundi (C)             1960-70 Belgium; 1971-U.S.   1977        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
27     662     Cote d’Ivoire (E) (C)   France                       1964        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
28     522     Cambodia                U.S.                         1994        2006   1961     2006   1973     2006
29     622     Cameroon                France                       1968        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
30     156     Canada                  U.S.                         1960        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
31     624     Cape Verde              Germany                      1985        2006   1961     2006   1982     2006
32     626     Central African Rep.    France                       1968        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
33     628     Chad (C)                France                       1968        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
34     228     Chile (E) (C)           U.S.                         1977        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
35     924     China (E)               U.S.                         1980        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
36     233     Colombia (E)            U.S.                         1964        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
37     632     Comoros                 France                       1983        2006   1961     2006   1981     2006
38     636     Congo, Dem. Rep. (C)    U.S.                         1982        2003   1961     2006   1970     2000
39     634     Congo, Rep. (C)         France                       1968        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
40     238     Costa Rica              U.S.                         1964        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
41     960     Croatia                 Germany                      1992        2006   1993     2006   1998     2006
42     423     Cyprus                  Germany                      1969        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
43     935     Czech Republic (E)      Germany                      1993        2006   1994     2006   1998     2006
44     128     Denmark                 Germany                      1960        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
45     611     Djibouti                U.S.                         1996        2006   1961     2006   1982     2006
46     321     Dominica                U.S.                         1981        2006   1961     2006   1982     2006
47     243     Dominican Republic      U.S.                         1995        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
48     248     Ecuador (E)             U.S.                         1970        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
49     469     Egypt, Arab Rep. (E)    U.S.                         1964        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
50     253     El Salvador             U.S.                         1983        2005   1961     2006   1970     2006
51     642     Equatorial Guinea (C)   France                       1985        2006   1961     2006   1973     2006
52     643     Eritrea                 U.S.                           -           -    1961     2006   1998     2006
53     939     Estonia                 Germany                      1993        2006   1993     2006   1998     2006
54     644     Ethiopia (C)            U.S.                         1985        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
55     819     Fiji                    U.S.                         1974        2006   1961     2006   1975     2006
56     172     Finland                 Germany                      1960        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
57     132     France                  Germany                      1964        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
58     646     Gabon (C)               France                       1968        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
59     648     Gambia, The             U.K.                         1977        2006   1961     2006   1971     2006
60     915     Georgia                 U.S.                         1995        2006   1996     2006   1998     2006
61     134     Germany                 U.S.                         1960        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
62     652     Ghana (E) (C)           U.S.                         1964        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
63     174     Greece                  1960-80 U.S.; 1981-Germany   1960        2006   1961     2006   1970     2006
64     328     Grenada                 U.S.                         1981        2006   1961     2006   1979     2006



                                                          41
      Country
                                                                              Monetary        Exchange rate     KA Openness
       Code     Country Name             Base Country
                                                                          Independence (MI)   stability (ERS)    (KAOPEN)
       (cn)
 65    258      Guatemala (C)            U.S.                              1960      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 66    656      Guinea (C)               1960-73 France; 1974-U.S.         1986      2006     1961      2005    1970   2006
 67    654      Guinea-Bissau (C)        U.S.                              1975      2006     1961      2006    1981   2006
 68    336      Guyana (C)               1960-75 U.K.; 1976-U.S.           1966      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 69    263      Haiti                    U.S.                              1994      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 70    268      Honduras (C)             U.S.                              1979      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 71    532      Hong Kong, China (E)     U.S.                              1982      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 72    944      Hungary (E)              1960-91 U.S.; 1992-Germany        1971      2006     1969      2006    1998   2006
 73    176      Iceland (C)              1960-90 U.S.; 1991-Germany        1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 74    534      India (E)                1960-79 U.K.; 1980-U.S.           1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 75    536      Indonesia (E)            U.S.                              1983      2006     1968      2006    1970   2006
 76    429      Iran, Islamic Rep. (C)   U.S.                              1960      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 77    433      Iraq (C)                 U.S.                                -         -      1961      2006    1970   2006
 78    178      Ireland                  1960-78 U.K.; 1979-Germany        1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 79    436      Israel (E)               U.S.                              1982      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 80    136      Italy                    Germany                           1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 81    343      Jamaica (E)              U.S.                              1961      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 82    158      Japan                    U.S.                              1960      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 83    439      Jordan (E)               U.S.                              1966      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 84    916      Kazakhstan               U.S.                              1994      2006     1994      2006    1998   2006
 85    664      Kenya (E)                U.S.                              1967      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 86    826      Kiribati                 Australia                           -         -      1961      2006    1990   2005
 87    542      Korea, Rep. (E)          U.S.                              1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 88    443      Kuwait                   U.S.                              1975      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 89    917      Kyrgyz Republic          U.S.                              1993      2006     1994      2006    1998   2006
 90    544      Lao PDR                  U.S.                              1979      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 91    941      Latvia                   Germany                           1993      2006     1993      2006    1998   2006
 92    446      Lebanon                  U.S.                              1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 93    666      Lesotho                  South Africa                      1980      2006     1961      2006    1972   2006
 94    668      Liberia (C)              U.S.                              1981      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 95    672      Libya (C)                U.S.                              1963      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 96    946      Lithuania (E)            Germany                           1994      2006     1993      2006    1998   2006
 97    137      Luxembourg               1960-78 Belgium; 1979- Germany    1985      2006     1961      2006             -
 98    674      Madagascar (C)           France                            1970      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
 99    676      Malawi (C)               U.S.                              1963      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
100    548      Malaysia (E)             U.S.                              1966      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
101    556      Maldives                 U.S.                              1978      2006     1961      2006    1982   2006
102    678      Mali (C)                 France                            1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
103    181      Malta                    France                            1969      2006     1961      2006    1972   2006
104    682      Mauritania (C)           1960-73 France; 1974-U.S.         1964      2006     1961      2005    1970   1964
105    684      Mauritius (E)            U.K.                              1967      2006     1961      2006    1972   1967
106    273      Mexico (E)               U.S.                              1976      2006     1961      2006    1970   1976
107    868      Micronesia, Fed. Sts.    U.S.                              1996      2006     1961      2006    1996   1996
108    921      Moldova                  U.S.                              1995      2006     1992      2006    1998   1995
109    948      Mongolia (C)             U.S.                              1993      2006     1991      2006    1998   1993
110    686      Morocco (E)              France                            1969      2006     1961      2006    1970   1969
111    688      Mozambique               U.S.                              1994      2006     1961      2006    1988   1994
112    518      Myanmar (C)              U.S.                              1975      2006     1961      2006    1970   1975
113    728      Namibia (C)              South Africa                      1991      2006     1962      2006    1994   1991
114    558      Nepal                    1960-82 U.S.; 1983-India          1974      2006     1961      2006    1970   1974
115    138      Netherlands              Germany                           1960      2006     1961      2006    1970   1960
116    353      Netherlands Antilles     U.S.                              1980      2006     1961      2006    1970   1980
117    196      New Zealand (C)          Australia                         1969      2006     1961      2006    1970   1969
118    278      Nicaragua (C)            U.S.                              1990      2006     1961      2006    1970   1990
119    692      Niger (C)                France                            1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   1964
120    694      Nigeria (E) (C)          U.S.                              1964      2005     1961      2006    1970   1964
121    142      Norway                   Germany                           1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   1964
122    449      Oman (C)                 U.S.                              1980      2006     1961      2006    1977   1980
123    564      Pakistan (E)             U.S.                              1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   1964
124    283      Panama                   U.S.                              1986      2006     1961      2006    1970   1986
125    853      Papua New Guinea (C)     1960-85 Australia; 1986-U.S.      1974      2006     1961      2006    1979   1974
126    288      Paraguay (C)             U.S.                              1990      2006     1961      2006    1970   1990
127    293      Peru (E) (C)             U.S.                              1960      2006     1961      2006    1970   1960
128    566      Philippines (E)          U.S.                              1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   1964
129    964      Poland (E)               Germany                           1991      2006     1961      2006    1990   1991
130    182      Portugal                 Germany                           1960      2006     1961      2006    1970   1960
131    453      Qatar (C)                U.S.                              1980      2006     1967      2006    1976   1980
132    968      Romania                  U.S.                              1994      2006     1961      2006    1976   1994



                                                            42
      Country
                                                                               Monetary        Exchange rate     KA Openness
       Code     Country Name                Base Country
                                                                           Independence (MI)   stability (ERS)    (KAOPEN)
       (cn)
133     922     Russian Federation (E)      U.S.                            1995      2006     1993      2006    1998   2006
134     714     Rwanda (C)                  1960-73 Belgium; 1974-U.S.      1966      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
135     716     Sao Tome & Principe (C)     U.S.                            1989      2006     1961      2006    1981   2006
136     862     Samoa                       Australia                       1983      2006     1961      2006    1975   2006
137     135     San Marino                  Germany                           -         -      1961      2006    1996   2006
138     456     Saudi Arabia (C)            U.S.                            1997      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
139     722     Senegal                     France                          1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
140     718     Seychelles                  U.S.                            1979      2006     1961      2006    1981   2006
141     724     Sierra Leone                1960-77 U.K.; 1978-U.S.         1966      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
142     576     Singapore (E)               Malaysia                        1972      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
143     936     Slovak Republic (E)         Germany                         1993      2006     1994      2006    1998   2006
144     961     Slovenia (E)                Germany                         1993      2006     1992      2006    1998   2006
145     813     Solomon Islands (C)         1960-85 Australia; 1986-U.S.    1981      2006     1961      2006    1982   2006
146     726     Somalia (C)                 U.S.                              -         -      1961      1989    1970   2006
147     199     South Africa (E)            U.S.                            1960      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
148     184     Spain                       Germany                         1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
149     524     Sri Lanka (E)               1960-92 U.S.; 1993-India        1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
150     361     St. Kitts and Nevis         U.S.                            1981      2006     1961      2006    1988   2006
151     362     St. Lucia                   U.S.                            1981      2006     1961      2006    1983   2006
152     364     St. Vinc. & the Gren. (C)   U.S.                            1981      2006     1961      2006    1983   2006
153     732     Sudan (C)                   1960-71 U.K.; 1972-U.S.         1978      1984     1961      2006    1970   2005
154     366     Suriname (C)                U.S.                            1991      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
155     734     Swaziland (C)               South Africa                    1974      2006     1961      2006    1973   2006
156     144     Sweden                      Germany                         1960      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
157     146     Switzerland                 Germany                         1964      2006     1961      2006    1996   2006
158     463     Syrian Arab Republic        U.S.                            2003      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
159     528     Taiwan (E)                  U.S.                            1985      2006     1983      2006      -      -
160     923     Tajikistan                  U.S.                            1997      2006     1993      2006    1998   2006
161     738     Tanzania (C)                U.S.                            1973      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
162     578     Thailand (E)                U.S.                            1977      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
163     742     Togo (C)                    France                          1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
164     866     Tonga                       Australia                       1981      2006     1961      2006    1989   2006
165     369     Trinidad & Tobago (E) (C)   1960-75 U.K.; 1976-U.S.         1965      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
166     744     Tunisia (E)                 France                          1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
167     186     Turkey (E)                  U.S.                            1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
168     925     Turkmenistan (C)            U.S.                              -         -      1994      2001    1998   2006
169     746     Uganda (C)                  U.S.                            1980      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
170     926     Ukraine                     U.S.                            1992      2006     1993      2006    1998   2006
171     466     United Arab Emirates (C)    U.S.                              -         -      1967      2006    1976   2006
172     112     United Kingdom              Germany                         1960      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
173     298     Uruguay                     U.S.                            1976      2006     1965      2006    1970   2006
174     846     Vanuatu                     U.S.                            1981      2006     1961      2006    1985   2000
175     299     Venezuela, RB (E) (C)       1960-89 France; 1990-U.S.       1964      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
176     582     Vietnam (C)                 U.S.                            1996      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
177     474     Yemen, Rep.                 U.S.                            1996      2006     1991      2006    1995   2006
178     754     Zambia (C)                  U.S.                            1965      2006     1961      2006    1970   2006
179     698     Zimbabwe (E) (C)            U.S.                            1965      2005     1961      2005    1984   2006


      Notes: The base countries are primarily based on Shambaugh (QJE) and complemented by information from
      IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangement and Exchange Restrictions and CIA Factbook




                                                                 43
Table 1: Mean-Equality Tests of the Trilemma Indexes between Emerging Market
Countries (EMG) and Non-Emerging Market Developing Countries (Non-EMG LDC)


                                       1971 – 1980   1981 – 1990   1991 – 2000   2001-2006
                        Non-EMG LDC       .4495         .4510         .4748        .4427
    Monetary            EMG               .4784         .4772         .4941        .3847
    Independence (MI)   Difference       .02883         .0262         .0193        -.0579
                        t-statistics     2.86***       2.71***       2.07**       4.31***
                        Non-EMG LDC       .7941         .7228         .6508        .7266
    Exchange Rate       EMG               .6703         .4983         .4901        .5364
    Stability (ERS)     Difference        -.1238        -.2245        -.1607       -.1902
                        t-statistics     6.70***      11.04***       8.47***      8.68***
                        Non-EMG LDC       .3511         .3138         .3785        .4177
    Financial
                        EMG               .2803         .2522         .4014        .5498
    Openness
                        Difference        -.0708       - .0616        .0230        .1320
    (KAOPEN)
                        t-statistics     3.42***       3.08***       1.1912%      5.09***
                        Non-EMG LDC       .1013         .1093         .1331        .1772
    International
                        EMG               .1109         .1104         .1697        .2322
    Reserves Holding
                        Difference        .0095         .0011         .0366         .0550
    (% of GDP; IR)
                        t-statistics       1.31*         0.12        4.25***      4.67***




                                             44
Table 2 (a): Tests for Structural Breaks in the Trilemma Indexes

                                                                             1970-72      1974-81          1983-96          1999-2006
                                                               Mean           0.376         0.407            0.389             0.139
                               Monetary Independence          Change                       +0.031           -0.018            -0.250
                                                         t-stats (p-value)               1.31 (0.11)      0.85 (0.20)    11.91 (0.00)***
                                                               Mean           0.688         0.429            0.476             0.702
            Industrial
                               Exchange Rate Stability        Change                       -0.259           +0.047            +0.226
           Countries (18)
                                                         t-stats (p-value)             6.64 (0.00)***   2.41 (0.01)**    12.45 (0.00)***
                                                               Mean           0.439         0.469            0.688             0.955
                                 Financial Openness           Change                       +0.030           +0.219            +0.266
                                                         t-stats (p-value)              1.62 (0.07)*    4.34 (0.00)***    5.27 (0.00)***
                                                                             1970-72      1974-81          1983-96         1999-2006
                                                               Mean           0.500         0.399            0.457            0.534
                               Monetary Independence          Change                       -0.101           +0.058           +0.077
                                                         t-stats (p-value)              1.68 (0.06)*    1.84 (0.04)**    3.55 (0.00)***
          Non-Emerging
                                                               Mean           0.786         0.780            0.635            0.742
           Developing
                               Exchange Rate Stability        Change                       -0.006           -0.145           +0.107
            Countries
                                                         t-stats (p-value)               0.10 (0.46)    5.26 (0.00)***   3.76 (0.00)***
              (32)
                                                               Mean           0.267         0.365            0.326            0.391
                                 Financial Openness           Change                       +0.098           -0.040           +0.065
                                                         t-stats (p-value)             5.73 (0.01)***   2.25 (0.02)**    3.93 (0.00)***
                                                                             1970-72      1974-81          1983-96         1999-2006
                                                               Mean           0.526         0.474            0.508            0.407
                               Monetary Independence          Change                       -0.052           +0.034           -0.100
                                                         t-stats (p-value)             2.16 (0.03)**     1.42 (0.09)*    3.81 (0.00)***
             Emerging
                                                               Mean           0.818         0.715            0.517            0.579
              Market
                               Exchange Rate Stability        Change                       -0.103           -0.198           +0.63
             Countries
                                                         t-stats (p-value)             3.38 (0.00)***   9.55 (0.00)***   2.71 (0.01)***
               (18)
                                                               Mean           0.210         0.229            0.240            0.474
                                 Financial Openness           Change                       +0.020           +0.010           +0.234
                                                         t-stats (p-value)             5.03 (0.00)***     0.40 (0.35)    8.88 (0.00)***
         Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                        45
Table 2(b): Tests for Structural Breaks in the Trilemma Indexes

                                                                              1983-89        1991-2006      1983-2000     2002-2006
                                                                Mean           0.396            0.246         0.355          0.126
                               Monetary Independence           Change                          -0.150                       -0.229
                                                          t-stats (p-value)                3.17 (0.00)***               5.82 (0.00)***
                                                                Mean               0.476        0.599         0.511          0.715
            Industrial
                               Exchange Rate Stability         Change                          +0.124                       +0.204
           Countries (18)
                                                           t-stat (p-value)                2.64 (0.01)***               5.33 (0.00)***
                                                                Mean               0.578        0.905         0.748          0.949
                                 Financial Openness            Change                          +0.327                       +0.201
                                                          t-stats (p-value)                9.22 (0.00)***               2.62 (0.01)**
                                                                              1983-89        1991-2006      1983-2000     2002-2006
                                                                Mean           0.421            0.522         0.483          0.517
                               Monetary Independence           Change                          +0.100                       +0.034
                                                          t-stats (p-value)                4.80 (0.00)***                 1.05 (0.15)
          Non-Emerging
                                                                Mean               0.633        0.699         0.643          0.778
           Developing
                               Exchange Rate Stability         Change                          +0.066                       +0.135
            Countries
                                                          t-stats (p-value)                2.01 (0.03)**                4.73 (0.00)***
              (32)
                                                                Mean               0.296        0.376         0.336          0.400
                                 Financial Openness            Change                          +0.080                       +0.064
                                                          t-stats (p-value)                5.94 (0.00)***               3.20 (0.00)***
                                                                              1983-89        1991-2006      1983-2000     2002-2006
                                                                Mean           0.471            0.469         0.508          0.385
                               Monetary Independence           Change                          -0.002                       -0.123
                                                          t-stats (p-value)                  0.08 (0.47)                4.52 (0.00)***
             Emerging
                                                                Mean               0.537        0.532         0.515          0.608
              Market
                               Exchange Rate Stability         Change                          -0.005                       +0.093
             Countries
                                                          t-stats (p-value)                  0.19 (0.43)                3.95 (0.00)***
               (18)
                                                                Mean               0.188        0.403         0.282          0.482
                                 Financial Openness            Change                          +0.215                       +0.200
                                                          t-stats (p-value)                6.27 (0.00)***               4.23 (0.00)***
         Note: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                         46
Table 2(c): Summary of the Structural Breaks Tests

                                                                      Structural Breaks
                                  Monetary Independence                    1997-98
            Industrial
                                                                            1997-98
            Countries             Exchange Rate Stability
                                                                 (1973 for non-Euro Countries)
              (IDC)
                                    Financial Openness                       1990



          Non-Emerging            Monetary Independence                      1990
           Developing
                                  Exchange Rate Stability                    1982
            Countries
           (NOEMG)                  Financial Openness                       1990



            Emerging              Monetary Independence                      2001
             Market
                                  Exchange Rate Stability                    1982
            Countries
             (EMG)                  Financial Openness                     1997-98




                                                            47
Table 3: Regression for the Linear Relationship between the Trilemma Indexes: 1 = a j MI i, t + b j ERSi, t + c j KAOPENi, t + ε t

                                      (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)        (8)          (9)
                                    FULL         1970-72       1974-81         1983-96 1999-2006 1983-89               1991-2006    1983-2000    2002-2006
       Monetary Independence         1.084         0.946          1.339          0.99          0.336          1.065        0.558       0.931        0.522
                                 [0.039]*** [0.127]*** [0.069]*** [0.057]*** [0.109]*** [0.066]***                     [0.077]***   [0.057]***   [0.101]***
       Exch. Rate Stability          0.611         0.665          0.597          0.647         0.223          0.613        0.633       0.66         0.448
                                 [0.032]*** [0.076]*** [0.090]*** [0.051]***                 [0.181]      [0.061]***   [0.100]***   [0.050]***    [0.249]*
       KA Openness                   0.437         0.369          0.29           0.448         0.869          0.439        0.632       0.468        0.733
                                 [0.021]*** [0.050]*** [0.063]*** [0.031]*** [0.072]*** [0.045]***                     [0.042]***   [0.029]***   [0.091]***
       ERM x MI                     -0.166           –            0.375         -0.287         0.159          -0.43       -0.059      -0.104       -0.022
                                  [0.072]**          –          [0.299]      [0.111]***      [0.119]        [0.286]      [0.103]      [0.086]      [0.126]
       ERM x ERS                    -0.026           –            0.254          0.073        -0.115          0.218       -0.398      -0.105       -0.338
                                   [0.055]           –          [0.165]        [0.073]       [0.183]       [0.104]**   [0.108]***     [0.067]      [0.251]
       ERM x KAOPEN                 -0.005           –           -0.273         -0.009         0.039          0.09         0.137      -0.012        0.177
                                   [0.052]           –        [0.128]**        [0.054]       [0.075]        [0.122]     [0.059]**     [0.054]     [0.097]*
       LDC x MI                      0.148         0.389         -0.175          0.299         0.78           0.214        0.675       0.365        0.567
                                 [0.045]*** [0.164]**          [0.097]* [0.065]*** [0.119]*** [0.078]***               [0.083]***   [0.064]***   [0.120]***
       LDC x ERS                    -0.193        -0.371         -0.118          -0.21         0.211         -0.134       -0.244       -0.24        0.001
                                 [0.035]*** [0.094]***          [0.097]      [0.055]***      [0.184]       [0.067]**    [0.103]**   [0.054]***     [0.252]
       LDC x KAOPEN                 -0.158        -0.136         -0.043         -0.176        -0.536         -0.009       -0.362      -0.257       -0.378
                                 [0.030]*** [0.079]*            [0.081]      [0.051]*** [0.080]***          [0.069]    [0.052]***   [0.045]***   [0.100]***
       Observations                  1850           150            400            700           400            350          800         900          250
       Adjusted R-squared            0.95          0.98           0.94           0.96          0.95           0.96          0.96       0.95         0.95
       Robust standard errors in brackets * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
NOTES: ERM is a dummy for the countries and years that correspond to participation in ERM (i.e., Belgium, Denmark, Germany, France, Ireland,
and Italy from 1979, Spain from 1989, U.K. only for 1990-91, Portugal from 1992, Austria from 1995, Finland from 1996, and Greece from 1999)




                                                                                 48
              Table 4-1: Output Volatility: Less Developed Countries (LDC), 1972 – 2006, Panels of 5-year Windows
                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)                                   (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
                       -0.032       -0.039       -0.034       -0.022       -0.031       -0.045                                -0.029       -0.036       -0.035       -0.037       -0.026       -0.047
Relative Income                                                                                        Relative Income
                      [0.020]      [0.020]*     [0.020]*     [0.020]      [0.020]     [0.021]**                              [0.020]      [0.020]*     [0.020]*     [0.020]*     [0.020]     [0.021]**
Relative                0.05        0.062        0.059        0.034        0.057        0.085          Relative Income,       0.046        0.057        0.063         0.07        0.047        0.089
Income, sq.          [0.024]**    [0.024]**    [0.024]**     [0.025]     [0.024]**    [0.026]***       sq.                   [0.024]*    [0.024]**    [0.024]***   [0.024]***   [0.024]**    [0.025]***
Change in US           0.173        0.171        0.166        0.166        0.168         0.17          Change in US           0.174        0.173        0.164        0.164        0.171        0.172
real interest rate   [0.045]***   [0.046]***   [0.046]***   [0.046]***   [0.046]***   [0.046]***       real interest rate   [0.045]***   [0.045]***   [0.046]***   [0.046]***   [0.046]***   [0.046]***
Volatility of          0.037        0.037        0.036        0.036        0.035        0.035          Volatility of          0.036        0.037        0.036        0.036        0.035        0.035
TOT*OPN              [0.008]***   [0.008]***   [0.008]***   [0.008]***   [0.008]***   [0.008]***       TOT*OPN              [0.008]***   [0.008]***   [0.008]***   [0.008]***   [0.008]***   [0.008]***
Inflation              0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001          Inflation              0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001
volatility            [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]         volatility            [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]
Fiscal                 0.003        0.003        0.003        0.003        0.003        0.003          Fiscal                 0.003        0.003        0.003        0.003        0.003        0.003
Procyclicality        [0.002]      [0.002]      [0.002]*     [0.002]*     [0.002]*     [0.002]*        Procyclicality        [0.002]      [0.002]      [0.002]*     [0.002]*     [0.002]*     [0.002]*
                       0.011        0.012        0.011        0.011        0.011        0.011                                 0.011        0.012        0.011        0.011         0.01        0.011
Oil Exporters                                                                                          Oil Exporters
                     [0.004]***   [0.004]***   [0.004]***   [0.004]***   [0.004]***   [0.004]***                            [0.004]***   [0.004]***   [0.004]***   [0.004]***   [0.004]***   [0.004]***
Private credit         -0.009       -0.009       -0.01        -0.009       -0.009       -0.009         Private credit         -0.009       -0.008       -0.01        -0.011       -0.009       -0.009
creation              [0.005]*     [0.006]      [0.005]*     [0.005]*     [0.005]*     [0.006]         creation              [0.005]      [0.005]      [0.005]*     [0.005]*     [0.005]*     [0.006]
Total                  0.018        0.049        0.019        0.021        0.018        0.045          Total                  0.018        0.048        0.019        0.025        0.019        0.045
Reserve/GDP          [0.008]**     [0.041]     [0.008]**     [0.033]     [0.009]**     [0.025]*        Reserve/GDP          [0.008]**     [0.034]     [0.008]**     [0.031]     [0.008]**     [0.024]*
Monetary               -0.02        -0.015       -0.019       -0.016                                   PC of MI &             -0.018       -0.009
Independ. (MI)       [0.008]**     [0.012]     [0.008]**     [0.012]                                   ERS                  [0.008]**     [0.012]
                                    -0.038                    -0.017                                   MI_ERS x                            -0.068
MI x reserves
                                   [0.067]                   [0.063]                                   reserves                           [0.071]
Exchange Rate          -0.005       -0.001                                 -0.003       0.002          PC of MI &                                       -0.02        -0.018
Stability (ERS)       [0.004]      [0.005]                                [0.004]      [0.005]         KAO                                            [0.009]**     [0.012]
                                    -0.029                                              -0.034         MI_KAO x                                                      -0.012
ERS x reserves
                                   [0.032]                                             [0.031]         reserves                                                     [0.058]
                                                 -0.005       -0.007       -0.004       -0.002         PC of ERS. &                                                               -0.006         0
KA Openness
                                                [0.004]      [0.005]      [0.004]      [0.005]         KAO                                                                       [0.005]      [0.007]
KAOPEN x                                                      0.015                     -0.02          ERS_KAO x                                                                               -0.054
reserves                                                     [0.025]                   [0.025]         reserves                                                                               [0.041]
# of Obs.               412          412          412          412          412          412           # of Obs.               412          412          412          412          412          412
Adjusted R2             0.21         0.21         0.22         0.2          0.21         0.22          Adjusted R2             0.21         0.21         0.22         0.22         0.2          0.23
       Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The estimated coefficients of the dummies for East
       Asia and Pacific and Sub-Saharan Africa are not reported.


                                                                                                  49
                Table 4-2: Output Volatility: Less Developed, Commodity Exporting Countries (LDC-CMD), 1972 – 2006, Panels of 5-year Windows
                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)                                   (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
                       -0.057       -0.055       -0.062       -0.071       -0.04        -0.044                                -0.053       -0.054       -0.066       -0.073       -0.037       -0.037
Relative Income                                                                                        Relative Income
                      [0.040]      [0.039]      [0.040]      [0.039]*     [0.039]      [0.038]                               [0.038]      [0.038]      [0.039]*     [0.038]*     [0.039]      [0.039]
Relative               0.133        0.133        0.138        0.145        0.121        0.126          Relative Income,        0.13        0.132        0.141        0.147        0.118        0.119
Income, sq.          [0.046]***   [0.045]***   [0.046]***   [0.045]***   [0.045]***   [0.044]***       sq.                  [0.045]***   [0.045]***   [0.046]***   [0.044]***   [0.045]***   [0.045]***
Change in US           0.232        0.246        0.213        0.211        0.227        0.238          Change in US           0.234        0.242        0.218        0.212         0.23        0.234
real interest rate   [0.086]***   [0.085]***   [0.087]**    [0.085]**    [0.086]***   [0.084]***       real interest rate   [0.086]***   [0.086]***   [0.087]**    [0.084]**    [0.086]***   [0.086]***
Volatility of           0.03         0.03        0.029        0.029        0.028        0.028          Volatility of           0.03         0.03         0.03        0.029        0.028        0.028
TOT*OPN              [0.012]**    [0.012]**    [0.012]**    [0.012]**    [0.012]**    [0.012]**        TOT*OPN              [0.012]**    [0.012]**    [0.012]**    [0.012]**    [0.012]**    [0.012]**
Inflation              0.001        0.002        0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001          Inflation              0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001        0.001
volatility            [0.003]      [0.002]      [0.003]      [0.002]      [0.003]      [0.002]         volatility            [0.002]      [0.002]      [0.003]      [0.002]      [0.003]      [0.003]
Fiscal                 0.002        0.002        0.003        0.004        0.003        0.003          Fiscal                 0.002        0.002        0.003        0.004        0.002        0.002
Procyclicality        [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]         Procyclicality        [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]
                       0.011         0.01         0.01        0.009        0.008        0.007                                  0.01         0.01         0.01         0.01        0.008        0.008
Oil Exporters                                                                                          Oil Exporters
                      [0.006]*     [0.006]*     [0.006]      [0.006]      [0.006]      [0.006]                               [0.006]*     [0.006]*     [0.006]*     [0.006]      [0.006]      [0.006]
Private credit         0.003        0.005        -0.005       -0.006       0.002        0.004          Private credit         0.004        0.005        -0.005       -0.006       0.005        0.005
creation              [0.017]      [0.016]      [0.017]      [0.016]      [0.016]      [0.016]         creation              [0.016]      [0.016]      [0.017]      [0.016]      [0.016]      [0.016]
Total                   0.01        0.021        0.015        -0.105       0.011        0.031          Total                  0.009        0.053        0.015        -0.124       0.009        0.024
Reserve/GDP           [0.015]      [0.072]      [0.015]      [0.073]      [0.015]      [0.050]         Reserve/GDP           [0.014]      [0.058]      [0.015]      [0.067]*     [0.014]      [0.049]
Monetary               -0.021       -0.031       -0.021       -0.043                                   PC of MI &             -0.024       -0.011
Independ. (MI)        [0.017]      [0.024]      [0.017]      [0.024]*                                  ERS                   [0.016]      [0.023]
                                    0.092                      0.15                                    MI_ERS x                            -0.095
MI x reserves
                                   [0.131]                   [0.133]                                   reserves                           [0.124]
Exchange Rate          -0.009       0.004                                  -0.005       0.007          PC of MI &                                       -0.034       -0.078
Stability (ERS)       [0.007]      [0.010]                                [0.007]      [0.010]         KAO                                             [0.019]*    [0.027]***
                                    -0.105                                              -0.091         MI_KAO x                                                      0.295
ERS x reserves
                                   [0.061]*                                           [0.063]15%       reserves                                                    [0.139]**
                                                 -0.015       -0.035       -0.012       -0.023         PC of ERS. &                                                               -0.016       -0.012
KA Openness
                                                [0.009]*    [0.013]***    [0.009]      [0.013]*        KAO                                                                       [0.010]      [0.016]
KAOPEN x                                                      0.129                     0.068          ERS_KAO x                                                                               -0.033
reserves                                                    [0.062]**                  [0.064]         reserves                                                                               [0.101]
# of Obs.               180          180          180          180          180          180           # of Obs.               180          180          180          180          180          180
Adjusted R2             0.22         0.24         0.22         0.24         0.22         0.24          Adjusted R2             0.22         0.22         0.22         0.25         0.22         0.22
        Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The estimated coefficients of the dummies for East
        Asia and Pacific and Sub-Saharan Africa are not reported.


                                                                                                  50
        Table 4-3: Output Volatility: Emerging Market Countries (EMG), 1972 – 2006, Panels of 5-year Windows
                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)                                  (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
                       -0.032       -0.04        -0.033       -0.026       -0.031       -0.039                               -0.036       -0.038       -0.031       -0.032       -0.033       -0.044
Relative Income                                                                                       Relative Income
                      [0.024]      [0.024]*     [0.024]      [0.025]      [0.024]      [0.026]                              [0.023]      [0.022]*     [0.023]      [0.024]      [0.023]      [0.025]*
Relative               0.046        0.056        0.048        0.038        0.045        0.056         Relative Income,       0.049        0.052        0.047        0.049        0.046        0.064
Income, sq.           [0.030]      [0.030]*     [0.029]*     [0.032]      [0.029]      [0.034]        sq.                   [0.028]*     [0.027]*     [0.028]*     [0.030]      [0.028]      [0.033]*
Change in US           0.204        0.212         0.2         0.198        0.196         0.2          Change in US           0.207        0.212        0.194        0.196         0.2          0.21
real interest rate   [0.055]***   [0.054]***   [0.055]***   [0.054]***   [0.054]***   [0.054]***      real interest rate   [0.052]***   [0.051]***   [0.053]***   [0.053]***   [0.052]***   [0.053]***
Volatility of          0.006        0.003        0.011        0.013        0.006        0.001         Volatility of          0.015        0.014        0.013        0.013        0.014        0.013
TOT*OPN               [0.013]      [0.013]      [0.013]      [0.013]      [0.013]      [0.013]        TOT*OPN               [0.013]      [0.012]      [0.013]      [0.013]      [0.013]      [0.013]
Inflation              0.057         0.06        0.049        0.043        0.054        0.059         Inflation              0.039         0.04        0.043        0.043         0.04        0.042
volatility           [0.005]***   [0.005]***   [0.005]***   [0.005]***   [0.005]***   [0.005]***      volatility           [0.005]***   [0.005]***   [0.005]***   [0.005]***   [0.005]***   [0.005]***
Fiscal                 0.005        0.005        0.004        0.005        0.005        0.005         Fiscal                 0.004        0.004        0.004        0.004        0.004        0.004
Procyclicality       [0.002]**    [0.002]**     [0.002]*    [0.002]**    [0.002]**    [0.002]**       Procyclicality        [0.002]*    [0.002]**    [0.002]**    [0.002]**    [0.002]**    [0.002]**
                       0.011        0.013        0.012        0.012         0.01        0.012                                0.013        0.014        0.011        0.011        0.012        0.011
Oil Exporters                                                                                         Oil Exporters
                     [0.005]**    [0.005]***   [0.005]**    [0.005]***   [0.005]**    [0.005]**                            [0.005]***   [0.004]***   [0.005]**    [0.005]**    [0.004]**    [0.005]**
Private credit         -0.007       -0.004       -0.008       -0.008       -0.007       -0.003        Private credit         -0.006       -0.004       -0.008       -0.008       -0.006       -0.005
creation              [0.006]      [0.006]      [0.006]      [0.006]      [0.006]      [0.006]        creation              [0.005]      [0.005]      [0.006]      [0.006]      [0.005]      [0.006]
Total                  0.026        0.105        0.028        0.041        0.028        0.059         Total                  0.027        0.089        0.029         0.04        0.027        0.053
Reserve/GDP          [0.008]***   [0.038]***   [0.008]***    [0.035]     [0.008]***   [0.024]**       Reserve/GDP          [0.008]***   [0.030]***   [0.008]***    [0.033]     [0.008]***   [0.023]**
Monetary               -0.017       -0.005       -0.02        -0.013                                  PC of MI &             -0.012        0.01
Independ. (MI)        [0.010]*     [0.014]     [0.010]**     [0.013]                                  ERS                   [0.010]      [0.013]
                                    -0.081                    -0.043                                  MI_ERS x                            -0.139
MI x reserves
                                   [0.063]                   [0.061]                                  reserves                          [0.065]**
Exchange Rate          0.004        0.017                                  0.005        0.017         PC of MI &                                       -0.017       -0.014
Stability (ERS)       [0.005]     [0.007]**                               [0.005]     [0.007]**       KAO                                            [0.010]11%    [0.013]
                                    -0.081                                              -0.072        MI_KAO x                                                      -0.018
ERS x reserves
                                  [0.033]**                                           [0.032]**       reserves                                                     [0.060]
                                                 -0.004       -0.005       -0.001       -0.003        PC of ERS. &                                                               -0.001       0.006
KA Openness
                                                [0.005]      [0.006]      [0.004]      [0.006]        KAO                                                                       [0.006]      [0.009]
KAOPEN x                                                      0.011                     0.008         ERS_KAO x                                                                               -0.047
reserves                                                     [0.026]                   [0.026]        reserves                                                                               [0.042]
# of Obs.               208          208          208          208          208          208          # of Obs.               208          208          208          208          208          208
Adjusted R2             0.47         0.5          0.44         0.41         0.46         0.5          Adjusted R2             0.39         0.42         0.41         0.41         0.4          0.41
       Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The estimated coefficients of the dummies for East
       Asia and Pacific and Sub-Saharan Africa are not reported.



                                                                                                 51
     Table 5-1: Inflation Volatility: Less Developed Countries (LDC), 1972 – 2006, Panels of 5-year Windows, Robust Regression
                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)                                 (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
                       -0.078       -0.078       -0.087       -0.078       -0.08        -0.071                              -0.08        -0.084       -0.084       -0.081       -0.08        -0.075
Relative Income                                                                                         Relative Income
                     [0.026]***   [0.026]***   [0.027]***   [0.028]***   [0.026]***   [0.027]***                          [0.026]***   [0.026]***   [0.026]***   [0.027]***   [0.026]***   [0.027]***
Relative Income,       0.074        0.075        0.082        0.062        0.072        0.054           Relative             0.08        0.086        0.083        0.079        0.072        0.061
sq.                  [0.032]**    [0.033]**    [0.033]**     [0.036]*    [0.033]**     [0.036]          Income, sq.       [0.033]**    [0.033]**    [0.033]**    [0.034]**    [0.033]**     [0.036]*
Volatility of          0.017        0.016         0.02        0.021        0.017        0.017           Volatility of       0.017        0.017        0.017        0.017        0.017        0.017
TOT*OPN               [0.010]*     [0.010]*    [0.010]**    [0.010]**     [0.010]*     [0.010]*         TOT*OPN            [0.010]*     [0.010]*     [0.010]*     [0.010]*     [0.010]*     [0.010]*
                       0.215        0.213        0.221        0.222        0.223        0.221                               0.207         0.21        0.212        0.211        0.223        0.224
Inflation Rate                                                                                          Inflation Rate
                     [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.010]***                          [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.010]***
Relative oil price     0.005        0.005        0.006        0.006        0.005        0.005           Relative oil        0.006        0.006        0.006        0.006        0.005        0.005
shocks                [0.003]      [0.003]     [0.003]**     [0.003]*     [0.003]*     [0.003]          price shocks      [0.003]**    [0.003]**    [0.003]**    [0.003]**     [0.003]*     [0.003]*
Total                  -0.008       0.033        -0.012       -0.01        -0.01        -0.022          Total               -0.01        0.016        -0.011       -0.02        -0.009       -0.026
Reserve/GDP           [0.012]      [0.057]      [0.012]      [0.050]      [0.012]      [0.035]          Reserve/GDP        [0.012]      [0.049]      [0.012]      [0.045]      [0.012]      [0.034]
Monetary               -0.01        -0.001       -0.011       -0.006                                    PC of MI &            0          0.008
Independ. (MI)        [0.012]      [0.017]      [0.012]      [0.017]                                    ERS                [0.012]      [0.018]
                                    -0.058                    -0.04                                     MI_ERS x                         -0.059
MI x reserves
                                   [0.094]                   [0.093]                                    reserves                        [0.104]
Exchange Rate          0.007        0.011                                  0.007         0.01           PC of MI &                                    0.006        0.003
Stability (ERS)       [0.005]      [0.008]                                [0.005]      [0.008]          KAO                                          [0.013]      [0.018]
                                    -0.027                                              -0.011          MI_KAO x                                                   0.019
ERS x reserves
                                   [0.045]                                             [0.043]          reserves                                                  [0.083]
                                                 0.008        0.004        0.009        0.004           PC of ERS. &                                                            0.016        0.012
KA Openness
                                                [0.006]      [0.008]      [0.006]      [0.008]          KAO                                                                   [0.008]**     [0.011]
KAOPEN x                                                       0.03                     0.032           ERS_KAO x                                                                            0.031
reserves                                                     [0.036]                   [0.035]          reserves                                                                            [0.057]
# of Obs.               429          429          429          429          429          429            # of Obs.            429          429          429          429          429          429
Adjusted R2             0.59         0.59         0.59         0.59         0.59         0.59           Adjusted R2          0.58         0.58         0.58         0.58         0.6          0.59
     Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The estimated coefficients of the dummies for
     Middle East and North Africa and Sub-Saharan Africa are not reported.




                                                                                                   52
     Table 5-2: Inflation Volatility: Less Developed, Commodity Exporting Countries (LDC-CMD), 1972 – 2006, Panels of 5-year Windows,
     Robust Regression
                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)                                 (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
                       -0.184       -0.18        -0.162       -0.16        -0.147       -0.143                              -0.169       -0.167       -0.151       -0.151       -0.152       -0.152
Relative Income                                                                                         Relative Income
                     [0.066]***   [0.065]***   [0.066]**    [0.066]**    [0.069]**    [0.068]**                           [0.066]**    [0.065]**    [0.065]**    [0.064]**    [0.068]**    [0.069]**
Relative Income,       0.234        0.232        0.218        0.217        0.198        0.198           Relative            0.223        0.222        0.208        0.208        0.205        0.204
sq.                  [0.087]***   [0.086]***   [0.087]**    [0.087]**    [0.091]**    [0.088]**         Income, sq.       [0.088]**    [0.087]**    [0.087]**    [0.086]**    [0.089]**    [0.090]**
Volatility of           0.06        0.059        0.054        0.055        0.047        0.047           Volatility of       0.055        0.055        0.051        0.051        0.048        0.048
TOT*OPN              [0.022]***   [0.022]***   [0.022]**    [0.022]**    [0.023]**    [0.022]**         TOT*OPN           [0.022]**    [0.022]**    [0.022]**    [0.022]**    [0.022]**    [0.023]**
                       0.323        0.315        0.319        0.315        0.303        0.288                               0.294        0.295        0.319        0.313        0.287         0.29
Inflation Rate                                                                                          Inflation Rate
                     [0.033]***   [0.032]***   [0.031]***   [0.032]***   [0.035]***   [0.034]***                          [0.032]***   [0.031]***   [0.031]***   [0.031]***   [0.034]***   [0.035]***
Relative oil price     0.021        0.023        0.018        0.019        0.024        0.025           Relative oil        0.026        0.027        0.019        0.018        0.027        0.026
shocks               [0.009]**    [0.009]**    [0.009]**    [0.009]**    [0.010]**    [0.009]***        price shocks      [0.009]***   [0.009]***   [0.009]**    [0.009]**    [0.009]***   [0.009]***
Total                  -0.036       0.081        -0.032       -0.033       -0.039       -0.011          Total               -0.046       0.075        -0.033       -0.093       -0.044       -0.029
Reserve/GDP           [0.032]      [0.160]      [0.032]      [0.163]      [0.034]      [0.116]          Reserve/GDP        [0.033]      [0.132]      [0.032]      [0.153]      [0.033]      [0.115]
Monetary               -0.076       -0.054       -0.082       -0.069                                    PC of MI &          -0.061       -0.022
Independ. (MI)       [0.036]**     [0.053]     [0.035]**     [0.052]                                    ERS                [0.037]      [0.053]
                                    -0.113                    -0.084                                    MI_ERS x                         -0.262
MI x reserves
                                   [0.291]                   [0.299]                                    reserves                        [0.278]
Exchange Rate          -0.004       0.012                                  -0.003        0.01           PC of MI &                                    -0.094       -0.11
Stability (ERS)       [0.017]      [0.023]                                [0.017]      [0.023]          KAO                                         [0.038]**     [0.057]*
                                    -0.122                                              -0.118          MI_KAO x                                                   0.124
ERS x reserves
                                   [0.134]                                             [0.146]          reserves                                                  [0.314]
                                                 -0.026       -0.041       -0.023       -0.034          PC of ERS. &                                                            -0.028       -0.023
KA Openness
                                                [0.019]      [0.028]      [0.019]      [0.029]          KAO                                                                    [0.026]      [0.040]
KAOPEN x                                                      0.095                     0.079           ERS_KAO x                                                                            -0.033
reserves                                                     [0.137]                   [0.145]          reserves                                                                            [0.235]
# of Obs.               182          182          182          182          182          182            # of Obs.            182          182          182          182          182          182
Adjusted R2             0.48         0.47         0.48         0.48         0.45         0.44           Adjusted R2          0.45         0.45         0.48         0.48         0.44         0.44
     Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                   53
    Table 5-3: Inflation Volatility: Emerging Market Countries (EMG), 1972 – 2006, Panels of 5-year Windows, Robust Regression
                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)                             (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
                    -0.078       -0.075       -0.087       -0.085       -0.083       -0.082                          -0.08        -0.081       -0.085       -0.088       -0.079       -0.079
Relative Income                                                                                  Relative Income
                  [0.031]**    [0.031]**    [0.031]***   [0.034]**    [0.031]***   [0.034]**                       [0.029]***   [0.030]***   [0.031]***   [0.032]***   [0.030]***   [0.033]**
Relative            0.082         0.08        0.087        0.084        0.082         0.08       Relative            0.085        0.087        0.087        0.094        0.078        0.079
Income, sq.       [0.039]**    [0.040]**    [0.039]**     [0.046]*    [0.039]**     [0.048]*     Income, sq.       [0.037]**    [0.038]**    [0.038]**    [0.042]**    [0.038]**     [0.045]*
Volatility of       0.102         0.1         0.105        0.105        0.099        0.098       Volatility of       0.106        0.104        0.099        0.099        0.096        0.096
TOT*OPN           [0.017]***   [0.017]***   [0.017]***   [0.017]***   [0.017]***   [0.017]***    TOT*OPN           [0.016]***   [0.016]***   [0.016]***   [0.016]***   [0.016]***   [0.016]***
                    0.177        0.177        0.184        0.185        0.184        0.186                           0.167         0.17        0.178        0.176         0.18        0.181
Inflation Rate                                                                                   Inflation Rate
                  [0.011]***   [0.011]***   [0.011]***   [0.011]***   [0.011]***   [0.011]***                      [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.011]***   [0.011]***   [0.011]***   [0.011]***
Relative oil        0.003        0.003        0.004        0.004        0.003        0.003       Relative oil        0.003        0.003        0.004        0.004        0.003        0.003
price shocks       [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      price shocks       [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]      [0.003]
Total               -0.005       0.034        -0.009       0.008        -0.009       -0.004      Total               -0.004       0.015        -0.005       0.012        -0.008       -0.007
Reserve/GDP        [0.011]      [0.053]      [0.012]      [0.051]      [0.012]      [0.034]      Reserve/GDP        [0.011]      [0.043]      [0.011]      [0.047]      [0.011]      [0.033]
Monetary            -0.009       0.002        -0.006       0.001                                 PC of MI &          -0.003       0.004
Independ. (MI)     [0.014]      [0.019]      [0.014]      [0.019]                                ERS                [0.013]      [0.019]
                                 -0.058                    -0.039                                MI_ERS x                         -0.042
MI x reserves
                                [0.087]                   [0.087]                                reserves                        [0.092]
Exchange Rate       0.006         0.01                                  0.005        0.009       PC of MI &                                    0.013        0.018
Stability (ERS)    [0.007]      [0.010]                                [0.007]      [0.010]      KAO                                          [0.015]      [0.020]
                                 -0.024                                              -0.016      MI_KAO x                                                   -0.032
ERS x reserves
                                [0.045]                                             [0.044]      reserves                                                  [0.086]
                                              0.011        0.011        0.011         0.01       PC of ERS. &                                                            0.017        0.017
KA Openness
                                             [0.007]*     [0.009]      [0.006]*     [0.009]      KAO                                                                    [0.009]*     [0.012]
KAOPEN x                                                   0.002                     0.006       ERS_KAO x                                                                            -0.002
reserves                                                  [0.038]                   [0.037]      reserves                                                                            [0.059]
# of Obs.            215          215          215          215          215          215        # of Obs.            215          215          215          215          215          215
Adjusted R2          0.68         0.68         0.69         0.69         0.69         0.68       Adjusted R2          0.68         0.68         0.68         0.68         0.69         0.69
    Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The estimated coefficients of the dummies for
    Middle East and North Africa and Sub-Saharan Africa are not reported.




                                                                                                54
    Table 6-1: Inflation: Less Developed Countries (LDC), 1972 – 2006, Panels of 5-year Windows, Robust Regression
                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)                             (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
                    -0.028       -0.015       0.013        0.036        -0.028       0.005                           -0.022       -0.019       0.004        0.012        -0.022       0.016
Relative Income                                                                                  Relative Income
                   [0.052]      [0.052]      [0.053]      [0.055]      [0.050]      [0.052]                         [0.054]      [0.054]      [0.055]      [0.055]      [0.050]      [0.051]
Relative            0.059        0.045        0.014        -0.022       0.074        0.027       Relative            0.052        0.049        0.018        0.005        0.068        0.013
Income, sq.        [0.062]      [0.063]      [0.065]      [0.068]      [0.060]      [0.064]      Income, sq.        [0.065]      [0.065]      [0.066]      [0.068]      [0.060]      [0.064]
World Output        0.876         0.91         0.71        0.714        0.897        0.921       World Output        0.901        0.898         0.8         0.771        0.861        0.871
Gap               [0.310]***   [0.310]***   [0.321]**    [0.321]**    [0.300]***   [0.298]***    Gap               [0.323]***   [0.323]***   [0.328]**    [0.330]**    [0.300]***   [0.296]***
                    -0.013       -0.014       -0.015       -0.018       -0.008       -0.012                          -0.02        -0.02        -0.021       -0.023       -0.007       -0.012
Trade openness                                                                                   Trade openness
                   [0.008]*     [0.008]*     [0.008]*    [0.008]**     [0.007]      [0.008]                        [0.008]**    [0.008]**    [0.008]***   [0.008]***    [0.007]      [0.008]
Volatility of       0.032        0.031        0.027        0.025        0.022         0.02       Volatility of       0.042        0.041        0.041        0.041        0.019        0.018
TOT*OPN            [0.021]      [0.021]      [0.022]      [0.022]      [0.020]      [0.020]      TOT*OPN            [0.022]*     [0.022]*     [0.022]*     [0.022]*     [0.020]      [0.020]
Inflation           0.311         0.31        0.295        0.293        0.304        0.303       Inflation            0.3          0.3         0.297        0.297         0.3         0.299
volatility        [0.013]***   [0.013]***   [0.013]***   [0.013]***   [0.012]***   [0.012]***    volatility        [0.013]***   [0.013]***   [0.014]***   [0.014]***   [0.012]***   [0.012]***
Private Credit      -0.016       -0.022       -0.011       -0.014       -0.017       -0.025      Private Credit      -0.015       -0.017       -0.012       -0.013       -0.016       -0.024
Creation           [0.013]      [0.013]      [0.014]      [0.014]      [0.013]      [0.013]*     Creation           [0.014]      [0.014]      [0.014]      [0.014]      [0.013]      [0.013]*
M2 Growth           0.137        0.146        0.116        0.116        0.144        0.149       M2 Growth           0.127         0.13        0.111        0.112        0.142        0.147
Volatility        [0.036]***   [0.036]***   [0.038]***   [0.037]***   [0.035]***   [0.035]***    Volatility        [0.038]***   [0.038]***   [0.038]***   [0.039]***   [0.035]***   [0.035]***
Fiscal              -0.001       -0.001       0.003        0.003        -0.003       -0.002      Fiscal              0.002        0.002        0.004        0.004        -0.003       -0.002
Procyclicality     [0.005]      [0.005]      [0.005]      [0.005]      [0.005]      [0.005]      Procyclicality     [0.005]      [0.005]      [0.005]      [0.005]      [0.005]      [0.005]
                    0.044        0.044        0.038        0.037         0.04         0.04                           0.039        0.039        0.038        0.038        0.038        0.038
Oil Shock                                                                                        Oil Shock
                  [0.005]***   [0.006]***   [0.006]***   [0.006]***   [0.005]***   [0.005]***                      [0.006]***   [0.006]***   [0.006]***   [0.006]***   [0.005]***   [0.005]***
Total               -0.021       -0.122       0.014        -0.002       -0.01        -0.136      Total               -0.001       -0.114       0.011        -0.058       -0.002       -0.128
Reserve/GDP        [0.024]      [0.104]      [0.025]      [0.089]      [0.024]     [0.061]**     Reserve/GDP        [0.025]      [0.090]      [0.026]      [0.083]      [0.023]     [0.059]**
Monetary            0.037        0.033        0.063        0.067                                 PC of MI &          -0.092       -0.125
Independ. (MI)     [0.022]*     [0.030]     [0.022]***   [0.031]**                               ERS               [0.022]***   [0.033]***
                                 0.029                     -0.067                                MI_ERS x                         0.248
MI x reserves
                                [0.169]                   [0.166]                                reserves                        [0.189]
Exchange Rate       -0.074       -0.096                                 -0.08        -0.099      PC of MI &                                    -0.009       -0.031
Stability (ERS)   [0.010]***   [0.014]***                             [0.009]***   [0.013]***    KAO                                          [0.025]      [0.034]
                                 0.161                                               0.152       MI_KAO x                                                   0.138
ERS x reserves
                                [0.082]*                                           [0.075]**     reserves                                                  [0.159]
                                              -0.037       -0.051       -0.048       -0.059      PC of ERS. &                                                            -0.131       -0.16
KA Openness
                                            [0.011]***   [0.015]***   [0.010]***   [0.013]***    KAO                                                                   [0.014]***   [0.018]***
KAOPEN x                                                   0.095                     0.086       ERS_KAO x                                                                            0.238
reserves                                                  [0.068]                   [0.064]      reserves                                                                           [0.104]**
# of Obs.            403          403          403          403          403          403        # of Obs.            403          403          403          403          403          403
Adjusted R2          0.72         0.72         0.68         0.68         0.73         0.74       Adjusted R2          0.68         0.68         0.66         0.66         0.73         0.74
    Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The estimated coefficients of the dummies for Latin
    American and the Caribbean and Eastern Europe are not reported.

                                                                                                55
    Table 6-2: Inflation: Less Developed, Commodity Exporting Countries (LDC-CMD), 1972 – 2006, Panels of 5-year Windows, Robust
    Regression
                     (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)                             (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)         (11)         (12)
                    -0.015       -0.003       -0.044       -0.04        -0.012       -0.004                          -0.088       -0.078       -0.082       -0.078       -0.013       -0.012
Relative Income                                                                                  Relative Income
                   [0.083]      [0.084]      [0.086]      [0.088]      [0.079]      [0.079]                         [0.087]      [0.088]      [0.088]      [0.089]      [0.078]      [0.077]
Relative            0.019        0.007        0.037        0.032        0.038        0.029       Relative            0.092        0.082        0.067        0.063        0.042        0.038
Income, sq.        [0.100]      [0.101]      [0.104]      [0.106]      [0.094]      [0.095]      Income, sq.        [0.106]      [0.106]      [0.107]      [0.107]      [0.094]      [0.093]
World Output        1.355         1.35         1.08         1.1          1.39        1.372       World Output        1.079         1.01        0.955        1.025         1.35        1.315
Gap               [0.521]**    [0.530]**    [0.540]**     [0.560]*    [0.499]***   [0.503]***    Gap                [0.555]*     [0.558]*     [0.557]*     [0.566]*    [0.496]***   [0.491]***
                    0.006          0          -0.018       -0.018       0.001        -0.002                          -0.019       -0.022       -0.021       -0.022       -0.004       -0.003
Trade openness                                                                                   Trade openness
                   [0.017]      [0.017]      [0.017]      [0.018]      [0.016]      [0.016]                         [0.017]      [0.017]      [0.017]      [0.018]      [0.015]      [0.015]
Volatility of       -0.013       -0.017       -0.001       -0.004       -0.025       -0.027      Volatility of       0.005        0.001        0.016        0.013        -0.028       -0.026
TOT*OPN            [0.029]      [0.029]      [0.030]      [0.031]      [0.028]      [0.028]      TOT*OPN            [0.030]      [0.031]      [0.031]      [0.031]      [0.027]      [0.027]
Inflation           0.297        0.296        0.285        0.284        0.289        0.289       Inflation            0.29        0.291        0.288        0.287        0.286        0.286
volatility        [0.016]***   [0.017]***   [0.017]***   [0.018]***   [0.016]***   [0.016]***    volatility        [0.018]***   [0.018]***   [0.018]***   [0.018]***   [0.016]***   [0.015]***
Private Credit      -0.043       -0.046       -0.037       -0.038       -0.058       -0.061      Private Credit      -0.052       -0.056       -0.038       -0.036       -0.06        -0.062
Creation           [0.038]      [0.038]      [0.039]      [0.040]      [0.036]      [0.036]*     Creation           [0.040]      [0.040]      [0.041]      [0.041]      [0.036]*     [0.035]*
M2 Growth           0.209        0.226        0.177        0.191        0.226        0.234       M2 Growth            0.21        0.217        0.171         0.18        0.231        0.227
Volatility        [0.059]***   [0.060]***   [0.061]***   [0.064]***   [0.056]***   [0.057]***    Volatility        [0.062]***   [0.063]***   [0.063]***   [0.064]***   [0.056]***   [0.055]***
Fiscal              -0.006       -0.005       0.001        0.001        -0.009       -0.007      Fiscal              -0.003       -0.004       0.003        0.003        -0.009       -0.007
Procyclicality     [0.008]      [0.008]      [0.008]      [0.008]      [0.008]      [0.008]      Procyclicality     [0.008]      [0.008]      [0.008]      [0.008]      [0.007]      [0.008]
                     0.05        0.048        0.043        0.043        0.045        0.044                           0.041        0.039        0.043        0.044        0.042        0.042
Oil Shock                                                                                        Oil Shock
                  [0.009]***   [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.009]***   [0.009]***                      [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.010]***   [0.009]***   [0.009]***
Total               -0.046       -0.137       0.027         0.1         -0.031       -0.159      Total               -0.005       -0.191       0.023        0.114        -0.016       -0.168
Reserve/GDP        [0.034]      [0.167]      [0.035]      [0.184]      [0.033]      [0.112]      Reserve/GDP        [0.036]      [0.144]      [0.036]      [0.175]      [0.031]      [0.106]
Monetary            0.048        0.044         0.07        0.099                                 PC of MI &          -0.141       -0.198
Independ. (MI)     [0.039]      [0.057]      [0.040]*     [0.060]*                               ERS               [0.041]***   [0.056]***
                                 -0.009                    -0.19                                 MI_ERS x                         0.408
MI x reserves
                                [0.306]                   [0.332]                                reserves                        [0.305]
Exchange Rate       -0.104       -0.126                                 -0.108       -0.13       PC of MI &                                    -0.002       0.028
Stability (ERS)   [0.017]***   [0.023]***                             [0.016]***   [0.022]***    KAO                                          [0.048]      [0.069]
                                 0.184                                               0.193       MI_KAO x                                                   -0.188
ERS x reserves
                                [0.146]                                             [0.146]      reserves                                                  [0.359]
                                              -0.049       -0.054       -0.061       -0.071      PC of ERS. &                                                            -0.178       -0.217
KA Openness
                                            [0.022]**     [0.032]*    [0.019]***   [0.029]**     KAO                                                                   [0.024]***   [0.035]***
KAOPEN x                                                   0.026                     0.067       ERS_KAO x                                                                            0.317
reserves                                                  [0.154]                   [0.141]      reserves                                                                            [0.217]
# of Obs.            173          173          173          173          173          173        # of Obs.            173          173          173          173          173          173
Adjusted R2          0.72         0.72         0.68         0.67         0.74         0.74       Adjusted R2          0.67         0.67         0.66         0.65         0.74         0.75
    Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The dummy for Latin America is not reported.

                                                                                                56
Table 6-3: Inflation: Emerging Market Countries (EMG), 1972 – 2006, Panels of 5-year Windows, Robust Regression
                   (1)    (2)     (3)      (4)     (5)      (6)                     (7)    (8)       (9)     (10)                                                        (11)         (12)
                    -0.079       -0.062       -0.019       -0.039       -0.073       -0.071                          -0.021       -0.016       0.002        -0.002       -0.075       -0.066
Relative Income                                                                                  Relative Income
                   [0.090]      [0.092]      [0.085]      [0.090]      [0.088]      [0.095]                         [0.088]      [0.088]      [0.087]      [0.090]      [0.086]      [0.093]
Relative            0.122        0.101        0.075        0.107        0.134        0.138       Relative            0.063        0.055        0.048        0.057        0.132        0.118
Income, sq.        [0.110]      [0.112]      [0.104]      [0.115]      [0.108]      [0.122]      Income, sq.        [0.108]      [0.108]      [0.107]      [0.112]      [0.106]      [0.119]
World Output        0.994        1.016        0.781        0.812        0.888        0.939       World Output        0.978        0.974        0.928        0.937         0.93        0.926
Gap               [0.440]**    [0.444]**     [0.422]*     [0.425]*    [0.433]**    [0.431]**     Gap               [0.439]**    [0.439]**    [0.431]**    [0.435]**    [0.423]**    [0.425]**
                    -0.012       -0.011       -0.004       -0.002       -0.004       -0.001                          -0.01        -0.009       -0.006       -0.006       -0.005       -0.006
Trade openness                                                                                   Trade openness
                   [0.011]      [0.011]      [0.011]      [0.012]      [0.011]      [0.012]                         [0.011]      [0.011]      [0.011]      [0.012]      [0.011]      [0.011]
Volatility of       0.068         0.07        0.052        0.051        0.066        0.067       Volatility of       0.062        0.064        0.056        0.055        0.068        0.069
TOT*OPN            [0.040]*     [0.041]*     [0.039]      [0.039]      [0.040]*     [0.039]*     TOT*OPN            [0.040]      [0.040]      [0.040]      [0.040]      [0.039]*     [0.039]*
Inflation           0.443        0.444        0.443        0.446        0.423        0.432       Inflation           0.458        0.457        0.455        0.455        0.432        0.431
volatility        [0.023]***   [0.023]***   [0.023]***   [0.023]***   [0.023]***   [0.023]***    volatility        [0.023]***   [0.023]***   [0.023]***   [0.023]***   [0.022]***   [0.023]***
Private Credit      -0.026       -0.031       -0.039       -0.039       -0.031       -0.037      Private Credit      -0.038       -0.04        -0.044       -0.045       -0.03        -0.031
Creation           [0.018]      [0.019]     [0.018]**    [0.018]**     [0.018]*    [0.018]**     Creation          [0.018]**    [0.018]**    [0.018]**    [0.018]**     [0.018]*     [0.018]*
M2 Growth           0.128        0.136        0.155        0.145        0.178        0.169       M2 Growth           0.123        0.128        0.142         0.15        0.151        0.155
Volatility        [0.051]**    [0.052]***   [0.050]***   [0.050]***   [0.051]***   [0.050]***    Volatility        [0.051]**    [0.051]**    [0.051]***   [0.051]***   [0.050]***   [0.050]***
Fiscal              -0.01        -0.01        -0.008       -0.008       -0.013       -0.012      Fiscal              -0.008       -0.008       -0.008       -0.008       -0.012       -0.012
Procyclicality     [0.007]      [0.007]      [0.007]      [0.007]      [0.007]*     [0.007]*     Procyclicality     [0.007]      [0.007]      [0.007]      [0.007]      [0.007]*     [0.007]*
                    0.027        0.026        0.015        0.015         0.02         0.02                           0.021         0.02        0.016        0.016        0.022        0.021
Oil Shock                                                                                        Oil Shock
                  [0.008]***   [0.008]***    [0.008]*     [0.008]*    [0.008]**    [0.008]**                       [0.008]***   [0.008]**     [0.008]*     [0.008]*    [0.008]***   [0.008]***
Total               -0.023       -0.138       -0.018        0.01        -0.02        -0.048      Total               -0.026       -0.126       -0.026       -0.005       -0.018       -0.037
Reserve/GDP        [0.030]      [0.121]      [0.029]      [0.108]      [0.030]      [0.076]      Reserve/GDP        [0.030]      [0.101]      [0.030]      [0.106]      [0.030]      [0.075]
Monetary            0.034        0.012         0.02        0.019                                 PC of MI &          -0.026       -0.063
Independ. (MI)     [0.031]      [0.043]      [0.031]      [0.042]                                ERS                [0.032]      [0.044]
                                 0.115                     0.002                                 MI_ERS x                         0.219
MI x reserves
                                [0.197]                   [0.188]                                reserves                        [0.210]
Exchange Rate       -0.04        -0.059                                 -0.042       -0.059      PC of MI &                                    -0.067       -0.061
Stability (ERS)   [0.016]**    [0.023]***                             [0.016]***   [0.021]***    KAO                                          [0.034]*     [0.044]
                                 0.118                                               0.112       MI_KAO x                                                   -0.043
ERS x reserves
                                [0.102]                                             [0.097]      reserves                                                  [0.202]
                                              -0.048       -0.038       -0.052       -0.042      PC of ERS. &                                                            -0.092       -0.098
KA Openness
                                            [0.014]***   [0.019]**    [0.014]***   [0.018]**     KAO                                                                   [0.020]***   [0.028]***
KAOPEN x                                                   -0.057                    -0.058      ERS_KAO x                                                                            0.037
reserves                                                  [0.086]                   [0.086]      reserves                                                                            [0.139]
# of Obs.            203          203          203          203          203          203        # of Obs.            203          203          203          203          203          203
Adjusted R2          0.78         0.78         0.8          0.8          0.79         0.8        Adjusted R2          0.78         0.78         0.79         0.79         0.8          0.79
Notes: Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The estimated coefficients of the dummies for Latin
American and the Caribbean and Eastern Europe are not reported.

                                                                                                57
Table 7: Summary of the Effects of the Trilemma Configurations

(A) Output Volatility
                           Monetary    Exchange          Financial
                                                                          MI and          MI and          ERS and
                           Independ.   Rate Stab.        Openness
                                                                           ERS            KAO              KAO
                             (MI)       (ERS)             (KAO)

     Less Developing
                           Decreases                                     Decreases       Decreases
     Countries (LDC)

     Commodity                                          Decreases, but                  Decreases, but
                                        Decreases if
                                                            can be                          can be
     Exporters             Decreases    coupled w.
                                                         increased if                    increased if
     (LDC-CMD)                           higher IR
                                                          IR > 27%                        IR > 26%
                                       Increases, but
                                                                         Decreases if
     Emerging Market                       can be
                           Decreases   reduced if IR
                                                                         coupled w.
     Countries (EMG)                                                      higher IR
                                         > 21-24%


(B) Inflation Volatility
                           Monetary    Exchange          Financial
                                                                          MI and          MI and          ERS and
                           Independ.   Rate Stab.        Openness
                                                                           ERS            KAO              KAO
                             (MI)       (ERS)             (KAO)

     Less Developing
                                                                                                          Increases
     Countries (LDC)

     Commodity
     Exporters             Decreases                                                     Decreases
     (LDC-CMD)

     Emerging Market
                                                         Increases                                        Increases
     Countries (EMG)



(C) Level of Inflation
                           Monetary    Exchange          Financial
                                                                          MI and          MI and          ERS and
                           Independ.   Rate Stab.        Openness
                                                                           ERS            KAO              KAO
                             (MI)       (ERS)             (KAO)
                                       Decreases, but                                                    Decreases, but
     Less Developing                        can be                                                           can be
                           Increases     increased if
                                                         Decreases       Decreases                        increased if
     Countries (LDC)
                                        IR >53-65%                                                         IR > 67%
     Commodity
     Exporters             Increases    Decreases        Decreases       Decreases                        Decreases
     (LDC-CMD)


     Emerging Market
                                        Decreases        Decreases                       Decreases        Decreases
     Countries (EMG)




                                                        58
Table 8: Output Volatility: the Trilemma Indexes Interacted w/ different levels of PCGDP
                                      Developing Countries (LDC)                  Emerging Market Countries (EMG)
                                      (1)        (2)          (3)                    (4)        (5)            (6)
       Private credit creation      -0.012     -0.013       -0.011                  0.001      0.001        -0.005
       (% of GDP)                   [0.008]   [0.007]*     [0.008]                [0.008]     [0.007]      [0.008]
       MI x                         -0.042                  -0.023                 -0.092                   -0.068
        Int’l reserves              [0.068]                [0.065]                [0.068]                  [0.065]
       MI x                         -0.014                  -0.009                 -0.006                    -0.01
        High PCGDP                  [0.017]                [0.016]                [0.020]                  [0.017]
       MI x                         -0.016                  -0.019                 -0.007                   -0.016
        Medium PCGDP                [0.012]                [0.012]                [0.014]                  [0.014]
       MI x                         -0.005                  -0.018                  0.009                   -0.022
        Low PCGDP                   [0.015]                [0.013]                [0.023]                  [0.018]
       ERS x                        -0.036     -0.042                              -0.082     -0.067
        Int’l reserves              [0.033]    [0.031]                           [0.037]** [0.032]**
       ERS x                         0.002      0.012                               0.013      0.017
        High PCGDP                  [0.010]    [0.009]                            [0.012]    [0.009]*
       ERS x                         0.003      0.003                               0.018      0.017
        Medium PCGDP                [0.006]    [0.005]                           [0.007]** [0.007]**
       ERS x                        -0.011     -0.005                               0.019      0.005
        Low PCGDP                   [0.007]    [0.006]                            [0.016]     [0.010]
       KAOPEN x                                -0.014       -0.001                             0.026        0.032
        Int’l reserves                         [0.027]     [0.027]                            [0.027]      [0.027]
       KAOPEN x                                -0.012       -0.015                            -0.012        -0.018
        High PCGDP                             [0.010]     [0.009]                            [0.010]     [0.010]*
       KAOPEN x                                   0            0                              -0.005        -0.008
        Medium PCGDP                           [0.006]     [0.006]                            [0.006]      [0.006]
       KAOPEN x                                -0.004        -0.01                             0.037        0.039
        Low PCGDP                              [0.009]     [0.010]                          [0.016]**    [0.018]**
       Adjusted R2                   0.23       0.24         0.23                   0.49       0.48           0.44
       Significance of the estimated coefficients of the interaction terms b/w the trilemma indexes and different PCGDP groups
       is tested using a Wald test.
       MI: High vs. Med.             0.04                           0.85             0.00                             0.26
       MI: Med. vs. Low              1.25                           0.03             0.60                             0.24
       MI: High vs. Low              0.32                           0.42             0.42                             0.51
       ERS: High vs. Med.            0.02           1.30                             0.17            0.00
       ERS: Med. vs. Low            4.39**         2.60*                             0.01            1.57
       ERS: High vs. Low             1.82          3.70**                            0.11            1.05
       KAO: High vs. Med.                           1.81           2.74*                             0.45             1.27
       KAO: Med. vs. Low                            0.19            0.81                           6.61***          6.83***
       KAO: High vs. Low                            0.52            0.17                           7.35***          8.84***




                                                                 59
Table 9: The Impact of External Financing: Less Developed Countries
                Dependent Variable:                   Output Volatility                               Inflation Volatility                          Level of Inflation
                                               (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)            (6)        (7)              (8)              (9)
     Total Reserve/GDP                        0.057          -0.022          0.039             0.039              0.038      -0.038        -0.074          0.162            -0.096
                                            [0.058]         [0.055]         [0.036]          [0.086]            [0.083]     [0.055]       [0.145]        [0.145]           [0.089]
     Currency Crisis                         0.018           0.016           0.014             0.052              0.053       0.053        0.131           0.144             0.118
                                            [0.011]         [0.011]         [0.011]       [0.016]***         [0.017]***   [0.017]***   [0.028]***      [0.028]***        [0.027]***
     Net FDI inflows/GDP                     -0.022          0.009           0.003             -0.24             -0.287      -0.286       -0.388          -0.299            -0.293
                                            [0.074]         [0.075]         [0.075]       [0.065]***         [0.067]***   [0.067]***     [0.208]*        [0.219]           [0.204]
     Net portfolio inflows/GDP               0.124           0.136            0.15            0.172               0.258       0.237       -0.078          -0.098            -0.119
                                            [0.087]       [0.087]12%       [0.087]*          [0.179]            [0.188]     [0.187]       [0.306]        [0.326]           [0.306]
     Net 'other' inflows/GDP                 0.045           0.051           0.056            -0.015             -0.035       -0.03        -0.017          0.06              0.032
                                            [0.030]        [0.030]*        [0.030]*          [0.042]            [0.043]     [0.043]       [0.071]        [0.074]           [0.070]
     Short-term Debt                         -0.003           0.005          0.006             0.042              0.041       0.038         0.054          0.094             0.085
      (as % of total external debt)         [0.017]         [0.017]         [0.017]         [0.023]*           [0.024]*   [0.024]11%      [0.043]       [0.045]**         [0.042]**
     Total debt service                       0.047         0.058*           0.048              0.12              0.106       0.109         0.203          0.281             0.209
      (as % of GNI)                         [0.036]         [0.035]         [0.036]        [0.052]**          [0.053]**    [0.053]**    [0.099]**      [0.100]***         [0.096]**
     Monetary Independence (MI)              -0.021          -0.029                           -0.009              -0.01                     0.03           0.078
                                            [0.015]       [0.015]**                          [0.022]            [0.023]                   [0.038]       [0.039]**
     MI x reserves                           -0.003           0.063                            -0.11               -0.1                     -0.02         -0.223
                                            [0.095]         [0.095]                          [0.140]            [0.144]                   [0.237]        [0.249]
     Exchange Rate Stability (ERS)            0.001                           0.003            0.002                          0.002        -0.084                           -0.09
                                            [0.007]                         [0.007]          [0.011]                         [0.011]   [0.018]***                        [0.017]***
     ERS x reserves                          -0.049                          -0.044             0.03                          0.039         0.189                           0.202
                                            [0.048]                         [0.047]          [0.071]                         [0.070]      [0.121]                         [0.115]*
     KA Openness                                            -0.018           -0.014                            0.006          0.004                      -0.035            -0.052
                                                          [0.008]**        [0.008]*                           [0.013]        [0.012]                     [0.022]         [0.020]***
     KAOPEN x reserves                                       0.063           0.041                             0.019          0.046                       -0.01             0.051
                                                           [0.045]          [0.044]                           [0.071]        [0.068]                     [0.124]           [0.112]
     Observations                             313             313              313            321               321            321        306              306               306
     Adjusted R-squared                       0.21           0.22             0.21            0.6              0.59           0.59        0.75            0.73               0.76
     Robust standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                              60
    Table 10: External Financing and Policy Orientation

       Dependent variable                                  Output Volatility                                                              Inflation Volatility

                                 Mon. Indep. & ERS         Mon. Indep. & KAO             ERS & KAO               Mon. Indep. & ERS         Mon. Indep. & KAO             ERS & KAO
      (Policy Orientation)       “Financially Closed”     “More Flexible Exch. R”      “Currency Union”          “Financially Closed”     “More Flexible Exch. R”      “Currency Union”

                                  (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)         (7)             (8)         (9)           (10)        (11)         (12)
Total Reserve/GDP                 0.04            0.039       0.017        0.02         0.034         0.032         0              0         0.006        0.002          0.004       0.004
                              [0.014]***     [0.014]***     [0.014]     [0.014]     [0.014]**     [0.014]**     [0.021]        [0.022]     [0.021]      [0.020]        [0.023]     [0.023]
Currency Crisis                  0.015            0.015       0.014      0.014         0.017         0.019       0.053          0.052       0.042        0.043          0.048       0.046
                                [0.011]         [0.011]     [0.011]     [0.011]       [0.011]      [0.011]*   [0.017]***    [0.017]***   [0.018]**     [0.017]**    [0.018]***   [0.018]**
(Policy Orientation)             0.002           0.004       -0.001      0.002         0.002         -0.009      -0.011         -0.005       0.016        0.004          0.006       0.014
                                [0.004]         [0.007]     [0.005]     [0.008]       [0.005]       [0.008]    [0.007]*        [0.011]   [0.008]**      [0.012]        [0.007]     [0.012]
(Policy Orientation)            -0.034          -0.034       0.032       0.028         -0.011        -0.003      0.004          -0.005      -0.015       -0.011         -0.008      -0.007
     x Reserves                 [0.024]         [0.023]     [0.024]     [0.024]       [0.023]       [0.023]     [0.035]        [0.036]     [0.038]      [0.037]        [0.035]     [0.036]
Net FDI inflows/GDP             -0.089           -0.196       0.015      0.023         -0.038        -0.035      -0.251         -0.302      -0.179       -0.164         -0.394       -0.41
                                [0.086]       [0.086]**     [0.080]     [0.081]       [0.112]       [0.112]   [0.070]***    [0.072]***   [0.071]**     [0.069]**     [0.180]**   [0.182]**
Net FDI inflow                   0.174           0.332       -0.223      -0.181        0.022            0        -0.034         -0.111      -0.508       -0.664          0.206       0.189
     x (Policy Orientation)     [0.176]        [0.175]*     [0.188]     [0.191]       [0.151]       [0.152]     [0.245]        [0.261]    [0.289]*     [0.283]**       [0.200]     [0.202]
Net portfolio inflows/GDP        0.181           -0.121       0.191      0.199          0.06         0.061       0.149          0.183       0.278        0.237          -0.102      -0.137
                                [0.133]         [0.131]   [0.090]** [0.091]**         [0.105]       [0.104]     [0.196]        [0.204]     [0.225]      [0.217]        [0.369]     [0.375]
Net Portfolio inflow            -0.066           0.234       -0.348      -0.277         0.298         0.332      0.042           0.14       -0.679       -0.948          0.363       0.451
     x (Policy Orientation)     [0.176]         [0.174]     [0.273]     [0.284]     [0.187]11%     [0.190]*     [0.924]        [0.958]     [0.463]     [0.464]**       [0.435]     [0.446]
Net 'other' inflows/GDP          0.059            0.066       0.028       0.03         0.079          0.08       0.005          0.026       -0.064       -0.052          -0.03      -0.033
                                [0.044]         [0.044]     [0.032]     [0.033]     [0.034]**     [0.033]**     [0.066]        [0.069]     [0.048]      [0.047]        [0.052]     [0.052]
Net 'Other' inflow               0.009           0.004       0.097       0.084         -0.106        -0.094      -0.073         -0.095       0.166        0.174         -0.053       -0.03
     x (Policy Orientation)     [0.056]         [0.056]     [0.069]     [0.070]     [0.068]12%      [0.070]     [0.085]        [0.089]     [0.112]      [0.109]        [0.106]     [0.110]
Short-term Debt (as % of         -0.003           0.005         0        -0.004         0.002         0.001       0.034          0.017        0.04        0.044          0.047       0.061
 total external debt)           [0.018]         [0.021]     [0.017]     [0.019]       [0.018]       [0.020]     [0.025]        [0.031]     [0.025]      [0.028]       [0.025]*   [0.029]**
Short-term Debt                                 -0.026                   0.020                       -0.002                     0.049                    -0.015                     -0.051
     x (Policy Orientation)                     [0.030]                 [0.032]                     [0.032]                    [0.047]                  [0.046]                    [0.049]
Total debt service               0.054            0.072       0.069       0.097         0.055         0.008      0.088           0.149      0.149         0.081       0.111          0.114
  (as % of GNI)                 [0.036]         [0.044]    [0.035]* [0.041]**         [0.035]       [0.042]    [0.053]*      [0.068]**   [0.055]***     [0.060]     [0.055]**     [0.069]*
Total debt service                               -0.038                  -0.102                       0.172                     -0.187                    0.271                     -0.002
     x (Policy Orientation)                     [0.067]                 [0.080]                   [0.074]**                   [0.106]*                 [0.117]**                   [0.115]
Observations                      313              313         313         313           313           313       319              319       319            319         319            319
Adjusted R-squared                0.2             0.23         0.21        0.21          0.2           0.21      0.56             0.55      0.55           0.55        0.54           0.54
Robust p values in brackets * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                             61
Table 10 (con’t): External Financing and Policy Orientation

           Dependent variable                                   Level of Inflation

                                     Mon. Indep. & ERS          Mon. Indep. & KAO               ERS & KAO
            Policy Orientation       “Financially Closed”      “More Flexible Exch. R”        “Currency Union”

                                     (13)           (14)         (15)           (16)          (17)         (18)
   Total Reserve/GDP                    0.03         0.025         0.051         0.052         0.034        0.044
                                     [0.039]       [0.039]       [0.037]       [0.037]       [0.037]      [0.037]
   Currency Crisis                    0.167          0.162         0.138        0.137         0.142         0.134
                                  [0.029]***     [0.029]*** [0.029]*** [0.029]*** [0.028]***           [0.028]***
   (Policy Orientation)               0.014         -0.011        0.037         0.029         -0.045       -0.013
                                     [0.012]       [0.018]    [0.014]***       [0.022]    [0.011]***      [0.019]
   (Policy Orientation)               0.029          0.04         -0.069        -0.067        0.037         0.022
        x Reserves                   [0.061]       [0.062]       [0.063]       [0.064]       [0.057]      [0.058]
   Net FDI inflows/GDP                -0.186        -0.146        -0.393         -0.39       -0.404        -0.366
                                     [0.240]       [0.242]      [0.229]*      [0.230]*       [0.302]      [0.304]
   Net FDI inflow                      -0.31        -0.435         0.205        0.203         0.212          0.19
        x (Policy Orientation)       [0.464]       [0.469]       [0.505]       [0.512]       [0.379]      [0.382]
   Net portfolio inflows/GDP          -0.266        -0.246         0.032        0.037         0.236         0.173
                                     [0.349]       [0.351]       [0.342]       [0.345]       [0.500]      [0.503]
   Net Portfolio inflow               1.331         1.289         -0.268        -0.326        -0.363       -0.268
        x (Policy Orientation)    [0.860]12%       [0.860]       [0.806]       [0.828]       [0.633]      [0.645]
   Net 'other' inflows/GDP            -0.129        -0.151         0.091          0.09        -0.009       -0.017
                                     [0.115]       [0.117]       [0.081]       [0.081]       [0.080]      [0.081]
   Net 'Other' inflow                 0.249         0.251         -0.479         -0.46         0.131         0.11
        x (Policy Orientation)      [0.148]*      [0.150]*     [0.187]**     [0.191]**       [0.169]      [0.176]
   Short-term Debt (as % of            0.099         0.086         0.038          0.03        0.082         0.111
    total external debt)           [0.047]**       [0.058]       [0.044]       [0.049]      [0.044]*    [0.050]**
   Short-term Debt                                  0.073                       0.021                      -0.073
        x (Policy Orientation)                     [0.080]                     [0.081]                    [0.079]
   Total debt service                0.217           0.102         0.216         0.199         0.277        0.406
     (as % of GNI)                 [0.100]**       [0.124]     [0.098]**      [0.110]*    [0.096]***   [0.117]***
   Total debt service                                0.284                      0.088                      -0.326
        x (Policy Orientation)                   [0.180]11%                    [0.208]                   [0.188]*
   Observations                       306             306           306           306           306          306
   Adjusted R-squared                 0.72            0.72          0.73          0.72         0.75         0.74
   Robust p values in brackets * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                         62
     Table 11: Trilemma Configurations and External Financing of Major EMG Countries as of 2007

               Financial
                                                        Trilemma Indexes                                               External Finances                      Swap
               Develop.
                                                                                                                                                              /IMF
                                                                                    KA-                                                                    ($ bill.)**
               PCGDP*         IR        dIR      MI        dMI     ERS     dERS         dKAO         FDI     dFDI      Port.     dPort     Other    dOther
                                                                                   OPEN
Argentina          11.4%    17.2%       4.5%     0.74      0.49    0.61     0.29    0.24    -0.08    1.9%     0.1%      2.7%      5.3%     -3.0%      3.6%
Brazil             32.9%    13.6%       6.0%     0.12      -0.36   0.24     0.05    0.64     0.06    2.1%     0.8%      3.7%      3.5%      1.0%      2.1%       30 (FR)
Chile              74.5%    10.3%      -7.4%     0.96      0.74    0.35    0.06     1.00    0.07      6.5%    2.5%     -9.6%     -5.7%     -2.9%     -2.8%
China             135.5%    46.6%      15.7%     0.50      -0.02   0.75    -0.22    0.15     0.00    3.7%     0.9%      0.6%      0.9%     -2.1%     -2.5%
Colombia           24.5%    10.2%      -1.5%     0.83       0.24   0.17    -0.16    0.39     0.10     4.7%    1.9%      0.5%      1.4%      0.8%      0.6%
Czech Rep.         37.3%    19.7%      -6.6%     0.16      -0.34   0.38     0.00    0.81    -0.15    4.7%    -1.1%     -1.5%     -0.5%     -0.3%     -2.7%
Egypt              52.6%    23.6%       3.6%     0.50      0.18    0.64    -0.11    1.00     0.06    8.5%     5.0%     -2.8%     -3.3%     -3.4%      2.7%
Hong Kong         138.7%    73.9%       2.8%     0.10      -0.11   0.79    -0.21    1.00     0.00    -3.3%   -2.7%     -1.3%     18.8%     -7.7%    -12.8%
Hungary            51.4%    17.4%       1.0%     0.86      0.24    0.38     0.01    0.81    -0.07    3.2%    -0.1%     -1.7%     -6.3%     4.8%      3.4%       25 (IMF)
India              40.2%    24.3%       7.1%     0.37       0.21   0.35    -0.14    0.15     0.00
Indonesia          22.7%    12.7%      -1.1%     0.32      -0.02   0.34     0.04    0.69     0.00     0.5%    0.0%      1.3%      0.0%      -1.1%     0.9%
Israel             87.5%    17.4%      -4.4%     0.55       0.20   0.28    -0.11    1.00     0.02     1.6%    1.3%      0.2%      2.3%      -3.0%    -0.1%
Korea             112.5%    27.0%       1.0%     0.93      0.56    0.40     0.06    0.39     0.00    -1.4%   -1.5%     -2.5%     -3.0%      4.3%     3.0%       30(FR)***
Lithuania          37.2%    19.4%       2.4%     0.11      -0.12   0.71     0.18    1.00     0.00     3.7%    0.5%     -0.6%     -0.7%      13.3%     7.4%
Malaysia          110.2%    54.0%       6.8%     0.50      0.06    0.44    -0.46    0.39     0.00    -1.4%   -2.5%      3.0%      1.8%      -7.5%    -1.9%
Mexico             19.5%     8.5%      -0.5%     0.90       0.48   0.42     0.09    0.69     0.10     2.1%   -0.2%      1.7%      1.1%      -1.4%    -0.8%       30 (FR)
Pakistan           26.5%     9.8%      -1.5%     0.51      0.24    0.76    -0.06    0.15     0.00     3.6%    2.0%      1.5%      0.8%      1.9%     2.9%       10 (IMF)
Peru               17.3%    25.1%       7.6%     0.93       0.76   0.50    -0.05    1.00     0.00     4.9%    1.9%      3.1%      2.4%       0.5%     2.4%
Philippines        29.0%    21.0%       1.6%     0.10      -0.18   0.37    -0.12    0.45     0.00    -0.4%   -1.6%      3.1%      1.5%      -0.5%     2.0%
Poland             28.6%    14.9%       0.4%     0.13      -0.20   0.37     0.08    0.45     0.00     4.3%    1.5%     -1.2%     -3.0%       6.9%     7.4%
Russia             26.2%    36.1%      14.8%     0.80       0.35   0.48    -0.07    0.39     0.00     0.7%    0.5%      0.5%      0.5%       6.2%     6.1%
Singapore          96.1%    101.2%      0.9%     0.52      -0.03   0.51     0.00    1.00     0.00     7.3%   -1.8%    -10.3%     -0.5%      -8.4%     4.5%       30 (FR)
Slovak             35.9%    24.0%      -9.0%     0.73       0.28   0.39    -0.03    0.76     0.25     4.0%   -3.5%     -1.0%     -1.7%       6.3%     3.8%
S. Africa         103.6%    10.5%       3.2%     0.97       0.43   0.29     0.12    0.15     0.00     1.0%    0.7%      4.2%      1.7%       2.8%     3.0%
Thailand           86.9%    34.8%       4.4%     0.19      0.09    0.52     0.11    0.15    -0.24     3.0%   -0.5%     -2.8%     -3.9%      -1.4%     1.6%
Turkey             28.8%    11.1%      -3.2%     0.02      -0.47   0.31     0.12    0.15     0.00     3.1%    1.7%      0.1%     -1.2%       4.2%     2.0%
Venezuela          13.4%    10.6%      -8.5%     0.94       0.64   1.00     0.19    0.31    -0.06    -0.7%   -0.9%      1.8%      3.8%     -11.1%    -3.3%

        Notes: dX refers to a change of the variable X compared to the 2002-06 period.
        * PCGDP is as of 2006 or 2005 if the figure for 2006 is unavailable.
        ** “Swap/IMF” refer to the amount of swap lines provided by the U.S. Federal Reserve on Oct. 29, 2008 as well as the loans provided by IMF as of Mach
        2009. The information on Fed’s swap lines is based on Obstfeld et al. (2009)
        *** In December 2008, China and Japan also agreed to provide Korea with the swap lines of $28 billion and $20 billion, respectively.



                                                                                   63
                                Closed Financial Markets
                               and Pegged Exchange Rate




              Monetary                                   Exchange Rate
              Independence                               Stability




       Floating                                                   Monetary Union or
       Exchange Rate                                              Currency Board
                               Financial Integration


                 Figure 1: The Trilemma Framework

45


40


35


30


25


20


15


10


5


0
     80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06


      Developing countries        Industrial countries     Asia ex. China      China


             Figure 2: International Reserves/GDP, 1980-2006




                                                 64
                                   Figure 3: The Trilemma and International Reserves Configurations over Time
                               Industrialized Countries                                                         Non-Euro Industrialized Countries
                                    Monetary Independence                                                                    Monetary Independence




Financial Integration                                           Exchange Rate Stability Financial Integration                                            Exchange Rate Stability
                                               .2                                                                                       .2
                                               .4                 1971-80                                                               .4                 1971-80
                                               .6                  1981-90                                                              .6                 1981-90
                                                                   1991-2000                                                                               1991-2000
                                               .8                  2001-06                                                              .8                 2001-06

                                               1                                                                                        1
                                   International Reserves/GDP                                                               International Reserves/GDP
                  Center is at 0                                                                           Center is at 0


                            Emerging Market Countries                                                 Non-Emerging Market Developing Countries
                                    Monetary Independence                                                                    Monetary Independence




Financial Integration                                           Exchange Rate Stability Financial Integration                                            Exchange Rate Stability
                                               .2                                                                                       .2
                                               .4                 1971-80                                                               .4                 1971-80
                                               .6                  1981-90                                                              .6                 1981-90
                                                                   1991-2000                                                                               1991-2000
                                               .8                  2001-06                                                              .8                 2001-06

                                               1                                                                                        1
                                   International Reserves/GDP                                                               International Reserves/GDP
                  Center is at 0                                                                     Center is at 0




                                                                                      65
                                                    Figure 4: The Trilemma and International Reserves Configurations over Time:
                                                                     Regional Patterns for Developing Countries

                                       Latin America                                                                 Emerging Latin America                                                                            Sub Saharan Africa
                                    Monetary Independence                                                                 Monetary Independence                                                                         Monetary Independence




Financial Integration                                           Exchange Rate Stability
                                                                                  Financial Integration                                                           Exchange Rate Stability
                                                                                                                                                                                    Financial Integration                                           Exchange Rate Stability
                                               .2                                                                                      .2                                                                                          .2
                                               .4                 1971-80                                                              .4                            1971-80                                                       .4                 1971-80
                                               .6                  1981-90                                                             .6                             1981-90                                                      .6                  1981-90
                                                                   1991-2000                                                                                          1991-2000                                                                        1991-2000
                                               .8                  2001-06                                                             .8                             2001-06                                                      .8                  2001-06

                                               1                                                                                        1                                                                                          1
                                   International Reserves/GDP                                                            International Reserves/GDP                                                                    International Reserves/GDP
                  Center is at 0                                                                        Center is at 0                                                                                Center is at 0


                                     Developing Asia                                                             Emerging Asian Economies
                                    Monetary Independence                                                                 Monetary Independence                                                  NOTES: “Emerging Asian Economies”
                                                                                                                                                                                                 include China, Hong Kong, Indonesia,
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore,
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Taiwan, and Thailand. “Emerging Latin
                                                                                                                                                                                                 America” includes Argentina, Brazil,
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Jamaica,
Financial Integration
                                               .2
                                                                Exchange Rate Stability
                                                                                  Financial Integration
                                                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                                                                                  Exchange Rate Stability        Mexico, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, and
                                               .4                                                                                      .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Venezuela.
                                                                  1971-80                                                                                            1971-80
                                               .6                  1981-90                                                             .6                             1981-90
                                                                   1991-2000                                                                                          1991-2000
                                               .8                  2001-06                                                             .8                             2001-06

                                               1                                                                                        1
                                   International Reserves/GDP                                                            International Reserves/GDP
                  Center is at 0                                                     Note: This sample includes Taiwan, HK, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philipines, Singapore, Thailand, China




                                                                                                                                 66
                                                                        Figure 5: Development of Individual Trilemma Indexes

                                                                               (a) Industrialized countries vs. Developing countries

       Monetary Independence (MI), Industrial vs. Developing                             Exchange Rate Stability (ERS), Industrial vs. Developing                        Financial Integration (KAOPEN), Industrial vs. Developing
1




                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                  1
.8




                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                  .8
.6




                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                  .6
.4




                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                  .4
.2




                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                  .2
0




                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                   0
     1970         1980                1990           2000               2010           1970           1980               1990           2000                2010        1970          1980               1990         2000             2010
                                      Year                                                                               Year                                                                            Year

                 Mon. Indep., IDC              Mon. Indep., LDC                                    Exchr. Stab., IDC              Exchr. Stab., LDC                             KAOPEN, IDC                     KAOPEN, LDC
                 MI Avg. + One Std.            Full-sample avg of MI                               ERS Avg. + One Std.            Full-sample avg of ERS                        KAOPEN Avg. + One Std.          Full-sample avg of KAOPEN
                 MI Avg. - One Std.                                                                ERS Avg. - One Std.                                                          KAOPEN Avg. - One Std.




                                                      (b) Emerging market countries vs. Non-emerging market, developing countries

      Monetary Independence (MI), Emerging Mkt vs. Non-EMG                             Exchange Rate Stability (ERS), Emerging Mkt vs. Non-EMG                      Financial Integration (KAOPEN), Emerging Mkt vs. Non-EMG
1




                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                  1
.8




                                                                                                                                                                   .8
                                                                                  .8
.6




                                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                  .6
.4




                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                  .4
.2




                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                  .2
0




                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                   0
     1970         1980                1990            2000              2010           1970          1980                1990           2000                2010        1970         1980                1990         2000             2010
                                      Year                                                                               Year                                                                            Year

               Mon. Indep., EMG              Mon. Indep., non-EMG LDC                            Exchr. Stab., EMG              Exchr. Stab., non-EMG LDC                       KAOPEN, EMG                     KAOPEN, non-EMG LDC
               MI Avg. + One Std.            Full-sample avg of MI                               ERS Avg. + One Std.            Full-sample avg of ERS                          KAOPEN Avg. + One Std.          Full-sample avg of KAOPEN
               MI Avg. - One Std.                                                                ERS Avg. - One Std.                                                            KAOPEN Avg. - One Std.




                                                                                                                       67
                                                                                                          Figure 6: The Evolution of Trilemma Indexes
                                                                                                                    (a) Industrialized Countries
                                                                                                                   MI, ERS, and KAOPEN: Industrial Countries




                                                                        0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                                                                         1970           1980             1990                                       2000            2010
                                                                                                                                         Year

                                                                                                                          Mon. Indep., IDC                Exchr. Stab., IDC
                                                                                                                          KAOPEN, IDC


                                              (b) Emerging Market Countries                                                                                                       (c) Non-Emerging Market Developing Countries

                                        MI, ERS, and KAOPEN: Emerging Market Countries                                                                                            MI, ERS, and KAOPEN: non-EMG Developing Countries
0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                                                                0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                 1970            1980            1990                                       2000           2010                                                  1970            1980            1990        2000             2010
                                                                 Year                                                                                                                                            Year

                                                  Mon. Indep., EMG              Exchr. Stab., EMG                                                                                          Mon. Indep., non-EMG LDC     Exchr. Stab., non-EMG LDC
                                                  KAOPEN, EMG                                                                                                                              KAOPEN, non-EMG LDC




                                                                                                                                        68
                                Figure 7: Policy Orientation of IDCs and LDCs
(a) Cumulative Effects: (aˆMI + bˆERS ) , (aˆMI + cˆKAOPEN ), (bˆERS + cˆKAOPEN ), and (aˆMI + bˆERS + cˆKAOPEN )
            Industrial Countries                                               Developing Countries
                         Policy Orientation - Cumulative: IDC                                                                   Policy Orientation - Cumulative: LDC




                                                                                                        1
1




                                                                                                        .8
.8




                                                                                                        .6
.6




                                                                                                        .4
.4




                                                                                                        .2
.2
0




                                                                                                        0
     1970                   1980                     1990                   2000           2010              1970                   1980                     1990                   2000          2010
                                                     Year                                                                                                    Year

                  Upper Bound/Lower Bound                                   aMI+bERS for IDC                              Upper Bound/Lower Bound                                  aMI+bERS for LDC
                  aMI+cKAOPEN for IDC                                       bERS+cKAOPEN for IDC                          aMI+cKAOPEN for LDC                                      bERS+cKAOPEN for LDC
                  Mean of (aMI+bERS+cKAOPEN) for IDC                        value of 1                                    Mean of (aMI+bERS+cKAOPEN) for LDC                       value of 1
      Note: The vertical lines correspond to the candidate break years.                                       Note: The vertical lines correspond to the candidate break years.
      The shaded areas indicate the 95% confidence interval for aMI+bERS+cKAOPEN.                             The shaded areas indicate the 95% confidence interval for aMI+bERS+cKAOPEN.



                                                 (b) Individual Effects aˆMI, bˆERS, and cˆKAOPEN
                            Industrial Countries                                                Developing Countries
                    Policy Orientation - Individual Effects: IDC                                                           Policy Orientation - Individual Effects: LDC
1




                                                                                                        1
.8




                                                                                                        .8
.6




                                                                                                        .6
.4




                                                                                                        .4
.2




                                                                                                        .2
0




                                                                                                        0




     1970                    1980                     1990                  2000           2010              1970                    1980                     1990                  2000          2010
                                                      Year                                                                                                    Year

                                  aMI for IDC                             bERS for IDC                                                   aMI for LDC                              bERS for LDC
                                  cKAOPEN for IDC                         value of 1                                                     cKAOPEN for LDC                          value of 1
      Note: The vertical lines correspond to the candidate break years                                        Note: The vertical lines correspond to the candidate break years




                                                                                                   69
                                                     Figure 8: Non-linear Effect of Exchange Rate Stability – 1992-96 vs. 2002-06
                                                                                    (a) Asian EMG
                                                                                                           1992-96 (red-x) vs. 2002-06 (black-cicrcle)
                                                                                                                                                  -4% pt.




                                                                                    1.2
                                                                                                     -0.5% pt.        -2% pt.         -3% pt.                                   -5% pt.      -6% pt.     -7% pt.
                                                                                                              -1% pt.


                                                                                                                                         Singapore




                                                                                    1
                                                                         IR holding (% of GDP)
                                                                                                                                     Singapore




                                                                                           .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hong Kong




                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Malaysia




                                                                           .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hong Kong
                                                                                                                               Malaysia                                                                     China
                                                                                                                              Thailand
                                                                                                                     Korea, Rep.



                                                                                    .2
                                                                                                                                   Philippines                                 Thailand
                                                                                                                                          India
                                                                                                                   Indonesia Sri Lanka
                                                                                                                             Philippines
                                                                                                                              Sri Lanka                       China      Pakistan
                                                                                    0                                                  Pakistan        Korea, Rep.
                                                                                                                                                     Bangladesh     IndiaIndonesia
                                                                                                                                                                           Bangladesh
                                                                                                                           +0.5% pt.                        +1% pt.

                                                                                                 0                 .2                   .4           .6                                           .8                  1
                                                                                                                                     Exchange Rate Stability


                                              (b) Latin American EMG                                                                                                            (c) EMG excluding Asia and Latin America
                                   1992-96 (red-x) vs. 2002-06 (black-cicrcle)                                                                                                             1992-96 (red-x) vs. 2002-06 (black-cicrcle)
                                                                     -4% pt.                                                                                                                                                   -4% pt.
           1.2




                                                                                                                                                                  1.2
                             -0.5% pt.        -2% pt.     -3% pt.                                -5% pt.     -6% pt.       -7% pt.                                                  -0.5% pt.        -2% pt.       -3% pt.                 -5% pt.       -6% pt.      -7% pt.
                                      -1% pt.                                                                                                                                                -1% pt.
           1




                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Botswana
IR holding (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                       IR holding (% of GDP)
                  .8




                                                                                                                                                                         .8                      Botswana
          .6




                                                                                                                                                                 .6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jordan
  .4




                                                                                                                                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Slovak Republic                                       Bulgaria
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jordan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Morocco                               Egypt
                                                                                                     Trinidad and Tobago                                                                            Czech Republic             Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mauritius
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mauritius           Nigeria
                        Venezuela, RB                      Chile                                                                                                                                               Israel         Russia
           .2




                                                                                                                                                                  .2




                                                                          Jamaica                    Venezuela, RB                                                                                     HungaryCzech Republic                         Egypt
                                               Chile                   Peru                                                                                                                                               Lithuania                          Ghana
                                               Argentina  Peru                                                                                                                                       SlovakHungary
                                                                                                                                                                                           Turkey Poland    Republic      Tunisia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Morocco
                                               Colombia
                                              Jamaica               Colombia                                                                                                            Bulgaria        Ghana Kenya                                                  Cote d'Ivoire
                                                    Ecuador
                                                 Mexico                                                                                                                                              Zimbabwe        Israel
                                    Brazil               Brazil
                                                     MexicoTrinidad and Tobago                                               Argentina                                              South Lithuania
                                                                                                                                                                                          Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                               KenyaTurkeyPoland Slovenia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Tunisia             Nigeria
                                                                                                                              Ecuador                                                         Russia South Africa                                                    Cote d'Ivoire
                                                                                                                                                                                          Zimbabwe
           0




                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                  +0.5% pt.                                 +1% pt.                                                                                                      +0.5% pt.                       +1% pt.

                         0                   .2              .4           .6                                      .8                     1                                      0                  .2                 .4           .6                        .8                      1
                                                          Exchange Rate Stability                                                                                                                                  Exchange Rate Stability



                                                                                                                                                70
                                                   Figure 9: Non-linear Effect of Exchange Rate Stability – 2002-06 vs. 2007-08
                                                                                  (a) Asian EMG
                                                                                                              2002-06 (red-x) vs. 2007 (black-cicrcle)
                                                                                                                                               -4% pt.




                                                                                    1.2
                                                                                                     -0.5% pt.        -2% pt.       -3% pt.                                  -5% pt.        -6% pt.    -7% pt.
                                                                                                              -1% pt.


                                                                                                                                        Singapore
                                                                                                                                        Singapore




                                                                                    1
                                                                         IR holding (% of GDP)
                                                                                           .8
                                                                                                                                                                                  Hong Kong
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Hong Kong




                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                                                 Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                                                    China        Malaysia




                                                                           .4
                                                                                                                                          Thailand
                                                                                                                               Thailand                                                                     China
                                                                                                                          Korea,
                                                                                                                     Korea,  Rep.  Rep.
                                                                                                                             India
                                                                                                                        Philippines Philippines


                                                                                    .2
                                                                                                                                            India
                                                                                                                   Indonesia
                                                                                                                      IndonesiaSri LankaSri Lanka                      Pakistan
                                                                                                                                                                  Pakistan
                                                                                    0                                                              Bangladesh Bangladesh
                                                                                                                          +0.5% pt.                       +1% pt.

                                                                                                 0                 .2                  .4           .6                                          .8                     1
                                                                                                                                    Exchange Rate Stability


                                           (b) Latin American EMG                                                                                                            (c) EMG excluding Asia and Latin America
                                     2002-06 (red-x) vs. 2007 (black-cicrcle)                                                                                                                2002-06 (red-x) vs. 2007 (black-cicrcle)
                                                                     -4% pt.                                                                                                                                                  -4% pt.
           1.2




                                                                                                                                                                1.2
                            -0.5% pt.        -2% pt.    -3% pt.                                  -5% pt.     -6% pt.      -7% pt.                                                -0.5% pt.        -2% pt.           -3% pt.               -5% pt.   -6% pt.      -7% pt.
                                     -1% pt.                                                                                                                                              -1% pt.
           1




                                                                                                                                                                1
IR holding (% of GDP)




                                                                                                                                                     IR holding (% of GDP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Botswana
                  .8




                                                                                                                                                                       .8                       Botswana
          .6




                                                                                                                                                               .6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jordan
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Bulgaria
  .4




                                                                                                                                                       .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Russia
                                                                                   Trinidad and Tobago                                                                                              Slovak Republic
                                                                                                                                                                                                             MoroccoNigeria                             Bulgaria
                                                                                            Trinidad and Tobago                                                                                 Czech   Republic                   Morocco
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Slovenia
                                                                  Peru                                                                                                                           Mauritius
                                                                                                                                                                                               Mauritius
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Slovak  Republic           Nigeria Egypt
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Israel TunisiaRussia
           .2




                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                        Jamaica   Venezuela, RB                                                                                                 Czech Republic                                  Egypt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Lithuania
                                            Chile                    Peru
                                                                      Argentina
                                                                          Jamaica                                                                                                                Israel Hungary
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Hungary       Lithuania                        Ghana
                                      BrazilArgentina                                                                                                                                   Turkey Poland    Poland        Tunisia
                                          Colombia                                                                      Venezuela, RB                                                                 Cote
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                                            South Africa    d'Ivoire
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Kenya                    Ghana                       Cote d'Ivoire
                             Colombia             ChileMexico
                                              Mexico                                                                                                                                                         Kenya
                                 Brazil                                                                                                                                          South Africa
                                                                                                                             Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                                                       Zimbabwe
           0




                                                                                                                                                                0




                                                +0.5% pt.                                   +1% pt.                                                                                                   +0.5% pt.                         +1% pt.

                        0                 .2               .4           .6                                        .8                    1                                    0                   .2                 .4           .6                     .8                      1
                                                        Exchange Rate Stability                                                                                                                                  Exchange Rate Stability




                                                                                                                                              71
                                 Figure 10: MI-KAO vs. Exchange Rate Stability



               1        .8
    PC of MI and KAOPEN
  .2      .4   0  .6




                             0         .2          .4            .6               .8                 1
                                             Exchange Rate Stability (ERS)

                                            IR < 0.21            Fitted values
                                            IR > 0.21            Fitted values



  Figure 11: Trilemma Indexes and IR Holding for Asian EMG and China

                                 Emerging Asian Economies and China
                                             Monetary Independence




Financial Integration                                                        Exchange Rate Stability


                                                        .2


         EMG Asia: 1990-96                              .4                    China: 1990-96
 EMG Asia: 1997-2000                                                          China: 1997-2000
                                                        .6
         EMG Asia: 2001-06                                                    China: 2001-06
                                                        .8


                                                        1

                                            International Reserves/GDP
Note: The Emerging Asian Economies sample includes Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philipines, and Thailand




                                                        72
