                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         FINANCIAL LITERACY, INFORMATION, AND DEMAND ELASTICITY:
             SURVEY AND EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM MEXICO

                                          Justine S. Hastings
                                         Lydia Tejeda-Ashton

                                        Working Paper 14538
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14538


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008




We thank Joseph Altonji, Daniel Benjamin, Jeffrey Brown, Donald Green, Dean Karlan, Jeffrey Kling,
Annamaria Lusardi, Olivia Mitchell, Paul Schultz, Robert Willis, and seminar participants at Yale
University, the University of Illinois and the NBER Program on Aging for valuable comments. We
also thank the excellent staff at CONSAR for assistance with this project. We gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the Yale University Institution for Social and Policy Studies. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Justine S. Hastings and Lydia Tejeda-Ashton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Literacy, Information, and Demand Elasticity: Survey and Experimental Evidence
from Mexico
Justine S. Hastings and Lydia Tejeda-Ashton
NBER Working Paper No. 14538
December 2008
JEL No. H0,H55,L10

                                              ABSTRACT

We use responses to a survey and experiment with participants in Mexico’s privatized social security
system to examine how financial literacy impacts workers’ choice behavior and how simplifying information
on management fees may increase measures of price elasticity sensitivity among the financially illiterate.
We find that by presenting fees in pesos instead of annual percentage rates, financially illiterate workers
focus much more on fees when choosing between investment funds, selecting funds with lower average
fees in hypothetical choice settings. Even though changes in information have small impacts on fees
of the selected fund, holding fees constant, we show that changes in choice behavior imply a substantial
increase in price sensitivity. Hence, the way in which information is presented to workers can have
a substantial impact on optimal fees that firms can charge in the marketplace.


Justine S. Hastings
Yale University
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
justine.hastings@yale.edu

Lydia Tejeda-Ashton
207 Giannini Hall #3310
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-33
lashton@are.berkeley.edu
1. Introduction

          Policy reforms are increasingly incorporating expanded consumer choice and
privatization in an effort to increase efficiency and consumer welfare in traditionally publicly
provided markets. This movement towards increased choice and privatization has affected policy
reforms in public education (No Child Left Behind, school choice, and charter schools), public
healthcare (Medicare part D), and social security. Social security reform is a particularly pressing
issue as economies around the world grapple with aging populations and longer life expectancy.
One goal of replacing pay-as-you-go systems with fully funded private account plans is to
increase expected retirement wealth for a given level of contributions, through market-driven
efficiency gains (Geanakoplos, Mitchell, and Zeldes [1998], Feldstein and Samwick [1999],
Feldstein and Liebman [2001]). However, as in any traditional product market, the fundamental
behavior of consumers and firms determines market efficiency and net benefits from expanded
choice.
          Several recent papers have explored how salience and cognitive costs affect consumer
decisions in a wide range of markets, including retail purchases, Medicare plans, credit cards,
and public schooling (Chetty, Looney, and Kroft [2007], Kling et al. [2008], Ausubel [1991],
Hastings and Weinstein [2008], respectively).1 Market outcomes may not be efficient if, for
example, decision making costs cause consumers to place more weight on firm brand name
relative to price than they would if prices were transparent and easy to understand. If decision
making costs are negatively correlated with education, income, and wealth, then increased
privatization and choice could increase disparities across socioeconomic groups in traditionally
publicly provided markets (Hastings, Kane, and Staiger [2008], Hastings and Weinstein [2008]).
          In the context of privatized social security, differences in financial literacy, investment
experience, and education may significantly impact the choice of funds since decisions involve
understanding financial concepts, such as compounding, inflation, risk, and return.2 If financially

1
  Borgans et al. (2008) summarize the related literature in psychology and outline approaches for incorporating
personality and cognition in decision making and economic outcomes.
2
  Lusardi and Mitchell (2006) and Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie (2007) show links between measures of financial
literacy, savings behavior, and wealth at retirement using survey data from the US Health and Retirement Study and
the Dutch National Bank household survey, respectively. Measures of financial literacy in both studies are compiled
from respondents’ ability to demonstrate basic understandings of financial concepts necessary to make investment
decisions, such as the effects of compound interest, inflation, and risk on savings accumulation. In both surveys,
many respondents fail to correctly answer basic questions on inflation, compounding, and risk. The researchers also


                                                                                                                 2
illiterate participants face higher costs of interpreting information on fees, they may choose funds
based on easier-to-determine characteristics, such as brand name. The resulting demand
inelasticity may mitigate gains in retirement wealth from privatization for these consumers, and
there may be market-level efficiency implications, as well. If large segments of investors are
financially illiterate or face high decision making costs and choose funds based on brand name or
convenience, rather than on low management costs, equilibrium fees may be significantly above
competitive levels, negatively impacting wealth at retirement for all participants.
         This paper uses data from a survey with an embedded experiment in Mexico’s privatized
social security system to examine how characteristics, such as income, education, investment
experience, and financial literacy impact how workers view investment funds, called Afores
(Administradoras de Fondos para el Retiro, pronounced Ah-FOR-ay), the extent to which
workers minimize fees when selecting an Afore, and the degree to which information
presentation can affect measures of price sensitivity among financially unsophisticated
participants.3 The survey collected information on worker characteristics from 763 subjects,
focusing on characteristics not available in administrative data. These included educational
attainment, knowledge of the savings and retirement system rules, reasons for choosing the
current Afore, sources of information used in selecting the Afore, savings behavior and
experience, and measures of financial literacy.4 The survey was then followed by an information
experiment, in which participants were presented with hypothetical Afore choices in different
formats, to examine how typically unobserved consumer characteristics, such as financial
literacy, impact stated price elasticity of demand and how receiving information in simplified



show an empirical link between financial literacy, savings, and planning for retirement, suggesting that differences
in cognitive costs may contribute to differences in wealth at retirement. Moreover, researchers have found that even
among relatively wealthy and educated investors, investors’ decisions are overly responsive to defaults (Madrian
and Shea [2001], Cronqvist and Thaler [2004]), information on past returns (Choi et al. [2007]), and the number of
options offered for choice (Benartzi and Thaler [2001]).
3
  Mexico privatized social security in 1997, creating a fully funded system based on private accounts. Over the past
decade, between eleven and twenty-one privately owned firms called Afores (Administradoras de Fondos para el
Retiro) have provided fund management for the mandatory contributions of formal-sector labor market participants.
Despite the relatively large number of firms to choose from, fees remain substantially higher than management fees
for indexed mutual funds. High equilibrium fees may be due either to consumer behavior (demand inelasticity), firm
behavior (anti-competitive behavior), or both. Hastings (2008) uses administrative data from social security accounts
in Mexico and finds that this demand inelasticity is caused not only by decision making costs among workers, but
also by regulations concerning how information on fees of firms are presented to workers .
4
  The surveys were collected in face-to-face interviews at malls and parks in Mexico City. Comparing our survey
data to administrative data from the social security administration, we find that our sample is fairly representative of
the population as a whole.


                                                                                                                      3
format affected the price elasticity of demand, particularly among financially unsophisticated
respondents.
         The information experiments asked each subject to rank her top 3 choices for Afore when
fees for the Afores in the market were presented in pesos per year instead of as an annual
percentage rate on assets under management (the typical presentation format), when total fees
over 10 years in pesos were presented instead of pesos per year, and when historic rates of return
were given alongside information on fees. The relative prices of the Afores (and their returns,
where applicable) varied randomly across surveys, providing a source of variation in addition to
multiple ranked responses, to separately identify the importance respondents placed on price
from unobservable characteristics of the Afore (such as brand-name quality).
         We find that workers are fairly knowledgeable about the system. Approximately 81% of
respondents were able to recall and write down the name of their Afore, and shares of Afores
named by respondents closely match the actual shares of Afores in the market. While most
respondents ranked fees as one of the most important factors determining their choice of Afore,
we find that many workers lacked the financial literacy to answer basic questions about inflation
and compound interest. Furthermore, few participants had experience investing in stocks, bonds,
or mutual funds outside of their social security account.
         Using the rank-ordered responses from the Afore choice forms, we find that respondents
who scored high on financial literacy questions were much more price-sensitive when ranking
Afores. This relationship remained even after allowing price sensitivity to vary with age,
education, and salary.5 We also find that financially illiterate workers pay much more attention to
fees when fees are presented in pesos, but financially literate respondents have no change in
choice behavior when given fees in pesos instead of in percentages. Since one of the
determinants of financial literacy is correctly answering basic questions about compounding and
inflation, these findings provide a link between measures of underlying financial skills and the
ways in which agents are able to understand management fees.
         Over all respondents, presenting fees in pesos instead of in percentages generated a 25 -
55% increase in demand elasticity for Afore choices in our experiment.6 If all respondents were


5
  In addition, respondents who stated that fees were important to them when choosing their actual funds placed
significantly higher weights on fees when selecting funds in our experiment.
6
  Specifically, we estimate the change in demand elasticity for each Afore, since each is modeled as a differentiated
product. To translate changes in demand elasticity into changes in optimal fees, we assume that firms compete on


                                                                                                                    4
financially literate, demand elasticity would increase by 74 - 134%. Hence simply changing the
format from percents to pesos has about a third of the impact on demand elasticity that financial
literacy does, implying that providing information that makes fees more transparent and easy to
understand may be a very cheap alternative to expensive education programs. We also examine
the impact that presenting both information on fees and past returns has on price elasticity of
demand and Afore choice. For financially illiterate, Afore brand name becomes a more important
determinant of their choice when statistics on both fees and past returns are given to financially
illiterate workers.7 This contributes to the overall decline in price elasticity of demand that each
Afore hypothetically faces when consumers are given information on fees and past returns
together.
         These results have interesting implications for the presentation of government-mandated
information and its potential to influence choices and competition in privatized social security
markets. Because social security accounts cover financially literate and illiterate workers alike,
presenting information in easy-to-understand calculations may have a significant impact on the
ability of low-income and low-educated workers to understand fees and incorporate them into
their decisions. Furthermore, presenting one statistic instead of multiple statistics may increase
demand elasticity to that statistic (e.g., fees or returns-net-of fees) and minimize the weight
workers place on brand name instead.



2. Background on Mexican Privatized Social Security System

2.1 System Background and Regulations

         Mexico’s privatized social security system has been in effect since July 1, 1997. The
objective of the reform was to make the pension system financially viable, reduce the inequality
of the previous pay-as-you-go system, and increase the coverage and amount of pensions,
through the establishment of individual ownership over retirement account contributions.8 The


prices in a differentiated products market. The implied first-order conditions relate the profit-maximizing price-cost
margin to the inverse of the firm’s demand elasticity.
7
  We will show that fees and returns are not significantly positively correlated in this highly-regulated investment
market, so investors should not somehow infer that a high fee implies an abnormally high rate of return.
8
  Sinha (2003), PowerPoint presentation by CONSAR on “Modernization of the Mexican Pension System,” New
York, February, 2005.


                                                                                                                    5
government approved private investment managers, previously introduced as Afores, to manage
the individual accounts and established CONSAR (Comision Nacional del Sistema de Ahorro
para el Retiro) to oversee this new Sistema de Ahorro para el Retiro (SAR).9 In June 2007, SAR
had 37.5 million registered accounts.10 The economically active population in Mexico was 44.4
million and about 72.9% of the labor force participated in the formal sector.11 Total funds in the
system exceeded 1.14 trillion pesos, which was approximately 12.5% of the expected 2007
GDP.12 Since its inception, there have been many changes in rules and regulations governing the
system. We will describe the rules governing the system in place as of June of 2007 when the
survey was conducted.
        Mandatory contributions to the retirement account come from three places: the worker
contributes a mandatory 1.125% of her base salary, the employer contributes an additional
5.15%, and the government contributes 0.225% of the base salary, as well as a ”social
contribution” of 5.5% of the inflation-indexed Mexico City minimum wage (Sinha [2003]).13
The funds in the account are managed by the Afore that the worker chooses. Afores are approved
by CONSAR, and each Afore is required to offer at least two specialized investment funds,
called Siefores (Sociedades de Inversión Especializadas en Fondos para el Retiro, pronounced
See-FOR-ay): A higher-risk fund called Siefore Básica 2 and a low-risk fund called Siefore
Básica 1. The investment possibilities for each Siefore are heavily regulated by CONSAR.
Siefore 1 is effectively restricted to investing in Mexican government bonds, and all workers
over 55 years of age must have their funds in a Siefore 1. Siefore 2 may include investments in
equities, but equity investments are capped at 15%, and the investment vehicles are restricted to
Principal Protected Notes and Exchange Traded Funds tied to major stock indices. Hence
Siefores can be seen as fund managers that can invest in government bonds, high-rated corporate




9
   Initial reforms introduced in 1992 created private SAR accounts for workers at a bank of her choice, concurrent
with participation in the partially funded scheme. However, all investment decisions were still made in a manner
similar to the older system, but this role was largely limited to administrative tasks, such as record keeping and
account statement generation (Sinha [2003]).
10
    Comisión Nacional del Sistema de Ahorra para el Retiro (CONSAR), Cuentas Administradas por las Afores,
http://www.consar.gob.mx/boletin_estadistico/cuentas.shtml.
11
    Instituto Nacional de Estadística Geografia e Informática (INEGI), http://www.inegi.gob.mx.
12
     Comisión Nacional del Sistema de Ahorra para el Retiro (CONSAR), Fondos acum RCV, Vol y Vivienda,
http://www.consar.gob.mx/estadisticas/2007/02/valor_0207.xls.
13
    In addition, another 5% of the worker’s base salary is contributed to a housing account.


                                                                                                                6
bonds, and equity indices. Web Appendix B shows investment requirements and holdings for the
Siefores.14
        When a worker is first employed at a firm offering benefits, she must actively choose an
Afore. Once registered with an Afore, the worker may transfer to another Afore fairly easily.15
There is no system-wide default option – workers must select an Afore. If an account starts but is
not properly registered or attached to a worker (i.e., if the system does not know who owns the
funds), the account is automatically assigned to an Afore according to rules established by
CONSAR. These unassigned accounts typically have a very low balance and represent less that
5% of total assets under management.
        Afores charged commissions on both flows (load fee) and on assets under management
(balance fee). The fee is the same whether the account is invested in Siefore 1 or Siefore 2. The
load fee is called a “flow fee” because it is quoted as a percent of the worker’s salary instead of
as a percent of the contribution to the account. Hence a flow fee of 1% is actually a 15.4% load
fee (1/6.5 =0.154). In June 2007, flow fees ranged from 0.5% - 1.6% (i.e., a 7.7% - 25% load). In
addition to the flow fee, firms charged balance fees ranging from 0.12% to 1.5%. These two fees
are published by CONSAR along with a combination of these two fees called the “1 Year
Equivalent Fee on the Balance” or the “Equivalent Fee”.16 The equivalent fee is the published fee
that a firm would charge on balance alone to yield the same balance at the end of one year, based
on its published flow and balance fee to a hypothetical worker with assumptions placed on
monthly salary and balance. We will refer to this fee as the CEF (CONSAR’s Equivalent Fee).
The assumptions placed on the CEF significantly understated salary and overstated balance
relative to workers in the system, skewing the equivalent fee downward, and substantially
14
    Comisión Nacional del Sistema de Ahorro para el Retiro (CONSAR), Cartera de Valores Básica 2,
http://www.consar.gob.mx/estadisticas/2007/08/valor_0807.xls.
15
   Workers can switch Afores as often as they would like as long as the Afore to which they want to switch is less
expensive than their current Afore. They can switch to any Afore once per year or whenever their current Afore
raises its fees. As we will discuss later, most workers switch far fewer times than once per year, implying that this
restriction is rarely binding. Workers can switch in several ways – over the phone by calling a toll-free number that
CONSAR provides, over the internet at CONSAR’s secure website, or by requesting the Afore to which they are
switching to complete the request. All switches are centralized at an autonomous agency called PROCESAR
(Empresa Operadora de la Base de Datos Nacional SAR), which is in charge of processing account data. This
eliminates the ability of the Afores to make switching difficult or time consuming.
16
   In addition, most firms offer a small discount off their base fee that applies to workers who have been in the
system for longer than a predetermined period. These discounts used to be applied based on the tenure of the worker
with the Afore – effectively introducing a substantial switching cost over time. CONSAR required that, as of
January 2005, all firms offer discounts based on the worker’s tenure in the system instead of their tenure with the
Afore. This substantially and exogenously changed the set of fees each worker faced when choosing whether to
switch Afores.


                                                                                                                   7
understating the fees actually paid by most workers in the system. Table 1 shows the June 2006
published CEF and distribution of actual equivalent fees paid by workers in each Afore; the
actual fees paid are substantially higher than the published CEF representation of Afore’s fees.17
        To register for an Afore, workers were required to view the table of CEF’s, along with
each Afore’s 3 year historic return, and sign a form stating that they had seen and understood the
table of fees and returns as a part of the registration for an Afore account. If a worker were to
switch online, she would have to acknowledge that she viewed the required fees and returns
table, and every Afore is required to post this table on its website, as well, along with a statement
that past returns do not guarantee future performance. We will return to this when we examine
how viewing both fees and returns impacts demand elasticity of workers in our survey
experiment. An example of this required table appears in Web Appendix C.


2.2 Descriptive Statistics of Accounts and Fund Choices


        Table 2 shows summary statistics for a 10% random sample of afiliados (registered
account holders) in the system in June 2007. All financial statistics are reported in Mexican
pesos unless otherwise noted. The symbol for a Mexican peso is $, and 10.8 Mexican pesos ≈ 1
US Dollar in June 2006. 18 More than 60% of afiliados are men, reflecting the higher propensity
of Mexican men to participate in the formal labor market. The wage distribution is skewed to the
right – with a mean that is substantially larger than the median. The balance is also skewed to the
right, and overall, pension account balances are relatively small (in comparison to US 401(k)
accounts, for example).19 The average worker has been with her current Afore for 5.62 years and
has been in the system for an average of 7.28 years. The mean number of switches (weighted by
the number of years in the system) is about once every three years (0.3), although the median
number of switches is once ever five years (0.21), and, in fact, the higher mean is driven mostly
by an active upper tail that switches around once per year. Changes in Afore fees, changes in a
workers’ balances, wages, and labor market participation will change the optimal fund to invest

17
   Duarte and Hastings (2008) shows how this presentation impacts actual demand elasticity and Afore choices in
the system.
18
   Banco de México, Tipos de Cambio,
http://www.banxico.gob.mx/PortalesEspecializados/tiposCambio/indicadores.html.
19
   For example, the Employee Benefit Research Institute puts average 401(k) balance in the US at $121,202 US
Dollars (VanDerhei et al. [2007]).


                                                                                                             8
in, which suggests that workers may not be actively managing their accounts as much as they
could.
         Despite the seemingly large number of Afores to choose from and the range in fees
across the Afores,20 few workers seemed to be choosing Afores to minimize fees.21 If we
generate a rank of each Afore for each individual based on their actual fees paid, we find that the
average person is in their 12th ranked Afore out of 17.22 The average person pays 6.12% of their
balance in annual fees, and could cut that fee approximately in half by switching to their
cheapest Afore. An average savings of 3.46% of fees for assets under management represents a
substantial amount of money left on the table.23 Column 4, of Table 2, shows the potential
savings that afiliados could gain by switching from their current Afores to the cheapest Afores as
a percentage of their balances. It is important to note that there is not a historical relationship
between measures of persistent Afore performance and fees, implying that workers should not be
choosing higher-fee funds because these higher fees cover higher costs of management for better
performing firms. Web Appendix Table A.2 presents test for correlation between fees and
historic performance. The lack of correlation may not be surprising given that the investment
vehicles firms can use are highly regulated by CONSAR.




20
   In July 1997, seventeen Afores began operations (Sinha [2003]). Since then, there has been a consolidation wave
followed by an entry wave. In early 2003, at its most consolidated point, the market consisted of 11 firms. Duarte
and Hastings (2008) present graphs showing changes in fees from 2004-2006. Since then there have been several
new entrants, so that as of June 2007, there were 21 Afores in the market. Web Appendix Table A.1 lists the Afores
operating in the market in June 2007, with their entry date as well as a description of the firm. The Afores range
from prominent Mexican banks like Banamex, and international investment firms like HSBC, to department store
chains like Coppel (similar to Sears).
21
   Web Appendix Table A.2 presents results that test if fees are correlated with measures of market over- or under-
performance and does not find evidence that they are. However the sample period is relatively small given the short
history of the Afore market.
22
   To make this comparison, we calculate the fee that each firm would charge to each afiliado using her balance, her
last recorded salary, and tenure in the system. We ranked the firms from cheapest to most expensive for each
afiliado. Duarte and Hastings (2008) perform similar calculations using expected balances and wages going forward,
and past average contribution rates and find basically the same fact – that workers are paying substantially more fees
than they could if they switched to the cheapest fund. In addition, Duarte and Hastings (2008) show that this pattern
remains even when examining choices of Afore at the time of choice. On average, workers choose only slightly less
expensive funds, and over 25% of workers switch to Afores that are actually more expensive than the one they are
currently in.
23
   Note that the 12th cheapest means that there are approximately 12 Afores that they could have chosen that would
have charged them a cheaper management fee. Also, each afiliado pays an average CEF of 2.86% and the average
CEF that would be charged by the cheapest Afore for each afiliado is 1.52%. The average CEF rank of each
afiliado’s current Afore is 11.45 out of 17.


                                                                                                                    9
3. Survey and Field Experiment

3.1 Description of the Survey and Field Experiment


       To examine how demographics such as education, financial literacy, savings and
investment experience influence Afore choice and price elasticity of demand, we conducted a
survey and field experiment in Mexico City in June 2007. The survey was administered in parks
and malls around Mexico City – covering areas where people from all economic backgrounds
spend time with their families on weekends. We hired a team of 12 surveyors from local
government agencies, universities, and NGOs in Mexico City to help administer the survey.
Potential respondents were approached by a surveyor who stated that they were with a group
from Yale University, conducting a study of the savings and retirement system, and they were
informed that their responses would be anonymous and confidential. We collected 763 surveys in
total. Most respondents spent approximately 30 minutes completing the survey.
       The first portion of the survey consisted of three pages of questions that gathered
information on demographics, choice and savings behavior, and measures of financial literacy.
An example of the questions appears in Web Appendix D. Where appropriate, response options
were randomly varied across surveys. Questions 1-12 collected basic demographic information
as well as information unavailable in administrative data, including education, marital status,
number of children, internet access, and internet usage. We also collected information on
employment status in the formal sector, employment title, and income. Questions 13-24 asked
respondents questions about their current Afore choice and their knowledge of and participation
in the SAR.
       The final 3 questions of the survey were designed to construct a measure of financial
literacy, modeled after the US Health and Retirement Study (HRS) Module 8 on Retirement
Planning (HRS [2004]). The first question measures whether an individual understands
compound interest by asking if she would have more, less, or equal to 1500 pesos at the end of
five years if she invested 1000 pesos today at 10% annual return. The second question gauges
whether a person understands inflation by asking if she would be able to buy more or less with
her money at the end of a 1 year investment if inflation were 2% and investment returns were
1%,. The third question tests familiarity with financial investments, such as mutual funds and



                                                                                            10
stocks, by asking participants to select from possible relationships between past and future
returns. One of the options is to select the familiar phrase that “past returns do not predict future
performance” highlighted on Afore websites and printed materials. In all cases, the option “I
don’t know” and the option “Prefer not to answer” were both listed to minimize the chance of
guessing (Lusardi and Mitchell [2006]).
        These three pages were followed by four separate hypothetical sets of information on
Afores. The respondents were told that they needed to advise their brother on which Afore to
choose for his SAR account. They were to consider the subsequent hypothetical information on
the Afores given by CONSAR to assist with Afore choice and rank their top 3 Afore choices.
The table was similar to CONSAR’s actual table of information and real names of Afores were
used, but the relative fees varied randomly across surveys so that we could estimate price
sensitivity in a choice model incorporating the realistic value of Afore brand name. Each sheet
presented information designed to test how simplified information and framing of information
would impact Afore choice and price sensitivity. There were six types of information framing –
each participant received 4 of these types. Examples of these sheets are given in Web Appendix
E. The six basic information frames were: 1) Fees presented as a percentage of balance (how fees
are typically presented), 2) Fees presented as pesos charged per year (simplifying the fees by
performing multiplication for the worker), 3) Fees presented as 10 year total fees paid in pesos
(changing the framing of the fees to increase the size), 4) Account balances after 10 years
(framing the Afore choice as account balance gains instead of costs), 5) Fees presented with 1
year past returns, or 6) Fees presented with 1 and 3 year past returns.
        Each survey contained a randomly selected combination of 4 of these sheets.24 The fees
and returns were drawn from the actual distribution of fees and returns for the Afores, so they
were realistic. However, the relative fees (and returns, if applicable) for each Afore listed on
each sheet were randomized across surveys and across sheets within a survey, allowing us to
measure demand elasticities based on the stated choices of each respondent in each table. In
addition, fees in all formats were calculated using the appropriate equivalent fee formula, and
underlying fees were expressed as a percentage of balance. This allowed us to convert all fees



24
  Only 4 sheets were used in each survey because initial tests suggested that more than 4 sheets was too long. There
were 3 different combinations of these 4 sheets, and each respondent was randomly given a survey with one of these
combinations. The fees of the firms varied both within and across the 3 different overall formats.


                                                                                                                 11
(whether pesos per year or pesos per 10 years) back into a percentage of balance to make the
appropriate regression comparisons of the effect of information framing on demand elasticity.


3.2 Analysis of Survey Responses


       Table 3 compares demographic characteristics of our survey sample with those of the
population in the administrative data. The population in this case is a snapshot from the
administrative database for June of 2007 for all afiliados residing in Estado de Mexico and
Distrito Federal (Mexico City). Column 1 gives summary statistics for our sample, while
Columns 2-4 give the population mean when available with confidence intervals for the
population mean given the sample variance and our sample size. Our sample has a higher
average salary driven by a slight under-sampling of the lowest-income workers and over-
sampling of the highest-income workers; however, we have density in all areas of wage
distribution. For demographic variables in the survey but not in the administrative data, the
majority of survey participants have a high school degree or higher and over two thirds of
respondents had access to the internet, either at home or at the office.
       Overall, respondents were fairly knowledgeable about their accounts and about the
savings and retirement system. Approximately 81% of respondents knew and could write down
on the survey the name of their current Afore, and the market shares of the respondents’ stated
Afores were fairly representative of the actual Afore market shares in the population in June
2007. In addition, 79% of respondents considered their SAR account as part of their personal
wealth, and 86% knew that they could switch Afores for free.
       Table 4 presents results from probit regressions of whether a respondent ranked a
particular reason as one of the top three reasons she chose her current Afore on responses to
demographic questions. The first row gives the mean of the dependent variable; the fraction of
people who listed that reason as one of the top three reasons why they chose their Afore. The
first column shows that respondents with a post-high school education and respondents who use
the internet often for paying bills, making reservations, or reading the news are more likely to list
financial stability as a top reason for choosing their Afore. In addition, Internet users and/or
those with Internet access (survey questions 7 and 8) value an Afore more if they have other
accounts with that bank, and they are less likely to value easy branch access or “good service”



                                                                                                  12
when choosing an Afore (perhaps for online banking and account management). Interestingly,
receiving payroll through an Afore is most important for low-income workers, as is easy branch
access. Most importantly, higher-educated workers are more likely to state that low fees are an
important determinant of choice, but they are also more likely to look for higher past returns.
       Table 5 presents results from probit regressions of whether a respondent ranked a
particular information source as her primary information source for choosing her Afore (survey
question 17) on respondent’s demographics. The first row gives dependent variable means and
shows that, while CONSAR is a major source of information (21.6%), people are most likely to
get their information from the Afores through Agentes Promotores (Afore sales agents; mean
response of 26.9%). Women and low-income workers are more likely to rely on their employer
for information when choosing an Afore, while men and internet users are much more likely to
rely on information published by CONSAR. There is no significant difference across
demographic groups in the extent to which information from Afore agents is used in deciding on
which Afore to go with. The survey results on stated reasons for choices and sources of
information suggest that low-income and lower-educated individuals may be less sensitive to
fees, relying more on their employer’s advice or the Afore that is affiliated with the bank that
provides payroll at their employer. In addition, they seem to value product differentiation
through service and branch access – both characteristics that may given them added value from
large banks such as Banamex and at the same time make them less likely to respond to lower
prices by choosing another Afore.
       One reason that low-income and/or lower-educated workers may rely more on their
employers and local branch services when choosing an Afore, focusing less on fees and returns,
may be because they have little experience with financial savings and investment in general.
Survey question 24 asked respondents to list which type of vehicles they use for savings (outside
of their SAR account), and very few respondents indicated that they had experience with
financial instruments, such as stocks or bonds. For a large fraction of people, their Afore is the
only experience they have with investing money outside of informal savings networks. Table 6
shows that only 16% of people report that they save through equities, debt, or foreign securities.
Almost half of the respondents do not even save in a bank, saving instead in informal networks




                                                                                                  13
of friends, families, or employee cooperatives.25 As expected, education and income are much
lower for respondents who do not save or who save in informal networks or cooperatives. Of
workers who do not save, only 32.2% have greater than a high school education, while almost
90% of respondents who save in stocks or bonds have post-high school education. Average
salary triples from those who say they do not save to those who save in sophisticated financial
assets ($5,809 versus $18,967).
         These statistics imply that many people may not be familiar with basic calculations
needed to make wise investment decisions when planning their retirement savings and choosing
between the Afores in the market. To examine financial literacy, we asked 3 questions (survey
questions 25-27) motivated by the financial literacy module in the HRS. We asked a question
that measured respondents’ understanding of compounding, one that measured their
understanding of inflation, and one that tested their knowledge of the relationship between past
and future returns emphasized by investment firms.26 Using the answers we formed a financial
literacy index that is the sum of correct answers across the three questions (Lusardi and Mitchell
[2006], Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie [2007]).27 Overall, 32% of respondents answered the
compounding question correctly, 65% of respondents answered the inflation question correctly,
and 23% demonstrated knowledge of investment returns terminology by selecting “past returns
do not predict future returns” in question 27. When we sum the number of correct answers, we
find that 26%, 39%, 25% and 10% of respondents answered 0, 1, 2, and 3 questions correctly,
respectively. Our measure of financial literacy is positively correlated with education, salary, and
savings sophistication, as expected. Table 7 shows averages for these variables by the number



25
   Tandas are informal savings networks typically between families and relatives. Cooperativas are savings
cooperatives typically formed by co-workers. The employer often acts as the “bank” overseeing the worker savings
cooperative and providing interest on the deposits. Cajas de Ahorro or Solidarias are small local cooperative savings
communities that formed after pesos crises in the early 1990s when people lost trust in formal financial institutions.
26
   As in the United States, all investment firms in Mexico, including the Afores, must clearly state that “past returns
do not predict future performance” when providing statistics on past returns.
27
   Knowing ahead of time that investments in mutual funds, stocks and bonds are much more prevalent in the United
States than in Mexico, we replaced the question in HRS Module 8 on risk in a mutual fund versus in a stock with the
question on past returns. In both questions, it is not clear what the correct answer is, since it is possible for a stock to
be riskier than some narrow mutual funds and there is some evidence of persistent performance across actively
managed funds. However, both questions measure the degree to which respondents are familiar with commonly
expressed financial concepts. The past returns question also allow us to measure a stated response that could help
predict changes in Afore choices in the information framing test that examined how Afore choices changed when
respondents were given information on fees alone, fees with 1 year returns, or fees with 1 year and 3 year past
returns.


                                                                                                                        14
correct responses to the financial literacy questions. Average salary increases significantly with
the index, but there is still significant variation in salary within each cell.


3.3 Analysis of Hypothetical Afore Choices


        To test if information might affect Afore choice and price elasticity of demand, we
analyzed the stated choices of each respondent on the Afore choice sheets they received as the
final part of their survey. Recall that each respondent was asked to rank her top three choices for
an Afore based on the hypothetical information from CONSAR provided to her on each sheet.
We use these rankings to measure the implicit weight each respondent attached to fees when
choosing an Afore and how that weight varies with financial literacy and the type of information
presented. The parameter estimates can then be used to calculate demand elasticities for each
Afore implied by the choices made in each information format.


3.3.1 The effect of viewing fees in pesos versus in percentages
        We begin by examining the reduced-form effect that viewing a table of Afore fees in
pesos instead of in percentages has on the fee of the first-choice Afore. There are two
experiments: viewing annual fees in pesos versus in percentages and viewing fees in pesos over
ten years versus the annual fees in pesos. Table 8 shows the reduced form impact that each of
these treatments has on the fee of the first-choice Afore. Column 1 does not include covariate
controls, while column 2 does. The treatment effect estimates are very similar across the two
columns. Both indicate that seeing fees in pesos per year or pesos over ten years leads to a 6-7
basis point reduction in the fee of the first-choice Afore relative to viewing fees in annual
percentage rates. In addition, if we look at the covariates in column 2, this effect is a little more
than one third of the effect that being financially literate has on the fee of the first-ranked Afore,
and about one half of the effect that being a person who stated they look for fees when selecting
their actual Afore has. However, these covariates together explain very little of the overall
variation in Afore choice. The reduced-form approach excludes the importance of other factors
when ranking the Afores, such as brand name. It also does not allow us to quantify what these
changes in fees paid might mean from the firm’s perspective as a hypothetical impact on overall
demand elasticity.



                                                                                                   15
         We can estimate the implicit importance attached to fees relative to other factors when
ranking the Afores utilizing all three ranked choices, by estimating a rank-ordered conditional
(individual fixed-effects) logit model of Afore choice, where the indirect utility function for
person i choosing Afore j is given by:


U ij  X ij   p j  Ti p j  p j Z i    ij     (1)


where Xij is a matrix of Afore dummies and an indicator for whether Afore j is the Afore that
person i currently holds their account with, pj is the price of Afore j in annual percent charged on
balances, Ti is an indicator for whether person i viewed fees in pesos rather than in percentages,
Zi is a matrix of characteristics for i such as income and financial literacy, and εij is an i.i.d.
extreme value error term.28 Because we randomized the fees across tables and solicited each
respondent’s top three choices, we are able to include Afore fixed effects, as well as an indicator
for the respondent’s current Afore, in each regression to control for unobserved brand value. We
can then use the estimates to calculate the effect that information has on the importance placed
on fees and the overall demand elasticity that each Afore hypothetically faces.
         Table 9 presents results across four specifications. Column 1 presents results pooling the
Afore choices across respondents who were given information on fees in annual percentage rates
or in pesos in either format. It also excludes financial literacy as a factor that determines price
elasticity. Column 2 includes financial literacy in the pooled specification. Columns 3 and 4
allow for price elasticity to vary with whether the respondent was given fees as a percentage or
fees as pesos per year (in either format). Note, to save on space, we report coefficients on only
the Afores whose fixed effects were significantly different from zero (relative to the excluded
Afore, Profuturo GNP).
         Comparing the results in Columns 1 and 2, we see that financial literacy is a key
determinant of the weight workers place on price, dominating the effect of income, and larger in
magnitude than an indicator for whether the person stated they valued fees when selecting an
Afore in the survey portion of the experiment. Getting 2 or more correct answers in the financial

28
  We don’t estimate a mixed logit because we allow for many interactions between individual characteristics and
price. Many of these characteristics, such as financial literacy and stated preference for fees when selecting a fund,
can be interacted directly with price using our survey data, even though they would be unobserved in administrative
data and enter instead through idiosyncratic preferences for fees in a mixed logit model.


                                                                                                                  16
literacy section (financial literacy score>=2) nearly doubles the implicit weight respondents
placed on fees when choosing an Afore.
       Column 3 shows that the implicit weight respondents place on fees increases by about
50% (coefficient of -0.319 off a base of -0.750) when respondents see fees expressed in pesos
rather than in an annual percentage rate. The effect is half as large as the effect of being
financially literate (-0.791), or stating that fees are the most important factor in Afore choice
(-0.596). Column 4 further breaks down the effects of viewing fees in pesos versus percentages
by financially literate and illiterate respondents. If financial literacy enables people to
understand, process, and incorporate information on annual percentage rates when choosing
Afores, we might expect a higher impact of informational format on the financially illiterate
respondents. This is exactly what we find. All of the impact of viewing fees in pesos on price
sensitivity accrues to financially illiterate respondents. Viewing fees in pesos almost doubles the
weight they place on fees (intercept of -0.593 and treatment effect of -0.521). However, viewing
fees in pesos has no effect on the price sensitivity of financially literate respondents (total
treatment effect of -0.521 + 0.754 is not statistically different from zero).


3.3.2 The effect of viewing both past returns and fees
       We can also use the Afore choices to compare how the weight placed on fees changes
when viewing information on both fees and past returns. Following Choi et al. (2007), we
allowed for positive correlation between fees and past returns, so that chasing past returns would
raise the fee paid with certainty and therefore lower expected future returns, even though returns
(relative to the market average) are not significantly correlated with fees. This relationship was
true in the sheet providing information on 1 year past returns, as well as the sheet that provided 1
year and 3 year past returns. In addition, in the sheet providing 1 year past returns, we allowed 1
year and 3 year returns to be slightly negatively correlated to examine if viewing information
that past returns are variable within Afore would cause respondents to place a higher weight on
fees and less weight past returns.
       Table 10 shows the reduced form impact of the different information formats on the fee
of the first-choice Afore. The first column shows just differences in means without controlling
for demographic characteristics. The first coefficient after the constant shows just the effect of
seeing fees in pesos versus percentages, given that only fees are shown. The second coefficient



                                                                                                 17
gives the added effect of seeing pesos instead of percentages when both fees and past returns are
given. The impact of seeing pesos on the fee of the first-choice Afore is positive and doubles in
magnitude when both fees and returns are shown in pesos, suggesting that viewing fees and
returns in pesos helps respondents process both types of information, and to the extent that they
focus on past returns, viewing pesos increases the fee of the first-choice firm more than viewing
information in percentages. In addition, viewing information on one year past returns increases
the price of the first-choice Afore by 0.291 percentage points. Seeing information on both 1 year
and 3 year past returns increases the fee of the chosen afore by significantly less, 0.212,
suggesting that agents are less prone to return chasing when they view two sets of past returns
that demonstrate variability in past returns. The second column presents the same coefficient
estimates controlling for demographics. As in Table 12, financially literate respondents and those
who stated they considered fees as an important determinant of their Afore choice, chose Afores
that have lower average fees in the experimental tables.
       Table 11 estimates a rank-ordered logit model of Afore choice using responses from
forms showing 1 year, as well as 1 and 3 year past returns. Columns 1 shows that on average,
respondents place a higher weight on fees than they do on past returns, but on average, they
place positive weights on past returns, and in addition, the magnitude of the coefficient on price
relative to the value placed on own Afore indicates that respondents place less absolute weight
on fees when both fees and past returns are presented. In Table 9, the average respondent valued
a 1 percentage point decrease in fees as much as they valued their current Afore. In Table 11,
respondents value a 1 percentage point decrease in fees only 1/3 as much as they value their own
Afore. Thus, not only do respondents place a positive and significant weight on past returns
when both fees and past returns are presented, but they place substantially less importance on fee
information, all else equal. Column 2 presents results for formats presenting both 1 year and 3
year past returns. Here respondents correctly place higher importance on past returns over 3
years rather than 1 year, but they still place a significant weight on 1 year past returns. In
addition, viewing both types of past returns again decreases the importance of fees relative to
other factors, such as own Afore, when comparing the ratios of coefficients to those in column 1
and in Table 9.
       Columns 3 and 4 allow the value placed on fees and returns to vary by financially literate
and illiterate respondents. As in Table 9, financially literate respondents place significantly more



                                                                                                 18
weight on fees than illiterate respondents do. However, financially literate respondents also place
higher weights on past returns as well. Both illiterate and literate respondents place lower
weights on 1 year past returns when 3 year returns are shown as well. However, when both 1 and
3 year returns are shown, financially illiterate workers do not place a significant negative weight
on fees, instead only 3 year past returns are significant determinants of their choices. Hence,
financially illiterate workers appear to choose their Afore almost completely on brand name
when information on fees and past returns are presented.


3.3.3 Impact on demand elasticity facing each Afore
         Using estimates from Tables 10 and 11, we can calculate the demand elasticity that each
Afore would hypothetically face under different conditions. For each column, we analytically
compute the demand elasticities each Afore faces evaluated at the parameter estimates from the
corresponding rank-ordered conditional logit model.29 Column 1 of Table 12 gives demand
elasticity estimates for each Afore implied by the demand estimates in Table 9 column 4,
assuming that everyone received information only on fees expressed as an annual percentage
rate. Overall demand is elastic, with demand elasticities ranging from -1.45 to -1.86. Column 2
computes the demand elasticity that each Afore would face if all consumers received fees in
pesos instead of in annual percentage rate terms. Demand elasticity increases by 25 – 55% from
column 1 to column 2, indicating a substantial impact of the simple change in format on stated
demand elasticities. Column 3 calculates demand elasticities assuming that all people are
financially literate. This is an interesting statistic for comparing the potential impact of a simple
change in information format versus the impact of moving a consumer population towards
financial literacy. Column 3 shows that if all people were financially literate, hypothetical
demand elasticity would increase by 74 – 134% across Afores. Comparing the impact on demand
elasticity moving from column 1 to column 2 versus column 3 implies that a simple change in
information format has about 34 – 44% of the impact on demand elasticity that increasing
financial literacy might have.30

29
   Note that this is not the actual demand elasticity a firm might face in the market, but instead is useful for
quantifying and comparing changes in price sensitivity across different conditional logit models with different scale
factors. For an outline of factors that affect demand and the firm’s optimization problem in the Afore market, please
see Duarte and Hastings (2008).
30
   In addition, note that the largest brand-name banks (Banamex, Bancomer, Banorte, Santander) also have some of
the largest estimated changes in demand elasticity from providing simplified information or increasing the financial


                                                                                                                  19
         Columns 4 and 5 compute demand elasticity from responses where both fees and past
returns are presented (in either pesos or annual percentage rates) for 1 year past returns, as well
as 1 and 3 year past returns, respectively. Overall demand elasticity decreases substantially when
compared to column 1. The computed elasticities in both of columns imply that presenting
information on fees and returns substantially reduces price elasticity of demand. The demand
elasticities in columns 4 and 5 are similar in magnitude to those found using actual
administrative data, and the information presented in these two formats are the most similar to
the required information from CONSAR (Duarte and Hastings [2008]). In addition, Column 6
presents the price elasticity of demand to the CEF using the survey respondent’s stated Afore and
the choice set they faced during the time period they chose that Afore (constructed using the
midpoint of the number of years the individual stated that they had been with that Afore). The
demand elasticities are similar to those in Columns 4 and 5, although they are slightly sensitive
to the assumption on exactly when the individual chose their Afore.
         Another way to interpret the impact of these hypothetical choices on demand elasticity
and overall fees in the market is to compute the change in optimal price-cost margin for each
firm assuming firms compete on prices in a static, differentiated products market.31 From Table
12, for example, viewing fees in pesos instead of percents decreased the fee of the first-choice
Afore by 0.07 off a base of 1.70, implying a relative small decrease in fees paid of 4%. However,
in a market setting where prices are high, inducing consumers to pay greater attention to price
may result in a small immediate savings for them, but a much larger savings through the effect
increased demand elasticity has on optimal firm prices. In column 1 of Table 13, the implied
Afore price-cost margins range from 54 – 69%. The increased demand elasticities in column 2
translate into a 20 – 35% reduction in price-cost margins, and those in column 3 imply a 42 –
57% decrease in price-cost margins across Afores. Hence, a hypothetical market-wide increase in




literacy levels. These banks also serve predominantly financially illiterate and lower-income customers. In our
survey response, respondents who stated they were currently an affiliate of one of these Afores were more likely to
be financially illiterate (68-70% financially illiterate). In addition, in the administrative data, these firms have
afiliados with lower than average salary and balance given their age. These relatively high fee firms have a strong
brand name, and serve financially illiterate workers, and hence face the largest hypothetical change in demand
elasticity (and therefore decrease in optimal fees) as a result of increased financial literacy or simplified information
that increases the price sensitivity of financially illiterate customers.
31
   In this setting, the firm’s optimal price-cost margin is proportional to the inverse of their demand elasticity. Since
the firms offer differentiated products, demand elasticity varies for each firm.


                                                                                                                      20
price sensitivity can substantially lower Afores’ optimal prices, even if it has only a marginal
impact on the immediate price paid when viewed in isolation of potential market effects.



4. Conclusion

       This paper examines the links between investor characteristics such as financial literacy,
information format, and measures of investment choice behavior, using data collected from a
survey and field experiment in Mexico’s privatized social security system. We find that, while
many participants in the system are well informed about their choices, few have experience
investing in financial assets such as stocks, bonds, or mutual funds outside of their mandatory
savings and retirement account. In addition, we show that financial literate respondents place
much higher importance on fees relative to brand name when selecting funds in a hypothetical
situation. This implies that wealth accumulation in a privatized system will be on average higher
for these individuals. However, we also find that simple changes in format presentation,
presenting fees in pesos charged rather than as an annual percentage rate, can have a significant
effect on the weight financially illiterate respondents place on fees, implying that the ability to
understand basic financial concepts such as compounding has a significant impact on how
individuals interpret and choose funds when faced with comparative fee tables.
       In addition, we show that all respondents place lower weights on fees when past returns
are included in the information presentation. This is particularly pronounced for financially
illiterate workers, who place near zero weight on fees or returns, focusing much more on firm
brand name when simultaneously presented with multiple pieces of information on fees and
returns. While information presentation has a modest impact on the fee of the first-choice Afore,
holding fees constant, by translating the impact of information into a demand elasticity, we find
that changes in information have very large implied impacts on demand elasticities and on
calculations for price-cost margins in the market. The increase in price sensitivity that induces
workers to list first-choice Afores with 0.07% lower annual fees, holding fees constant, is
equivalent to a 25 – 55% increase in demand elasticity. This implies that, although the reduced-
form impact on an individual’s choice may not lead to substantial increase in wealth
accumulation, the increased competitive pressure on firms may lower fees by 20 – 35% percent,
potentially resulting in a substantial market improvement in efficiency and wealth accumulation.


                                                                                                21
References:

Ausubel, Lawrence M. (1991). “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card Market.”
      American Economic Review, 81(1): 50-81.

Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler. (2001). “Naïve Diversification Strategies in Defined
       Contribution Saving Plans.” American Economic Review, 91(1): 79-98.

Borgans, Lex, Angela L. Duckworth, James J. Heckman and Bas ter Weel (2008). “The
      Economics and Psychology of Personality Traits.” Journal of Human Resources, 43(4):
      972-1059.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Looney, and Kory Kroft. (2007). “Salience and Taxation: Theory and
       Evidence.” NBER Working Paper No. 13330.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. (2007).
      “Reinforcement Learning and Investor Behavior.” Working Paper, Yale University.

Cronqvist, Henrik, and Richard H. Thaler. (2004). “Design Choices in Privatized Social-Security
      Systems: Learning from the Swedish Experience.” American Economic Review (Papers
      and Proceedings), 94(2): 424-428.

Duarte, Fabian, and Justine Hastings. (2008). “Consumer Behavior in a Private Social Security
       System: Implications for Competition and Distribution of Wealth at Retirement.”
       Unpublished Manuscript, Department of Economics, Yale University.

Feldstein, Martin, and Andrew Samwick. (1999). “Maintaining Social Security Benefits and Tax
       Rates through Personal Retirement Accounts: An Update Based on the 1998 Social
       Security Trustees Report.” NBER Working Paper No. 6540.

Feldstein, Martin, and Jeffrey B. Liebman. (2001). “Social Security.” NBER Working Paper No.
       8451.

Geanakoplos, John, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Stephen P. Zeldes. (1998). “Social Security Money’s
      Worth.” NBER Working Paper No. 6722.

Hastings, Justine S. (2008). “Worker Behavior, Firm Behavior, and Equilibrium Fees in
       Mexico’s Privatized Social Security Market.” Unpublished Manuscript, Department of
       Economics, Yale University.

Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger. (2008). “Heterogeneous
       Preferences and the Efficacy of Public School Choice.” Formerly NBER Working Papers
       No. 11805 and No. 12145. Available at
       http://aida.econ.yale.edu/~jh529/HKS_Combined_200806.pdf.




                                                                                            22
Hastings, Justine S., and Jeffrey M. Weinstein. (2008). “Simplified Information, School Choice,
       and Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 123(4): forthcoming November 2008.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, Lee Vermeulen, and Marian V. Wrobel.
       (2008). “Misperceived Prices: Medicare Drug Plan Choice.” Unpublished Manuscript,
       Harvard University.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2006). “Financial Literacy and Planning:
       Implications for Retirement Wellbeing.” Wharton School Pension Research Council
       Working Paper 2006-1.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. (2007). “Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The
       Roles of Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth.” Journal of Monetary
       Economics, 54(1): 205-224.

Madrian, Brigitte C., and Dennis F. Shea. (2001). “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
      Participation and Savings Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1149-
      1187.

Sinha, Tapen. (2003). Retrospective and Prospective Analysis of the Privatized Mandatory
       Pension System in Mexico (Monograph M-RS02-1). Schaumburg, IL: Society of
       Actuaries.

The Health and Retirement Study (HRS). (2004). “Documentation.” Retrieved May 18, 2007
      from http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu.

VanDerhei, Jack, Sarah Holden, Craig Copeland, and Luis Alonso. (2007). “401(k) Plan Asset
      Allocation, Account Balances, and Loan Activity in 2006.” Employee Benefit Research
      Institute       Issue         Brief       No.        308.        Available        at
      http://www.ebri.org/pdf/briefspdf/EBRI_IB_08-20073.pdf.

Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. (2007). “Financial Literacy and Stock
      Market Participation.” De Nederlandsche Bank Working Paper No. 146.




                                                                                            23
                   Table 1: CEF vs. Actual Equivalent Fees for June 2006
                                    Fee as % of Balance         Fee as % of Balance
                                       (all accounts)         (accounts in that Afore)
   Afore Name              CEF          Average          Std. Dev.          Average           Std. Dev.
Actinver                  2.02%          4.02%              4.10            4.01%                3.88
Afirme Bajío*             1.52%          2.98%              2.85            15.89%               2.31
Azteca                    2.22%          4.53%              4.62            3.95%                3.73
Banamex                   3.16%          6.28%              6.23            6.35%                6.14
Bancomer                  3.02%          5.93%              5.64             5.00%               5.29
Banorte Generali          2.99%          6.01%              5.83            7.14%                6.23
Coppel**                  2.21%          4.37%              4.22                -                  -
HSBC                      3.11%          6.23%              6.12            5.72%                5.68
Inbursa                   1.53%          2.71%              2.29            1.93%                1.79
ING                       3.01%          6.14%              6.06            5.66%                5.51
Invercap                  2.17%          4.35%              4.38             4.05%               3.71
IXE                       2.40%          4.71%              4.62            4.20%                3.62
Metlife                   2.67%          5.35%              5.35             4.49%               4.07
Principal                 3.48%          6.93%              6.92            9.17%                7.71
Profuturo GNP             3.00%          6.44%              6.54             6.45%               6.23
Santander                 3.15%          6.15%              5.87            5.72%                5.59
XXI                       2.89%          5.83%              5.86            7.99%                7.72
Notes: CEF comes from published tables by CONSAR for the 1 Year Equivalent Fee on the Balance,
available at http://www.consar.gob.mx/boletin_estadistico/comisiones.shtml. Columns 2 and 4 give actual
average fee paid expressed as a percent of the balance for all accounts in the system and for all accounts in
each Afore, respectively. Calculations were done using account-level data from June 2006. *Afirme Bajió
had just opened with very few accounts, and most of these accounts were people who paid relatively high
commissions given its flow and balance fees (high wage relative to balance). **Afore Coppel just opened
and had an insignificant market share.




                                                                                                                24
                        Table 2: Summary Statistics for Afiliados, December 2006
                                                5th         25th                 75th                           95th
                                   Mean     Percentile Percentile Median Percentile                           Percentile
Demographics
  Male                                 0.62              --             --            --           --             --
  Age                                  36.29           21.49          27.24         33.86        43.24          59.52
  Monthly Salary*                     $5,483          $1,506         $2,147        $3,314       $5,798         $18,014
  Account Balance                     $18,024          $0.00         $2,011        $8,473       $21,655        $69,144

System Affiliation and Afore Choice
   Tenure in Current Afore        5.62                 0.25           1.71          6.37           9.26           9.67
   Tenure in System               7.28                 2.01           5.51          8.38           9.42           9.72
   Number of Switches per
   Years in System                0.32                 0.00           0.11          0.21          0.36            0.85
   Rank of Current Afore          12.5                   4             11            13            15              17
   Fee Current Afore             6.12%                0.96%          2.17%         3.69%         7.78%          19.74%
   Fee at Cheapest Afore         2.66%                0.57%          1.15%         1.81%         3.32%           7.77%
   Potential Fee Savings         3.46%                0.17%          1.04%         1.89%         4.46%          12.03%

Notes: All statistics were calculated using data for accounts in the system for December 2006. *Monthly Salary is
calculated as the last recorded daily integrated wage for the worker multiplied by 365/12 and adjusted for inflation
(reported in 2007 pesos). The first panel of demographic summary statistics are for the entire population with number of
observations of 25,876,207, 25,753,981, 23,953,273, and 25,876,217 for gender, age, monthly salary and account balance,
respectively. Statistics on system affiliation and Afore choice were calculated using a random 1% sample of account
holders because calculating the characteristics of all choices for all affiliates is computationally burdensome. The sample
size for these calculations is 236,572




                                                                                                                    25
                              Table 3: Survey Sample Versus Population Characteristics
                                                                          Sample          Population           Lower              Upper
Variable                                                                   Mean             Mean*             95% CI             95% CI
Fraction Male (N=742)                                                      0.644             0.604              0.569              0.639
Age (N=755)                       Fraction age 14-30                       0.420             0.313              0.280              0.346
                                  Fraction age 31-40                       0.338             0.342              0.309              0.376
                                  Fraction age 41-50                       0.166             0.198              0.170              0.227
                                  Fraction age 51 or older                 0.077             0.147              0.122              0.172
Monthly Salary                    Fraction 3,000 pesos or less             0.199             0.258             0.226               0.291
(N=694)                           Fraction 3,001 - 4,500                   0.156             0.175              0.147              0.203
                                  Fraction 4,501 - 6,500                   0.163             0.159              0.132              0.187
                                  Fraction 6,501 - 10,000                  0.140             0.152              0.126              0.179
                                  Fraction 10,001 - 15,000                 0.102             0.101              0.078              0.123
                                  Fraction 15,001 - 20,000                 0.066             0.049              0.033              0.065
                                  Fraction 20,001 - 25,000                 0.040             0.033              0.020              0.046
                                  Fraction more than 25,000                0.134             0.072              0.053              0.091
Current Afore**                   Actinver                                 0.016             0.008              0.001              0.016
(N=615)                           Azteca                                   0.055             0.015              0.006              0.025
                                  Banamex                                  0.198             0.235              0.202              0.269
                                  Bancomer                                 0.120             0.136              0.109              0.164
                                  Banorte                                  0.044             0.053              0.036              0.071
                                  Coppel                                   0.002             0.001             -0.002              0.004
                                  HSBC                                     0.042             0.051              0.033              0.068
                                  Inbursa                                  0.104             0.066              0.047              0.086
                                  ING                                      0.054             0.069              0.049              0.089
                                  Invercap                                 0.018             0.008              0.001              0.015
                                  IXE                                      0.015             0.006              0.000              0.012
                                  Metlife                                  0.041             0.011             0.003               0.019
                                  Principal                                0.028             0.069              0.049              0.090
                                  Profuturo                                0.112             0.110              0.086              0.135
                                  Santander                                0.093             0.109              0.084              0.134
                                  XXI                                      0.059             0.049             0.032               0.066
Educational Attainment            Primary or less                          0.047               --                 --                 --
(N=760)                           Secondary                                0.162               --                 --                 --
                                  High school                              0.266               --                 --                 --
                                  Technical School                         0.091               --                 --                 --
                                  College degree                           0.337               --                 --                 --
                                  Post graduate degree                     0.097               --                 --                 --
Notes: Data from the responses to questions 1 (Male), 3 (Age), 6 (Educational Attainment), and 23 (Monthly Salary). *Population statistics
calculated using SAR database snapshot for Estado de Mexico and Distrito Federal, June 2007. **To save space, market shares for Afirme Bajío,
AhorraAhora, Argos, DelaGente, and Scotia were omitted. Zero respondents stated they were currently in those relatively new Afores, and zero is
contained in the 95 percent confidence interval for the mean of a random sample.




                                                                                                                                   26
     Table 4: Probit Analysis of Reasons for Afore Choice and Demographics
                  (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)    (6)                                   (7)           (8)
              Financial    Other                   Branch     Low                                         Better         Brand
               Stability Accounts Payroll          Access     Fees  Returns                               Service       Prestige
Dep. Var.
Mean            0.218      0.154       0.158        0.091    0.345   0.232                                  0.281         0.168

Salary >             0.086         0.052         -0.300**        -0.302*       -0.025 0.377***             -0.078         0.005
Median              (0.137)       (0.148)         (0.143)        (0.168)       (0.121) (0.135)             (0.125)       (0.138)
Schooling >         0.231*         0.047           0.063           0.139       0.237* 0.275**               0.108         0.158
High School         (0.139)       (0.150)         (0.144)        (0.174)       (0.125) (0.138)             (0.128)       (0.143)
Male                 0.098         0.176          -0.038           0.032        0.101   0.005               0.087         -0.018
                    (0.120)       (0.133)         (0.126)        (0.153)       (0.108) (0.117)             (0.112)       (0.122)
Has Internet         0.110         -0.117         -0.158        -0.372**        0.030   -0.010            -0.304**       -0.135
Access              (0.172)       (0.181)         (0.167)        (0.187)       (0.144) (0.161)             (0.149)       (0.164)
Internet           0.208***       0.159**          0.105           0.008       -0.017   0.039               0.098         0.045
Use Index†          (0.068)       (0.074)         (0.069)        (0.080)       (0.058) (0.065)             (0.061)       (0.066)
Age                 -0.004         0.011          -0.024          -0.002        0.015   -0.005              0.029        -0.009
                    (0.030)       (0.031)         (0.030)        (0.036)       (0.027) (0.029)             (0.028)       (0.031)
Age Squared          0.000         0.000           0.001           0.000        0.000   0.000               0.000         0.000
                    (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000) (0.000)             (0.000)       (0.000)
Observations          660           660             660             660          660     660                 660           660
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1% level. Each
column presents results from a probit of the top stated reason for picking an Afore on demographic characteristics. Data from
responses to questions 3, 6, 7, 8, 18, and 23 of survey collected in June 2007. We exclude regressions for the following choice
reasons: i) “An Salesman gave me a present to switch” had only 3% of people who listed it as one of their top 3 choice reasons,
ii) “The Afore offers voluntary contribution accounts” because 17.5% of people listed this as a choice while almost no one in the
SAR actually has a voluntary account and there were no significant explanatory variables in this regression, and iii) a response of
“Other”. †The internet use index is the maximum response to each of the Internet usage questions in the survey. The highest
value indicates that a respondent said she used the Internet frequently for either paying bills, reading the news, or making
reservations. The lowest value indicates that she did not use the Internet for any of these activities.




                                                                                                                         27
        Table 5: Probit Analysis of Stated Sources of Information for Afore Choice
                           (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)
Top Information         Family &                                                 Agente
Source:                  Friends      Co-workers Employer CONSAR               Promotor
Mean                      0.145          0.122          0.177       0.216         0.269

Salary > Median                    0.126              0.156            -0.315**           0.142              0.021
                                  (0.144)            (0.154)            (0.140)          (0.131)            (0.122)
Schooling >                        -0.159             0.132              0.225            0.093              0.038
High School                       (0.145)            (0.158)            (0.143)          (0.134)            (0.126)
Male                               0.118              0.160           -0.324***         0.318***            -0.001
                                  (0.128)            (0.137)            (0.120)          (0.118)            (0.109)
Has Internet                       0.007              0.119             -0.131           -0.240             -0.010
Access                            (0.171)            (0.191)            (0.165)          (0.159)            (0.146)
Internet                          0.113*             -0.012             -0.001          0.144**             -0.049
Use Index†                        (0.068)            (0.073)            (0.066)          (0.064)            (0.058)
Age                               -0.056*             0.048             0.054*            0.017              0.030
                                  (0.030)            (0.035)            (0.031)          (0.029)            (0.027)
Age Squared                       0.001*             -0.001              0.000            0.000              0.000
                                  (0.000)            (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)
Observations                        688                688                688              688                688
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10% level; ** significant at 5% level; *** significant at 1%
level. Each column presents results from a probit of the top stated source of information used when choosing an
Afore on demographic characteristics. Data from responses to questions 3 (Age), 6 (Schooling > High School), 7
Has Internet Access), 8 (Internet Use Index), 17 (Sources of Information), and 23 (Salary > Median) of survey
collected in June 2007. †The internet use index is the maximum response to each of the Internet usage questions in
the survey. The highest value indicates that a respondent said she used the Internet frequently for either paying bills,
reading the news, or making reservations. The lowest value indicates that she did not use the Internet for any of
these activities. This formula for the Internet index fits regressions better than other alternatives such as the average
usage across all three activities.




                                                                                                                      28
                             Table 6: Stated Methods of Savings
                                            % Who Save      %                       %Schooling >        Monthly
Savings Method                              in This Way Male                        High School          Salary
Do Not Save                                    26.5%      60.6%                        32.2%            $5,809
Save Money at Home/Informal Network*           20.8%      69.1%                       40.4%             $7,173
Save Money in Cooperative**                    12.7%      67.7%                       44.2%             $8,290
Save at a Bank                                 39.3%      67.9%                       68.5%             $12,601
Save in Stocks/Bonds/Foreign Currency          16.3%      68.6%                       89.3%             $18,967
Notes: Data from responses to questions 1 (Male), 6 (Schooling > High School), 23 (Monthly Salary), and 23 (Savings
Method) of survey collected in June 2007. *Includes Tandas. **Cooperativas, Cajas de Ahorro, Cajas Solidarias.


                                    Table 7: Financial Literacy Index
                                    % Schooling > % Saves in Bank/Stocks/                              Monthly
                       % Male        High School    Bonds/Foreign Currency                    Age      Salary
 Index Value:
   Zero Correct         52.6%            34.5%                       32.3%                  31.57      $6,196
                                                                                            (12.02)    (5,880)
   One Correct          65.5%            45.7%                       41.8%                  33.70      $8,154
                                                                                            (10.59)    (6,694)
   Two Correct          72.7%            70.0%                       61.1%                  33.37      $12,510
                                                                                            (10.04)    (8,991)
   Three Correct        71.2%            83.6%                       76.4%                  35.69      $19,077
                                                                                            (11.33)    (8,126)
 Notes: Data from responses to questions 1 (Male), 3 (Age), 6 (Schooling > High School), 23 (Monthly Salary), 25,
 26, and 27 (Financial Literacy Index Value) of survey collected in June 2007.




                                                                                                                29
Table 8: Reduced Form Impact of Information Format on Fee of First-Choice Afore
  Dependent Variable:
  Fee of First-Choice Afore                    (1)                (2)

  Constant                                                  1.702***                 1.812***
                                                             (0.027)                  (0.076)
  Viewed fees in pesos per year                             -0.075**                 -0.073**
                                                             (0.031)                  (0.033)
  Viewed fees in pesos over 10 years                        -0.066**                  -0.053
                                                             (0.031)                  (0.033)
  Median salary (in thousands of pesos)                         --                     -0.049
                                                                --                    (0.044)
  Bachelor’s degree or more                                     --                      -0.07
                                                                --                    (0.045)
  Has Internet access                                           --                      0.002
                                                                --                    (0.051)
  Internet usage index                                          --                      0.007
                                                                --                    (0.020)
  Age                                                           --                      0.001
                                                                --                    (0.002)
  Financially literate (score>=2)                               --                  -0.179***
                                                                --                    (0.037)
  Stated fees were important for Afore                          --                  -0.110***
  choice                                                        --                    (0.037)
  Sophisticated saving                                          --                      -0.04
  (saves in equity/debt/foreign currency)                       --                    (0.044)

  Observations                                                1783                     1583
  R-squared                                                   0.04                     0.09
  Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors are
  clustered at the survey respondent level. Each column reports coefficients from an OLS regression
  of the fee of the first-ranked Afore on indicators for the information format the fees were presented
  in. Data come from sheets where only fees were presented, and the presentation of fees varied from
  annual percentage rates to cost in pesos per year to cost in pesos over ten years.




                                                                                                          30
              Table 9: Rank-Ordered Conditional Logit Results for Stated Afore Demand
                                                      (1)                      (2)                    (3)                    (4)
Fees                                             -1.162***                -1.019***               -0.750**                 -0.593
                                                   (0.348)                  (0.342)                (0.370)                (0.374)
Fee* Financially literate                              --                 -0.786***              -0.791***              -1.323***
                                                       --                   (0.253)                (0.253)                (0.350)
Fee* Saw fees in pesos                                 --                       --                -0.319**              -0.521***
                                                       --                       --                 (0.149)                (0.169)
Fee* Saw pesos* Financially                            --                       --                     --                 0.754**
literate                                               --                       --                     --                 (0.352)
Fee* Female                                         -0.055                   -0.105                 -0.112                 -0.121
                                                   (0.209)                  (0.211)                (0.212)                (0.213)
Fee* Salary (in thousands of                      -0.035**                   -0.022                 -0.021                 -0.022
pesos)                                             (0.017)                  (0.018)                (0.018)                (0.018)
Fee* Age                                             0.011                    0.009                  0.008                  0.008
                                                   (0.009)                  (0.009)                (0.009)                (0.009)
Fee* Values fees                                 -0.580***                -0.584***              -0.596***              -0.593***
                                                   (0.210)                  (0.210)                (0.210)                (0.210)
Fee* Sophisticated saving                            0.068                    0.177                  0.178                  0.158
                                                   (0.297)                  (0.298)                (0.297)                (0.298)
Fee* Bachelors degree or more                       -0.193                    -0.12                 -0.127                 -0.123
                                                   (0.250)                  (0.249)                (0.250)                (0.251)
Indicator for current (own) Afore                 1.247***                 1.241***               1.243***               1.244***
                                                   (0.066)                  (0.066)                (0.066)                (0.066)
Afore Actinver                                   -1.288***                -1.288***              -1.290***              -1.291***
                                                   (0.185)                  (0.185)                (0.185)                (0.185)
Afore Banamex                                     0.970***                 0.973***               0.969***               0.970***
                                                   (0.117)                  (0.117)                (0.117)                (0.117)
Afore Bancomer                                    0.678***                 0.677***               0.673***               0.672***
                                                   (0.120)                  (0.120)                (0.120)                (0.120)
Afore Coppel                                      0.334***                 0.313***               0.308***               0.311***
                                                   (0.114)                  (0.114)                (0.114)                (0.114)
Afore HSBC                                        0.776***                 0.768***               0.765***               0.763***
                                                   (0.109)                  (0.108)                (0.108)                (0.108)
Afore IXE                                        -0.751***                -0.759***              -0.767***              -0.772***
                                                   (0.181)                  (0.181)                (0.182)                (0.182)
Afore Inbursa                                     0.830***                 0.821***               0.818***               0.813***
                                                   (0.109)                  (0.108)                (0.108)                (0.108)
Afore Metlife                                    0.467***                 0.467***               0.461***               0.461***
                                                   (0.106)                  (0.106)                (0.105)                (0.106)
Afore Principal                                  -0.992***                -0.993***              -0.993***              -0.993***
                                                   (0.196)                  (0.196)                (0.196)                (0.196)
Afore XXI                                          0.310**                  0.297**                0.299**                0.297**
                                                   (0.127)                  (0.127)                (0.127)                (0.127)
Afore Banorte                                     -0.316**                 -0.317**               -0.320**               -0.321**
                                                   (0.138)                  (0.138)                (0.138)                (0.138)

Observations                                       23426                    23426                   23426                 23426
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors are clustered at the survey respondent level.
Each column presents the results from a rank-ordered conditional logit of Afore choice on Afore and individual characteristics using
responses from respondents who were given information on fees only. The fees were presented in an annual percentage rates, as costs in
pesos per year, or as costs in pesos over ten years. Fixed effects estimates for Afirme Bajio, Azteca, ING, Invercap, and Santander were
statistically indistinguishable from Profuturo GNP (the excluded Afore).
Table 10: Reduced-Form Impact of Information on Fee of the First-Choice Afore
Dependant Variable:                                       (1)         (2)
Fee of the First-Choice Afore
Constant                                                                  1.687***        1.753***
                                                                           (0.029)         (0.078)
Viewed fees in pesos per year                                              -0.054*        -0.070**
                                                                           (0.031)         (0.034)
Viewed fees and returns in pesos                                          0.106**           0.085
                                                                           (0.051)         (0.065)
Viewed 1 year returns                                                     0.291***        0.291***
                                                                           (0.043)         (0.052)
Viewed 3 year returns                                                     0.212***        0.225***
                                                                           (0.043)         (0.053)
Median salary (in thousands of pesos)                                         --            0.000
                                                                              --           (0.044)
Bachelor's degree or more                                                     --           -0.043
                                                                              --           (0.045)
Has Internet access                                                           --            0.035
                                                                              --           (0.054)
Internet usage index                                                          --           -0.007
                                                                              --           (0.022)
Age                                                                           --            0.000
                                                                              --           (0.002)
Financially literate (score>=2)                                               --         -0.118***
                                                                              --           (0.039)
Fees as top reason for choosing Afore                                         --          -0.081**
                                                                              --           (0.039)
Returns as top reason for choosing Afore                                      --            0.038
                                                                              --           (0.044)
Sophisticated saving (saves in equity/debt/foreign currency)                  --            0.022
                                                                              --           (0.047)
Observations                                                                2290            2033
R-squared                                                                    0.06            0.1
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors are clustered
at the survey respondent level. Each column reports coefficients from an OLS regression of the fee of
the first-ranked Afore on indicators for the information format the fees were presented in. Data are
from sheets where both fees and returns were presented, and the presentation of fees and returns was
either as an annual percentage rate or in pesos per year.
                     Table 11: Rank-Ordered Logit Model of Afore Choice
                                             (1)           (3)         (2)                             (4)

Fees                                               -0.370***        -0.298***        -0.178**        -0.161
                                                     (0.074)          (0.112)         (0.084)       (0.127)
1 year returns                                      0.138***          0.050**       0.067***          0.011
                                                     (0.019)          (0.022)         (0.022)       (0.025)
3 year returns                                          --           0.172***            --         0.096**
                                                        --            (0.038)            --         (0.043)
Fees* Financially literate (score>=2)                   --               --         -0.703***      -0.383**
                                                        --               --           (0.154)       (0.186)
1 year returns* Financially literate                    --               --         0.225***       0.112***
(score>=2)                                              --               --           (0.038)       (0.042)
3 years returns* financially                            --               --              --        0.215***
literate (score>=2)                                     --               --              --         (0.074)
Indicator for current (own) Afore                   1.142***         1.192***       1.109***       1.199***
                                                     (0.087)          (0.084)         (0.089)       (0.085)

Afore fixed effects                                     Y                Y               Y              Y

Observations                                          8262             8228            8245           8211
Number of groups                                      486              484             485            483
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors are clustered at the
survey respondent level. Each column presents the results from a rank-ordered conditional logit of Afore choice
on Afore and individual characteristics using responses from respondents who were given information on fees
and past returns, and the information was presented in an annual percentage rate or as cost in pesos per year.




                                                                                                              33
                                   Table 12: Demand Elasticities for Afores
Afore                                 (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)                             (5)              (6)
Actinver                               -1.712         -2.358         -3.384         -0.954          -0.543           -0.427
Afirme Bajío                           -1.451         -1.820         -2.546         -0.679          -0.656           -0.358
Azteca                                 -1.542         -2.024         -2.851         -0.673          -0.304           -0.432
Banamex                                -1.662         -2.576         -3.885         -0.774          -0.575           -0.516
Bancomer                               -1.645         -2.486         -3.697         -0.847          -0.510           -0.555
Banorte Generali                       -1.679         -2.372         -3.403         -1.123          -0.634           -0.634
Coppel                                 -1.515         -1.943         -2.634         -0.852          -0.484           -0.523
HSBC                                   -1.578         -2.228         -3.120         -0.796          -0.592           -0.637
ING                                    -1.856         -2.825         -4.090         -1.068          -0.553           -0.624
IXE                                    -1.676         -2.283         -3.152         -0.892          -0.747           -0.427
Inbursa                                -1.500         -1.978         -2.802         -0.932          -0.404           -0.313
Invercap                               -1.715         -2.386         -3.244         -1.300          -0.413           -0.444
Metlife                                -1.492         -1.937         -2.654         -0.596          -0.702           -0.526
Principal                              -1.797         -2.638         -3.742         -1.148          -0.583           -0.720
Profuturo GNP                          -1.717         -2.472         -3.563         -0.888          -0.555           -0.620
Santander                              -1.732         -2.615         -3.881         -0.885          -0.580           -0.682
XXI                                    -1.619         -2.226         -3.127         -0.914          -0.740           -0.526
Notes: Column 1 calculates demand elasticities for specification 4 in Table 13, assuming nobody receives information in pesos
format. Column 2 calculates demand elasticities for specification 4 in Table 13 assuming that all people view information in
pesos instead of in percentages. Column 3 instead assumes that all people are financially literate, but nobody receives
information in pesos. Column 4 calculates demand elasticities using responses in which agents viewed 1 year past returns only,
allowing for full interactions between responsiveness to returns and responsiveness to fees with baseline demographic
characteristics. Column 5 uses estimates with full demographic interactions from responses in which people viewed both 1 and 3
year past returns. Column 6 attempts to compare these elasticities to the demand elasticity for the respondent at the approximate
time they chose their stated Afore. We create the choice set based on the number of years the person states they have been with
their afore, choosing the midpoint of the time period they selected. Then we estimate a conditional logit model based on the fees
and returns the Afores charged at that point in time. We then convert this into a demand elasticity facing each firm.




                                                                                                                             34
