                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DO ENTERPRISE ZONES CREATE JOBS? EVIDENCE FROM CALIFORNIA'S
                        ENTERPRISE ZONE PROGRAM

                                           David Neumark
                                             Jed Kolko

                                        Working Paper 14530
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14530


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008




We thank Marco Anderson, Eric Becker, Amy Ewing, Toni Feinstein, Matthew Gelbman, Ethan Jennings,
Davin Reed, Mark Vasquez, and especially Jennifer Graves, Marisol Cuellar-Mejia, Ingrid Lefebvre-Hoang,
and Smith Williams for outstanding research assistance. We also thank Toni Symonds and Frank Luera
for many helpful discussions about California’s enterprise zone program, and Daria Burnes, Joel Elvery,
Mark Ibele, Magnus Lofstrom, Suzanne O’Keefe, Michael Teitz, seminar participants at UCI and the
All-UC Labor Conference, and two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments, and Jonah Gelbach
for supplying the code for the wild bootstrap computations. Neumark is also a Bren Fellow at the Public
Policy Institute of California, a Research Associate of the NBER, and a Research Fellow at IZA, and
gratefully acknowledges support from the Kauffman Foundation. The views expressed are the authors’
alone, and do not represent the views of the Kauffman Foundation, of PPIC, or of the NBER.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by David Neumark and Jed Kolko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Do Enterprise Zones Create Jobs? Evidence from California's Enterprise Zone Program
David Neumark and Jed Kolko
NBER Working Paper No. 14530
December 2008, Revised January 2010
JEL No. H25,H73,J23,R12

                                             ABSTRACT

We use new establishment-level data and geographic mapping methods to improve upon evaluations
of the effectiveness of state enterprise zones, focusing on California’s program. Because zone boundaries
do not follow census tracts or zip codes, we created digitized maps of original zone boundaries and
later expansions. We combine these maps with geocoded observations on most businesses located
in California. The evidence indicates that enterprise zones do not increase employment. We also find
no shift of employment toward the lower-wage workers targeted by enterprise zone incentives. We
conclude that the program is ineffective in achieving its primary goals.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
UCI
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu

Jed Kolko
Public Policy Institute of California
500 Washington St., Suite 600
San Francisco, CA 94111
kolko@ppic.org
1. Introduction

      State and federal enterprise zone programs are the principal means by which governments try to

directly promote economic development in specific locations, typically economically-distressed urban

areas. There is considerable debate over the effectiveness of enterprise zones in spurring job creation

(e.g., Peters and Fisher, 2002). Evaluations of enterprise zone programs face several challenges, including

precisely identifying the targeted areas, selecting appropriate comparison or control areas, distinguishing

the effects of enterprise zones from other geographically-targeted policies, and choosing outcomes in line

with program incentives and goals (e.g., Boarnet, 2001).

      We evaluate the effectiveness of California’s enterprise zone program, using new data sources that

permit us to meet many of these challenges. The first data source is detailed GIS maps we constructed of

the precise boundaries of enterprise zones as they evolved over time. With maps of both initial

designations and expansion areas, we define the control areas in multiple ways, allowing us to perform

sensitivity tests and to examine whether spillovers affect our results. The second is the National

Establishment Time-Series (NETS) database, which includes employment and location information on

nearly all business establishments in California in the period 1992-2004. By constructing precisely

geocoded location information and combining this information with GIS maps, we can measure

employment, the number of establishments, and other characteristics of these establishments in each year,

in each enterprise zone and in appropriate control areas. In addition, we incorporate information on other

geographically-targeted policies to try to isolate the effect of the state enterprise zone program.

2. Limitations of Previous Research on Enterprise Zones

      Most existing research evaluating the effects of enterprise zones assesses their effects on jobs,

businesses, or zone residents. Typically, these studies compare outcomes like employment (e.g.,

Bondonio and Engberg, 2000; O’Keefe, 2004) or number of establishments (Dabney, 1991) across

enterprise zones and comparable regions where zone incentives do not apply. The results vary across

studies. Many studies fail to find employment effects of enterprise zones, although some of the work

(e.g., O’Keefe, 2004; and research reviewed in Wilder and Rubin, 1996) concludes that there are positive

                                                      1
employment effects, at least in the short-run. Other recent work (Lynch and Zax, 2008; Elvery, 2009)

provides thorough overviews of the literature. In this section, instead, we highlight the limitations of the

existing research on which we try to improve in the present study. In the concluding section of the paper

we provide some comparisons between our findings and the existing literature.

         The first challenge in estimating the effects of enterprise zones is to identify geographic areas that

precisely reflect enterprise zone boundaries for which outcomes of interest – such as employment – can

be measured. In California and many other places, the boundaries of enterprise zones do not follow

boundaries of census tracts, zip codes, or other standard geographic designations. Instead, studies have

used aggregate data on zip codes (e.g., Dowall, 1996; Bondonio and Greenbaum, 2007) or census tracts

(e.g., O’Keefe, 2004; Ham et al., 2009), the boundaries of which correspond only approximately to those

of enterprise zones. These approximations, however, introduce measurement error by incorrectly

assigning areas (and the workers or businesses in them) as inside or outside enterprise zones (Papke,

1993). For example, Elvery (2008) notes that for the two states he studies, if enterprise zones are defined

as the areas encompassing all zip codes that overlap with enterprise zones, then the resulting enterprise

zone definitions are six times larger than the actual zones. Similarly, he shows that, based on 1990 Census

data and tracts, less than half of the population residing in census tracts that include enterprise zones

actually live in enterprise zones. If locations are incorrectly classified as to whether or not they are in

enterprise zones or control areas, there is likely a bias towards finding no effect of enterprise zones.

         The second challenge is selecting appropriate control groups for enterprise zones. The ideal control

group consists of areas economically similar to enterprise zones but lacking enterprise zone designation.

Some studies, however, have used broad control groups that may preclude meaningful comparison with

the enterprise zones. For instance, Peters and Fisher (2002) estimate the effects of enterprise zones in a

number of states relative to the areas of states outside the enterprise zone; similarly, Lynch and Zax

(2008) use all regions of Colorado that are not in enterprise zones. 1 Others have constructed control

groups differently, matching enterprise zone areas to control areas without enterprise zones based on

1   By ignoring births and relocations, this study may miss an important role played by births in job growth.

                                                            2
characteristics of the zones or simply nearness to the zone. O’Keefe (2004) matches census tracts that

approximate enterprise zone boundaries to other census tracts using propensity score matching based on

residential and employment characteristics. However, propensity score matching does not account for

unobservable sources of differences in job growth that may be the basis for assignment to zones. In

addition, for many of the zones the matching is on post-treatment observations, which implies that her

matching may mask the effects of enterprise zones by conditioning them out. 2 Elvery (2009) improves on

this propensity score strategy by matching on the employment variation across neighborhoods that is not

accounted for by residents’ characteristics, and by matching on pre-treatment observations. None of these

studies makes use of before and after comparisons of areas observed both before and after enterprise

zones were established. Other studies use these matching strategies with before and after comparisons. 3

      More recent research has addressed the comparison group problem in ways that try to identify more

reliable control groups. Billings (2009) uses a spatial discontinuity model, looking at employment growth

in Colorado’s enterprise zones within ¼ mile of the zone boundary and using the area outside the zones

within ¼ mile of the zone boundary as the control group. 4 Busso and Kline (2007) compare residential

employment outcomes in census tracts that became part of federal empowerment zones with outcomes in

census tracts that submitted unsuccessful applications to be designated empowerment zones; they also in

some cases do comparisons with areas that become parts of zones in the future. Hanson (2009) also

compares employment outcomes in federal empowerment zones with unsuccessful applicant areas, and

then he goes a step further by instrumenting for zone applicant success using measures of the political

influence of the zone’s Congressional representative. His IV results show no statistically significant effect

on employment of federal empowerment zones, even though his OLS results – using unsuccessful

applicant zones as a control group – show a positive employment effect. In earlier work, Boarnet and


2 Moreover, O’Keefe matches on employment levels, whereas we would like to hold employment growth rates (in
the pre-treatment period) constant between treatment and control groups. Bondonio and Greenbaum (2007) also use
propensity score methods, but their study is limited to manufacturing establishments.
3 See Papke (1994), Greenbaum and Engberg (2004), and Ham et al. (2009).
4 Billings uses geographic methods most similar to ours, with digitized maps of enterprise zone boundaries and
geocoded establishment locations.

                                                       3
Bogart (1996) study a set of municipalities in New Jersey, all of which qualified for enterprise zones.

They compare those that received zones to all that qualified, and, paralleling Busso and Kline, also

compare those that received zones to those that qualified and applied for zones but did not receive them;

however, this study suffers from poor delineation of enterprise zones by using entire municipalities.

         The third challenge is that an enterprise zone program may cover areas that are also affected by

other geographically-targeted policies, including other local or state policies or federal enterprise zone

programs. If another program has strong effects and in some areas targets both the treatment and control

areas used to estimate the effects of enterprise zones, then ignoring the effects of the other program will

lead to biased estimates of the effects of enterprise zones. We are not aware of studies that have

simultaneously considered the effects of programs that apply to overlapping areas.

         Finally, the fourth challenge is to study outcomes that are appropriate – and appropriately measured

– given the enterprise zone program’s goals and design. It is also essential to identify which businesses

and households qualify for program incentives. For example, in California’s program businesses in an

enterprise zone can claim hiring credits for employees living in a targeted employment area (TEA), which

need not be coincident with the enterprise zone. Hence, evaluating the program in terms of employment

or other labor market outcomes of zone residents (as in Ham et al., 2009) would be less appropriate, as the

effects of California’s enterprise zones on household outcomes, like employment or poverty, should be

more apparent in TEA’s. In contrast, for asking whether the state’s enterprise program boosted

employment – when measured by the location of jobs – it is appropriate to look at enterprise zones.

3. California’s Enterprise Zone Program

         California’s enterprise zone program has multiple goals: attracting jobs and businesses and raising

employment is one goal, while others include reducing poverty and unemployment and raising incomes in

target areas. 5 These multiple goals – job creation and improving residents’ circumstances – stem from the

1996 merger of two precursor programs that gave rise to the current enterprise zone program: the

Enterprise Zone Act, which provided incentives to businesses located in specific areas (and which led to

5   See Assembly Jobs, Economic Development, and the Economy Committee (2006, p. 5).

                                                       4
the creation of the original enterprise zones); and the Employment and Economic Incentive Act, which

provided incentives to businesses that hired employees living in distressed residential areas.

       The program seeks to accomplish these goals by providing a variety of tax incentives to businesses

located in designated areas to encourage the hiring of economically disadvantaged workers and to spur

the creation of businesses. The largest incentive is state tax credits for hiring a “disadvantaged” employee;

this credit is available for those hired after the zone is designated. 6 The state calculates the allowable

hiring credit as a share of wages up to 150% of the minimum wage; the allowable credit is 50% of

qualified wages in the first year, falling by 10 percentage points each year until reaching zero after five

years. 7 Workers qualify as “disadvantaged” if they are unemployed for a sufficient duration or for certain

other reasons − for example, if they have sufficiently low income, if they belong to one of several

“eligibility groups” (veteran, enrolled in welfare-to-work, etc.), or if they live in a targeted employment

area. 8 Given that disadvantaged workers are likely to earn low wages, the tax credit can result in a

substantial reduction in the cost of hiring low-skill labor. For example, at a $6 minimum wage, the credit

would reduce the cost of a full-time worker earning $9 per hour by $9,000 in the first year, $7,200 in the

second year, etc. Another way to think about this is that the cost of hiring new low-skilled workers who

are likely to turn over within a year is reduced by 50%, which is much more than the labor cost change

associated with other policies about which there is lively debate regarding employment effects (e.g.,

health insurance mandates, discussed in Burkhauser and Simon, 2008). 9

       The program offers four other incentives: (1) an income tax credit for sales or use taxes for

machinery or parts for use within the zone; (2) a longer period (15 years versus 10 years) in which

6 See, e.g., http://www.mcedco.com/FAQ%20Enterprsie%20Zone.pdf (viewed November 28, 2009).
7 This reduction over five years in the hiring credit is relative to when the worker is hired, not relative to when the
enterprise zone is designated. Thus, the structure of the hiring credit does not have implications for the timing of
employment effects over the life of the enterprise zone.
8 The eligibility of residents of targeted employment areas (TEA’s) for the hiring credit began in 1997. Enterprise
zones are defined by individual street addresses. TEA’s are defined by census tracts. TEA’s often include parts of an
enterprise zone itself along with other lower-income neighborhoods, but they are defined independently of enterprise
zones and do not necessarily overlap with them. A worker living in a TEA qualifies for the hiring credit regardless
of the worker’s characteristics. TEA’s include census tracts where more than half the population earns less than 80
percent of median area income, according to the 1980 Census.
9 See Engberg and Greenbaum (1999) for a description of subsidies in other states.


                                                          5
businesses can carry forward net operating losses into future years to reduce tax liabilities; (3) accelerated

depreciation of depreciable property; (4) a tax credit of 5% of qualified wages that low-income employees

can claim, up to a maximum and subject to restrictions on work for the business in the zone and services

performed within the zone. 10 Each of these incentives is intended to reduce the tax burden or costs for

businesses located in enterprise zones, which might be expected to spur the creation of new businesses or

the expansion of existing ones. In addition, businesses in enterprise zones can sometimes receive

preferential treatment on state contracts. Finally, financial lenders may deduct from their income net

interest received from loans made to businesses in enterprise zones.

       Localities apply to the Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) to have a

geographic area designated as an enterprise zone. Eligibility criteria include job-generating capacity as

well as the level of economic distress measured along a number of dimensions. New zones are selected by

HCD from the eligible areas based on these and other factors, including the local applicant’s plan for

bundling other local incentives, administering the program, and evaluating the outcome. There are some

minimum criteria for enterprise zone designation – such as, for example, whether an area has recently

experienced a particularly sharp decline, or conversely exhibited promise for growth – but beyond that the

process is not formulaic and appears to rely on subjective assessments.

       As of the period covered by this paper, the enterprise zone program allowed for up to 42 zones in

the state. HCD can conduct an application process when the number of zones falls below the maximum,

whether due to zones expiring, zones being de-designated, or the legislature increasing the maximum

number of zones.

       Ten enterprise zones were created at the program’s inception in 1986; since then, legislation has

increased the number to 42. Zones are designated for an initial 15-year term, after which 5-year

extensions can be granted. After the 15- or 20-year period, the enterprise zone expires, and a new

application must be submitted. In practice, there is very little turnover in enterprise zones. All of the zones

10 Although technically this credit is given to the worker, the incidence of the tax credit is independent of who
claims it. As long as labor supply is not completely inelastic, market wages should fall (although wages plus the
credit will rise), and employment increase.

                                                          6
designated before 1990 were granted 5-year extensions when they reached the end of their original 15-

year terms. Zones have expanded periodically, and in 1998 many enterprise zones were allowed a one-

time expansion of their boundaries by up to 20% (which they could undertake later). No enterprise zone

in the state has ever been de-designated for poor audit results or any other reason. 11 Furthermore, the

application process is sometimes uncompetitive: in the 2006 application round, when 23 of 42 enterprise

zone slots were open, HCD received 25 applications and ended up combining several applications so that

all 25 applicants became part of 23 newly designated zones – and many of these were in localities where a

zone recently expired.

         Our study focuses on the effects of enterprise zones on jobs and businesses located inside the

zones, emphasizing the question of whether enterprise zones spur job growth. Job creation is an explicit

goal of the program, and is also presumably a prerequisite for improving the economic circumstances of

the disadvantaged workers the program is intended to help. In addition, in a survey of local zone

managers, nearly all respondents cited job or business creation when asked an open-ended question about

the purpose of the enterprise zone program; far fewer cited improving residents’ outcomes such as

unemployment or poverty (Kolko and Neumark, 2010).

         Our study does not directly assess evidence of the effects on residents of the enterprise zones or of

targeted employment areas (or on other individuals meeting eligibility for the hiring tax credit). The

effects on zone residents per se are not the best metric for evaluating the policy, since the zones do not

explicitly target these residents. As already noted, although the effects on residents of targeted

employment areas are more relevant (since 1997), the first-order question, it seems to us, is whether

enterprise zones lead to job creation. If they do, then an important next step would be to ask whether the

gains accrue to those who are targeted by the policy. We do, though, indirectly assess the question of

whether enterprise zones likely help these disadvantaged workers, by asking whether the enterprise zone

incentives affect the composition of employment in a manner that is more likely to be consistent with

helping those who are socioeconomically disadvantaged.

11   See Assembly Jobs, Economic Development, and the Economy Committee (2006, p. 10).

                                                        7
4. Data, Mapping, and Methods

       The challenges faced by research on enterprise zones played a central role in shaping the methods

and approaches we use in this paper. With regard to the first challenge – precise identification of zone

boundaries – we digitally map California’s enterprise zones street-by-street rather than approximating by

using census tracts, zip codes, etc. Of course the precise geographic contours of enterprise zones that we

create are only useful if we can map business establishments or employment into them. The NETS data

are uniquely suited to this task, as they include exact street addresses that we have geocoded to precise

geographic locations.

       The second challenge concerns the selection of appropriate control groups. We use two approaches.

One approach we use is similar to Billings (2007) in that we consider a narrow buffer just outside the

enterprise zone as a control group. Our second approach is to use only areas that are ever included in

enterprise zones, exploiting variation in when the areas were added owing to the ability of California’s

enterprise zones to expand numerous times. For example, we use areas that are later added to enterprise

zones as control groups for areas original to (or added earlier to) the same enterprise zone. This has

parallels with some of the analyses of federal zones in Busso and Kline (2007). In our view, this latter

approach provides the most reliable estimates. In addition, we estimate heavily-saturated regression

models to account for remaining possible differences between treatment and control areas.

       The third challenge is accounting for other geographically-targeted policies, which we address by

also digitizing maps of the areas affected by two such policies that are particularly important. The most

extensive is redevelopment areas, which are designed to encourage property development that removes

urban blight. 12 Cities and counties in California administer hundreds of redevelopment agencies (Dardia,

1998). Many of these redevelopment areas partially overlap with or are adjacent to enterprise zones. In

addition, there are three federal programs – Renewal Communities, Enterprise Communities, and

12 Activities qualifying for redevelopment area benefits include the “rehabilitation/reconstruction of existing
structures, the redesign/replanning of areas with inefficient site layout, the demolition and clearance of existing
structures, the construction/rehabilitation of affordable housing and the construction of public facilities including,
but not limited to, public buildings, streets, sidewalks, sewers, storm drains, water systems and street lights”
(California Redevelopment Association, 2008). Redevelopment is typically financed via tax-increment revenue.

                                                            8
Empowerment Zones – with a variety of benefits similar to those in state enterprise zones. 13 These can

also overlap with enterprise zones or our control areas.

         And finally, with regard to the fourth challenge – using appropriate outcome variables defined for

the right areas – we focus on the effects of enterprise zones on job growth in the zones compared to

control areas. We also examine their effects on establishment counts and the composition of employment.

In particular, because the hiring credit is capped per worker, firms in industries that hire lower-wage

workers would see their labor costs reduced by a higher percentage than firms in high-wage industries,

and the program’s tax incentives that target machinery and property are most likely to benefit

manufacturing enterprises. We therefore estimate the effects of enterprise zones on the shares of

employment in low-wage industries or manufacturing. The next two subsections explain the mapping

procedures and the statistical models we use.

4.1. Data and Geographic Methods

         We use the National Establishment Time-Series (NETS) database and GIS software to address

many of the difficulties and complications that arise in delineating the boundaries of areas affected by

enterprise zone incentives, and measuring the effects of these incentives on affected businesses. The

NETS is a national, longitudinal file of the universe of business establishments, created by Walls &

Associates using establishment-level data from Dun & Bradstreet. Our extract of the NETS covers all of

California over the period 1992-2004. The NETS has a couple of central features that make it well-suited

to studying the effects of California’s enterprise zones. First, it provides exact street addresses for

establishments in every year, allowing us to identify location precisely rather than having to aggregate to

the tract or zip code level, once the enterprise zones are mapped. Second, it includes detailed industry

information, allowing us to look not only at changes in the level of employment and number of

establishments but also in the composition of employment. 14


13 Fordiscussion of federal benefits, see Busso and Kline (2007), U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (2003), and http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/economicdevelopment/programs/rc/about/timeline.cfm
(viewed October 10, 2006).
14 Neumark et al. (2007) conducted a detailed investigation of the quality of the NETS data along numerous


                                                       9
       Preparing the data for analysis involved two processes: digitizing enterprise zone maps (as well as

maps for areas covered by other policies), and geocoding establishments in the NETS so that they can be

mapped. The geocoding is fairly standard and is explained in Appendix A. The mapping, however, is

unique and is central to this research, and so we explain it in some detail.

4.1.1. Mapping Enterprise Zones and Businesses

       Mapping establishments to enterprise zones requires GIS maps (“shapefiles”) of the zones, and our

identification strategy requires historical as well as current maps in order to distinguish original zone

definitions from expansion areas. As these shapefiles are not available, we had to create historical and

current enterprise zone maps from official lists of street address ranges and the years they were included

in the zone; these lists are provided by local zone administrators to HCD. 15 , 16 Table 1 lists the enterprise

zones in the state, the years when they were initially designated, and the number of expansions (if any).

The table also shows a handful of enterprise zones – mainly smaller ones – for which the street list

information was either unavailable or inconsistent and which were therefore dropped from the analysis.

       Because the date each address range was added to the zone is contained in the underlying data for

each hypothetical address, we can select street ranges for the year in which the street range would have

entered the zone. Figure 1 displays the results for the San Diego Barrio Logan zone. The grey streets

represent the original zone (1987), and the black streets represent the first expansion to the zone (1991) as

well as the second expansion in 1998, which in this case added only a tiny area which we do not

distinguish separately in the figure. 17 This map also illustrates that a simple polygon of the outer

boundary by year would miss much detail. There are streets that were not included in the original zone

dimensions, including issues raised in earlier criticism of the Dun & Bradstreet data from which the NETS is
constructed (Davis et al., 1996). They concluded that the NETS by and large provides reliable measurement of
employment levels, births and deaths, business relocations, etc.
15 Available at http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/cdbg/ez/enterprise/ (viewed November 1, 2006). These lists are used by
California’s Franchise Tax Board to determine whether establishments qualify for benefits. In some cases date
ranges were missing or ambiguous in the files listed on the HCD webpage, in which case we contacted zone
administrators directly to obtain the requisite information. In the majority of cases zone administrators were able to
provide us with clarifying information.
16 We also had to develop methods for the selection of street address ranges in GIS; these methods are described in
Appendix B of the working paper version of this paper (Neumark and Kolko, 2008).
17 Although many expansions are minor, many are also substantial, and expansions account for more than one-
quarter of employment in areas that are ever in enterprise zones, as discussed below with reference to Table 4.

                                                          10
that are between zone streets or in areas largely surrounded by zone streets. If we simply used outer

boundaries we would have some misclassification of areas. In fact these largely surrounded streets in

some cases constitute significant parts of the control areas that we use in our analysis. There are a handful

of cases where we are unable to determine if a street belongs in a zone. This can occur if a street is not

listed as belonging to a zone but appears to be completely surrounded by streets in the zone, which

happens, for example, when a street has been developed subsequent to zone designation or expansion but

the street lists from HCD do not yet reflect this information. For the main analysis we exclude these

questionable streets, but we also verify that our analysis is not affected by including them in the zones.

      After creating the GIS shapefile with all zone streets, we display the zone streets and the geocoded

businesses in the same map and then select businesses based on their location, by year, in the enterprise

zone treatment or control areas. Because geocoded longitude and latitude assigned to establishments

corresponds to the center of the street on which they are located, some modifications had to be

implemented for the correct classification of whether a business was inside an enterprise zone for streets

on the boundaries of zones, by determining on which side of a street a business was located. 18

      Overall, our approach to determining whether businesses are in or out of a zone in each year was

successful. We checked the error rate by comparing the final variable created to indicate zone status in

various years against the original zone ranges from the street address lists for San Diego (a city zone) and

Yuba Sutter (a rural zone), for random samples of observations, finding both to have error rates of less

than 1%. However, our approach was more problematic for the zones in Los Angeles, for which the

mapping of enterprise zones was much more complicated because of the large numbers of street ranges

(covering 103 pages) and the four separate zones in the city. We had to modify our mapping procedures

to handle this complexity, and in part as a result of these complications and modifications, for Los

Angeles we end up with a classification error rate in the 5-6% range. 19



18These modifications are described in Appendix C of Neumark and Kolko (2008).
19Appendix D in Neumark and Kolko (2008) provides more detail on the complexities and problems with the Los
Angeles zone as well as our modifications.

                                                     11
4.1.2. Mapping Redevelopment Areas and Federal Zones

       Redevelopment areas are included in the analysis if they are located within one mile of an

enterprise zone boundary. For each enterprise zone, the overlapping and surrounding redevelopment

agencies were found by combining information from the California State Controller’s Office’s

Redevelopment Agencies Annual Report 20 with information from Google Maps, to determine which

redevelopment agencies within that enterprise zone’s county were located near that enterprise zone. We

then contacted the agencies online or by phone to obtain maps of the redevelopment areas administered

by that agency. These maps could take a few forms, including GIS files, PDF files, or paper maps. We

used information from the agencies and the Controller’s report to determine when areas had been created,

when they would expire, and where the area boundaries changed during the study period. We then used

the maps and this information to create the final files for use in the analysis. If GIS maps were available,

we edited these as necessary if there were boundary changes not reflected in the most current map. This

might involve cutting existing polygons or creating new polygons using GIS software. If PDF or paper

maps were available, we used these to draw polygons that corresponded to the maps. 21 Then, as for the

maps of enterprise zones, we added dates to each polygon. 22

       Information on the locations of federal designated zones comes from the U.S. Department of

Housing and Urban Development. 23 These zones are listed in Table 2. We added beginning and ending


20 Table 2, http://www.sco.ca.gov/ard/local/locrep/index.shtml (viewed August 28, 2008).
21 Drawing and editing polygons was done utilizing StreetMap, following the boundaries in the redevelopment area
maps. Streets were followed down the center if the area boundary followed the center of the street or about 30 feet to
either side if the area included both or neither sides of the street. This ensured that establishments, which were
geocoded to be located 10 feet from the center of the street, were properly included in or excluded from the area.
The points that connect the edges of the polygons were placed along the streets as closely as was required to ensure
that the boundary was less than 10 feet from the center of the street if the boundary included one side or more than
30 feet from the center of the street if the boundary included both or neither sides. This placement depended on how
much the streets curved. There were some areas for which it was impossible to tell from the map, from the boundary
description, or from talking with people at the redevelopment agency whether the boundary followed the center of
the street or included both sides of the street. For these areas the boundary was drawn down the center of the street.
22 For one redevelopment area, overlapping with the Lindsay enterprise zone, we were unable to obtain maps or
descriptions of its original 1986 or its amended 1993 boundary and only obtained those for its amended 1995
boundary. We use the 1995 boundary for all years of the analysis.
23 Specifically, we use GIS boundary files that were available from the HUD website
(http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/economicdevelopment/programs/rc/tour/ca/index.cfm, viewed July 20, 2007). The
files have since been removed and replaced with tables containing the 1990 and 2000 census tracts that make up the

                                                         12
dates for each area to the resulting polygon for each federal designated community. There are some

designated communities that changed status during the period of analysis. However, because we treat

these federal programs identically in terms of their potential economic impact, the beginning date

assigned to each zone is the first year when they were designated federally. 24 As an example of the

combination of all of the information on geographically-targeted incentives, Figure 2 displays the

redevelopment areas, the federal zones, and the state enterprise zone streets for Santa Ana.

4.2. Statistical Approach

      For any enterprise zone, we define a set of subzones consisting of the original zone plus each

expansion. An observation, then, is a subzone-year pair. For example, suppose that a zone is designated in

year 1, and expands only once, in year 5, and that there are 10 years of data. Then this zone contributes 20

observations – 10 years of observations on the originally-designated area, and 10 years of observations on

the expansion area.

      Our estimates of the effects of enterprise zones come from comparing changes in outcomes

associated with an area becoming designated as an enterprise zone to changes in areas for which

enterprise zone status does not change. Because economic conditions vary across areas, it is important to

identify an appropriate control group. One approach we use is to restrict attention to a very narrow control

ring. In particular, based on our GIS maps of enterprise zones, we choose an area of fixed, relatively small

distance from the outer boundary of an enterprise zone – 1,000 feet – on the presumption that economic

conditions, aside from the effects of the enterprise zone, are likely to be very similar in the treated area

that became an enterprise zone and the surrounding, nearby control area. 25 To illustrate, Figure 3 shows

the map for the Santa Ana enterprise zone, displaying the initially-designated streets, the expansion

streets, and the 1,000-foot control ring. When we include control rings, we generate an additional

Renewal Communities, Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities
(http://www.hud.gov/offices/cpd/systems/mapping/rcezec/boundaryfiles/metadata.htm, viewed September 30,
2008). This information still allows creating the RC/EZ/EC boundaries and incorporating them into GIS.
24 For the same reason, although Los Angeles has both a Renewal Community and an Empowerment Zone, we have
appended the two together.
25 In some sensitivity analyses, we also report results using a 2,500-foot control ring. Because the results are
insensitive we did not explore using different dimensions for this control ring.

                                                       13
observation for each year’s data on each control ring; we also refer to the control ring as a subzone.

       A second and potentially more reliable source of identifying information comes from variation

strictly within the zone. In particular, we can compare what happens when an area of a zone is designated

relative to changes in areas that were designated earlier or will be designated later. This identifying

information is likely even more reliable because the control areas consist only of areas that were included

in the zone at some point during the sample period. That is, it has been demonstrated through the policy

process that the areas in the control groups used for this analysis were appropriate for enterprise zone

designation. In contrast, the area outside a zone might already have been conducive to job growth, which

is why it was not included. In that case, comparing what happened in designated areas to what happened

in the control ring could suggest that enterprise zones reduced employment, even if this was not their

actual effect. Alternatively, perhaps the area outside the zone was not conducive to job growth, and that is

why the area was omitted. In this case we would have the opposite bias – overstating the positive impact

of enterprise zones. But because expansion areas eventually do become part of the enterprise zone,

omitting the control rings and focusing only on initial designation and expansion areas should reduce the

bias: areas that eventually all became part of a zone should be more similar to each other than to the

control ring, which never becomes part of the enterprise zone. In our view, this is the principal advantage

of our identification strategy, which relies on areas that would become or earlier became parts of

enterprise zones, compared to, for example, propensity score methods matching on characteristics of areas

inside and outside zones. 26

       We index the geographic locations corresponding to each enterprise zone by j = 1, …, J, which

include the zone itself and can include the control ring. We have observations over time, indexed by t = 1,

…, T. We define subzones within j, indexed by k, with k = 0, …, Kj; k = 0 for the part of j that is never in


26As noted earlier, the two best-known prior published studies of California’s enterprise zone program use
propensity score methods (Elvery, 2009; O’Keefe, 2004). Another issue with using propensity score methods is that
once one takes the approach of using actual street maps to define the zone boundaries accurately (rather than, for
example, approximating with census tracts), it becomes much more difficult to think about using a matching
approach, since there are no well-defined geographic areas to compare with the areas encompassed by enterprise
zone streets.

                                                        14
a zone, and k = 1, …, Kj for the parts that become a zone initially and with each expansion. The dependent

variable Yjkt is, for example, the log of the number of jobs in a subzone. We denote by EZjkt a dummy

variable for whether a location k in area j is in an enterprise zone in year t. So for the part of area of j that

is never in the zone, EZjkt = 0 for all t; in a sub-area that becomes a zone in t’, EZjkt = 0 for all t < t’, and

EZjkt = 1 for all t ≥ t’; and for the part that is always a zone in our sample period, EZjkt = 1 for all t.

       We begin by estimating a model in levels, in which enterprise zone designation of a subzone shifts

the level of the dependent variable, as in:

                                   J       Kj                           T                      J      T
(1)      Y jkt = α + β EZ jkt +   ∑∑             D j' k ' λ j' k ' +
                                  j' =1 k ' = 0 or1
                                                                       ∑
                                                                       t' =1
                                                                               Dt ' θ t ' +   ∑∑ { D
                                                                                              j' = 2 t' =1
                                                                                                             j'   ⋅ Dt' }τ j' t' + ε jkt . 27


       The parameter of interest is β, which measures the effect of enterprise zones on the outcome Y. Djk,

Dt, and Dj are dummy variables for each subzone, year, and enterprise zone, respectively. The dummy

variables Djk capture differences common to each subzone, to control for any characteristics (education

levels, industry mix, infrastructure, land area, etc.) that are time-invariant. 28 The dummy variables Dt

capture aggregate changes, accounting for the possibility that enterprise zones tended to be established in

periods of either particularly high or low employment (or establishment) growth across all of the regions

included in our sample. The term Dj·Dt allows for enterprise zone-specific changes over time in the

outcome Y, to allow for an arbitrary pattern of changes over time across the broad area covered by a zone,

its expansions, and the associated control ring (when included). Given that we identify effects off of

subzone-level variation, we can allow these arbitrary changes over time for each enterprise zone j and still

identify β.

       We also estimate a version of equation (1) in which we control even more richly for differences

across subzones by adding subzone-specific linear time trends, in the form of interactions between the

subzone dummy variables (Djk) and a linear time trend. This specification allows for the possibility – in

an unrestricted fashion – that each subzone had different underlying rates of growth of either employment

27 Note that the sum over k’ begins with zero if the control ring is included, and one if it is not.
28 When we include the control rings, the dummy variables for each control ring will account for these differences
relative to the areas that became parts of enterprise zones.

                                                                                15
or the number of businesses. Note that we can add interactions between time and the subzone dummy

variables (Djk) as long as we use a parametric specification of time; we cannot of course introduce a full

set of subzone-year interaction dummy variables and still identify β.

         Because we allow separate dummy variables for each subzone, an area jk that is in an enterprise

zone for the entire sample period contributes nothing to the identification of β, as Djk and EZjkt are

identical for all t. In this case, we have a pure difference-in-differences estimator that identifies β only

from subzones that change status, relative to those that do not. Because the data begin in 1992, whereas

most zones were originally designated prior to that year, much of our identifying information comes from

expansions. 29 Thus, interpreting our results as estimating “the” effects of enterprise zones hinges on the

assumption that the effects of original designations and expansions are the same. 30 We present some

results that seek to separately identify the effects of initial zone designations and expansions, and find no

significant evidence of differences. In the absence of pre-1992 employment data, we cannot of course

assess whether the effects of initial designations and expansions prior to 1992 are different from those we

can study.

         While equation (1) specifies the effects of enterprise zones as a one-time shift in the level of the

dependent variable, an alternative possibility is that enterprise zones shift the growth rate of employment.

To explore this possibility, we instead estimate the model for the first-difference of Y:

                                     T            J      T
(2)        ΔY jkt = α + β EZ jkt + ∑ Dt' θ t' + ∑∑ { D j' ⋅ Dt' }τ j' t' + η jkt .
                                    t' =1        j' = 2 t' =1


         In this specification, β measures the shift in the growth rate of outcome Y associated with enterprise

zone designation. We have dropped the subzone dummy variables Djk from this specification because


29 For three of the 26 zones, there is no expansion and the original zone was created before the first year for which
NETS data are available, implying that only 23 zones contribute identifying information.
30 In our survey of local enterprise zone administrators, we asked why zones expanded when and where they did.
Two main reasons emerged. First, zones often expanded to benefit businesses that were moving to or growing in
areas just outside the enterprise zone. Second, zones sometimes expanded to incorporate areas newly designated as
commercial or industrial by the local planning process. To the extent that zones expanded where businesses planned
to relocate or grow, zone expansions were sometimes the effect rather than the cause of employment growth; thus,
our estimates of the effect of the enterprise zone program on employment would be biased upward, strengthening
our findings of no positive employment effects of enterprise zones.

                                                                16
equation (2) can be viewed as the first-difference of a version of equation (1) in which enterprise zone

designation affects the growth rate of the dependent variable rather than the level. 31 , 32 We also estimate

the model with these subzone dummy variables added back in, which corresponds to the first-differenced

version of equation (1) when it includes subzone-specific linear time trends.

       In addition, we estimate models that allow enterprise zone designation to shift both the level and

growth rate of the dependent variable. The corresponding equation is:

                                                  T              J     T
(3)       ΔY jkt = α + β EZ jkt + β ' EZD jkt + ∑ Dt' θ t' + ∑∑ { D j' ⋅ Dt' }τ j' t' + η jkt .
                                                 t' =1         j' = 2 t' =1


       In this model, EZDjtk is a dummy variable that is equal to one only in the year in which a subzone

becomes designated as part of the zone. Thus, this equation augments equation (2) by allowing a discrete

jump in the level of Y in the year the subzone is designated in addition to the constant effect of enterprise

zone designation on the growth rate that equation (2) imposes. Thus, this is a more flexible version of the

previous model. As in the other specifications, we also estimate this model including the subzone dummy

variables to allow for subzone-specific linear trends.

       We account for other geographically-targeted policies in two steps. First, we redefine subzone-year

pairs to represent status with regard not only to whether and when they became part of an enterprise zone

but also whether and when they became part of a redevelopment area or federal zone. As a result, there

are far more subzones. Second, we modify the above specifications to include dummy variables indicating

whether each subzone k is in a redevelopment area (or federal zone) in year t. We also include the

31  Specifically, in equation (1) the enterprise zone treatment is captured in the dummy variable EZjkt. Suppose
instead that the enterprise zone variable in equation (1) was the product of EZjkt and the number of years the subzone
has been designated an enterprise zone, denoted tD; in this specification the growth rate of the dependent variable
shifts when EZjkt switches from zero to one. Because the first difference of EZjkt· tD is just EZjkt, the first-differenced
version of equation (1) with EZjkt· tD substituted for EZjkt yields equation (2). (In principle, we need to first difference
the year dummy variables and the zone-year interactions including in equation (1). But doing so gives the identical
fit to leaving in the original dummy variables, as long as we leave the intercept in the first-differenced model.)
32 In Kolko and Neumark (2010) we reported estimates of how the effects of enterprise zones vary with zone
characteristics. Some of our specifications used a model like the one described in the previous footnote (in levels,
with an interaction between EZjkt and a linear trend). However, we used a simple linear trend starting with a value of
one in 1992, rather than in the year in which the subzone was designated, and it is the latter that leads directly to the
model for the first-difference in equation (2). We have re-estimated these interactive effects in Kolko and Neumark
(2010) using the latter specification instead. The conclusions are unchanged (results available from the authors upon
request).

                                                            17
enterprise zone dummy variables as well as interactions between these. Thus, we do not restrict the effects

of the different kinds of zones to be additive, but rather allow for the possibility, for example, that state

enterprise zone benefits have different effects if the state enterprise zone overlaps with a federal zone.

       In all of the estimations, to allow for arbitrary correlations over time within areas and across

observations on the subzones of each zone, we use standard errors that cluster on the enterprise zone only;

this also allows for different error variances across zones. Our tables report the standard cluster-robust

standard errors. However, as noted above, we do not have data on a large number of zones, so the usual

asymptotics under which these standard errors are consistent, and confidence intervals therefore provide

the correct coverage, may not apply. Cameron et al. (2008) have shown that using the wild bootstrap,

modified to account for clustering, 33 provides confidence intervals for the t-statistics based on the

standard cluster-robust standard errors with coverage probabilities that are approximately correct even

when the number of groups (zones, in our case) is quite small. 34 In addition to the standard cluster-robust

standard errors, therefore, we have also calculated these bootstrapped confidence intervals, and in each

table report whether the estimated effects of enterprise zones are statistically significant at various

significance levels based on the bootstrap results. As it turns out, some differences emerge, but very

rarely for the employment results.

5. The Effects of Enterprise Zones

5.1. Enterprise Zone Employment and Establishments in the Context of the State’s Economy

       Table 3 presents descriptive information on the enterprise zones we study. Column (1) reports

employment in each enterprise zone in our sample as of 2004. The zones are sorted from highest to lowest

employment levels. As reported at the bottom of column (1), overall employment statewide in these

enterprise zones is about 1.38 million, and employment in the control rings used in our empirical analysis

(extending 1,000 feet from the zone boundaries) is about 580,000. Overall, employment in the counties in


33 In particular, the bootstrapping is on the clusters rather than the individual observations.
34 In their Monte Carlo simulations, when the number of groups is in the 20’s, confidence intervals based on the
standard cluster-robust standard errors are fairly accurate; but this result need not carry over to our particular
specification.

                                                          18
which the zones we study are located is 12.6 million, so that enterprise zone employment is about 11% of

the total. Statewide employment in 2004, based on the NETS data, was 16.4 million, and employment in

all counties with enterprise zones – whether or not we could construct maps for those zones – was about

14.2 million. Thus, if we assume that the share of county employment represented by enterprise zones is

the same in the counties for which we do not have zone maps as for the counties for which we could

construct these maps, then our enterprise zones represent 89% (12.7/14.2) of enterprise zone employment

in the state. Columns (2)-(4) provide information on enterprise zone employment relative to county and

statewide employment. The shares of enterprise zones in county employment vary a good deal across

counties, varying from a high of 52.8% in Shasta Metro to a low of 0.7% in Altadena/Pasadena. Column

(4) indicates that the large zones (Los Angeles, San Francisco, Santa Ana, and Oakland) each account, on

their own, for 1% or more of total statewide employment. 35

5.2. Enterprise Zones: Initially-Designated Areas, Expansions, and Control Rings

       Table 4 reports some figures for the sample as a whole (i.e., covering the enterprise zones and the

control rings), as well as the enterprise zones separately – including the originally-designated areas as

well as the expansions separately – and the 1,000-foot control ring. These are reported for 1992, the first

year of the sample. Ideally, we would like pre-treatment comparisons. However, many of the areas in the

original zone designations were so designated before 1992, in which case there are no pre-treatment data.

As indicated in the first row, enterprise zone employment constitutes about 69% of total employment in

the zones and the control rings, and of this, about 72% is in the areas originally designated as part of

zones. Clearly there is plenty of employment (and also plenty of establishments, as shown in the second

row) in the control ring and, of course, in the expansion areas. Perhaps even more informative is the third

row, which reports employment density. Although density is higher in the areas designated as enterprise


35 Similar figures for the number of establishments indicate that the establishments in the enterprise zones we study
are 6.5% of the statewide total, and 8.7% of establishments in the counties in which they are located. In total, we
have data on about 124,000 enterprise zone establishments, about 58,000 in control rings, relative to a statewide
total of 1.6 million establishments, 1.4 million of which are in the counties with enterprise zones in our study. As for
employment, the largest zones (in this case Los Angeles and San Francisco) each account for 1% or more of the total
statewide number of establishments.

                                                          19
zones than the control rings, density is still quite high in the latter. Moreover, density is actually higher in

the expansion areas than in the initially-designated areas. The last three rows report establishment size

and composition. Average establishment size in the zones and the control rings is quite similar (around

14.5), although slightly higher in the enterprise zone expansion areas than in the originally-designated

areas. The same is true of the share of employees in low-wage industries. 36 The share in manufacturing is

somewhat higher in the zone expansion areas, and somewhat lower in the control rings. It is certainly the

case that the three types of areas are not identical in terms of these measures; but it would be quite

surprising if they were. Nonetheless, there is plenty of employment in the expansion areas and the control

rings, and the types of establishments do not appear very different across them. In the empirical analysis,

of course, we control for initial or time-invariant differences between the areas by including subzone

fixed effects, and in some specifications for different underlying trends in each subzone.

5.3. The Effects of Enterprise Zones on Jobs and Businesses

        We now turn to estimates of the economic effects of enterprise zones by looking at their effects on

employment and the number of business establishments. We have already argued why the employment

effect is central. Information on effects on the number of establishments, coupled with information on

employment effects, is informative about whether enterprise zones lead to larger establishments (for

example, fewer establishments coupled with no effect on employment) or smaller establishments, which

is likely related to the question of whether enterprise zones lead to the creation of more new businesses,

although we do not explore the latter question directly.

5.3.1. Descriptive Statistics

        Table 5 presents a simple descriptive analysis. This table treats each subzone-year pair as an

observation, as we do in the regression analysis, so that a subzone is classified by year as to whether or

not it is in the zone. Reflecting what we regard as the cleanest way to measure the effects of enterprise

zones, the control rings are not used in this table, and instead comparisons are only between subzones


36 We  ranked industries by average pay based on 2004 data from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages,
dividing NAICS industry subsectors into three groups, each containing approximately one-third of the workforce.

                                                       20
currently in enterprise zones, and subzones not currently in enterprise zones but which are in enterprise

zones in later years. Columns (1) and (2) report unweighted averages of annual percentage changes in

employment and the number of establishments, and suggest that for both employment and establishments

– but especially employment – the rate of growth was faster after areas were included in enterprise zones.

      However, given that there is tremendous variation in size across zones (see Table 3), small zones

may contribute large percentage changes but small absolute changes. In columns (3)-(6) we report the

same descriptive statistics for below-median and above-median size subzones (in terms of 1992

employment or number of establishments). These columns show that, for employment, the small

subzones contribute larger percentage changes in both directions. Moreover, for the larger subzones,

which obviously represent a far larger number of jobs or establishments, growth in jobs and the number of

establishments was lower in the enterprise zones; the difference is much sharper for job growth.

      Weighting the observations by either employment or number of establishments thus gives us

estimates that are more representative of what actually happens to jobs or establishments statewide. As

reported in columns (7) and (8), when we weight by base-year levels, the weighted estimates are much

closer to those using the large subzones. The evidence now suggests that enterprise zones slightly reduced

the growth of jobs, with a fairly small relative difference of 0.5% slower growth in enterprise zones. In

contrast, enterprise zones appear to have slightly increased the growth rate in the number of

establishments.

5.3.2. Basic Regression Estimates

      The descriptive statistics reported in Table 5 do not account for other influences on employment

and the number of establishments that we want to disentangle from the actual effects of enterprise zones.

Regression estimates accounting for these influences are reported in Table 6; these ignore (for now) a

number of complications, including the overlap of enterprise zones with areas affected by other

geographically-targeted polices. The dependent variable is the log of employment or the number of




                                                     21
establishments. 37 All estimates are weighted by 1992 employment levels or numbers of establishments.

The control rings are included in columns (1) and (2) but excluded in columns (3) and (4); we view the

latter specifications as preferable.

       In Panel A, enterprise zone designation shifts the level of employment or number of establishments

in the corresponding subzone. The estimates provide no evidence that enterprise zones boost employment

as the estimates in columns (1) and (3) are small and statistically insignificant, and actually negative in

both cases. With regard to establishments, both estimates indicate that enterprise zones reduce the number

of businesses, holding everything else constant. In the preferred specification excluding the control ring

the estimate is significant at the 10-percent level (but not based on the bootstrap results). In Panel B we

introduce subzone-specific linear time trends. The estimated employment effects are still near zero and

not statistically significant, although they are now positive. The estimated effects on number of

establishments also become positive, but the effect is small and statistically insignificant in the preferred

specification excluding the control rings.

       In Panels C and D we report the model estimates for the growth rate in the dependent variable. In

this case, whether or not we allow subzone-specific trends, there is no evidence of positive effects of

enterprise zones on employment; the estimates are small and statistically insignificant. The estimated

effects on the number of establishments are always negative, and sometimes statistically significant

(based only on the bootstrap results).

       Finally, Panels E and F report more flexible models than those in Panels C and D, by allowing

enterprise zones to be associated with shifts in the level and growth rate. However, the results are very

similar. There is no evidence that enterprise zones affect employment; the estimates are small, statistically

insignificant, and negative as often as they are positive. On the other hand, there is again a hint of a

negative effect on the number of establishments.

37 As indicated in the notes to the table, in the handful of cases where employment (or the number of
establishments) was zero (26 observations), we substituted one for zero before taking logs. This can be viewed as
perhaps introducing the slightest measurement error, or presuming that the data are not sufficiently accurate to
distinguish between zero and one job or establishment in a cell. Regardless, we verified that simply dropping these
cases had no impact on the estimates.

                                                         22
      Although the specifications with the subzone-specific linear time trends often generate much less

precise estimates of the effects of enterprise zones, the inclusion of these time trends has little clear effect

on the estimated effects of enterprise zones, suggesting that there is little if any difference in underlying

trends between the treatment and control groups. Thus, in what follows we focus on the specifications

without the subzone-specific linear time trends, which yield more precise estimates.

      As a more flexible way of asking whether enterprise zone designation shifts the level or rate of

growth of employment, we re-estimated the baseline model for the employment level (Panel A), with

many leads and lags of the enterprise zone dummy variable; these estimates are not reported in a table,

but in the figure discussed below. The leads reveal whether enterprise zones have tended to be established

in areas that had transitory downturns in employment relative to other areas, in which case our finding of

no effect would be strengthened (because the mean reversion would look like a positive treatment effect).

Alternatively, if zones are established in areas doing particularly well just before designation, perhaps

because such areas have better organized constituents for capturing an enterprise zone, then the estimated

effects from the simple model might fail to detect longer-run positive effects of enterprise zone

designation on the rate of job growth. Similarly, the many lags allow the data to tell us whether over the

longer-term the effects of enterprise zones look different from what is implied by the one-time

contemporaneous shift implied by equation (1).

      Figure 4 displays the results for the specifications both with and without the control ring. The

figure reports the leading (to the left) and lagged (to the right) coefficient estimates, as well as the upper

and lower limits of the standard cluster-based 95-percent confidence intervals for each estimate. The

figures do not exhibit any evidence indicating that the basic specification obscures more interesting

results. For example, there is no evidence of leading effects of enterprise zones because they are either

established in places doing particularly well or particularly badly; similarly, there is no evidence that

employment increases more further from the date of enterprise zone designation. Thus, the figures give no

indication that the simple specifications reported in Table 6 mask any greater richness that might suggest

different effects of enterprise zones, whether positive or negative. Instead, the results in Figure 4 cement

                                                       23
the view that enterprise zones do not affect employment. 38

       The results to this point indicate that enterprise zones have no statistically significant effect on

employment. But the statistical power of our test is modest, as the confidence intervals for the estimated

employment effects are rather large. For example, in the level specification, the estimates in Panel A,

column (3), which exclude the control rings, yield a 95-percent confidence interval of −8.1 to 5.7 percent.

       If the enterprise zone program has positive spillovers, encouraging employment growth not only

within zone boundaries but just outside zone boundaries as well, then we might find no effect of

enterprise zones on employment because we are comparing enterprise zones to immediately neighboring

areas. 39 By using two different control groups – future expansion areas and control rings – we can assess

whether spillovers color our results. Future expansion areas are closer to current enterprise zone areas

geographically than control rings are, so any spillover effects should be greater in future expansion areas

than in control rings. Evidence of positive employment effects when using the control rings but not when

using only the future expansion areas would suggest that zones create positive spillover effects in

neighboring areas. However, since our results with and without control rings are similar, we discount the

possibility of positive spillover effects. Similarly, had we found evidence of a positive effect using the

larger (2,500-foot) control rings, we might have reached this conclusion. However, as discussed below,

the results are essentially unchanged using the larger control rings.

       Perhaps a more likely scenario, especially given our research design, is that there are negative

spillover effects, with enterprise zones pulling jobs and businesses away from nearby areas. Given that

our control areas are geographically close to our treatment areas, it might be fairly easy for businesses to

move to take advantage of enterprise zone incentives (without, for example, inconveniencing their

workforce), or for similar results to occur via the location decisions of new businesses. The similarity of

38 The specifications in Panels A and B of Table 6 might be more likely to detect short-run shifts in outcomes
associated with enterprise zones, while the specifications in Panels C and D of Table 6 would more likely capture
longer-run effects. The failure to find evidence of employment effects of enterprise zone effects in either type of
specification is consistent with findings – reported in Figure 4 – that adding explicit lagged (or leading) enterprise
zone variables to the specification for levels led to no evidence of employment effects.
39 Spillovers could stem from a number of sources, including increased retail “traffic,” rising incomes of nearby
residents, and changes in infrastructure.

                                                           24
results with and without control rings also undermines this possibility. Moreover, such negative spillovers

would tend to produce evidence that enterprise zones do encourage job growth relative to control areas.

Thus, if there were negative spillovers, our conclusion that there are not positive employment effects

would only be reinforced.

       Although the evidence on number of establishments is weak, one possible interpretation of a

decline in the establishment count coupled with no change in employment – which implies that

establishments are becoming larger – is that there are fixed costs to taking advantage of enterprise zone

benefits, and large establishments (or firms) are therefore more likely to find enterprise zone benefits

attractive. If this interpretation is valid, it suggests that enterprise zone policies do not particularly favor

and may even adversely affect entrepreneurship in the form of small business creation. 40

5.3.3. Accounting for Other Local Economic Policies

       We next turn to the analysis where we account for the overlap between state enterprise zones and

redevelopment areas or federal zones. Table 7 reports the share of enterprise zone employment that is in

either redevelopment areas or federal zones, in the last year of our sample. Clearly both redevelopment

areas and federal zones sometimes cover a wide swath of enterprise zones.

       The regression models are now expanded to include a dummy variable for redevelopment areas or

federal zones, and an interaction for regions that are in both enterprise zones and one of these other areas.

As reported in Table 8, in all of the estimations the estimated effects of enterprise zones in areas that do

not overlap with redevelopment areas (columns (1) and (2)) or federal zones (columns (3) and (4)) –

which are reported in the first row of each panel – are small, statistically insignificant, and generally

negative. This is true for the effects on both employment and the number of establishments. The effects of

enterprise zones that overlap with these other areas comes from the sum of these estimates plus the




40 There is a long-standing debate on whether small businesses create more jobs, on net, than large businesses.
Neumark et al. (2008) provide recent evidence on this question using the NETS data, pointing to a higher net job
creation rate from small businesses.

                                                        25
estimated interactions between enterprise zone and either redevelopment areas or federal zones. 41 As

reported in the fourth row of each panel, these estimates are almost always negative, and based on the

bootstrap results they are never statistically significant. 42 There is also no evidence of significant

differences between the effects of enterprise zones that are or are not part of redevelopment areas or

federal zones (the interactions, reported in the third row of each panel). The main conclusion is that there

is no evidence that enterprise zones have positive employment effects, whether or not they are combined

with these other local policies. 43 , 44

5.3.4. Effects on the Composition of Employment

       The results to this point suggest that enterprise zones do not affect employment growth. However,

using a criterion of overall job growth may be inappropriate. After all, one goal of enterprise zones is to

help create jobs among those who are economically disadvantaged and likely to be low-skilled. In

addition, some of the enterprise zone benefits targeted on machinery and property are most likely to

benefit manufacturing enterprises. Thus, it is possible that enterprise zones do not affect overall

employment growth, but nonetheless affect the composition of employment growth.

       The NETS data do not permit us to say anything about the characteristics of workers employed by

a business establishment. Nonetheless, we can ask whether there is a shift toward lower-paying industries.

We might not normally think of this as a good outcome, but in this case it could reflect increased hiring of


41 Negative interactions could arise if, for instance, different programs offer duplicative benefits; in this case, the
marginal effect of one program would be lower for an area covered by another program than for an area not covered
by another program.
42 We actually did the bootstrap inference for these effects by respecifying the model so that the effect of enterprise
zones in either redevelopment areas or federal zones was captured in a single coefficient.
43 There is also no evidence of positive effects of redevelopment areas or federal zones. We do not emphasize these
findings, however, as our research was not designed to assess the effects of these areas in the most definitive way,
but instead simply to distinguish between different “parts” of enterprise zone areas – that do and do not overlap with
redevelopment areas or federal zones. In particular, the comparison groups are either other parts of enterprise zones
or the rings around them, which are not necessarily the best comparison groups for estimating the effects of
redevelopment areas or federal zones. In addition, the mapping of redevelopment areas is not as accurate as the
mapping of enterprise zones. And finally, the incentives are not uniform across the federal zones (U.S. General
Accounting Office, 2004; Busso and Kline, 2007).
44 There are also a few other state programs focused on specific areas, including: the Los Angeles Revitalization
Zone (LARZ), Local Agency Military Base Recovery Areas, the Tulare Targeted Tax Area, and Manufacturing
Enhancement Areas (in Imperial County). We address potential problems from overlap between the LARZ and the
Los Angeles and Long Beach zones below.

                                                          26
less-skilled workers. On the other hand, it could be that the shift to less-skilled workers occurs within

industries, which we would not observe. It is straightforward in the NETS to ask whether enterprise zones

are associated with shifts in the share of employment in manufacturing.

      The results for employment in low-wage industries, reported in the first two columns of Table 9, do

not provide any indication that enterprise zones shift employment towards (or away from) low-wage

industries. Nearly all of the estimated compositional effects are small and statistically insignificant, and

the only exceptions are the negative and significant (but still small) estimates for the specifications in

Panels E and F, for the effect of enterprise zones on the level of employment. The estimates in columns

(3) and (4) suggest that there is a positive and statistically significant effect on the growth rate of the share

of employment in manufacturing, when the control rings are excluded. However, the effects on the

growth rate in Panels C and E are not significant based on the bootstrap results, and there is no effect in

any of the levels specifications. Thus, there is some evidence, although it is weak, that enterprise zones

may shift employment towards manufacturing.

5.3.5. Sensitivity Analyses

      Finally, we report on a number of sensitivity analyses. The first set of these focuses on whether our

conclusions are sensitive to issues regarding the mapping, or “measurement,” of the enterprise zones or

the control rings. In Table 10, row 1 reports the baseline estimates from Table 6. Then rows 2-4 present

estimates for the variations in how we define the enterprise zones or control rings. First, we use a 2,500-

foot control ring instead of a 1,000-foot control ring. This results in little change, although in one case

(column (6)) there is stronger evidence of a negative effect on the number of establishments. Second, we

revert to the 1,000-foot control ring, but include questionable streets that are in the interior of the zones

but are not explicitly listed as belonging to them. This has virtually no impact on the estimates. And third,

we revert to the 1,000-foot control ring and exclude questionable streets, but we also exclude a 100-foot

buffer (in any direction) from the enterprise zone boundary, to exclude observations that might be more

likely to be incorrectly classified as in or out of the zone. This, too, has no substantive effect on the

estimates.

                                                       27
       Next, we consider alternative weighting schemes. In row 5 we report estimates in which we do not

weight the observations. A somewhat different weighting issue arises because our unit of observation is

the subzone-year pair, which implies that if a particular zone had a lot of little expansions as opposed to a

smaller number of relatively larger expansions, that zone contributes more observations. However, we

may not want the estimates to be weighted towards zones with more expansions. 45 One way to make the

estimates representative of zones rather than subzones is to weight the observations inversely by the

number of subzones. Estimates with this weighting are reported in row 6 of Table 10. These estimates

with different (or no) weighting are sometimes slightly different in that some specifications provide

evidence of positive effects of enterprise zones on the growth rate of employment. In addition, these

estimates point to if anything weaker evidence of declines in the number of establishments. Nonetheless,

the weighting used in the main tables is our preferred specification, because it makes the estimates

representative of what happens to workers, treating each observed designation of an area as eligible for

enterprise zone benefits as an “experiment.” Moreover, the estimates without weighting or with this

alternative weighting, and excluding the control rings, are much less precise and in some cases (e.g.,

column (7)) implausibly large. 46

       Because Los Angeles is so large (and perhaps because it has so many expansions), it may have a

large influence on the estimates. We therefore, in the row 7 of Table 10, report results excluding Los

Angeles. 47 For the specifications with the control rings, in this case we find positive employment effects.

However, for the specification without the control rings, which we regard as more reliable, we only find a

positive effect of enterprise zones for the growth rate specification. More substantively, as we noted

earlier, there is the potential for overlap between the Los Angeles Revitalization Zone (LARZ) and the

Los Angeles and Long Beach enterprise zones. The LARZ offers benefits that are very similar to those of

45 The weighting by base-year employment or establishment levels offsets this to some extent, since when a zone is
divided into more subzones because of a greater number of expansions, all else the same, each subzone gets a lower
base-year weight.
46 Recall that we first raised the issue of weighting with respect to Table 5. There, we saw that, in the raw data, the
percentage growth in subzones after they became part of the enterprise zone was higher. Here, in contrast, we are
reporting the estimates of highly-saturated regression models.
47 In addition, recall that mapping enterprise zone boundaries for Los Angeles was more difficult.


                                                          28
the state enterprise zone program (Assembly Jobs, Economic Development, and the Economy Committee,

2006). Because of the potential overlap and similar benefits, and given that the LARZ started in 1992,

failure to account for overlap between the LARZ and subzones into which the Los Angeles or Long

Beach zones expanded after 1992 can lead to misclassification of the treatment and control groups.

Consequently, we excluded the Census tracts and cities covered by the LARZ, 48 and re-estimated our

models. The results, reported in row 8 of Table 10, yield results that are very robust relative to the

baseline estimates in the top row, indicating that the overlap between the LARZ and the Los Angeles and

Long Beach enterprise zones does not affect our results. 49

       Finally, we consider two issues related to the timing of enterprise zone designation. First, we ask

whether the effects of initial enterprise zone designation differ from the effects of subsequent zone

expansions. 50 Since initial designation results from a different process than subsequent expansions, the

effects could differ. The specification in row 9 of Table 10 shows that the effect of initial designations is

not significantly different from the overall enterprise zone effect. 51 Second, we ask whether enterprise

zones became more effective at creating jobs starting in 1997, when the pool of workers eligible for the

hiring credit areas expanded to include those in TEA’s. As shown in row 10 of the table, there is no

evidence of this, with the exception of one specification. And although not shown in the table, the

differences between the effects in the two sub-periods were never statistically significant.

       Overall, then, the earlier analysis plus all of our sensitivity analyses establish that our estimates

indicating that state enterprise zones in California do not boost employment growth is generally robust.


48 See http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/cdbg/ez/larz/ (viewed November 10, 2008).
49 This may reflect the fact that the overlap is not extensive. Using the census tracts that include the LARZ, which
encompass more than the actual streets covered, as of 2004 only 5% of Los Angeles enterprise zone employment
and 7.7% of Long Beach enterprise zone employment was in the LARZ. These percentages are considerably lower
than those covered by redevelopment areas or federal zones, as reported in Table 7.
50 The specification includes the enterprise zone dummy variable as well as an interaction of this dummy variable
with a corresponding dummy variable for the initially-designated areas only; the coefficient of the interaction
measures the difference between the effect in initially-designated areas and expansion areas.
51 We report only the model with control rings. The initial-designation estimates are identified from five zones that
were designated after 1992 (and before 2004). Only two of these – Oakland and Santa Ana – had subsequent
expansions (which serve as the control group when control rings are excluded), and Oakland’s expansion was very
small in terms of employment and therefore quite imprecise as a control group for the initial Oakland designation.
Omitting control rings would mean identifying the initial designation effect essentially only from Santa Ana.

                                                          29
The estimates for the effects of enterprise zones on the number of establishments is perhaps less robust,

with some indication that enterprise zones may reduce the number of establishments.

6. Discussion and Conclusions

        Our analysis of California’s enterprise zone program cannot reject the hypothesis that the program

fails to increase employment. We arrived at this conclusion after drawing precise enterprise zone

boundaries digitally, mapping nearly all businesses in the state, accounting for other geographically-

targeted policies, and comparing employment growth in enterprise zones with carefully considered

control areas. We do not assess the effect of the program on unemployment or poverty, but it is hard to

see how these outcomes could improve in the absence of a positive effect on employment. 52

        At the same time, we find some evidence that enterprise zones reduce the number of

establishments, which coupled with lack of an employment effect suggests that establishments are

growing in size. Increasing establishment size is consistent with survey respondents’ comments that

smaller businesses find it less worthwhile than larger businesses do to claim enterprise zone benefits

because of the administrative burden. 53 Another possibility is that increased prices for land relative to

other inputs lead employers to substitute towards other inputs including labor.

        The lack of a significant effect on employment may seem surprising in light of the program’s

incentives. In fact, however, economic theory provides some possible explanations for the absence of an

employment effect or at least a weak effect. First, as noted earlier, the strongest incentive offered by the

enterprise zone program is for hiring disadvantaged workers. If there are opportunities to substitute low-

skilled for higher-skilled labor, however, this incentive may induce a fair amount of “labor-labor”

substitution, with weaker effects on employment overall. At the same time, this kind of substitution might



52 As noted earlier, if enterprise zones have beneficial spillover effects onto other nearby areas, then benefits of the
program estimated from comparisons of areas inside the zone to areas outside the zone may be understated.
Nonetheless, our results would still imply that enterprise zones do not differentially benefit the areas they target.
Although we cannot rule out this possibility, we regard it as unlikely because our estimated effects were not
sensitive to using control groups that extended increasingly further from the enterprise zone itself.
53 See Kolko and Neumark (2010). This is also consistent with evidence from a HUD survey indicating that large
firms used federal enterprise zone tax credits, wage subsidies, and capital write-offs much more intensively than
small firms (Hebert et al., 2001).

                                                           30
still lead to beneficial shifts in the composition of employment to the extent that the program is intended

to improve job opportunities for the disadvantaged. Our ability to assess whether there is labor-labor

substitution is limited by the available data. All we can do is ask whether enterprise zones shift

employment toward low-wage industries that might be more likely to employ these workers, and we find

no such effect. 54 In addition, our evidence suggests that there is no overall increase in employment, and

although in theory it is possible to have labor-labor substitution and yet no increase in employment, this

can occur only under special conditions which we regard as unlikely to hold. 55

       The second possible explanation suggested by economic theory is that some of the enterprise zone

benefits targeting machinery and property could lead to substitution away from labor and towards other

inputs; depending on the magnitude of scale and substitution effects of lower prices for other inputs, the

overall employment effect could be positive or negative. We find it less plausible that the enterprise zone

program leads to substitution away from labor and towards other non-labor inputs, given the generosity of

the hiring credit – although admittedly we do not know the magnitudes of all of the relevant elasticities. 56

       One argument that we do not think is the right explanation is that the incentive effect of the

program is weak. If we simply divide the cost of the program by the number of jobs in enterprise zones,

54 A related possible beneficial effect of the program is increasing incomes of affected workers, owing to the tax
credit. In the absence of employment effects, however, the wage increases only if labor supply is perfectly inelastic,
which does not seem plausible. The relevant elasticity is for the extensive margin of labor supply – that is, entry into
the labor market in response to a higher wage. There is ample evidence of elastic labor supply on this dimension.
See, for example, Juhn (1992). At the same time, Bostic and Prohofsky (2006) find positive wage effects in the very
short-run (1-2 years) for low-wage affected workers (a non-representative sample of workers for whom employers
claimed an enterprise-zone-specific hiring tax credit).
55 Suppose there are three inputs – unskilled labor, skilled labor, and capital. The hiring credit reduces the cost of
unskilled labor. Assuming that the two types of labor are substitutes, the hiring credit induces substitution from
skilled to unskilled labor. If unskilled labor and capital are also substitutes, the credit also induces substitution from
capital to unskilled labor. These substitutions, in turn, lower the cost of production leading to a positive scale effect,
so total employment increases. However, if capital and unskilled labor are complements, then the firm may
substitute sufficiently strongly toward capital as well that skilled labor and total employment declines. Research on
production functions suggests that, if anything, it is capital and skilled labor that is complementary, making it even
less likely that the hiring credit could increase unskilled labor without increasing employment. (The same issue
comes up in the context of minimum wages, which increase the price of unskilled labor; see Neumark and Wascher,
2008, Chapter 3.)
56 Lynch and Zax (2008) discuss substitution between labor and other inputs. They suggest that one interpretation of
their findings that Colorado’s enterprise zone benefits do not boost employment at existing establishments is that
there is substitution towards capital that offsets any effect of reduced labor costs. It is the case that the Colorado
enterprise program has relatively strong capital subsidies and weak labor subsidies, in contrast to California; Lynch
and Zax argue that the most valuable enterprise zone incentive in Colorado is a 3% investment tax credit, while the
hiring tax credit is simply $500 for each new employee.

                                                           31
one might get this impression; using the 2005 spending figure of about $330 million on hiring credits and

sales and use tax credits (California Franchise Tax Board, 2006), and dividing by enterprise zone

employment of roughly 1.4 million, yields an estimate of about $240 per worker. However, what is

relevant is the effect of program subsidies at the margin; clearly a fairly large share of enterprise zone

employment would occur regardless of the program. At any rate, if the program incentives are too weak

to affect behavior, then it remains difficult to justify the program’s costs. A second argument that also

does not explain the absence of an employment effect is that capitalization of enterprise zone benefits into

land values eliminates the incentive effects of the enterprise zone benefits. Even if land values rise,

reductions in the relative cost of labor owing to the hiring credit still imply that employers will substitute

toward labor. And indeed increased land values may reflect an outward shift in the demand for land

against an upward-sloping supply of land available for businesses. 57

       We have argued that the data and strategies we use to estimate the effects of enterprise zones meet

many of the challenges that arise in the literature on enterprise zone evaluation. As it turns out, though,

our findings are consistent with much of the literature, in particular with more the recent and what we

regard as the more compelling studies. We already noted that many studies conclude that enterprise zones

are ineffective at creating jobs, consistent with our conclusions. If we use the confidence intervals for our

estimates to ask whether our approach “rules out” estimated magnitudes in the existing literature, again

we find broad consistency, although the results for other states or federal programs may vary because of

differences in incentives or other interventions. For example, the specification in Panel A of Table 6,

column (3), yields an estimate of a 1.2 percent reduction in employment, with the 95-percent confidence

interval ranging from an effect of −8.1 percent to 5.7 percent; the 95-percent confidence interval for the

effect on the annual growth rate (Panel C) is −2.2 percent to 4.0 percent. Busso and Kline (2007, Table

10) report effects on the employment rate in a five-year interval, from their preferred specification,

implying an annual growth rate that is higher by 0.6 percent, within this confidence interval. O’Keefe


57 Landers (2006) suggests that this capitalization occurs to some extent in industrial and commercial property
values, with the magnitude of the effect depending on other factors such as the supply elasticity of land.

                                                         32
(2004) estimates that enterprise zone designation boosts employment growth by 3 percent per year for the

first six years of enterprise zone designation – an estimate that is also within our confidence interval; on

the other hand, she finds that this effect does not persist after six years, with the results pointing to

negative but insignificant effects in years eight through 13. Elvery (2009) finds insignificant negative

employment effects; for California his estimates for men and women combined are in the −0.1 to −0.6

range, quite consistent with ours. Ham et al. (2009) also find no effect of California’ enterprise zones on

employment (p. 17) – a trivially small and insignificant positive effect of 31 additional employees

attributable to designation (they do not report the means with which to calculate the implied percentage

increase). 58 The results in Billings (2007) are not easily translatable, but if we use his estimates for

existing establishments (Table 3, row 1) they suggest effects on the level of employment of approximately

1.3 to 2.1 percent, 59 which are within our confidence interval. Moreover, even researchers who find some

positive and significant point estimates of the effects of state programs tend to downplay the strength of

the results. As already noted, O’Keefe (2004) points out that the positive job creation effects do not last;

and Billings (2007) concludes that his results “weakly support the idea that … job creation tax credits

positively influence … job creation” (p. 25).

       We cannot necessarily generalize conclusions regarding the absence of job creation effects of

California’s enterprise zone program to state enterprise programs elsewhere, because programs are not the

same everywhere, although they often have a similar set of incentives. 60 The generalization is probably

least valid with respect to the federal programs, which also entail other interventions including large block

grants aimed at poverty reduction, as well as loans for improvements in local infrastructure, and for which

the existing evidence seems to point more strongly to beneficial effects (Busso and Kline, 2007). 61


58 Other results in this study are curious. First, the only state in which enterprise zones have detectable employment
effects is Ohio, although in that state the hiring credit is trivial. Second, for California, despite finding no
employment effects, the study finds significant and positive effects on the fraction of households with wage and
salary income. Conversely, in Ohio, despite the apparent strong employment effects, the study finds no effect on this
fraction.
59 We use the sample means for all establishments from his Table 1, for the corresponding columns.
60 See, e.g., National Conference of State Legislatures (2005).
61 Ham et al. (2009) also find positive employment effects of federal zones.


                                                         33
Indeed, if the beneficial effects of federal programs hold up in further research, then the contrast with

apparently ineffective state programs raises two questions. First, do these other interventions included in

the federal programs account for the apparent differences in the effects of federal versus state programs,

suggesting that states seeking to improve the effectiveness of their programs should incorporate these

elements of federal programs? And second, aside from these other interventions, are the federal tax

incentives that parallel those offered by state enterprise programs ineffective, or do they perhaps interact

to enhance the effects of the federal block grants and infrastructure loans?




                                                     34
Appendix A: Geocoding the NETS

       Although the NETS contains the street address of each business establishment, we needed to

geocode the exact locations of these establishments to be able to use our GIS maps of enterprise zones

(and other targeted areas) to identify whether establishments are inside or outside the zones. 62

“Geocoding” is the conversion of street addresses or other designators to latitude-longitude coordinates,

which is common language that allows geographic information from different sources to be combined.

       We geocoded using the U.S. StreetMap Premium data, published by TeleAtlas. We matched NETS

addresses with the street map using street names, street numbers, and zip codes, in ArcGIS. We

performed this matching process at a high “spelling sensitivity” option of 80 and at a low option of 40. 63

For each round of matching, this process returns a “match score” for each address on a 0-100 scale,

reflecting the likelihood that the NETS address matched its correct analog in the street map file. With a

high spelling sensitivity, more addresses fail to have a reasonable match (a match score above 60), but

more have a very high match score. Thus, we used both rounds of matching; we chose the result with the

higher match score and treated match scores below 60 as failed matches that we exclude from subsequent

analysis. With these procedures and a few other refinements that added a modest number of matches, of

21 million establishment-year observations, 95.3% were successfully geocoded. 64 Among these, 96% had

a match score of 80 or higher. Establishments were less likely to be geocoded if they had over 1,000

employees, and were in agriculture, utilities, or public administration, or located in rural counties.

62 Latitude and longitude information provided in the NETS is not sufficiently precise to identify side of street. In
addition, the NETS reports these only for the last observation on each establishment, and often uses the centroid of
the zip code rather than to the exact street address. Thus, we entirely redid the geocoding.
63 The spelling sensitivity controls how much variation in spelling the software allows when it searches for likely
match candidates; the higher the value, the more restricted the number of candidates.
64 We pursued a number of refinements. First, because some establishments have non-standard addresses, like retail
centers or landmark names (rather than street addresses), we did a second round of geocoding with an address
locator consisting of these named features instead of street names. We were able to geocode (or improve the match
for) an additional 2,000 or so establishments this way. Second, we examined cases where establishments were not
successfully geocoded for up to a maximum of four consecutive years but were successfully geocoded to the same
address (i.e., they had not relocated) both before and after the year(s) they were not geocoded. We replaced the
ungeocoded establishment-years with the latitude and longitude from the successfully geocoded years, on the
assumption that the ungeocoded years were due to errors or misspellings rather than establishments moving from an
identifiable location to an ungeocodable location and then back to the same identifiable location. This “filling-in”
process geocoded an additional 15,000 or so observations. Finally, we manually geocoded a few hundred
observations, primarily establishments in airports and military bases.

                                                         35
                                              References

Assembly Jobs, Economic Development, and the Economy Committee, “20 Years of California
Enterprise Zones: A Review and Prospectus,” Sacramento, California, April 12, 2006.
Billings, Stephen, ”Do Enterprise Zones Work? An Analysis at the Borders,” Public Finance Review,
Vol. 37, No. 1, 2009, pp. 68-93.
Boarnet, Marlon, “Enterprise Zones and Job Creation: Linking Evaluation and Practice,” Economic
Development Quarterly, Vol. 15, No. 3, 2001, pp. 242-254.
Boarnet, Marlon G., and William T. Bogart, “Enterprise Zones and Employment: Evidence from New
Jersey,” Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 40, No. 2, 1996, pp. 198-215.
Bondonio, Daniele, and John Engberg, “Enterprise Zones and Local Employment: Evidence from the
States’ Programs,” Regional Science & Urban Economics, Vol. 30, No. 5, 2000, pp. 519-549.
Bondonio, Daniele, and Robert T. Greenbaum, “Do Local Tax Incentives Affect Economic Growth?
What Mean Impacts Miss in the Analysis of Enterprise Zone Policies,” Regional Science & Urban
Economics, Vol. 37, No. 1, 2007, pp. 121-36.
Bostic, Raphael, and Allen Prohofsky, “Enterprise Zones and Individual Welfare: A Case Study of
California,” Journal of Regional Science, Vol. 46, No. 2, 2006, pp. 175-203.
Burkhauser, Richard V., and Kosali I. Simon, “Who Gets What from Employment Pay or Play
Mandates?” Risk Management and Insurance Review, Vol. 11, No. 1, 2008, pp. 75-102.
Busso, Matias, and Patrick Kline, “Do Local Economic Development Programs Work? Evidence From
the Federal Empowerment Zone Program,” unpublished manuscript, 2007.
California Budget Project, California’s Enterprise Zones Miss the Mark, Sacramento, California, April
2006.
California Franchise Tax Board, Annual Report 2006,
http://www.ftb.ca.gov/aboutftb/annrpt/2006/2006AR.pdf, viewed August 26, 2008.
California Redevelopment Association, “What Can Redevelopment Do?,”
http://www.calredevelop.org/AM/Template.cfm?Section=Home&TEMPLATE=/CM/ContentDisplay.cfm
&CONTENTID=1705, viewed August 26, 2008.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, “Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
Inference with Clustered Errors,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 90, No. 3, 2008, pp. 414-27.
Dabney, Dan Y., “Do Enterprise Zone Incentives Affect Business Location Decisions?” Economic
Development Quarterly, Vol. 5, No. 4, 1991, pp. 325-334.
Dardia, Michael, Subsidizing Redevelopment in California, San Francisco, Public Policy Institute of
California, 1998.
Dowall, David E., “An Evaluation of California’s Enterprise Zone Programs,” Economic Development
Quarterly, Vol. 10, No. 4, 1996, pp. 352-368.
Elvery, Joel, “The Impact of Enterprise Zones on Residential Employment: An Evaluation of the
Enterprise Zone Programs of California and Florida,” Economic Development Quarterly, Vol. 23, No. 1,
2009, pp. 44-59.
Engberg, John B., and Robert T. Greenbaum, “State Enterprise Zones and Local Housing Markets,”
Journal of Housing Research, Vol. 10, No. 2, 1999, pp. 163-87.
Greenbaum, Robert, and John Engberg, “The Impact of State Enterprise Zones on Urban Manufacturing
Establishments,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2004, pp. 315-339.
Ham, John C., Ayse Imrohoroglu, and Charles Swenson, “Government Programs Can Improve Local
Labor Markets: Evidence from State Enterprise Zones, Federal Empowerment Zones and Federal
Enterprise Communities,” unpublished paper, 2009.
Hanson, Andrew, “Local Employment, Poverty, and Property Value Effects of Geographically-Targeted
Tax Incentives: An Instrumental Variables Approach,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2009, in
press.
Hebert, Scott, Avis Vidal, Greg Mills, Franklin James, and Debbie Gruenstein, “Interim Assessment of
the Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities (EZ/EC) Program: A Progress Report.” Office of
Policy Development and Research, 2001, http://www.huduser.org/Publications/pdf/ezec_report.pdf,
viewed August 28, 2008.
Juhn, Chinhui, “Decline of Male Labor Market Participation: The Role of Declining Market
Opportunities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 107, No. 1, 1992, pp. 79-121.
Kolko, Jed, and David Neumark, “Do Some Enterprise Zones Create Jobs?” Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management, Vol. 29, No. 1, 2010, pp. 5-38.
Landers, Jim, “Why Don’t Enterprise Zones Work? Estimates of the Extent that EZ Benefits are
Capitalized into Property Values,” The Journal of Regional Analysis & Policy, Vol. 36, No. 1, 2006, pp.
15-30.
Lynch, Devon, and Jeffrey S. Zax, “Incidence and Substitution in Enterprise Zone Programs,”
unpublished manuscript, 2008.
National Conference of State Legislatures, “Enterprise Zones: Development for Distressed
Communities,” Legisbrief, Vol. 13, No. 38, 2005.
Neumark, David, and Jed Kolko, “Do Enterprise Zones Create Jobs? Evidence from California’s
Enterprise Zone Program,” NBER Working Paper No. 14530, 2008.
Neumark, David, Brandon Wall, and Junfu Zhang, “Do Small Businesses Create More Jobs? New
Evidence for the United States from the National Establishment Time Series.” IZA Discussion Paper No.
3888, 2008.
Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 2008. Minimum Wages. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Neumark, David, Junfu Zhang, and Brandon Wall, “Employment Dynamics and Business Relocation:
New Evidence from the National Establishment Time Series,” Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 26,
2007, pp. 39-84.
O’Keefe, Suzanne, “Job Creation in California’s Enterprise Zones: A Comparison Using a Propensity
Score Matching Model,” Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 55, No. 1, 2004, pp. 131-150.
Papke, Leslie E., “Tax Policy and Urban Development: Evidence from the Indiana Enterprise Zone
Program,” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 54, No. 1, 1994, pp. 37-49.
Papke, Leslie E., “What Do We Know About Enterprise Zones?” Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 7,
1993, pp. 37-72.
Peters, Alan H., and Peter S. Fisher, State Enterprise Zone Programs: Have They Worked?, W.E. Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, Michigan, 2002.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, “Tax Incentives Guide for Businesses in the
Renewal Communities, Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities,” Washington, D.C., 2003.
U.S. General Accounting Office, “Community Development: Federal Revitalization Programs are Being
Implemented, but Data on Use of Tax Benefits are Limited,” Washington, D.C., 2004,
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04306.pdf, viewed October 1, 2008.
Wilder, Margaret, and Barry Rubin, “Rhetoric Versus Reality: A Review of Studies on State Enterprise
Zone Programs,” Journal of the American Planning Association, Vol. 62, No. 4, 1996, pp. 472-492.
Figure 1: Enterprise Zone Streets for San Diego (Barrio Logan), by Year
     (1987 designation in grey; 1991 and 1998 expansions in black)
Figure 2: Santa Ana Redevelopment Areas (grey regions), Federal Zones (thick black outline), and
                    State Enterprise Zone Streets (thin grey lines) as of 2004
Figure 3: Santa Ana Enterprise Zone, Initial 1993 Designation (thick black lines), 1994 Expansion
                 (light grey lines), and Control Ring (dark grey outer envelope)
    Figure 4: Estimates of Effects of Enterprise Zone Designation on (Log) Level of Employment with Long
                                                     Leads and Lagsa

                                                     A. With Control Ring




                                                   B. Without Control Ring




a
 Estimates are of equation (1), with five leads and eight lags of enterprise zone dummy variable added. The estimated lead
effects are displayed to the left of zero – i.e., prior to enterprise zone designation at time zero – and the estimated lagged
effects to the right. The diamonds plot the point estimates, and the bars plot the 95% confidence intervals based on
clustered standard errors.
                   Table 1: Current California Enterprise Zones and Year of Designationa

                                                                      Number of           Enterprise zones
    Enterprise zones included in the                                 expansions in       not included in the       Year of
                  study                   Year of designation          the zone                 study            designation
    Altadena/Pasadena                            1992                      1            Agua Mansa                  1986
    Bakersfield                                  1986                      3            Antelope Valley             1997
    Coachella Valley                             1992                      2            Calexico                    1986
    Delano                                       1991                      1            Fresno                      1986
    Eureka                                       1986                      1            Kings County                1993
    Lindsay                                      1997                      0            Pittsburg                   1988
    Long Beach                                   1992                      1            Stockton                    1993
    Los Angeles                                    ...                    14            Watsonville                 1997
    Los Angeles, Central City                    1986                                   Barstow                     2005
    Los Angeles, East Side                       1988                                   Imperial Valley             2005
    Los Angeles, Harbor Area                     1989                                   Stanislaus                  2005
    Los Angeles, Mid-Alameda
    Corridor                                       1986
    Los Angeles, Northeast Valley                  1986
    Madera                                         1989                     0
    Merced                                         1991                     1
    Oakland                                        1993                     1
    Oroville                                       1991                     1
    Porterville                                    1985                     0
    Richmond                                       1992                     1
    Sacramento, Florin Perkins and
    Army Depot                                     1989                     2
    Sacramento, Northgate / Norwood                1989                     2
    San Diego, Barrio Logan                        1987                     2
    San Diego, Ysidro/Otay Mesa                    1991                     3
    San Francisco                                  1992                     4
    San Jose                                       1986                     1
    Santa Ana                                      1993                     1
    Shafter                                        1995                     0
    Shasta Metro                                   1991                     2
    Shasta Valley                                  1993                     0
    West Sacramento                                1988                     0
    Yuba/Sutter                                    1986                     4
a
 The five Los Angeles zones are treated as one large zone for the analysis. In some cases the sources listed below provided
different start dates. In the cases of such discrepancies, we checked with zone administrators to verify the start date. For
Coachella, because the zone started in late 1991 (November 10), we use 1992 as the first year.
Sources: http://www.caez.org/Programs/Map_of_CA_Zones.html (viewed September 19, 2008); street address changes taken
from street files, found at http://www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/cdbg/ez/enterprise (viewed November 1, 2006); Assembly Jobs, Economic
Development, and the Economy Committee (2006).
                               Table 2: Federal Designated Communities in Californiaa

    Date of       Date of                                                                     Overlapping state
    designation   expiration      Program                                                     enterprise zone
    12/21/1994    12/31/2009      Round I Urban Enterprise Communities (65)
                                  Los Angeles                                                 Los Angeles
                                  Oakland                                                     Oakland
                                  San Diego                                                   San Diego, Barrio Logan
                                  San Francisco                                               San Francisco
    12/21/1994    12/31/2009      Round I Supplemental Empowerment Zones (2)
                                  Los Angeles                                                 Los Angeles
    12/21/1994    12/31/2009      Round I Enhanced Enterprise Communities (4)
                                  Oakland                                                     Oakland
    12/21/1994    12/31/2004      Round I Rural Enterprise Communities (30)
                                  City of Watsonville                                         Watsonville
                                  Imperial County                                             Calexico
    12/31/1998    12/31/2009      Round II Urban Empowerment Zones (15)
                                  Santa Ana                                                   Santa Ana
    12/24/1998    12/31/2009      Round II Rural Empowerment Zones (5)
                                  Desert Communities                                          Coachela Valley
    12/24/1998    12/24/2009      Round II Rural Enterprise Communities (20)
                                  Huron-Tule                                                  Fresno
    1/1/2002      12/31/2009      Round III Urban Empowerment Zones (8)
                                  Fresno                                                      Fresno
    1/1/2002      12/31/2009      Urban Renewal Communities (28)
                                  Orange Cove                                                 Fresno
                                  Parlier                                                     Fresno
a
 The shaded regions correspond to federal zones that overlap the state enterprise zones included in our study. Although some
zones changed status during the sample period, we treat the different federal zones as homogeneous, assigning to each zone
the starting year for the first year they were designated federally. Los Angeles has both a Renewal Community and an
Empowerment Zone. For our analysis we have appended these two together. The numbers in parentheses in the third column
are the total number of federal zones designated in each round in the entire country. The Huron-Tule, Los Angeles, San Diego,
and San Francisco Enterprise Communities became Renewal Communities in 2002.
Source: U.S. General Accounting Office (2004).
                   Table 3: Descriptive Information on Zone Employment, 2004a

                                         Employment                          Col. 1 share      Col. 1 share
                                         in enterprise Employment             of county          of state
                                             zone       in county            employment        employment
                                              (1)           (2)                   (3)               (4)
    Los Angeles                               274,434     4,677,221                5.9              1.7
    San Francisco                             215,329       600,488              35.9               1.3
    Santa Ana                                 175,018     1,733,164              10.1               1.1
    Oakland                                   163,181       775,214              21.0               1.0
    Long Beach                                121,754     4,677,221                2.6              0.7
    San Jose                                    98,162      984,246              10.0               0.6
    Sacramento, Florin Perkins and
    Army Depot                                  40,832           624,638            6.5              0.2
    Shasta Metro                                40,178            76,069           52.8              0.2
    Altadena/Pasadena                           33,956         4,677,221            0.7              0.2
    San Diego, Barrio Logan                     28,624         1,440,987            2.0              0.2
    West Sacramento                             24,779            85,538           29.0              0.2
    San Diego, Ysidro/Otay Mesa                 24,196         1,440,987            1.7              0.1
    Yuba/Sutter                                 21,853            47,581           45.9              0.1
    Richmond                                    20,567           389,983            5.3              0.1
    Eureka                                      18,065            50,442           35.8              0.1
    Sacramento, Northgate/Norwood               15,279           624,638            2.4              0.1
    Coachella Valley                            11,050           586,101            1.9              0.1
    Madera                                       9,765            38,635           25.3              0.1
    Oroville                                     8,954            81,353           11.0              0.1
    Bakersfield                                  8,829           242,303            3.6              0.1
    Delano                                       6,212           242,303            2.6              0.0
    Shasta Valley                                5,818            18,777           31.0              0.0
    Shafter                                      3,695           242,303            1.5              0.0
    Lindsay                                      2,758           123,101            2.2              0.0
    Porterville                                  2,633           123,101            2.1              0.0
    Merced                                         641            68,050            0.9              0.0
    Employment in all zones                  1,376,562                                               8.4
    Employment in control rings                579,845                                               3.5
    Employment in all counties
                                            12,643,891
    with zones in our sample
    Employment in all counties
                                            14,186,945
    with enterprise zones
    Statewide employment                    16,441,979
a
 Figures are reported for the complete area of each zone as of 2004. In cases where a zone is mainly in one
county but also extends into another county, in this table the zone is assigned to the county in which most of
the zone is located. Note that some numbers repeat in column (2). This occurs when there are multiple zones
in the same county.
                       Table 4: Descriptive Statistics for Enterprise Zones and Control Ring, 1992

                              Whole sample          Areas ever          Areas included        Areas included
                               (zones plus          included in          in the original          in EZ              1,000-foot
                              control rings)           EZ's             EZ designations        expansions           control ring

    Employment (total)           1,953,220            1,349,629              976,119              373,510             603,591



    Establishments (total)        140,969              96,752                71,006                25,746             44,217


    Employees per square
                                      9,974            11,531                10,778                13,500              8,124
    mile

    Employees per
    establishment                     14.6               14.7                 14.2                   16.2              14.3
    (weighted mean)
    Share of employees in
    low-wage industries               11.6               11.8                 11.6                   12.4              10.9
    (weighted mean)
    Share of employees in
    manufacturing                      8.0               8.6                   7.8                   10.8               6.7
    (weighted mean)

        Table 5: Descriptive Statistics on Employment and Establishment Growth, Within-Zone Comparisonsa

                                                        Unweighted small        Unweighted large            Weighted by levels
                                 Unweighted                 subzones               subzones                      in 1992
                              Empl.   Estab.’s          Empl.    Estab.’s       Empl.    Estab.’s           Empl.      Estab.’s
                               (1)      (2)               (3)       (4)          (5)        (6)              (7)          (8)
    Enterprise subzones
    after zone designation
    Average annual percent
    change, year of
    designation through
    2004                        2.3           1.8         4.4          1.6           0.2       2.1            0.3         2.1
    Enterprise subzones
    prior to zone
    designation
    Average annual percent
    change, 1992 through
    year of designation        -0.6           1.4         -3.3         0.7           2.2       2.2            0.8         1.8
a
 There is one observation for each year for each subzone. Only areas ever included in enterprise zones in the sample period are
included in this table. In columns (3)-(6), “small” and “large” refer to below or above median employment (or number of
establishments) in 1992. In columns (7) and (8) annual percentage changes are weighted using employment level (column (7)) or
number of establishments (column (8)) in 1992.
                              Table 6: Regression Estimates of Effects of Enterprise Zonesa

                                                    Including control rings                       No control rings
                                                  Employment Establishments                 Employment Establishments
                                                     (1)              (2)                      (3)              (4)
    A. Shift in level
    Enterprise zone                                    -0.017              -0.022               -0.012               -0.042
                                                      (0.047)             (0.024)              (0.035)              (0.021)*
    B. Model A, subzone-specific linear
    trends
    Enterprise zone                                    0.012              0.029 †               0.018                 0.015
                                                      (0.051)             (0.022)              (0.077)               (0.020)
    N (panels A-B)                                     1,300               1,300                 962                   962
    C. Shift in growth rate
    Enterprise zone                                    0.004               -0.002               0.009                 0.004
                                                      (0.009)             (0.002)              (0.016)               (0.005)
    D. Model C, subzone-specific linear
    trends
    Enterprise zone                                    0.009             -0.006 †††             0.007               -0.008††
                                                      (0.031)             (0.004)              (0.039)              (0.005)
    E. Shift in growth rate and level
    Enterprise zone (growth rate)                      0.004               -0.002               0.009                 0.004
                                                      (0.008)             (0.002)              (0.014)              (0.005)
    Enterprise zone (level)                            -0.008              -0.005              -0.004                -0.008
                                                      (0.022)             (0.003)*             (0.038)              (0.004)*
    F. Model E, subzone-specific linear
    trends
    Enterprise zone (growth rate)                      0.010              -0.006††              0.008                -0.008
                                                      (0.029)             (0.004)              (0.035)               (0.006)
    Enterprise zone (level)                           -0.009               -0.002              -0.006                0.0004
                                                      (0.025)             (0.003)              (0.041)               (0.004)
    N (panels C-F)                                     1,200                1,200                888                   888
a
  Each column and panel reports estimates of the enterprise zone effects from a separate regression. The differences in the
specification are explained in the panel headings. The dependent variables are in logs, substituting ones for zeros in levels
prior to taking logs. The other control variables included are explained in the text; Panels A, B, and C report estimates of
equations (1), (2), and (3), respectively. There are 26 zones, with the total number of initial zone designations and expansions
adding to 74. Thus, because we have 13 years of data, when we do the analysis without control rings, and in levels (Panels A
and B), we have 962 observations (74 × 13). When we include a control ring for each zone, we have 1,300 observations ({74 +
26} × 13). We lose one observation on each subzone in Panels C-F, because we have to compute growth rates. Standard
cluster-robust standard errors (clustering on enterprise zones) are in parentheses; ***, ** and * indicate that the estimated
coefficient is significant at the 1-, 5- or 10-percent level based on these standard errors. Cluster-robust wild bootstrapped
confidence intervals for the t-statistic were also computed for the enterprise zone treatment variables, based on 1,000
replications; †††, †† and † indicate that the estimated coefficient is significant at the 1-, 5- or 10-percent level based on the 99-
, 95-, and 90-percent confidence intervals, respectively. All estimates are weighted by 1992 employment levels (columns (1)
and (3)) or number of establishments (columns (2) and (4)) in each subzone.
Table 7: Employment in Enterprise Zones, Redevelopment Areas and Federal Designated Zones,
                                           2004a
                                                              % of enterprise         % of enterprise
                                                             zone employment               zone
                                                             in redevelopment         employment in
                                                                   areas               federal zones
         Altadena/Pasadena                                          11.6                     ...
         Bakersfield                                                60.2                     ...
         Coachella Valley                                           79.6                   18.4
         Delano                                                     70.4                     ...
         Eureka                                                     58.1                     ...
         Lindsay                                                      ...                    ...
         Long Beach                                                 63.4                     ...
         Los Angeles                                                44.8                   30.5
         Madera                                                     70.4                     ...
         Merced                                                     28.5                     ...
         Oakland                                                    82.8                     ...
         Oroville                                                   88.4                     ...
         Porterville                                                37.1                     ...
         Richmond                                                   55.5                     ...
         Sacramento, Florin Perkins and Army Depot                  34.1                     ...
         Sacramento, Northgate/Norwood                              13.8                     ...
         San Diego, Barrio Logan                                    52.1                   74.9
         San Diego, Ysidro/Otay Mesa                                17.0                     ...
         San Francisco                                              15.3                   25.5
         San Jose                                                   59.5                     ...
         Santa Ana                                                  68.1                   17.6
         Shafter                                                    88.3                     ...
         Shasta Metro                                               67.5                     ...
         Shasta Valley                                                ...                    ...
         West Sacramento                                            92.5                     ...
         Yuba/Sutter                                                93.3                     ...
     a
      It is possible for a redevelopment area or federal zone to overlap only with an enterprise zone’s
     control ring, in which case none of the enterprise zone’s employment would be in the
     redevelopment area or federal zone.
           Table 8: Regression Estimates of Enterprise Zones Accounting for Redevelopment Areas or
                                    Federal Zones, Including Control Ringsa
                                                    Redevelopment areas                               Federal zones
                                                 Employment Establishments                 Employment          Establishments
                                                    (1)            (2)                        (3)                    (4)
    A. Shift in level
    Enterprise zone                                   -0.001               -0.015              -0.015                -0.018
                                                     (0.034)              (0.019)             (0.032)               (0.023)
    Redevelopment area/federal zone                  -0.027               -0.0004             -0.051                  0.013
                                                     (0.039)              (0.022)             (0.052)               (0.014)
    Enterprise zone × redevelopment                   -0.050               -0.020              -0.005                -0.030
      area/federal zone                              (0.053)              (0.021)             (0.101)               (0.021)
    Effect of enterprise zone in                     -0.051                -0.035             -0.020                 -0.048
      redevelopment area/federal zone                (0.076)              (0.031)             (0.118)              (0.020)**
    N                                                 4,667                 4,667              1,664                 1,664
    B. Shift in growth rate
    Enterprise zone                                   0.003                -0.001              -0.001                -0.003
                                                     (0.011)              (0.001)             (0.005)               (0.002)
    Redevelopment area/federal zone                  -0.001               -0.002               -0.018                -0.003
                                                     (0.010)              (0.004)             (0.010)*              (0.002)
    Enterprise zone × redevelopment                   0.001                -0.003               0.018                 0.002
      area/federal zone                              (0.013)              (0.004)              (0.014)              (0.004)
    Effect of enterprise zone in                      0.004                -0.004               0.017                -0.001
      redevelopment area/federal zone                (0.004)              (0.004)             (0.018)               (0.004)
    N                                                 4,308                4,308                1,536                1,536
a
 Each column and panel reports estimates of the enterprise zone effects from a separate regression. See notes to Table 6 for
additional details. The fourth row (labeled “Effect of enterprise zone in redevelopment area/federal zone”) reports the
estimated sum of the coefficients in the first and third rows of each panel. When we expand the analysis to account for
redevelopment areas, we have a total of 255 distinct enterprise zone-redevelopment area designations or expansions, and 78
designations or expansions of redevelopment areas in the enterprise zone control rings. Thus, we have 4,667 observations
({255 + 26 + 78} × 13) when the enterprise zone control rings are included. When we expand the analysis to account for
federal zones, we have a total of 96 distinct enterprise zone-federal zone designations or expansions, and 6 designations or
expansions in control rings, for a total of 1,664 observations ({96 + 26 + 6} × 13) when the control rings are included. We lose
one observation on each subzone in Panel B, because we have to compute growth rates. Standard cluster-robust standard errors
(clustering on enterprise zones) are in parentheses; ***, ** and * indicate that the estimated coefficient is significant at the 1-,
5- or 10-percent level based on these standard errors. Cluster-robust wild bootstrapped confidence intervals for the t-statistic
were also computed for the enterprise zone variables, based on 1,000 replications; †††, †† and † indicate that the estimated
coefficient is significant at the 1-, 5- or 10-percent level based on the 99-, 95-, and 90-percent confidence intervals,
respectively. All estimates are weighted by 1992 employment levels (columns (1) and (3)) or number of establishments
(columns (2) and (4)) in each subzone.
Table 9: Regression Estimates of Effects of Enterprise Zones on Share of Employment in Low-Wage
                                 Industries and in Manufacturinga
                                               Low-wage industries                         Manufacturing
                                            Including      No control                Including      No control
                                           control rings     rings                  control rings     rings
                                                (1)           (2)                        (3)           (4)
     A. Shift in level
     Enterprise zone                            0.005               0.001               0.002               0.001
                                               (0.014)             (0.018)             (0.010)             (0.011)
     B. Model A, subzone-specific
     linear trends
     Enterprise zone                            0.007               -0.001              0.009               0.012
                                               (0.011)             (0.014)             (0.007)             (0.008)
     N (panels A-B)                             1,300               1,300                962                 962
     C. Shift in growth rate
     Enterprise zone                            -0.001              -0.001             0.0003               0.005
                                               (0.001)             (0.004)             (0.001)            (0.002)**
     D. Model C, subzone-specific
     linear trends
     Enterprise zone                            -0.003              -0.002              0.003               0.008
                                               (0.005)             (0.007)             (0.003)           (0.003)**, ††
     E. Shift in growth rate and
     level
     Enterprise zone (growth rate)              -0.001              -0.001             0.0003               0.005
                                               (0.001)             (0.004)             (0.001)            (0.002)**
     Enterprise zone (level)                    -0.004              -0.009             -0.001              -0.002
                                               (0.003)           (0.002)***, †         (0.005)             (0.005)
     F. Model E, subzone-specific
     linear trends
     Enterprise zone (growth rate)              -0.002             -0.0002              0.003               0.008
                                               (0.004)             (0.007)             (0.003)          (0.003)**, †††
     Enterprise zone (level)                    -0.004              -0.008              0.001              -0.001
                                               (0.003)           (0.003)***, ††        (0.005)            (0.005)
     N (panels C-F)                              1,200               888                1,200                888
 a
  Each column and panel reports estimates of the enterprise zone effects from a separate regression. See notes to Table
 6 for additional details. The dependent variables are the shares of employment in low-wage industries or
 manufacturing. Standard cluster-robust standard errors (clustering on enterprise zones) are in parentheses; ***, **
 and * indicate that the estimated coefficient is significant at the 1-, 5- or 10-percent level based on these standard
 errors. Cluster-robust wild bootstrapped confidence intervals for the t-statistic were also computed for the enterprise
 zone variables, based on 1,000 replications; †††, †† and † indicate that the estimated coefficient is significant at the
 1-, 5- or 10-percent level based on the 99-, 95-, and 90-percent confidence intervals, respectively. All estimates are
 weighted by 1992 employment levels (columns (1) and (3)) or number of establishments (columns (2) and (4)) in
 each subzone.
                                       Table 10: Regression Estimates of Effects of Enterprise Zones, Sensitivity Analysisa

                                                    Including control rings            No control rings                Including control rings            No control rings
                                                      Empl.         Estab.’s         Empl.         Estab.’s             Empl.          Estab.’s          Empl.         Estab.’s
                                                        (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)                (5)              (6)              (7)           (8)
                                                                    Model A from Table 6                                            Model C from Table 6
                                                         Estimated coefficient of enterprise zone (level)             Estimated coefficient of enterprise zone (growth rate)
1. Baseline (Table 6)                                 -0.017         -0.022          -0.012          -0.042              0.004           -0.002            0.009         0.004
                                                     (0.047)        (0.024)         (0.035)        (0.021)*             (0.009)         (0.002)          (0.016)       (0.005)
2. 2,500-foot control ring                            -0.022         -0.027          -0.012          -0.042              0.003           -0.004            0.009         0.004
                                                     (0.034)        (0.018)         (0.035)        (0.021)*             (0.006)      (0.002)  **, †††
                                                                                                                                                         (0.016)       (0.005)
3. 1,000-foot control ring, include                   -0.011         -0.022          -0.003          -0.043              0.005           -0.002            0.009         0.004
   questionable streets                              (0.050)        (0.024)         (0.040)        (0.021)*             (0.009)         (0.002)          (0.016)       (0.005)
4. 1,000-foot control ring, excluding 100-             0.010         -0.024           0.008          -0.061              0.006           -0.003           -0.001        0.005
   foot buffer on either side of boundary            (0.035)        (0.030)         (0.041)         (0.040)             (0.009)         (0.002)          (0.016)       (0.009)
5. No weighting                                       -0.033         -0.048          -0.047          -0.038              0.014           -0.010            0.050        -0.001
                                                     (0.067)        (0.056)         (0.073)         (0.066)            (0.009)†         (0.007)         (0.030)††      (0.019)
6. Weighting inversely by number of                   -0.008         -0.027          -0.017          -0.011              0.014           -0.011            0.062         0.001
                                                                                                                               †              **, †††           *, †††
   sub-zones                                         (0.078)        (0.064)         (0.098)         (0.080)            (0.009)       (0.005)          (0.031)          (0.019)
7. Estimates dropping LA                               0.046         -0.002           0.033          -0.028              0.012           -0.004            0.033        -0.001
                                                    (0.018)**,†     (0.032)         (0.040)         (0.044)            (0.006)*         (0.003)        (0.018)*,††     (0.010)
8. Estimates dropping LARZ                            -0.015         -0.019          -0.009          -0.039              0.005           -0.001            0.008        0.003
                                                     (0.047)        (0.023)         (0.034)        (0.021)*             (0.009)         (0.002)          (0.016)       (0.005)
9. EZ initial designations or expansions              -0.019         -0.025            …               …                 0.002           -0.003             …             …
                                                     (0.054)        (0.027)                                             (0.009)         (0.004)
    EZ initial designations only                      0.018           0.021            …               …                 0.003            0.001             …             …
                                                     (0.085)        (0.045)                                             (0.005)         (0.004)
10. EZ status pre-1997                                -0.026         -0.015          -0.007          -0.042             0.0003            0.004            0.003         0.002
                                                     (0.027)        (0.027)         (0.026)        (0.023)*             (0.008)         (0.003)†         (0.016)       (0.006)
     EZ status 1997 and after                         -0.007         -0.029          -0.035          -0.040              0.006           -0.005            0.021         0.007
                                                     (0.086)        (0.023)         (0.088)       (0.014)***            (0.014)         (0.004)†        (0.017)††      (0.009)
a
 Each column and panel reports estimates of the enterprise zone effects from a separate regression. See notes to Table 6 for additional details. The sample sizes are as in
Table 6, except that in Panel 7 the sample sizes fall to 1,092 and 767 (with and without control rings). The differences in the specification are explained in the panel
headings. Standard cluster-robust standard errors (clustering on enterprise zones) are in parentheses; ***, ** and * indicate that the estimated coefficient is significant at the
1-, 5- or 10-percent level based on these standard errors. Cluster-robust wild bootstrapped confidence intervals for the t-statistic were also computed for the enterprise zone
variables, based on 1,000 replications; †††, †† and † indicate that the estimated coefficient is significant at the 1-, 5- or 10-percent level based on the 99-, 95-, and 90-
percent confidence intervals, respectively. All estimates are weighted by 1992 employment levels (odd-numbered columns) or number of establishments (even-numbered
columns) in each subzone.
