NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HEIGHTS AND HUMAN WELFARE:
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND NEW DIRECTIONS
Richard H. Steckel
Working Paper 14536
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14536

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

The author thanks Joerg Baten, Scott Carson, Dora Costa, Angus Deaton, John Komlos, Tim Leunig,
Marco Sunder, and Joachim Voth for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Richard H. Steckel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Heights and Human Welfare: Recent Developments and New Directions
Richard H. Steckel
NBER Working Paper No. 14536
December 2008, Revised January 2009
JEL No. N00,O1
ABSTRACT
Since 1995 approximately 325 publications on stature have appeared in the social sciences, which
is more than a four-fold increase in the rate of production relative to the period 1977-1994. The expansion
occurred in several areas, but especially within economics, indicating that heights are now widely
accepted as a useful measure of human welfare. Much of this new work extends beyond the traditional
bailiwick of anthropometric history, including biological welfare during economic and political crises;
anthropometric influences on wages; the welfare of women relative to men in the contemporary world;
the fetal origins hypothesis; and inequality in the developing world. The approach has also expanded
within economic history to consider the consequences of empire for colonials; the health of populations
lacking traditional measures of social performance; the consequences of smallpox; and very long-term
trends in health. Much has also been learned about socioeconomic aspects of inequality, the welfare
implications of industrialization, and socioeconomic determinants of stature. The last is a work in
progress and one may doubt whether sufficient longitudinal evidence will become available for a complete
understanding of the variety and strength of pathways that affect human physical growth.

Richard H. Steckel
Department of Economics
Ohio State University
410 Arps Hall, 1945 North High Street
Columbus, OH 43210-1172
and NBER
steckel.1@osu.edu

In the late 1970s researchers began to create the new anthropometric history,
which required interdisciplinary communication and clear applications to a critical mass
of historical problems in which there was an established interest (Steckel 1998). Thirty
years ago most social scientists had little understanding of biological or socioeconomic
influences on human physical growth, and similarly human biologists understood little
economics or history. Influential papers using anthropometric data for an audience of
economic historians drew upon the literature of human biology to explain what average
heights do (and do not) measure and then applied concepts to specific research
questions. The initial findings stimulated further research, and the field has
mushroomed over the past three decades because heights capture important aspects of
human welfare, and abundant historical and contemporary records give wide scope to
research interests.
My previous survey discussed the literature from the late 1970s to 1994 (Steckel
1995b) and here I extend the effort from 1995 to the present while placing the articles of
this special issue in context. The review largely excludes publications catering to
audiences of public health, medicine, epidemiology, and medical anthropology, for
which the literature is enormous but of tangential interest to most readers of this journal.
I include articles from human biology journals if they discuss history but omit most
working papers in all fields because the published work is already extensive. Therefore
it is useful to organize the main body of material under subject headings arranged
alphabetically, much like an encyclopedia.

Research Trends
My 1995 article included 145 references, of which 83 were height studies as
opposed to publications that placed this body of work in context. At a rate of about 5
publications per year from the late 1970s to 1994, the majority of these covered topics
in economic history (53) or economic development (12).1 In contrast, this review cites
326 studies (including 14 books) that interpret or otherwise use heights published from
1995 through 2008, for a rate of 23.3 publications per year. Even for someone
3

reasonably well acquainted with the literature, the large increase in the rate is
surprising. The surge, which only an extensive literature search could reveal, reflects
the proliferation of height research on many topics in numerous subfields of economics
and in other segments of the social sciences. My earlier review found four articles that
analyzed or substantially used heights, for example, in the top four journals in
economics, but since 1995 these journals have published 13 papers, including nine in
the American Economic Review (of which three were in Papers and Proceedings), three
in the Journal of Political Economy and one in the Quarterly Journal of Economics. In
the earlier review there were only four height publications in specialty economics
journals, but here I found 51 articles of this type, in 25 outlets ranging from the
Economic Journal to the Journal of Econometrics, the Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Agricultural Economics, and Economic Development and Cultural
Change.
Our profession’s pattern of specialization may explain the surprise. Most
scholars acquire expertise in particular research areas such as technological change,
inequality, globalization, or the economic performance of a particular country, as
opposed to a technique such as anthropometrics. Because of their versatility, heights
are applied in numerous fields and subfields, which remain largely unfamiliar to most
researchers. Given our research strategies I suspect that few if any researchers are
acquainted, on an ongoing basis, with all the literature that uses or interprets heights in
the social sciences. Once concentrated on slavery, inequality, industrialization and
mortality, now the historical height literature also embraces the effects of colonialism;
the health and well-being of coal miners; the treatment of men versus women; the
consequences of small pox; the health of Native Americans; the health effects of
economic and political crises, and so forth. An enormous expansion of height research
has occurred in the area of economic development, and height data are increasingly
used in studying contemporary economic and social problems. Below I provide brief
research summaries for each of these areas.
With regard to the most popular outlets for height research, the economic history
journals ranked first prior to 1995 (18 articles out of 83, or 21.7% of the total); the
4

interdisciplinary history journals were second (10 articles or 12.0%); and a smattering
found homes in non-blue ribbon general interest economics journals (3) or outlets
catering to economic development (3). Many publications appeared in edited
collections (10) or human biology journals (8). None appeared in journals intended
primarily for demographers and only one for historians employed by history
departments.
In the current review, economic history journals retain their numerical lead with
72 of 326 articles (22.1%) concentrated in the Economic History Review (19), the
Journal of Economic History (18), and Explorations in Economic History (16, including
eight in this special issue), followed by the European Review of Economic History (6)
and Research in Economic History (5). Interdisciplinary history journals contributed 25
papers (7.7%), and other journals written for an audience of economists provided 51
articles (15.7%) of which28 appeared in development outlets. As height research has
become more widely accepted, the relative (but not the absolute number) of
publications has declined in interdisciplinary history journals.
With 65 articles, Economics and Human Biology is the largest single outlet for
height research. First appearing in 2003, one might think this journal alone was the
source of the large upswing in height publications. This is not the case, however. Even
if all its height articles were removed from consideration, and under the unlikely
assumption this research would not have appeared elsewhere, the annual rate of height
publications since 1995 would decline by only 4.6 articles per year (from 23.3 to 18.7),
which is still more than three times the rate from the late 1970s to 1994. Therefore this
new and useful journal reflects a trend, rather than the cause of growing interest in
anthropometric research.
Although many historians read the interdisciplinary history journals, the
mainstream history journals in the United States publish few studies that make
substantial use of heights. One was cited in the 1995 review and here I found only
three, two in the American Historical Review and one in the William and Mary Quarterly,
although it is likely that others not cited here appear in French, German, Spanish or
other language publications. Also puzzling is the absence of height studies published in
5

mainline political science or sociology journals. Given the interest in inequality and
class differences in social performance within these subject areas, one would think the
methodology would appeal to these audiences. There is certainly no lack of modern
surveys that contain height data useful in studying these questions, which suggests that
anthropometric historians should undertake some useful missionary work in these fields.
Similarly, it is perplexing that demographers have made relatively little use of heights, or
at least the mainline journals in the field contain few articles. The 1995 review cites
none from these outlets and here I found only four articles, three in Demography and
one in Population Studies. Because the articles were written with little discussion of the
methodology of height research, one can presume the audiences are at least somewhat
acquainted with the height literature. Apparently, however, few researchers in
demography or history analyze heights as part of their own research programs. One
wonders whether they teach the anthropometric approach in their classes.
Psychologists have made some use of stature, but mostly to consider how
individuals feel about their own height (see discussion and citations in (Hall 2006)). As
the cognitive consequences of early childhood nutritional deprivation have become
more widely understood, psychologists who analyze measures of cognitive achievement
have made increasing use of heights, especially measurements in early childhood (see
for example, the discussion and references in (Heckman 2006)).
Height studies are now more international in character. In the early years of the
field, most of the historical papers featured topics about the United States or Western
Europe, while a sprinkling covered developing countries such as India or the
Philippines. The current review considers 225 height studies that have a clear
geographic focus and among these the United States (21.3%) and Northwest Europe
(30.7%) continue to dominate, but a substantial number of publications also appear for
Southern Europe (6.2%); Eastern Europe and Russia (8.0%); South America (10.2%);
Africa (8.0%); and Asia (11.6%). In this spirit, the special issue reflects the current
global nature of the field, with two papers on England and one each on Argentina,
China, the Middle East, Russia and the United States (Carson 2009; Horrell, Meredith et

6

al. 2009; Humphries and Leunig 2009b; Morgan 2009; Salvatore 2009; Stegl and Baten
2009; Wheatcroft 2009).
The geographic blend of height papers reflects a growing interest and greater
data availability in developing countries. Like the recent past of countries in Southern
Europe or Eastern Europe and Russia, where height studies have proliferated, many
developing countries have weak or unreliable measures of social performance with
which to investigate geographic patterns, chronological trends and policy questions. In
these countries heights are often plentiful from military records or modern surveys.
Moreover, heights are reasonably comparable over time and space, or at least more
reliable and comparable than many traditional social statistics, especially for countries
bedeviled by high rates of inflation, which complicate measures of real income or real
wages, or large informal sectors that are missed by national income accounts. In
addition, many development problems are seen through the lenses of malnutrition, poor
education, high rates of exposure to pathogens, and poor public health services. In
these environments, heights are a sensitive indicator of child health useful for
monitoring policy interventions.
Lastly, since the mid 1990s the popular press and the news media have shown
considerable interest in height studies, including a recent book on ways that stature
affects the health and happiness of boys (Hall 2006). Articles written for an audience of
professionals, but not necessarily specialists in economics, appeared in Challenge;
Indicators: The Journal of Social Health; Historical Statistics of the United States:
Millennial Edition; and The Journal of Economic Perspectives (Steckel 1995a; Steckel
2003a; Steckel 2006; Steckel 2008). The October 16, 1996 issue of TIME magazine
(European and Asian editions) featured a cover story on height research, emphasizing
the importance of stature as a measure of human welfare. The New York Times has
published several pieces: November 5, 2006 (book review); March 1, 2005 (science
section); and October 29, 2002 (science section). Feature stories on height research
appeared in the April 5, 2004 issue of The New Yorker and in the March 31, 2005 issue
of the Canadian publication Macleans. The Spring 2004 issue of the Newsletter of the
Cliometric Society noted that more than two dozen popular press and website articles
7

on height research appeared in the 6 months prior to publication, including those in The
Sidney Morning Herald, BBC News, Le Monde, Suddeutsche Zeitung, and Pressetext
Austria.
There are many ways to organize the material of any substantial literature
review. Because heights are a versatile measure of social performance with
applications to numerous research questions, here I use fifteen broad subjects,
discussed in alphabetical order: (1) colonialism; (2) controversies and disputes; (3)
convergence; (4) crises in social performance; (5) determinants of heights; (6)
development; (7) fetal origins hypothesis; (8) gender; (9) health and economic growth;
(10) industrialization; (11) inequality; (12) living standards; (13) long-term trends; (14)
methods; and (15) wages. Numerous papers overlap with two or more categories,
which I identify where relevant.

Colonialism
One of the new applications of height research concerns the welfare of
populations that lived under colonial rule. Over the past decade papers have appeared
on India, North America, and Burma under the British, and Taiwan under the Japanese
(Brennan, McDonald et al. 1997; Komlos 2001; Olds 2003; Morgan and Liu 2007;
Bassino and Coclanis 2008). Various working papers in this general area are underway
for other countries. The results suggest that colonialism, often maligned as exploitative,
had some positive welfare benefit at least in these countries. Brennan et al. report a
modest increase in the average heights in India under the British, but suggest this might
be attributed to greater engagement in world markets and expansion of the
transportation system. With regard to Taiwan, Olds finds that heights of children
improved under Japanese rule up to 1930, which squares with results of Morgan and
Liu. Unlike Olds, the latter have evidence through 1945, which indicates that heights
after 1930 were static, as they were in Japan. In Burma the picture is more pessimistic;
heights did increase after World War II but this was apparently a recovery from an
earlier height decline induced by land-clearing for rice cultivation in malaria-infested
areas.
8

Komlos assembled evidence on heights from newspaper advertisements on
American-born soldiers who deserted and on run-away apprentices (Komlos 2001),
reporting a 0.5 inch decline in the first half of the eighteenth century followed by a
substantial rise. By the end of the century American men were as much as 6.6
centimeters taller than the English and at age 16 the American apprentices were about
12 centimeters taller than poor children of London. If the British exploited the American
colony, then other factors such as abundant cheap land and low population density
more than compensated.

Controversies
Enduring debates in economic history often involve topics for which there is at
least some traditional evidence on social performance such as Gross Domestic Product,
technological change, wages, wealth, or life expectancy. Consider, for example, the
course of human welfare during industrialization, the relationship between inequality
and economic growth or the contribution of technological change to rising incomes.
Although a few detractors continue to believe that anthropometric history is “not
economics,” heights are advancing toward the status of traditional evidence in
economics. As proof, the most recent papers discussing heights in various economics
journals seldom, or at most briefly, discuss the methodology of height research (see, for
example, (Stillman and Thomas 2008)). Numerous controversies accompany the new
role, and this section includes debates or exchanges among scholars over numerous
subjects involving height research. No doubt the number of publications in this
category, which is already large and here organized under seven subheadings, will
continue to grow over time. Therefore it is useful to reflect on the various debates and
to consider additional research that would advance the field.
Coal mining. Primarily using data gathered by the Children’s Employment
Commission in 1841, Peter Kirby observes that children who worked in English coal
mines tended to be 1 to 3 inches shorter than children who worked in other jobs,
depending upon age and occupation (Kirby 1995). Specifically, he constructs a scatter
9

diagram of height by age, which shows that colliers were systematically smaller than
children who worked on farms. Given that diets seem to have been good and the
children were reasonably robust, he attributes short stature to lack of sunlight, which
caused rickets and bowed long bones, and to genetic selection by fathers into an
occupation where short stature was an advantage for working narrow coal seams.
Humphries challenges his assessment of health as dubious, arguing that the experience
of colliers is not a counter-example to anthropometric history, which takes stature as a
good index of health and human welfare (Humphries 1997). She notes that a
disproportionate number of colliers came from disadvantaged families and that
coalmining was hard work, which drained nutritional intake. Moreover wives of
coalminers usually worked outside the home and were thus unable to breastfeed their
young children, which often resulted in diarrheal diseases arising from contaminated
supplements. In a reply Kirby indicates that he was misunderstood, affirming that
heights are a good measure of human welfare (Kirby 1997). In defense of occupational
selection by height, he notes that short children tended to work in mines with narrow
seams.
As an outsider to this lively exchange over the effects of mining on health, I see
an opportunity to advance the discussion by obtaining evidence on the prevalence of
rickets among colliery children and the effect of rickets on stature. Perhaps much or
most of the height deficit is related to this specific disease, although one might think that
respiratory infections attributable to life in the mines were also relevant for height.
Native Americans. Depictions of Native American life are arguably the most
distorted and contradictory of any large ethnic group in American history. Several
centuries ago, accounts of early explorers and missionaries merged with the primitivistic
tradition of Western civilization to create an image of the noble savage, who inhabited
an ideal landscape and lived in harmony with nature and reason (Berkhofer 1988).
During the westward movement the natives became bad Indians, who then morphed
into entertainers in Wild Bill Cody’s western shows. A few decades later western

10

movies caricatured their habits and by the end of the twentieth century many
intellectuals saw aborigines as victims of Euro-American aggression.
Height data collected by Franz Boas and his assistants near the end of the
century shed light on the health of Plains tribes who occupied a vast swath of land from
northern Texas to southern Canada, an area much larger than most countries. At 172.6
centimeters on average, the men were taller than any national population for which
evidence is available for the mid nineteenth-century (Steckel and Prince 2001; Prince
and Steckel 2003). Komlos argued against the conclusion, reporting that some groups
within the United States, such as rural residents of Georgia born in the 1820s exceeded
the average height of the Plains tribes (Komlos 2003a). While true, Steckel and Prince
qualified their comparison to the average height of countries whose individuals were
born near the middle of the nineteenth century, when most of the people in the Boas
sample were born. The chronological qualification is important because Euro-American
heights declined for cohorts born after 1830. Plausibly the Plains tribes were also taller
prior to 1830, before epidemics and incursion by whites imposed physiological stress.
In addition, if subgroups are the appropriate standard for comparison, at 176.7
centimeters the northern Cheyenne were also taller than any subgroup listed by
Komlos.
In any event, perhaps the most interesting feature of the Plains data is the wide
range of average heights across tribes. Amounting to nearly 9 centimeters, this range
exceeds by nearly 3 centimeters the growth in average height of Euro-Americans from
the early 1700s to the present. Because the tribes had similar technologies and life
ways, presumably ecological conditions and the differential pace of incursion by whites
were relevant for their health. Steckel is now investigating these questions.
Pre-industrial England. In the 1990s the Economic History Review published a
vigorous exchange between Komlos and Grubb on the course of heights in eighteenth
century England. The major issue is whether the country suffered a pre-industrial
Malthusian crisis in the early part of the century, as claimed by Komlos. Grubb
published his last paper on the debate in 1995, and after controlling for geographic
11

variation, using different procedures to assign non-metric heights and ambiguous ages,
reports that no systematic trend existed (Grubb 1999b). Moreover, using additional
height data on ads for runaway servants placed in the Pennsylvania Gazette, he finds
that heights of men (but not women) increased over the eighteenth century (Grubb
1999a).
Was there a pre-industrial decline in stature? The sample size for any such
claim is modest, but Grubb has added new evidence and followed plausible analytical
procedures. Until additional evidence is brought forward in the debate, it is reasonable
to doubt that physical growth in the mid eighteenth century suffered from a Malthusian
encounter. This is an important question on which other scholars are working.
Russia. Papers by Mironov, Hock, Wheatcoft and Komlos debate biological
aspects of living standards in Russia from the late 1800s to the mid-twentieth century, a
country and an era with questionable statistics on traditional measures of social
performance. Mironov opens the discussion by claiming that heights measure important
aspects of health, and using military records, concludes that Russians lagged behind
western Europeans but were taller than people from eastern and southern Europe prior
to World War I (Mironov 1999a). Wheatcroft extends the analysis to the middle of the
twentieth century, noting crises years of 1899-1909, 1913-1918, and 1923-1934 amidst
substantial long-term improvement in human welfare as measured by average height
and by mortality rates (Wheatcroft 1999). Brainerd reports that stature and mortality
rates fluctuated dramatically during the crisis years but showed no overall downward
trend until the late 1960s (Brainerd 2006). Hoch emphasizes limitations of the Russian
height evidence, including shortfall created by minimum height standards in the military,
notes that Mironov and Wheatcroft disagree on the timing and extent of fluctuations,
and chastises them for attempting to date episodes physiological stress using adult
heights, which are influenced by socioeconomic conditions over many years of physical
growth (Hoch 1999). Komlos enters the fray by observing that the Soviet improvement
in health, emphasized by Wheatcroft, was hardly exemplary, with numerous countries
such as Mexico, the Philippines, Spain, Chile and Jamaica achieving more for their
citizens, and that the Soviet record was especially poor after 1960 (Komlos 1999). In a
12

review of all these papers, Mironov focuses on Hoch and especially his skepticism
toward heights as a useful measure of human welfare, while defending the
anthropometric evidence as superior to other sources available (Mironov 1999b). All
participants agree, however, that lack of traditional evidence makes Russia well-suited
to anthropometric research and that gathering and analysis of evidence has only just
begun. In this vein Mironov and A’Hearn recently extended the chronological span of
research on Russian heights back to the middle of the eighteenth century (Mironov and
A'Hearn 2008).
Slavery. The extraordinary height-by-age profile of American slaves is one of the
most arresting findings of the new anthropometric history. The young slave children
were among the smallest ever measured yet through compensatory or catch-up growth
of nearly 5 inches that began in adolescence, adults exceed the heights of Stuttgart
aristocrats and the upper classes of Italy and fell less than one inch below Union troops
who fought in the Civil War and cadets at England’s Sandhurst military academy
(Steckel 1986; Komlos 2007b). As one of the most heavily cited articles in the Journal
of Economic History, two lines of debate have emerged over these findings: selectivity
in the height-by-age profile induced by traders or by mortality, and explanations for the
growth recovery of teenagers.
In 1992 Pritchett and Freudenberger pondered potential biases imposed on slave
manifests by traders who selectively purchased “lemons” (short slaves) or, alternatively,
who saw transportation cost advantages in exporting higher quality (taller) individuals
(Pritchett and Freudenberger 1992). They compared heights reported on “certificates of
good character” required by Louisiana law in 1829 with those on inward manifests to
New Orleans, reporting that the extent of catch-up growth was probably understated by
the manifests. Komlos and Alecke counter the theoretical and empirical basis of their
conclusions, claiming no upward bias existed but that the average heights of children on
the manifests were shorter than free black children in a Maryland sample (Komlos and
Alecke 1996). In subsequent work comparing the heights of children shipped by traders
and non-traders, Pritchett reports that his estimates of upward bias diminished
13

substantially with age, reinforcing the claim that the manifests understate catch-up
growth (Pritchett 1997).
Skeptics of height studies have noted correctly that selective mortality tends to
eliminate short people from the height distribution. Does this weaken the claim that
average height is a good measure of health? Does selective mortality create a negative
correlation between average height and life expectancy, i.e. short populations are
healthier than tall ones (Riley 1994). If so, the growth recovery observed among
teenage slaves might have been exaggerated if not created by the selective death of
the short. Bystanders to this discussion should know that population-wide physiological
stress also reduces the height of survivors and that the very tall are also more likely to
die than individuals of typical height. Contrary to the selectivity hypothesis, average
height and life expectancy are highly correlated at the national level (Steckel 1995b).
With regard to slave catch-up, Steckel recently completed simulations showing that
under a wide range of model life tables, selective mortality explains less than 5 per cent
of the height gain after age 10.
The 1986 paper argued that stunting from a poor diet was profitable, partly
because humans are resilient and have a considerable capacity for catch-up growth if
conditions improve before adolescence. A plausible model of planter decision-making
supports the profitability argument (Rees, Komlos et al. 2003). An alternative
explanation hinges on reduced exposure to pathogens, specifically hookworm. Coelho
and McGuire argue that young children were heavily exposed to this parasite around
the plantation nurseries but working teenagers largely escaped because they wore
shoes and/or the infective larva were far less prevalent where they worked in the fields
(Coelho and McGuire 2000). Steckel notes that reduced hookworm exposure could be
relevant but intervention studies in developing countries report small growth recovery
(about 0.3 centimeters) by infected children who underwent medical treatment, which is
a tiny per cent of the observed catch up growth (Steckel 2000). Steckel has coded and
is now analyzing the entire collection of slave manifests available at the National
Archives on nearly 150,000 individuals to prepare a book-length manuscript that will revisit this and many other topics in the health and nutrition of American slaves.
14

Smallpox. All historical demographers know that smallpox periodically ravaged
human populations well into the twentieth century, causing socioeconomic chaos.
Although the disease is long-gone, historical study of smallpox generates sharp
disagreement. Using data collected by the Marine Society, Voth and Leunig argue that
because individuals who survived were approximately one inch shorter than those who
never had the disease, the sharp reduction in smallpox in their sample beginning in the
1820s substantially improved heights (Voth and Leunig 1996). Razzell agrees that
smallpox reduced height but argues that the disease was prevalent in London well
beyond the 1820s and that the Marine Society recruiting officers probably missed some
smallpox cases (Razzell 1998). Heintel and Baten take issue with the Voth-Leunig
statistical methods, rejecting the claim that smallpox reduced height, and observe that
changes in minimum height standards invalidate their chronological comparisons in any
event (Heintel and Baten 1998). Studying literacy and the recording of smallpox, Leunig
and Voth reply that Razzell’s concerns are trivial as a practical matter (Leunig and Voth
1998). They also counter the Hentel-Baten statistical methods as unnecessary,
unsuitable and unreliable when based on very small sample sizes. In a continuation of
the debate, Razzell objects to the Voth-Leunig use of literacy as an index of accuracy in
recording smallpox (Razzell 2001), but Leunig and Voth reply that Razzell misread the
original data and moreover, when restricting the analysis to boys who were recorded as
literate they find the negative effect of smallpox was three times larger than found in the
pooled sample (Leunig and Voth 2001).
Pursuing the discussion with new data on height and smallpox from prisoner
records, Oxley reports that smallpox sufferers were stunted in London but not other
parts of the UK, suggesting that growth failure from the disease was connected to urban
disamenities (Oxley 2003). Leunig and Voth reply that coefficients on smallpox are
negative at all locations, as Oxley observes, but when her small subsamples are
combined in a more sophisticated way through meta-analysis, then the negative effects
systematically existed at all locations, not just London (Leunig and Voth 2006). In
subsequent work Oxley adds another 34,000 prisoners to her database and also refines
15

the definition of urban and rural, reporting that the smallpox effect varied by not only by
location but age, gender, and time period (Oxley 2006). She concludes that the
consequences of smallpox on physical growth were mediated through time and place.
Work and the Habsburg Empire. It is well-known that work or physical effort may
create a significant drain on net nutrition, yet comparatively little research has gone
forward on this important topic, I suspect because reliable measures of effort are difficult
to obtain. Nevertheless we do have some modern estimates of caloric expenditure for
various types of activities, which would advance understanding or at least place bounds
on answers to interesting historical questions. In fact one of the important contributions
of anthropometric history has been to explain why diets must be evaluated in relation to
work and disease.
In various publications John Komlos argues that a Malthusian crisis reduced
stature and stimulated technological change in the late eighteenth-century Habsburg
Empire. Voth challenges this view by estimating regression models showing the height
decline resulted from additional work associated with a reduction in the number of
religious holidays, first in the 1750s and then again in the early 1770s (Voth 1995).
Komlos and Ritschl respond on several fronts, indicating that hours of work under the
new policy would have increased work effort by a modest amount, more work likely led
to better diets or at least higher incomes, and that the height decline occurred in
countries where there was no change in the number of holidays (Komlos and Ritschl
1995). They substantiate their point by estimating Voth’s equations using the entire
data set. Voth maintains that high correlation between work days and the time trend
invalidates their tests of significance and that work days alone perform better than the
time trend (Voth 1996).
Multicollinearity is best addressed with additional data, and one wonders whether
there was geographic variation in the introduction of work days that could be
econometrically exploited. While the Komlos-Ritschl regressions have their problems,
Voth does not confront the larger point that heights also fell in other countries. Some
careful econometric work on the timing and possible causes of the late eighteenth
16

century height declines across European countries would be a welcome addition to the
literature.

Convergence
In recent years numerous papers have appeared in the macro, trade and
regional economics literature on geographic convergence in social performance across
countries or regions, often assessed by per capita GDP or by real wages. Central
questions are the speed of convergence and factors that influence it, such as openness,
transportation costs, labor mobility, and institutional structure. The first paper appearing
in the height literature on this subject considered stagnation in the northwest region of
Argentina during the first half of the twentieth century, where skills, education and social
standing retarded physical growth relative to other parts of the country (Salvatore
2004b). Arcaleni next applied the methodology to Italy, where she found the South
began to catch-up to the North in height and in other social indicators over the twentieth
century (Arcaleni 2006). In studying the Habsburg monarchy Komlos found a 3.3
centimeter difference in average height between the core and the periphery in the midnineteenth century, with gradual convergence beginning near the end of the century
(Komlos 2007a). Meisel and Vega study heights in Columbia reported on some 9
million national identification cards and passport records over the twentieth century,
reporting considerable geographic as well as social convergence in stature (Meisel and
Vega 2007). Considering the U.S. from 1820 to 1900 Chanda, Craig and Treme
describe divergence across states during the period of declining average stature in the
middle of the century, followed by classic convergence near the end of the 1800s when
average heights for the country recovered (Chanda, Craig et al. 2008). New results for
Italy reveal that a regime switch took place in the late 1800s, in which heights
converged from 1855 to 1880 but diverged from 1880 to 1910, a finding that challenges
traditional interpretations of regional social performance (A'Hearn, Peracchi et al. 2009
forthcoming). Given the large volume of height data now available, one can imagine
that these interesting papers have just scratched the surface of the convergence
research agenda relative to what will be available in the coming decade.
17

Crises in social performance
The physical growth of children quickly declines or ceases with the arrival of
adverse socioeconomic conditions, and if bad times persist, stunting registers in adult
heights. The growth of children is therefore best for pinpointing the time and duration of
short-term adversity but adult heights decline or fall below trend if adverse conditions
are particularly severe, continue for a substantial period of time and/or occur during
sensitive periods of growth, which are early childhood and adolescence.
The expansion of research on crises marks one of the most interesting policyrelated developments in the anthropometric literature. In contrast with heights,
traditional measures such as unemployment rates and GDP do not monitor or reflect
resource allocation within the household. By traditional measures, children are largely
invisible. The extent to which children are nutritionally vulnerable in times of crisis is an
important mark of a society’s priorities and its willingness to invest in the future.
Because children’s heights are scarce prior to the twentieth century, and the
numbers are modest until the middle of the century, most historical studies use adult
heights. That said, Komlos and collaborators have been writing for several years about
a Malthusian crisis that occurred in Europe near the end of the eighteen century
(Komlos and Heintel 1999; Komlos, Hau et al. 2003; Cinnirella 2008a). Interesting
papers have also been written on the consequences for young adult stature of
phylloxera (an insect that attacks the roots of grape vines) in late nineteenth-century
France (Banerjee, Duflo et al. 2007); of social and economic turmoil in Mexico and the
American Southwest (Carson 2005); agrarian reforms and crises in Poland (Kopczynski
2007); the burden of taxes in late eighteenth century Russia (Mironov and A'Hearn
2008); political and economic upheaval during the first 35 years of Soviet power
(Wheatcroft 2009) and in Russia in the 1990s (Mironov 2007; Stillman and Thomas
2008); and the shocks of World War I and the Great Depression on heights in Argentina
(Salvatore 2004a).
Two strands of literature have emerged on the health of children during crises,
the most numerous focusing on developing countries, where considerable height data
18

have been collected since the mid 1980s. In this vein papers have appeared on
Cameroon (Pongou, Salomon et al. 2006); Kazakhstan (Dangour, Farmer et al. 2003);
North Korea (Schwekendiek 2008b); Novi Sad (Bozić-Krstić, Pavlica et al. 2004); South
Africa (Hendriks 2005); and Zimbabwe (Alderman, Hoddinott et al. 2006; Hoddinott
2006). The growth of adolescent boys fluctuated seasonally with the supply of food in
Czechoslovakia (Cvrcek 2006).
One might expect that seismic shifts or differences in political systems adversely
affect the health and welfare of children. The stature of children in Nazi Germany
stagnated from 1933 to 1938 following autarchy and market disintegration (Baten and
Wagner 2003). North Koreans declined in health relative to the South in the late
twentieth century (Pak 2004), and were poorly equipped to deal with a famine that
appeared in the 1990s (Schwekendiek 2008b). Delivery of United Nations food aid,
however, seems to have improved anthropometric outcomes (Schwekendiek 2008a).
Eastern Europe and Russia during the transition in the 1990s were different, whereby
life expectancy deteriorated, especially in Russia, but anthropometric data suggest
children were protected (Stillman 2006). Apparently adults bore the brunt of declining
socioeconomic conditions during and immediately after these regime changes.

Determinants of height
To help understand this section it is useful to think of the body as a biological
machine, which consumes food as fuel--a blend of calories, protein, micronutrients and
other ingredients. This machine expends fuel at rest (basal metabolism) amounting to
some 1,200 to 1,400 calories per day (depending upon size of the person) to breathe,
keep warm, circulate the blood and so forth, and in physical effort, fighting infection and
physical growth. In the most arduous activities, such as mushing (guiding a dog sled) in
Alaska’s 1,100 mile Iditarod dog race, energy expended may amount to 10,000 calories
per day. For this reason diets are adequate or inadequate only in relation to demands
on the fuel. Infections may consume fuel by raising body temperature and/or mobilizing
the immune system, or through incomplete processing of the diet, especially in
gastrointestinal diseases. The body’s first priority is to survive, and growth stagnates or
19

takes a back seat under conditions of inadequate net nutrition (diet minus claims on the
diet made by work and disease). If good times return, the body may recover much or all
of foregone growth through a process of catch-up, whereby velocity exceeds that typical
for a given age. Malnutrition that is acute but severe retards growth and may lead to
permanent stunting, depending upon its duration, severity and quality of conditions
thereafter. Chronically poor net nutrition inevitably stunts adult height by as much as 10
to 15 centimeters, and possibly more in extreme situations.
Physicians, medical anthropologists and human biologists typically seek
explanations for human growth in terms of processes that operate at or below the
cellular level. Examples are the quantity and quality of protein and the role of
micronutrients such as iron or iodine in the diet, which might be called proximate
biological determinants. Social scientists mobilize their explanatory forces at a much
higher level of aggregation--the individual, regions, ethnic groups, countries and so
forth—and typically harness familiar socioeconomic variables such as income, migrant
status, availability of health insurance, inequality, or occupation. Ultimately these
socioeconomic variables operate through proximate biological forces on human cells
that create physical growth, and thus some knowledge of the medical literature is
essential to conduct good anthropometric history. Most medical scientists, however,
have little knowledge or perhaps little interest in socioeconomic processes, and
therefore have conducted little research illuminating the connection between
socioeconomic conditions and human growth.
This task has fallen to social scientists, who face the hurdle of learning some biomedical literature, to understand the complexities of the growth process in relation to
limitations of the data available to understand it. The latter arises because the most
common historical evidence, and indeed much modern data, consists of adult heights.
Human growth, however, unfolds over some 20 years, from conception to maturity;
there are sensitive periods such as early childhood and adolescence; a multitude of
socioeconomic variables potentially operate at each age; and genetic conditions may
interact with environmental ones. Adult heights merely summarize the final result, and if
this is all that’s available (as opposed to longitudinal height on height and
20

socioeconomic conditions at each age), then researchers face a huge identification
problem in which there are far more determinants than outcomes.
Therefore the greatest achievement of the new anthropometric history to date
has been to establish height as a useful measure of human welfare, which can be
compared to or with other familiar examples such as income, wages, inequality, or life
expectancy. Of course, to properly interpret the meaning of average height as social
scientists, we should know which socioeconomic forces affect it and how powerful they
are (or were). The research needs in the area are huge and I expect it will take many
years to complete the agenda, if that is ever possible given the data limitations. What
has been published since 1995 merely continues an important down payment that
extends efforts made between the late 1970s and 1994. Height researchers should not
be discouraged, however: after more than half a century macroeconomists are still
constructing models to explain the determinants of a somewhat different but related
welfare measure, GDP. Realistically, however, all that we may be able to achieve as
social scientists is a good intuitive understanding of socioeconomic influences on
physical growth, informed by imperfect quantitative studies.
Since 1995 five general publications have appeared on determinants of stature,
including a monograph by Barry Bogin and four edited collections of papers assembled
by John Komlos and collaborators (Komlos 1995a; Komlos 1995d; Komlos and Baten
1998; Komlos and Cuff 1998; Bogin 2001). Readers will find these books to be
compact and useful sources of information on anthropometric research and methods.
As a group the research emphasizes economic conditions, including business
cycles (Woitek 2003; Sunder and Woitek 2005); income (Dick 1995; Drukker and Van
Meerten 1995; Jacobs and Tassenaar 2004); income combined with disease (Coclanis
and Komlos 1995; A'Hearn 2003); income combined with nutrition (Strauss 1995;
Svedberg 2000); inequality (Cavelaars, Kunst et al. 2000; Alter and Oris 2008); taxation
(Mironov and A'Hearn 2008); socioeconomic status (Voss, Mulligan et al. 1998) (Webb,
Kuh et al. 2008); food prices (Christiaensen and Alderman 2004; Meng, Gong et al.
2009); and access to roads in rural areas of poor countries (Gibson and Rozelle 2003).
Research on the past of several countries, and most recently that on Italy (Peracchi
21

2008), indicates that the height-income relationship is not stable in the face of changing
epidemiological conditions. At a given level of income improvements in public health,
personal health life styles and childcare practices, reduce the prevalence of disease and
enhance physical growth.
Several studies report the importance of mother’s education for child health and
physical growth, with a recent case study for Russia (Fedorov and Sahn 2005). The
mechanism operates in two ways on the health and height of the child, via cognitive
ability (Rubalcava and Teruel 2004) and informed child-care practices (Shariff and Ahn
1995; Christiaensen and Alderman 2004). Consistent with this interpretation, a study on
Vietnamese children found that the effect of parental education remains powerful when
controlling for income, which suggests that the effect of education operates directly on
height rather than via income alone (Haughton and Haughton 1997). In Jamaica, where
females in the household often share child-care responsibilities, increased education of
any woman had a positive impact on child health (Handa 1999). Children of the
household head were nearly half a standard deviation taller than other children in the
household, which suggests that the head was able to direct resources to their own
children. One may wonder whether the head was also able to enhance the education of
her own children. In these same households, presence of the father had a large
positive impact on children’s height, even when controlling for household income, a
pattern that would be interesting to investigate for the past.
Although numerous studies document the importance of formal education of
parents on child growth, one may ask whether nutritional knowledge gained informally
from relatives, friends, the media, and community health services can enhance the
benefits of formal learning (Webb and Block 2004). Analysis of survey data from rural
Java confirms that formal schooling is important for standardized height for age scores
(a measure of long-term nutritional status), and that short-term health outcomes, as
measured by weight for height, were heavily influenced by maternal nutritional
knowledge gained from a marketing campaign.
Several studies report height differences by geographic area, which summarize a
multitude of forces such as income, public health investments, migration, exposure to
22

disease and to sunlight (A'Hearn 2006; Tatarek 2006; Cranfield and Inwood 2007;
Carson 2008a; Carson 2009). Haines and Kintner link greater height among early
twentieth-century German soldiers to birth in geographic areas where breast feeding
was relatively more common (Haines and Kitner 2008). A household-level study of
infant growth in Brazil independently confirms breastfeeding’s beneficial effects
(Senauer and Kassouf 2000). Other things equal, children from dairying regions tend to
be taller, but when combined with proximity to a large city in the nineteenth century
(Philadelphia) the urban penalty trumps the benefits of access to dairy products (Carson
2008b). Studies report that migrants tend to be taller on average than the people they
left behind and that for children, catch-up growth occurs in moving from poor to rich
countries (Smith, Bogin et al. 2003; Danubio, Enrica et al. 2005; Böetsch, Brus et al.
2008; Carson 2008d; Humphries and Leunig 2009b).
Socioeconomic conditions that reduce mortality also increase average height, a
result found by linking data on conscript heights with post-neonatal mortality rates
(Schmidt, Jørgensen et al. 1995). A similar relationship with childhood mortality rates
was found for groups of counties within the United States in the early twentieth century
(Haines and Steckel 2000). In a worldwide sample of life tables from 1940 to 1970,
average height was highly correlated with mortality rates, exceeding 0.85 in some cases
(Gage and Zansky 1995). A theory of technophysio evolution, by which improved
nutrition in utero and early childhood enhances vital organ systems, has been proposed
as a biological mechanism underlying the height-mortality relationship (Fogel and Costa
1997). A related theory argues that infections and inflammation that retard early growth
also contributes to cardiovascular diseases of old age (Crimmins and Finch 2006).
Angus Deaton has identified a puzzle in the relationship between average height
and traditional measures of social performance for Africa relative to the rest of the world
(Deaton 2007). Africans, especially women, are too tall relative to what would be
predicted (based on patterns observed in other continents) by their low incomes and
high childhood mortality. Genetic selection over the eons for conditions specific to
Africa might explain the pattern but he emphasizes alternatives. One hypothesis is that
high childhood mortality, selected heavily on height, erodes the lower tail of the height
23

distribution. This hypothesis could be investigated through simulation using various life
tables and survival rates in relation to physical growth, and by examining the frequency
distribution of stature in relation to mortality rates for various African countries. It is also
possible that measured socioeconomic data for Africa do not accurately reflect
experience, in which foraging and home production could play a major role in diets, or in
which barter and the underground economy are not captured by national income
accounts.
In investigating socioeconomic influences on physical growth, it is important to
distinguish household from community influences, and possible interactions between
the two. An interesting study on the Philippines assembles data for both entities
(Ghuman, Behrman et al. 2005). The researchers report that several household
variables improved growth as expected, including parent’s height and schooling, but
they found no systematic interactive effects on child height between household
variables and community characteristics, such as number of nurses, doctors and
sanitation inspectors (although interactions existed for hemoglobin levels and
occurrence of worms). In my view, the case is far from closed on interactions and their
implications for omitted variable bias in assessing influences on stature, and
researchers should continue to be vigilant in attempting to control for community level
variables where possible.
Diet and nutrition affect human growth, and the connections found by social
scientists illuminate the role of mechanical refrigeration (Craig, Goodwin et al. 2004);
relative price changes (Logan 2006); social policy (Pelletier and Frongillo 2003); general
living conditions (Silventoinen 2003); diet and work (Tadman 2000); socioeconomic
conditions associated with ethnicity (Brennan, McDonald et al. 1995; Dye 1995) ;
parental consumption decisions (Schneider 1996); the interaction of diet and disease
(Alter 2004); political disruption (Costa-Font and Gil 2008; Morgan 2009); and railroads
(Solakoglu 2007). Although democratic socialist countries devote considerable
resources to human welfare programs, a modest height gradient often persists (Turrell
2002).

24

The pre-famine Irish were relatively poor but tall by European standards prior to
the potato famine because they existed largely on a nutritious (but boring) diet of
potatoes and milk (Nicholas and Steckel 1997). One might suppose that children who
worked at sea in the mid-nineteenth century would have been stunted by the
experience, but Humphries and Leunig find the reverse, arguing that wages were
largely paid to the child in the form of food and shelter (Humphries and Leunig 2009a).
Relationships discovered between socioeconomic with anthropometric measures
have stimulated efforts to improve social policy in developing and middle-income
countries (Popkin and Ng 2007). Physical work, especially that requiring substantial
effort, reduces net nutrition and can retard the growth of children if diet and/or medical
care are inadequate, which is often the situation in developing countries (Ambadekar,
Wahab et al. 1999; Hawamdeh and Spencer 2003; Cortez, Barbieri et al. 2007).
Some researchers reverse the direction of causation, considering ways that
heights influence socioeconomic decisions rather than pathways by which these
conditions determine heights. In this vein, Baten and Murray, and Hacker investigate
how stature affects marriage prospects (Baten and Murray 1998; Hacker 2008) and
Humphries and Leunig consider the impact of stature on the decision to migrate
(Humphries and Leunig 2009b).
In an interesting study on household data from Ethiopia, Ayalew investigates
whether parents invest differentially in the human capital of their offspring, based on
child endowments in health (measured by stature) and by their scores on standard tests
(Ayalew 2005). The results suggest that parents try to compensate for health inequities
but actually reinforce differences in educational endowments, devoting more resources
to the education of children with greater ability. If the latter investment pattern existed in
the past, parents may have increased inequality over time in society as education grew
in important to the production process.

Development
Heights are an excellent measure of biological deprivation, and the extremes of
socioeconomic conditions often found in developing countries creates large absolute
25

differences in stature, which makes this setting particularly valuable for studying the
causes and implications of physical growth. Anthropometric studies in these countries
have flourished over the past two decades because substantially more evidence has
become available on height and weight, which are linked with various socioeconomic
variables in household surveys. Among these the Living Standards Measurement
Surveys (LSMS) administered by the World Bank, and the WHO Global Database on
Child Growth and Malnutrition are exceptionally important (Grosh and Glewwe 1995; de
Onis and Blössner 2003), and the findings from these and similar data sources have
been published in numerous outlets. As might be expected, many publications consider
the effectiveness of policy interventions and economic change on child health. In this
regard, much work has been done on Africa (Lavy and et al. 1996; Thomas, Lavy et al.
1996; Alderman, Hoogeveen et al. 2006; Yamauchi 2008; Alderman, Hoogeveen et al.
2009) and on South America (Alves and Belluzzo 2004; Attanasio, Gomez et al. 2004;
Behrman and Skoufias 2004; David, Narci et al. 2004; Gertler 2004), as well as some
on Asia (Morgan 2004; Chaudhuri 2008). Recent work has suggested ways to combine
various anthropometric indicators collected in these surveys into a composite index
(Bhattacharyya 2006) or otherwise gauge nutritional vulnerability (Chilima 2000).
The range of socioeconomic conditions found in developing and middle-income
countries are conducive for studying determinants of height. Various papers consider
the impact of child labor (Galiani and Schargrodsky 2004; Roggero, Mangiaterra et al.
2007); maternal education (Handa 1999; Dasgupta, Saha et al. 2008); income or
poverty (Morgan 2000; Gaiha and Kulkarni 2005); schooling and wealth (Chilima 2000;
Godoy, Reyes-Garcia et al. 2005); influences associated with geography and culture
(Morales, Aguilar et al. 2003; De Souza 2006); political oppression (Louw and
Henneberg 1997; Cameron 2003); and economic and health conditions in early
childhood and adolescence (Akachi and Canning 2007). Public health investments in
Peru during the 1990s had a small but disproportionate beneficial effect on the urban
poor but failed to reach poor children in rural areas (Valdivia 2004).
To gauge from citations to each other’s literature, anthropometric history and
anthropometrics in development economics have relatively little interaction. This is a
26

pity because each group has much to gain by creating a two-way street. The rich
household data sets now available for developing countries provide numerous insights
into socioeconomic determinants of stature that can inform historical studies. At the
same time, the wide range of economic, institutional and political conditions found in
historical settings exceed those found in the developing world, and this diversity
provides useful perspective on the causes, consequences and prospects for alleviating
poverty and deprivation in the modern world. Only a few generations ago the average
adult male in several now-rich countries of Europe and Asia was 158 to 164 centimeters
(Komlos 1995a; Komlos 1995d; Steckel and Floud 1997), which is smaller than the
typical poor adult male in many of today’s developing countries (Eveleth and Tanner
1976, 1990).

Fetal origins hypothesis
Careful sifting of epidemiological evidence assembled for the UK in the 1980s led
David Barker and colleagues to hypothesize that several adult diseases, such as
hypertension, type II diabetes and some cancers, could be traced to health conditions in
a critical formative period of early life, from conception through early childhood (Barker
1994). Although medical experts disagree on the biological mechanism by which health
in early life extends into adulthood, the empirical regularity is well established and is
sometimes called the fetal origins hypothesis or the Barker hypothesis (Blackwell,
Hayward et al. 2001). Because early childhood conditions are important for adult
height, several studies use stature as a marker to predict longevity and/or adult disease
patterns (Riley 1994; Harris 1997; Murray 1997; Jousilahti, Tuomilehto et al. 2000;
Costa 2004; Christensen, Djurhuus et al. 2007). Of course, other measures of early
childhood health have been used in this line of research, including body mass index
(Henriksson, Lindblad et al. 2001; Linares and Su 2005), child mortality rates (Bozzoli,
Deaton et al. 2007), exposure to epidemic disease (Almond and Mazumder 2005;
Almond 2006), and skeletal markers of physiological stress (Steckel 2005c). Recently
economists and other social scientists have investigated ways that early childhood
health affects cognition and skill formation, which sheds light on the optimal design of
27

public policy (Heckman 2006). Such policies should note the intergenerational
consequences of a mother’s reproductive fitness because healthier female children later
have healthier babies (Osmani and Sen 2003).
Some economic historians are already putting the health-cognition ideas to good
use by linking proxies for physiological stress in early childhood with numeracy, or the
ability to recall one’s precise age, in this case for census enumerators in nineteenth
century Britain (Baten, Crayen et al. 2008). Although the evidence is circumstantial, it is
plausible to believe that grain prices and welfare subsidies under the Poor Law
impacted early childhood net nutrition and cognitive development, and thus numeracy
rates found among these children as adults. This type of study opens an entirely new
dimension to height research for understanding the nutritional underpinnings of human
capital acquisition, technological change, innovation and economic growth.

Gender
Until recently men dominated or controlled labor market activity, political decision
making and property. In constructing and analyzing traditional measures of social
performance such as GDP, earnings and wealth, which are (or were) largely produced
or owned by men, many economists tacitly assume that material goods and services
are (or were) equitably distributed within the household. But is (or was) this the case?
It is desirable to have direct information on the fates of children relative to adults and
girls relative to boys. How did these groups fare during industrialization? Is (or was)
there gender discrimination in some societies? Numerous methodologies have been
used to address the issue (Lundberg 2005), and heights can provide some answers. To
make proper comparisons, the heights of men and women must be standardized for
biological differences in growth potential, with results translated into z scores or
percentiles of modern height standards.
In the developing world considerable research has gone forward using the LSMS
and similar surveys (Strauss and Thomas 1995). Contrary to predictions of the unitary
model of intra-household resource allocation, which maintains that both parents have
the same preferences for the wellbeing of sons and daughters, some studies find
28

preferences in allocation of resources to boys or to girls that correspond to the
resources or human capital available to the parent of the same sex. For example,
pensions received by women in South Africa had a greater positive impact on the
physical growth of girls than boys (Duflo 2003). A study by Sahn and Stifel using the
Demographic Health Surveys reports this result holds more generally in Africa (Sahn
and Stifel 2002). Similarly, mother’s education had a greater positive impact on the
height of daughters within an indigenous population of Brazil (Godoy, Reyes-Garcia et
al. 2005; Godoy, Leonard et al. 2006).
If mothers and fathers have preferences for children of their sex, one may
suspect that the sex composition of the household affects the allocation of dietary
resources. A study in rural India suggests that both boys and girls had poorer outcomes
(height) if they were born after multiple same-sex siblings; boys born after multiple
daughters, however, had the best outcomes (Pande 2003). In the 1990s economic
growth improved living standards in India, and height gains occurred for both sexes of
young children in the cities but girls lagged behind boys in rural areas, especially in the
northern part of the country where research documents a preference for sons (Tarozzi
and Mahajan 2007). Deaton reports that an excess of Indian males (consistent with
relatively higher female mortality) was positively correlated with the percentage
difference in their heights relative to the average height of males and females (Deaton
2008). In the Dominican Republic boys and girls fared similarly in female versus male
headed households but if the household was poor, children fared somewhat better with
a female head (Rogers 1996). According to evidence gathered upon admission to the
London House of Correction in the Victorian era, anthropometric indicators
disproportionately declined for women if the family became larger and/or their economic
resources declined (Horrell, Meredith et al. 2009). Some believe that strong son
preferences exist in Vietnam but a study on data from the early 1990s found no
differences in standardized height or weight for age achieved by preteen boys and girls
(Haughton and Haughton 1997).
Much of the debate over the distributional consequences of industrialization has
focused on differences by class or region, but recent studies now shed light on gender.
29

The general expansion of anthropometric history has led researchers to develop new
sources of data such as prison records, which are skewed towards males but otherwise
represent reasonably well the teenagers and younger adults of the working class.
Although women are a distinct minority in prison admissions, in absolute numbers the
female heights are abundant in many states and countries.
England has garnered the largest share of research on the relative health of
women during industrialization. Johnson and Nicolas show that heights of men and
women reported by London’s Scotland Yard declined from the late 1820s through the
1850s, with the hungry forties being the worst period to have been born (Johnson and
Nicholas 1995). Note, however, that the negative coefficients on their time period
dummies are generally larger for women than men, a result that understates the stress
on women because they were shorter (hence their percentage decline in height was
larger) and for biological reasons, women are ordinarily more resilient than men. In
subsequent work on heights of convicts sent to New South Wales from England and
Ireland covering birth years from 1785 to 1815, Nicolas and Oxley report that women’s
heights fell relative to men’s and that women living in rural as opposed to urban areas
underwent more physiological stress (Nicholas and Oxley 1996), but Jackson disputes
their result of a downward trend on grounds of statistical procedure (Jackson 1996). In
a final effort to settle the question, Johnson and Nicholas analyze 30,000 heights on
female prisoners from three sources, which they compare with male heights assembled
by other researchers (Johnson and Nicholas 1997). They reiterate the presence of a
growing height gap between men and women up to the end of the Napoleonic Wars but
thereafter their heights moved in parallel, which suggests that factors endogenous to
the household economy led to deterioration for women during the early phase of
industrialization. Moreover, heights in England declined relative to those in Ireland,
which suggests that disamenities of industrialization imposed health penalties. Unlike
the rest of pre-famine Ireland where heights declined, Ulster’s nascent industrial
economy competed favorably with that of England after the Napoleonic Wars, which
translated into improving heights for women (Oxley 2004).

30

Both men and women in nineteenth-century Bavaria benefited from a diet rich in
milk and potatoes. Heights declined for women relative to men, however, during the
hungry 1840s and in contrast to what is known about biological resiliency, women’s
heights were more sensitive to economic conditions in early childhood (Baten and
Murray 2000). On the other hand, research on heights gathered from passports issued
by the United States shows that female heights increased more rapidly than those for
men after the Civil War of the 1860s (Sunder 2007).

Health and economic growth
Casual empiricism suggests that health and economic growth are highly
correlated if not causally related. The correspondence is far from perfect but rich
countries of the late twentieth century are healthy and vice versa. Social scientists
debate the strength and direction of causation, however, and height has entered the
discussion as a measure of health in the papers cited below. The correlation is weakest
in a long-run view, say over the past two centuries because, Richard Easterlin argues,
the forces of market capitalism that gave rise to economic growth did not solve the
externalities, agency problems and other market failures that had to be overcome by
new government institutions, such as boards of health, to reduce exposure to infectious
diseases and provide for immunizations (Easterlin 1999). These investments, which
began in the mid-to-late nineteenth century and continue through the present in
developing countries, consume a tiny portion of GDP and yield enormous rates of
return.
Economists usually agree that better health improves economic growth, but they
disagree on the impact and pathways. While the strength or contribution of each is
unknown, it is easy to imagine possible mechanisms, such as diminished cognitive
capacity, which reduces the effectiveness and the amount of schooling. Also
connecting health to productivity are physical strength, stamina and days lost from work.
In addition, greater longevity encourages workers to save for retirement, which
promotes capital accumulation. Measuring these effects is more contentious and
depends upon statistical methods and data sources. The World Health Organization
31

recently formulated a macro perspective, which states that the “linkages of health to
poverty reduction and to long-term economic growth are powerful, much stronger than
is generally understood” (WHO 2001). Robert Fogel estimates that nutritional
improvements reflected in height gains account for about 30 per cent of British
economic growth over the past two centuries, principally by giving the ultra poor enough
calories to enter the labor force and by giving more energy for work to those already
employed (Fogel 2004b). David Weil investigates the micro foundations of the
relationship using cross-country, historical data on heights, survival rates and age at
menarche to conclude that eliminating health differences across countries would reduce
the inequality between the 90th to the 10 percentile of GDP per worker by approximately
20 per cent (Weil 2007). Arora used a century or more of height data for ten countries,
reporting that health improvements increased their pace of economic growth by 30 to 40
per cent (Arora 2001). López-Casasnovas and collaborators undertake the most wideranging discussion in the literature, exploring various mechanisms by which health
influences economic growth (López-Casasnovas, Rivera et al. 2005).
It is important to know the contribution of health to economic growth to properly
estimate the pay-off to health infrastructure investments. Much work has been done, for
example, on the economic value of life and the rate of return on clean water supplies as
measured by mortality rates or life expectancy. Economic growth, however, is more
complicated because a large number of variables affect it. Researchers therefore need
to embed estimation procedures in complex models that accommodate numerous
pathways and interactions as well as other influences on growth such as monetary
policy, investments in schooling, technological change, and the like. Furthermore the
payoff plausibly occurs over many years and the benefits may be intergenerational.
Significant progress on the agenda requires agreement on the appropriate models for
understanding economic growth, which is a major outstanding research question in
economics. The problem is formidable but historical data may be important if not
essential to move forward simply because the benefits of improving health unfold over a
long period of time.

32

Industrialization
Often arrayed into camps of optimists and pessimists, contributors have
fashioned a lively discussion over the welfare consequences of industrialization (Steckel
and Floud 1997). While most vigorous for England, the debate now encompasses
many countries that industrialized in the eighteenth or nineteenth century. In the past
14 years 44 papers analyzing heights have appeared on the subject, with the largest
number (10) on the United States followed by England (9), Germany (6), three each for
Australia, Spain and Portugal, and two each for Japan, France, Italy, the Netherlands,
and the Hapsburg monarchy. Scholars studying the first industrial country (England)
established the framework for the debate: participants agree that industrialization
eventually improved material living conditions for all groups, but controversy surrounds
the extent of redistribution en route across socioeconomic groups and regions, the
social and psychological adaptations required of men and women at work, and the
disamenities of an urban-industrial way of life.
Evidence for the two most-studied countries shows persistent declines in stature
of one to two inches during the heart of the process. Margo and Steckel, who
discovered that heights declined after 1830 in the United States, initially questioned
whether the cycle was genuine, as did Robert Gallman some 15 years later (Gallman
1996). Several independent sources of evidence have verified what is commonly called
the “antebellum paradox” (Komlos 1996; Komlos and Coclanis 1997; Carson 2008b;
Maloney and Carson 2008), or the decline in height and life expectancy in the midst of
vigorous economic growth, and research now focuses on its possible causes.
Candidates include migration and the spread of disease; growing inequality; the
appearance of business cycles that increased the nutritional vulnerability of the poor;
rising food prices; the emergence of public schools that exposed young children to
dangerous pathogens; the rise of commercial farming, which tempted farm families to
trade farm surpluses for manufactured goods; the Civil War; and urbanization (Costa
and Steckel 1997; Haines, Craig et al. 2003; Haines 2004; Sunder 2004; Cuff 2005;
Carson 2008b).

33

Several of these suspects may also apply to England, but the literature has
emphasized urbanization, and various conditions associated with it, as a major culprit
(Mokyr and O'Grada 1996; Crafts 1997; Floud and Harris 1997; Feinstein 1998; Komlos
1998; Szreter and Mooney 1998). Ewert links a decline in average heights in Saxony
and Württemberg after the Napoleonic period to deteriorating climate and rising food
prices (Ewert 2006), a result also reported by Cinnirella, who also cites higher food
prices but gives weight to urbanization in the decline in Saxony (Cinnirella 2008a).
Delajara blames the demographic transition in Europe for triggering a decline in
children’s heights that began in the mid-eighteenth century, which was followed by
growth recovery that began a century later (Delajara 2004).
In a recent paper Cinnirella re-works the Floud-Wachter height data for England
by focusing on the army recruits alone and using the truncated normal maximum
likelihood estimator throughout the analysis (Cinnirella 2008b). He confirms the FloudWachter finding of height decline in the mid-nineteenth century but places the decent
somewhat earlier, soon after the Napoleonic wars concluded. In his view, however, the
recovery after the wars merely interrupted a long-term decline of roughly 7 centimeters
from the middle of the eighteenth through the middle of the nineteenth century.
Importantly, they differ on the outcome for the early industrial period, for which FloudWachter reported increases but Cinnirella found declines explained by Gregory Clark’s
evidence on rising food prices and declining real wages. Now that deteriorating
conditions in the early-mid nineteenth century are clearer, it would be prudent to invest
in additional data collection for the eighteenth century.
Countries that industrialized after the revolution in public health inspired by the
germ theory of disease either had minor height cycles or experienced sustained upward
trends, as was the case in Germany (Twarog 1997); the Habsburg monarchy (Komlos
2006); Poland (Kopczynski 2007); Portugal (Padez and Johnston 1999; Padez 2002;
Padez 2003); Spain (Gomez-Mendoza and Perez-Moreda 1995; Carrión and Castejón
1998; Martinez-Carrion and Moreno-Lazaro 2007); Italy (Vecchi and Coppola 2006);
Argentina (Salvatore 2009); Hungary (Gyenis and Joubert 2004); and Sweden
(Sandberg and Steckel 1997). Australia is a borderline case, industrializing (or more
34

properly, modernizing) during the public health movement and experiencing a modest
swing in stature (Jackson and Thomas 1995; Whitwell, de Souza et al. 1997; Whitwell
and Nicholas 2001). In eastern Belgium the men were relatively short during the
nineteenth century but realized a sustained upward trend in average stature except for
occasional setbacks associated with rapid urbanization (Alter, Neven et al. 2004). The
Netherlands sustained a modest decline in average height in the early industrial period
(Drukker and Tassenaar 1997). Increases in stature in Italy during the second half of
the nineteenth century were led by improved diets and better sanitary conditions, the
latter occurring before the germ theory was widely influential (Federico 2003).
Countries that industrialized in the mid-to-late nineteenth century had
experiences straddling those the early and the late comers, but individual circumstances
influenced the process. Moderate paces of urbanization and economic growth
accompanied a trend of slow stature growth in France until the end of the nineteenth
century (Weir 1997; Heyberger 2007). Despite rapid economic growth in the early
twentieth century, Japan’s height gain was retarded by diverting resources to the
military (Mosk 1996; Honda 1997).
In sum, the adverse effect of urbanization on stature during industrialization was
in rough inverse proportion to public-health applications of the germ theory of disease.
Other factors such as population density, the pace of change, government priorities,
and quality of the diet were also relevant. Based on the height data the pessimist case
applies to the early industrializers but much less so to late comers that had the benefit
of public health investments that flowed from the germ theory as well as improved
transport that integrated markets for food. Thus the advantages of economic
backwardness enunciated by Gerschenkron regarding the pace and prime movers of
industrialization, also applies to the health costs because latecomers could emulate the
new health technology.

Inequality
The discovery of an inverse relationship between economic inequality and a
country’s average height expanded the welfare implications of stature (Steckel 1983).
35

So long as poverty exists (or existed) in a society, defined by lack of basic necessities
important for human growth, redistribution from the rich, whose physical growth would
not suffer (or suffer less) from loss of income, to the poor would increase the average
physical growth of children. Thus inequality can be understood as a determinant of
average height as well as a barometer of socioeconomic inequality if the data are
arrayed by ethnicity, occupation, social class, region and so forth.
Since 1995 scholars have published 29 papers on inequality and height. Seven
of them consider racial differences in biological aspects of the standard of living, with six
on the United States (Bodenhorn 1999; Bodenhorn 2002; Carson 2008c; Carson 2008b;
Maloney and Carson 2008; Carson 2009 forthcoming-a; Carson 2009 forthcoming-b)
and one on Argentina (Frank 2006). Other topics studied with this approach are the
fates of illegitimate children in Germany (Baten and Murray 1997) and implications of
the socioeconomic status of the mother on the health of the child (Costa 1998). Komlos
investigates the implications of height inequality for social and political change, in this
case the French Revolution (Komlos, Hau et al. 2003). The greatest social-class
difference in height on record amounted to 22 centimeters at age 16, which was found
in England during the first half of the nineteenth century (Komlos 2007b). About the
same time across the English Channel in Belgium the class difference in stature was 8
centimeters (Alter, Neven et al. 2004).
A second strand of the inequality-height literature considers the connection
between inequality and economic growth, with a focus on developing countries such as
India (Brennan and McDonald 2001; Mahal and Karan 2008); sub-Sahara Africa
(Moradi and Baten 2005); China (Morgan 2004); Mexico (Lopez-Alonso 2007); and a
cross-section of poor and rich countries (Deaton 2003). This body of literature also
includes several papers on height inequality during industrialization in central Europe
(Komlos 2006), Japan (Bassino 2006), England (Komlos 2007b), and Mexico (LopezAlonso and Condey 2003). In a new strand of research inequality has also been linked
with changes in public policy, and in particular with protectionism in Latin America
(Baltzer and Baten 2008).

36

A third category of papers views inequality as a socioeconomic determinant of
average height. As with many applications of stature, the range of topics is quite wide,
including papers on India (Guntupalli and Baten 2006; Deaton 2008); Germany before
and after reunification (Komlos and Kriwy 2002; Komlos and Kriwy 2003; Heineck 2006;
Hiermeyer 2008); Norway (Sunder 2003); and a cross-section of modern Europe
(Gylfason 2007). Interestingly, the unification of East and West Germany suggests
there is a negative relationship between equality and average height.
Research on inequality using heights has a bright and important future because
the topic cuts across the social sciences and into public policy. Moreover the outcome
measure, the physical well-being of children, is not easily observed using traditional
metrics. Finally, much can be learned about groups at risk by collecting relatively small
samples that are very cost-effective in terms of knowledge gained. Because the care
and feeding of children is under parental care in most societies, public policies must be
receptive to families. The successful history of programs to improve personal hygiene
in the early part of the twentieth century and, somewhat later to receive childhood
immunizations indicates that such interventions can be effective.

Living standards
Fifteen papers published since 1995 integrate heights into a discussion of trends
or differences in living standards. Several authors address the topic from a theoretical
or philosophical as opposed to an empirical perspective. Coatsworth argues that study
of human welfare, which can be assessed using heights as well as many alternative
measures, is the central unifying purpose of history (Coatsworth 1996). Engerman
invokes stature to help place the standard of living debate into international perspective
(Engerman 1997). Komlos discusses heights in the context of the biological standard of
living and Vecchi and Giovanni explore the deficiencies of traditional macro data using
height as an alternative (Komlos 1995b; Vecchi and Coppola 2006). Chakravarty
incorporates stature into a human poverty index, which concentrates on deprivation in
the basic necessities of life (Chakravarty and Majumder 2005), and Wilk argues that
stature is legitimately part of any effort to compare the quality of life (Wilk 1999). Tarp
37

et al. report that Z scores of height-for-age are highly correlated with other measures of
poverty such as income relative to the cost of basic needs as the household level in
Mozambique (Tarp, Simler et al. 2002). In two papers Steckel explains the
contributions that height can make to understanding physical well-being and provides
evidence for comparisons (Steckel 2006; Steckel 2008).
A second strand of this literature is more empirical, focusing on height statistics
to help explain the historical record of human welfare. Easterlin’s paper is the most
comprehensive in its effort to depict progress on the human condition over the past two
centuries (Easterlin 2000). A similar but less comprehensive assessment of human
progress traces improvements in mortality, partly as proxied by heights, since the late
eighteenth century (Cutler, Deaton et al. 2006). Svedberg demonstrates that
anthropometric measurements are more reliable and relevant than estimates prepared
by FAO using data on food availability, its distribution within countries, and suitable
norms for assessing global patterns of malnutrition (Svedberg 1999; Svedberg 2002).
Various scholars are now investigating why American heights have fallen behind those
of several European countries (Komlos and Baur 2004; Komlos and Lauderdale 2007;
Komlos 2008).
Now that stature is a widely accepted as a useful measure of living standards,
and that height time series are available for numerous countries, anthropometric history
is poised for investments in various comparative projects. Fifteen years ago when
Roderick Floud and I organized the conference that led to Health and Welfare during
Industrialization, the effort required most participants to assemble the raw data
necessary to investigate the industrial period of eight countries: the U.S., Japan,
Australia, England, the Netherlands, France, Germany, and Sweden. By now the
number of countries for which data are available has expanded to the point that one
could imagine separate comparative projects for Asia, for Eastern Europe and for Latin
America. Moreover, enough evidence has been gathered or could readily be
assembled for large comparative studies on the pre-industrial world and on physical
well-being in the post-industrial period. It would be a great service to these efforts for
some organization to create a repository for all height data that have been collected.
38

Perhaps it is time to establish a center for height research that could be amalgamated
with programs in economics, history, and anthropology as well as other social science
disciplines and medicine.

Long-term trends
This section discusses eighteen papers that have a chronological prevue that is
long by standards of economic history, exceeding two centuries. Among these one half
are based on skeletal data, which can depict important aspects of health over much
longer periods of time. Steckel set forth the methodology of research on skeletons in a
paper given at the 2003 meetings of the American Economic Association (Steckel
2003b). Four papers focus on the Western Hemisphere, where a long term decline in
health occurred prior to the arrival of Columbus (Neves and Costa 1998; Steckel and
Rose 2002a; Steckel and Rose 2002b; Steckel 2005a).
With regard to the colonial period of the United States, the most surprising result
is their remarkably tall stature, relative to any other populations for which height data
are available (Sokoloff 1995; Steckel 1999; Komlos 2001). Forces usually cited as
responsible for the exceptional net nutrition of colonial Americans are an abundance of
good farm land relative to population size; near equality across socioeconomic groups;
a combination of Old World and New World foods that provided dietary diversity; and
low population density that limited the spread of communicable diseases.
In Europe the most intriguing result to appear from skeletal data is the
remarkably tall stature of men during the early Middle Ages (Steckel 2004; Koepke and
Baten 2005; Steckel 2005b; Koepke and Baten 2008). There was a long-term U shape
to stature in northern Europe, with a minimum occurring near the seventeenth century.
Not until the early twentieth century did Northern Europeans attain their stature of the
early Middle Ages. Research on possible explanations for the first half of the U is at an
early stage but it seems likely that some forces differed from those behind the escape
from hunger, or the gradual upward trend in stature that began in the 1700s. Fogel
emphasizes improving diets driven by the revolution in agricultural technology, new
crops, food imports from the colonies, and the eventual move toward free trade (Fogel
39

2004a). Likely suspects for the decline are a cooling climate that followed the Medieval
warm period; the rise of commodity markets within Europe that spread disease;
urbanization; the world-wide exchange of disease that began with European exploration
and colonization; rising inequality; and wars and conflicts over religion and state
building.
Along with other metrics, heights are now used to investigate living standards in
the pre-industrial world (Allen, Bengtsson et al. 2005). France has the longest height
series available for study, which Komlos and co-authors use to monitor living standards
in pre-industrial France (Komlos 1995c; Komlos 2003b; Komlos, Hau et al. 2003).
Mironov documents that health, as measured by height, stagnated in eighteenth-century
Russia despite significant progress in arts, education and science (Mironov 2005).
Additional studies on Europe consider the modern period. Some work has been
done on the long height series of France, which illuminate their unusual if not unique
path toward industrialization (Heyberger 2006). Studies of Holland show that their
remarkable surge toward becoming the tallest in the world by the end of the twentieth
century did not begin until the second half of the nineteenth century (de Beer 2004).
Research on Eastern Europe indicates that most of the secular increase occurred in the
past 125 years (Lintsi and Kaarma 2006; Vignerová, Brabec et al. 2006).

Methods
As part of the new anthropometric history, scholars paid greater attention to
possible biases in data sources and to developing new methods of statistical analysis.
Minimum height standards that sometimes changed or were flexibly imposed by military
organizations, created an analytical problem. Early approaches, such as the quantile
bend estimator, were not very robust. Komlos and collaborators have been innovative
in recognizing problems and suggesting solutions (Komlos 2004). More recent
approaches include a Bayesian technique to estimate non-parametric additive models
(Lang and Sunder 2003). A’Hearn developed the restricted maximum likelihood
estimator to contend with small samples where the minimum height requirement is near
the mean of the distribution (A'Hearn 2004). Recently he and collaborators formulated a
40

semiparametric approach that relaxes the assumption of normality, providing new
insights into chronological patterns in the timing of the adolescent growth spurt in Italy
(A'Hearn, Peracchi et al. 2009 forthcoming). Lang and Sunder use a Bayesian
approach, and the computer program BayesX, to estimate nonparametric additive
models (Lang and Sunder 2003). After comparing the performance of various
estimators for a height sample from Drenthe, The Netherlands, Jacobs et al. develop an
estimator that imposes no distributional restrictions but assumes there is a linear
relationship between the proportion of conscripts below the minimum height
requirement and the mean of the truncated sample (Jacobs, Katzur et al. 2008).
Two additional papers that can be classified as methods concern the collection
and organization of data. Grosh and Glewwe discuss the data gathering activities of the
World Bank and specifically the Living Standards Measurement Surveys, which have
prompted much anthropometric study in developing countries (Grosh and Glewwe
1995). Steckel converts height data assembled by the National Center for Health
Statistics, which are often cited as a global standard, into relatively fine gradations that
are useful in calculating precise percentiles of mean heights that are useful in historical
work (Steckel 1996)
New types of evidence combined with suitable theoretical and econometric
techniques can advance the field. In an interesting study on Russia, Federov and Sahn
demonstrate the advantages of panel data for investigating the socioeconomic
determinants of child growth (Fedorov and Sahn 2005). They estimate a dynamic
health demand function using a generalized method of moments estimator to account
for the endogeneity of lagged height in determining health incomes. While economic
historians seldom have access to panel data, these methods have something to offer in
interpreting results from cross-section studies.
It is difficult to anticipate where methodological developments may go from here.
It is clear, however, that the new methods now available have yet to diffuse through
practitioners in the field. Perhaps it is time to take stock of the techniques at hand by
applying them to a wide range of data sets now available. It is important to know how
empirical results and their interpretation differ under these various techniques.
41

Wages
Since 1995 ten papers have appeared on heights as a determinant of wages or
income, the majority appearing in economics journals. Development economists have
known for some time that taller and stronger men earned more in occupations for which
physical strength is an asset. This research continues with studies on coalminers in
India (Dinda, Gangopadhyay et al. 2006), workers in Brazil (Thomas and Strauss 1997),
and farmers in Ethiopia (Croppenstedt and Muller 2000). Schultz finds an 8 to 10 per
cent increase in wages for every centimeter increase in stature of men or women in
Ghana and Brazil, if heights are instrumented by availability of private and public inputs
to nutrition and health care (Schultz 2002).
In a new direction for this type of research, the majority of papers since 1995
consider the implications of stature and other anthropometric measures for income or
wages in developed countries (Meyer and Selmer 1999; Heineck 2005; Rashad 2008).
Some papers now investigate the implications not only of height but weight and beauty
for labor market remuneration (Harper 2000; Wada and Tekin 2007). Possibly
employers discriminate against obese people for higher-paying positions of leadership
and decision making in nine European countries (Atella, Pace et al. 2008). In
Denmark’s private sector, obesity was a disadvantage for women but actually beneficial
for men (Greve 2008).
A few years ago Persico et al. suggested that boys who were taller in
adolescence gain confidence, social skills and related forms of human capital that serve
them well in adult labor markets (Persico, Postlewaite et al. 2004). The most recent
strand of this research argues that taller people earn more because they have greater
cognitive ability. Case and Paxson challenge the Persico et al. mechanism linking
stature to higher wages, showing that people who were tall as adolescents were also
tall and did well on cognitive tests in early childhood, before schooling could have
selectively boosted their human capital (Case and Paxson 2008b). The benefits of
robust physical growth in childhood extend into adulthood as reflected in better cognitive
function, improved mental health and ability to perform activities of daily living (Case
42

and Paxson 2008a). This finding has several implications, including an explanation for
why economic returns to height continue to be observed in wealthy countries. It also
demonstrates the long reach into adulthood of early childhood conditions, suggesting
that societies probably under invest in pre-natal and early childhood health and nutrition.
If confirmed by other studies, the mechanism outlined by Case and Paxson will
have considerable influence on economic history, economic development and our
understanding of the sources of economic growth. It will bring nutritional status and
stature to the fore in comprehending rates of return to schooling, socioeconomic
inequality that stems from cognitive deficits, and conceivably rates of technological
change. One could imagine dissertations on whether nutritional improvements helped
trigger the Enlightenment or whether increases in agricultural productivity, which
preceded or accompanied industrialization in many countries, also contributed to
economic growth via more effective decision making. At this point I am not convinced
that such studies are warranted but the speculations are useful as an exercise in
pondering the testable implications of the link between nutrition and cognition.

Concluding Remarks
This review demonstrates that anthropometric history and now anthropometric
research of many kinds are vigorous areas of study. Since 1995 analyses of stature
and related anthropometric measures have appeared in approximately 325 publications
within the social sciences. Much of this work investigates research and policy questions
beyond the traditional bailiwick of anthropometric history, including biological welfare
during economic and political crises; anthropometric determinants of wages; the welfare
of women relative to men in the contemporary world; the fetal origins hypothesis; and
inequality in the developing world. The approach has also expanded within economic
history to consider the consequences of empire for colonials; the health of populations
lacking traditional measures of social performance; the consequences of smallpox; and
very long-term trends in health. Much has also been learned about socioeconomic
aspects of inequality, the welfare implications of industrialization, and socioeconomic
determinants of stature. The last is a work in progress and one may doubt whether
43

sufficient longitudinal evidence will become available for a complete understanding of
the variety and strength of pathways that affect human physical growth.
It is heartening that economists are integrated into the field and no longer need to
explain their methods in papers accepted by general-interest economics journals. On
the other hand, it is unfortunate that some areas of the social sciences publish little
height research despite its promise to advance knowledge of their core questions.
Perhaps sociologists and political scientists are unaware of the potential of using
heights for studying inequality, socioeconomic performance, gender disparities, healthcare needs, and the like. Maybe fixed costs of learning the relevant human biology is
an obstacle, and few researchers are willing to invest until a critical mass of fellow
travelers is engaged in dialogue.
The intellectual history of the new anthropometric history, and similar
experiences in other disciplines, demonstrate that new methods often meet skepticism if
not outright resistance. Those who challenge the status quo face a large body of
literature that has already defined important research questions and acceptable
approaches. New methods requiring unfamiliar data sources must address important
topics in which there is already an established interest, confirming some beliefs that are
well established while providing new, plausible results on others. Hopefully other areas
of the social sciences are approaching this transition.
A vast and growing collection of data is encouraging news. Like historians in
general, anthropometric historians have mined the archives and have coded millions of
observations on height, including nearly ten million in Columbia alone. People were
regularly measured for identification purposes on sources such as ID cards, slave
manifests, prison records, muster rolls, and so forth. With these resources scholars
have investigated the anthropometric histories of dozens of countries and new studies
appear on a regular basis. By the 1980s household surveys in numerous developing
countries regularly included anthropometric information along with various
socioeconomic variables. Several developed countries also collect height and weight
data to monitor health, illustrated by the National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth in the United States; the German
44

Socio-Economic Panel; and the social indicators report of the OECD (Society at a
Glance). Given the cost-effectiveness of height data, more evidence should be
collected to identify and target treatment for groups at risk in high-income countries.
Analysis of health indicators found on archaeological skeletons is an important
new frontier of anthropometric research. Such remains provide far more information on
health than stature alone. They contain life-cycle information, including childhood
indicators such as stature (inferred from femur length) and tooth enamel deformities,
indicators of aging such as degenerative joint disease and dental decay, as well as
information on trauma, infections and specific diseases such as TB and syphilis.
Perhaps one to two million individuals are available for study in various museums
across the globe, furnishing biological perspective on health during the major transitions
in human history such as the rise of agriculture and pastoralism; the emergence of
cities; global exploration and colonization, and industrialization. Accompanied by
ecological and socioeconomic context, these materials enable researchers to
investigate important aspects of social performance within the deep history of human
civilization.

45

References
A'Hearn, Brian (2003). "Anthropometric Evidence on Living Standards in Northern Italy,
1730-1860." Journal of Economic History 63(2): 351-381.
A'Hearn, Brian (2004). "A Restricted Maximum Likelihood Estimator for Truncated
Height Samples." Economics and Human Biology 2(1): 5-19.
A'Hearn, Brian (2006). "Remapping Italy's Path to the XIXth Century: Anthropometric
Signposts." Journal of European Economic History 35(2): 349-392.
A'Hearn, Brian, Franco Peracchi, et al. (2009 forthcoming). "Height and the Normal
Distribution: Evidence from Italian Military Data." Demography 46(1).
Akachi, Yoko and David Canning (2007). "The Height of Women in Sub-Saharan Africa:
The Role of Health, Nutrition, and Income in Childhood." Annals of Human
Biology 34(4): 397-410.
Alderman, Harold, John Hoddinott, et al. (2006). "Long Term Consequences of Early
Childhood Malnutrition." Oxford Economic Papers 58(3): 450-474.
Alderman, Harold, Hans Hoogeveen, et al. (2006). "Reducing Child Malnutrition in
Tanzania: Combined Effects of Income Growth and Program Interventions."
Economics and Human Biology 4(1): 1-23.
Alderman, Harold, Hans Hoogeveen, et al. (2009). "Preschool Nutrition and Subsequent
Schooling Attainment: Longitudinal Evidence from Tanzania." Economic
Development and Cultural Change 57(2): 239-60.
Allen, Robert C., Tommy Bengtsson, et al., Eds. (2005). Living Standards in the Past:
New Perspective on Well-Being in Asia and Europe. Oxford, Oxford University
Press.
Almond, Douglas (2006). "Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-Term Effects of
in Utero Influenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population." Journal of
Political Economy 114(4): 672-712.
Almond, Douglas and Bhashkar Mazumder (2005). "The 1918 Influenza Pandemic and
Subsequent Health Outcomes: An Analysis of SIPP Data." American Economic
Review 95(2): 258-262.
Alter, George (2004). "Height, Frailty, and the Standard of Living: Modeling the Effects
of Diet and Disease on Declining Mortality and Increasing Height." Population
Studies 58(3): 265-279.
Alter, George, Muriel Neven, et al. (2004). "Stature in Transition - a Micro-Level Study
from Nineteenth-Century Belgium." Social Science History 28(2): 231-247.
Alter, George and Michel Oris (2008). "Effects of Inheritance and Environment on the
Heights of Brothers in Nineteenth-Century Belgium." Human Nature 19(1): 44-55.
Alves, Denisard and Walter Belluzzo (2004). "Infant Mortality and Child Health in Brazil."
Economics and Human Biology 2(3): 391-410.
Ambadekar, N.N., S.N. Wahab, et al. (1999). "Effect of Child Labour on Growth of
Children." Public Health 113(6): 303-06.
Arcaleni, Emilia (2006). "Secular Trend and Regional Differences in the Stature of
Italians, 1854-1980." Economics and Human Biology 4(1): 24-38.
46

Arora, Suchit (2001). "Health, Human Productivity, and Long-Term Economic Growth."
Journal of Economic History 61(3): 699-749.
Atella, Vincenzo, Noemi Pace, et al. (2008). "Are Employers Discriminating with
Respect to Weight? European Evidence Using Quantile Regression." Economics
and Human Biology 6(3): 305-29.
Attanasio, Orazio, Luis Carlos Gomez, et al. (2004). "Child Health in Rural Columbia:
Determinants and Policy Interventions." Economics and Human Biology 2(3):
411-38.
Ayalew, Tekabe (2005). "Parental Preference, Heterogeneity, and Human Capital
Inequality." Economic Development and Cultural Change 53(2): 381-407.
Baltzer, Markus and Jörg Baten (2008). "Height, Trade, and Inequality in the Latin
American Periphery, 1950-2000." Economics and Human Biology 6(2): 191-203.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, et al. (2007). Long Run Health Impacts of Income
Shocks: Wine and Phylloxera in 19th Century France NBER Working Paper No.
W12895. Cambridge.
Barker, David J. P. (1994). Mothers, Babies and Disease in Later Life. London, BMJ
Publishing Group.
Bassino, Jean-Pascal (2006). "Inequality in Japan (1892-1941): Physical Stature,
Income and Health." Economics and Human Biology 4(1): 62-88.
Bassino, Jean-Pascal and Peter A. Coclanis (2008). "Economic Transformation and
Biological Welfare in Colonial Burma: Regional Differentiation in the Evolution of
Average Height." Economics and Human Biology 6(2): 212-27.
Baten, Jörg, Dorthee Crayen, et al. (2008). Poor, Hungary and Stupid: Numeracy and
the Poor Law in Britain, 1780-1850. Tübingen.
Baten, Jörg and John E. Murray (1997). "Bastardy in South Germany Revisited: An
Anthropometric Synthesis." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 28(1): 47-56.
Baten, Jörg and John E. Murray (1998). "Women's Stature and Marriage Markets in
Preindustrial Bavaria." Journal of Family History 23(2): 124-35.
Baten, Jörg and John E. Murray (2000). "Heights of Men and Women in 19th-Century
Bavaria: Economic, Nutritional, and Disease Influences." Explorations in
Economic History 37(4): 351-69.
Baten, Jörg and Andrea Wagner (2003). "Autarky, Market Disintegration, and Health:
The Mortality and Nutritional Crisis in Nazi Germany, 1933-37." Economics and
Human Biology 1(1): 1-28.
Behrman, Jere R. and Emmanuel Skoufias (2004). "Correlates and Determinants of
Child Anthropometrics in Latin America: Background and Overview of the
Symposium." Economics and Human Biology 2(3): 335-51.
Berkhofer, Robert F. Jr. (1988). White Conceptions of Indians. History of Indian-White
Relations, Vol. 4 of Handbook of North American Indians. W. E. Washburn.
Washington, Smithsonian: 522-47.
Bhattacharyya, Amiya Kumar (2006). "Composite Index of Anthropometric Failure
(CIAF) Classification: Is It More Useful?" Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 84(4): 335-336.
Blackwell, D. L., M. D. Hayward, et al. (2001). "Does Childhood Health Affect Chronic
Morbidity in Later Life?" Social Science and Medicine 52(8): 1269-1284.
47

Bodenhorn, Howard (1999). "A Troublesome Caste: Height and Nutrition of Antebellum
Virginia's Rural Free Blacks." Journal of Economic History 59(4): 972-996.
Bodenhorn, Howard (2002). "The Mulatto Advantage: The Biological Consequences of
Complexion in Rural Antebellum Virginia." Journal of Interdisciplinary History
33(1): 21-46.
Böetsch, Gilles, Aude Brus, et al. (2008). "Stature, Economy and Migration During the
19th Century: Comparative Analysis of Haute-Vienne and Hautes-Alpes, France."
Economics and Human Biology 6(1): 170-180.
Bogin, Barry (2001). The Growth of Humanity. New York, Wiley-Liss.
Bozić-Krstić, V.S., T.M. Pavlica, et al. (2004). "Body Height and Weight of Children in
Novi Sad." Annals of Human Biology 31(3): 356-363.
Bozzoli, Carlos, Angus S. Deaton, et al. (2007). Child Mortality, Income and Adult
Height NBER Working Paper No. 12966. Cambridge.
Brainerd, Elizabeth (2006). Reassessing the Standard of Living in the Soviet Union: An
Analysis Using Archival and Anthropometric Data. CEPR Discussion Paper No.
5525. London.
Brennan, Lance and John McDonald (2001). "The 'Inverted U' Hypothesis: Evidence
from Indian Height Data." Journal of Income Distribution 10(3/4): 77.
Brennan, Lance, John McDonald, et al. (1995). "Long-Term Change and Sex
Differences in the Heights of Afro-Caribbeans and Indo-Caribbeans." Social and
Economic Studies 44(1): 73-93.
Brennan, Lance, John McDonald, et al. (1997). "Towards an Anthropometric History of
Indians under British Rule." Research in Economic History 17: 185-246.
Cameron, Noël (2003). "Physical Growth in a Transitional Economy: The Aftermath of
South African Apartheid." Economics and Human Biology 1(1): 29-42.
Carrión, José M. Martínez and Juan J. Pérez Castejón (1998). "Height and Standards
of Living During the Industrialisation of Spain: The Case of Elche." European
Review of Economic History 2(2): 201-230.
Carson, Scott A. (2009 forthcoming-a). "African-American and White Inequality in the
Nineteenth-Century American South: A Biological Comparison." Journal of
Population Economics.
Carson, Scott Alan (2005). "The Biological Standard of Living in 19th Century Mexico
and in the American West." Economics and Human Biology 3(3): 405-419.
Carson, Scott Alan (2008a). "The Effect of Geography and Vitamin D on African
American Stature in the Nineteenth Century: Evidence from Prison Records."
Journal of Economic History 68(3): 812-31.
Carson, Scott Alan (2008b). "Health During Industrialization: Evidence from the
Nineteenth-Century Pennsylvania State Prison System." Social Science History
32(3): 347-72.
Carson, Scott Alan (2008c). "Inequality in the American South: Evidence from the
Nineteenth Century Missouri State Prison." Journal of Biosocial Science 40: 587605.
Carson, Scott Alan (2008d). "The Stature and Body Mass of Mexicans in the
Nineteenth-Century United States." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 39(2):
211-32.
48

Carson, Scott Alan (2009). "Geography, Insolation, and Vitamin D in Nineteenth Century
U.S. African-American and White Statures." Explorations in Economic History
46(1).
Carson, Scott Alan (2009 forthcoming-b). "Health, Wealth and Inequality: A Contribution
to the Debate About the Relationship between Inequality and Health." Historical
Methods(42).
Case, Anne and Christina Paxson (2008a). "Height, Health, and Cognitive Function at
Older Ages." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 98(2): 463-67.
Case, Anne and Christina Paxson (2008b). "Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and
Labor Market Outcomes " Journal of Political Economy 116(3): 499-532.
Cavelaars, A.E., A.E. Kunst, et al. (2000). "Persistent Variations in Average Height
between Countries and between Socio-Economic Groups: An Overview of 10
European Countries." Annals of Human Biology 27(4): 407-21.
Chakravarty, Satya R. and Amita Majumder (2005). "Measuring Human Poverty: A
Generalized Index and an Application Using Basic Dimensions of Life and Some
Anthropometric Indicators." Journal of Human Development 6(3): 275-299.
Chanda, Areendam, Lee A. Craig, et al. (2008). "Convergence (and Divergence) in the
Biological Standard of Living in the United States, 1820-1900." Cliometrica 2(1):
19-48.
Chaudhuri, Anoshua (2008). "Revisiting the Impact of a Reproductive Health
Intervention on Children's Height-for-Age with Evidence from Rural Bangladesh."
Economic Development and Cultural Change 56(3): 619-56.
Chilima, Dorothy (2000). "Assessing Nutritional Status and Functional Ability of Older
Adults in Developing Countries." Development in Practice 10(1): 108-113.
Christensen, T. L., C. B. Djurhuus, et al. (2007). "An Evaluation of the Relationship
between Adult Height and Health-Related Quality of Life in the General UK
Population." Clinical Endocrinology 67(3): 407-412.
Christiaensen, Luc and Harold Alderman (2004). "Child Malnutrition in Ethiopia: Can
Maternal Knowledge Augment the Role of Income?" Economic Development and
Cultural Change 52(2): 287-312.
Cinnirella, Francesco (2008a). "On the Road to Industrialization: Nutritional Status in
Saxony, 1690–1850 " Cliometrica 2(3): 229-57.
Cinnirella, Francesco (2008b). "Optimists or Pessimists?: A Reconsideration of
Nutritional Status in Britain, 1740-1865." European Review of Economic History
12(3): 325-54.
Coatsworth, John H. (1996). "Welfare." American Historical Review 101(1): 1-12.
Coclanis, Peter A. and John Komlos (1995). "Nutrition and Economic Development in
Post-Reconstruction South Carolina: An Anthropometric Approach." Social
Science History 19(1): 91-115.
Coelho, Philip R. P. and Robert A. McGuire (2000). "Diets Versus Diseases: The
Anthropometrics of Slave Children." Journal of Economic History 60(1): 232-46.
Cortez, Solange Aparecida Estevão, Marco Antonio Barbieri, et al. (2007). "Does Child
Labor Affect Final Height?" Occupational Medicine 10(2): 118-25.
Costa-Font, Joan and Joan Gil (2008). "Generational Effects and Gender Height
Dimorphism in Contemporary Spain." Economics and Human Biology 6(1): 1-18.
49

Costa, Dora L. (1998). "Unequal at Birth: A Long-Term Comparison of Income and Birth
Weight." Journal of Economic History 58(4): 987-1009.
Costa, Dora L. (2004). "The Measure of Man and Older Age Mortality: Evidence from
the Gould Sample " Journal of Economic History 64(1): 1-23.
Costa, Dora L. and Richard H. Steckel (1997). Long-Term Trends in Health, Welfare,
and Economic Growth in the United States. Health and Welfare During
Industrialization. R. H. Steckel and R. Floud. Chicago, University of Chicago
Press: 47-89.
Crafts, N. F. R. (1997). "Some Dimensions of the 'Quality of Life' During the British
Industrial Revolution." Economic History Review 50(4): 617-39.
Craig, Lee A., Barry Goodwin, et al. (2004). "The Effect of Mechanical Refrigeration on
Nutrition in the United States." Social Science History 28(2): 325-36.
Cranfield, J. and K. Inwood (2007). "The Great Transformation: A Long-Run Perspective
on Physical Well-Being in Canada." Economics and Human Biology 5(2): 204228.
Crimmins, E.M. and C.E. Finch (2006). "Infection, Inflammation, Height, and Longevity."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 103(2): 498-503.
Croppenstedt, Andre and Christophe Muller (2000). "The Impact of Farmers' Health and
Nutritional Status on Their Productivity and Efficiency: Evidence from Ethiopia."
Economic Development and Cultural Change 48(3): 475-502.
Cuff, Timothy (2005). The Hidden Cost of Economic Development: The Biological
Standard of Living in Antebellum Pennsylvania. Burlington, Vt., Ashgate
Publishing.
Cutler, David M, Angus S. Deaton, et al. (2006). The Determinants of Mortality NBER
Working Paper No. 11963. Cambridge.
Cvrcek, Tomas (2006). "Seasonal Anthropometric Cycles in a Command Economy: The
Case of Czechoslovakia, 1946-1966." Economics and Human Biology 4(3): 31741.
Dangour, A.D., A. Farmer, et al. (2003). "Anthropometric Status of Kazakh Children in
the 1990s." Economics and Human Biology 1(1): 43-53.
Danubio, Maria Enrica, et al. (2005). "Height and BMI of Italian Immigrants to the USA,
1908-1970." Economics and Human Biology 3(1): 33-43.
Dasgupta, Parasmani, Rana Saha, et al. (2008). "Changes in Body Size, Shape and
Nutritional Status of Middle-Class Bengali Boys of Kolkata, India, 1982-2002."
Economics and Human Biology 6(1): 75-94.
David, Vincent, Nincadam Narci, et al. (2004). "Private and Public Determinants of Child
Nutrition in Nicaragua and Western Honduras." Economics and Human Biology
2(3): 457-88.
De Beer, Hans (2004). "Observations on the History of Dutch Physical Stature from the
Late-Middle Ages to the Present." Economics and Human Biology 2(1): 45-55.
De Onis, Mercedes and Monika Blössner (2003). "The World Health Organization
Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition: Methodology and
Applications." International Journal of Epidemiology 32(4): 518-26.

50

De Souza, Roberta G. (2006). "Body Size and Growth: The Significance of Chronic
Malnutrition among the Casiguran Agta." Annals of Human Biology 33(5-6): 604619.
Deaton, Angus (2007). "Height, Health, and Development." Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 104(33): 13232-37.
Deaton, Angus (2008). "Height, Health, and Inequality: The Distribution of Adults
Heights in India." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 98(2): 46874.
Deaton, Angus (2003). "Health, Inequality, and Economic Development " Journal of
Economic Literature 41(1): 113-58.
Delajara, Marcelo (2004). "Economic Development and the Quality of Life of Children."
Revista de Historia Economica 22(1): 13-38.
Dick, Trevor (1995). Heights, Nutrition, and Per Capita Income: Canada, 1870-1915.
The Biological Standard of Living on Three Continents: Further Explorations in
Anthropometric History. J. Komlos. Boulder, Westview Press: 123-131.
Dinda, Soumyananda, P.K. Gangopadhyay, et al. (2006). "Height, Weight and Earnings
among Coalminers in India." Economics and Human Biology 4(3): 342-50.
Drukker, J.W. and Vincent Tassenaar (1997). Paradoxes of Modernization and Material
Well-Being in the Netherlands During the Nineteenth Century. Health and
Welfare During Industrialization. R. H. Steckel and R. Floud. Chicago, University
of Chicago Press: 331-377.
Drukker, Jan W. and Michiel A. Van Meerten (1995). Beyond Villermé and Quetelet:
The Quantitative Relation between Sex- and Age-Specific Height and Real Per
Capita Income. The Biological Standard of Living on Three Continents: Further
Explorations in Anthropometric History. J. Komlos. Boulder, Westview Press: 2557.
Duflo, Esther (2003). "Grandmothers and Granddaughters: Old Age Pensions and IntraHousehold Allocations in South Africa." World Bank Economic Review 17(1): 125.
Dye, Ira (1995). Heights of Early American Seafarers, 1812-1815. The Biological
Standard of Living on Three Continents: Further Explorations in Anthropometric
History. J. Komlos. Boulder, Westview Press: 95-104.
Easterlin, Richard A. (1999). "How Beneficent Is the Market? A Look at the Modern
History of Mortality." European Review of Economic History 3(3): 257-94.
Easterlin, Richard A. (2000). "The Worldwide Standard of Living since 1800." Journal of
Economic Perspectives 14(1): 7-26.
Engerman, Stanley (1997). The Standard of Living Debate in International Perspective:
Measures and Indicators. Health and Welfare During Industrialization. R. H.
Steckel and R. Floud. Chicago, University of Chicago Press: 17-45.
Eveleth, Phyllis B. and James M. Tanner (1976, 1990). Worldwide Variation in Human
Growth Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Ewert, Ulf Christian (2006). "The Biological Standard of Living on the Decline: Episodes
from Germany During Early Industrialisation." European Review of Economic
History 10(1): 51-88.
51

Federico, Giovanni (2003). "Heights, Calories and Welfare: A New Perspective on
Italian Industrialization, 1854–1913." Economics and Human Biology 1(3): 289308.
Fedorov, Leonid and David E. Sahn (2005). "Socioeconomic Determinants of Children's
Health in Russia: A Longitudinal Study." Economic Development and Cultural
Change 53(2): 479-500.
Feinstein, Charles H. (1998). "Pessimism Perpetuated: Real Wages and the Standard
of Living in Britain During and after the Industrial Revolution." Journal of
Economic History 58(3): 625-658.
Floud, Roderick and Bernard Harris (1997). Health, Height, and Welfare: Britain, 17001980. Health and Welfare During Industrialization. R. H. Steckel and R. Floud.
Chicago, University of Chicago Press: 91-126.
Fogel, Robert W. (2004a). The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700-2100.
New York, Cambridge University Press.
Fogel, Robert W. (2004b). "Health, Nutrition, and Economic Growth." Economic
Development and Cultural Change 52(3): 643-658.
Fogel, Robert W. and Dora L. Costa (1997). "A Theory of Technophysio Evolution, with
Some Implications for Forecasting Population, Health Care Costs, and Pension
Costs." Demography 34(1): 49-66.
Frank, Zephyr (2006). "Stature in Nineteenth-Century Rio De Janeiro: Preliminary
Evidence from Prison Records." Revista de Historia Economica 24(3): 465-489.
Gage, Timothy B. and Shelly M. Zansky (1995). "Anthropometric Indicators of Nutritional
Status and Level of Mortality." American Journal of Human Biology 7(6): 679691.
Gaiha, Raghav and Veena Kulkarni (2005). "Anthropometric Failure and Persistence of
Poverty in Rural India." International Review of Applied Economics 19(2): 179197.
Galiani, Sebastian and Ernesto Schargrodsky (2004). "Effects of Land Titling on Child
Health." Economics and Human Biology 2(3): 353-72.
Gallman, Robert E. (1996). "Dietary Change in Antebellum America." Journal of
Economic History 56(1): 193-201.
Gertler, Paul (2004). "Do Conditional Cash Transfers Improve Child Health? Evidence
from Progresa's Control Randomized Experiment." American Economic Review
94(2): 336-341.
Ghuman, Sharon, Jere R. Behrman, et al. (2005). "Family Background, Service
Providers, and Early Childhood Development in the Philippines: Proxies and
Interactions." Economic Development and Cultural Change 54(1): 129-164.
Gibson, John and Scott Rozelle (2003). "Poverty and Access to Roads in Papua New
Guinea." Economic Development and Cultural Change 52(1): 159-185.
Godoy, Ricardo A., William R. Leonard, et al. (2006). "Physical Stature of Adult
Tsimane' Amerindians, Bolivian Amazon in the 20th Century." Economics and
Human Biology 4(2): 184-205.
Godoy, Ricardo A., Victoria Reyes-Garcia, et al. (2005). "Human Capital, Wealth, and
Nutrition in the Bolivian Amazon." Economics and Human Biology 3(1).
52

Gomez-Mendoza, A. and V. Perez-Moreda (1995). Heights and Welfare in Spain, 19001930. The Biological Standard of Living on Three Continents: Further
Explorations in Anthropometric History. J. Komlos. Boulder, Westview Press: 8191.
Greve, Jane (2008). "Obesity and Labor Market Outcomes in Denmark." Economics
and Human Biology 6(3): 350-62.
Grosh, Margaret E. and Paul Glewwe (1995). A Guide to Living Standards
Measurement Study Surveys and Their Data Sets. LSMS Working Paper No.
120. Washington, DC, World Bank.
Grubb, Farley (1999a). "Lilliputians and Brobdingnagians, Stature in British Colonial
America: Evidence from Servants, Convicts, and Apprentices." Research in
Economic History 19: 139-203.
Grubb, Farley (1999b). "Withering Heights: Did Indentured Servants Shrink from an
Encounter with Malthus? A Comment on Komlos." Economic History Review
52(4): 714-729.
Guntupalli, Aravinda Meera and Joerg Baten (2006). "The Development and Inequality
of Heights in North, West, and East India 1915-1944." Explorations in Economic
History 43(4).
Gyenis, Gyula and Kálmán Joubert (2004). "Socioeconomic Determinants of
Anthropometric Trends among Hungarian Youth." Economics and Human
Biology 2(2): 321-33.
Gylfason, Thorvaldur (2007). "Why Europe Works Less and Grows Taller." Challenge
50(1): 21-39.
Hacker, J. David (2008). "Economic, Demographic, and Anthropometric Correlates of
First Marriage in the Mid-Nineteenth Century United States." Social Science
History 32(3): 307-45.
Haines, M. R., L. A. Craig, et al. (2003). "The Short and the Dead: Nutrition, Mortality,
and The "Antebellum Puzzle" In the United States." Journal of Economic History
63(2): 382-413.
Haines, Michael R. (2004). "Growing Incomes, Shrinking People - Can Economic
Development Be Hazardous to Your Health? Historical Evidence for the United
States, England, and the Netherlands in the Nineteenth Century." Social Science
History 28(2): 249-270.
Haines, Michael R. and Hallie J. Kitner (2008). "Can Breast Feeding Help You in Later
Life? Evidence from German Military Heights in the Early 20th Century."
Economics and Human Biology 6(3): 420-30.
Haines, Michael R. and Richard H. Steckel (2000). "Childhood Mortality and Nutritional
Status as Indicators of Standard of Living: Evidence from World War I Recruits in
the United States." Jahrbuch für Wirtschafts Geschichte(1): 49-53.
Hall, Stephen S. (2006). Size Matters: How Height Affects the Health, Happiness, and
Success of Boys - and the Men They Become. New York, Houghton Mifflin.
Handa, Sudhanshu (1999). "Maternal Education and Child Height." Economic
Development and Cultural Change 47(2): 421-39.
Harper, Barry (2000). "Beauty, Stature and the Labour Market: A British Cohort Study."
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 62(s1): 771-800.
53

Harris, Bernard (1997). "Growing Taller, Living Longer? Anthropometric History and the
Future of Old Age." Ageing and Society 17(5): 491-512.
Haughton, Dominique and Jonathan Haughton (1997). "Explaining Child Nutrition in
Vietnam." Economic Development and Cultural Change 45(3): 541-556.
Hawamdeh, H. and N. Spencer (2003). "Effect of Work Related Variables on Growth
among Working Boys in Jordan." Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health
57(2): 154-58.
Heckman, James J. (2006). "Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in
Disadvantaged Children." Science 312(30 June): 1900-02.
Heineck, Guido (2005). "Up in the Skies? The Relationship between Body Height and
Earnings in Germany." Labour 19(3): 469-489.
Heineck, Guido (2006). "Height and Weight in Germany, Evidence from the German
Socio-Economic Panel, 2002." Economics and Human Biology 4(3): 359-382.
Heintel, Markus and Joerg Baten (1998). "Smallpox and Nutritional Status in England,
1770-1873: On the Difficulties of Estimating Historical Heights." Economic History
Review 51(2): 360-71.
Hendriks, Sheryl (2005). "The Challenges Facing Empirical Estimation of Household
Food (in)Security in South Africa." Development Southern Africa 22(1): 103 123.
Henriksson, Karin M., U. Lindblad, et al. (2001). "Associations between Body Height,
Body Composition and Cholesterol Levels in Middle-Aged Men. The Coronary
Risk Factor Study in Southern Sweden (CRISS)." European Journal of
Epidemiology 17(6): 521-526.
Heyberger, L. (2007). "Toward an Anthropometric History of Provincial France, 17801920." Economics and Human Biology 5(2): 229-254.
Heyberger, Laurent (2006). "Évolution De La Stature Moyenne Considérée Comme
Indice De Niveau De Vie Biologique Dans Trois Régions Françaises, 1780-1940.
(Evolution of Mean Height as an Index of the Biological Standard of Living in
Three French Regions, 1780-1940)." Economies et Societes 35(8): 1031-1052.
Hiermeyer, Martin (2008). "The Trade-Off between a High and an Equal Biological
Standard of Living--Evidence from Germany." Economics and Human Biology
6(3): 431-45.
Hoch, Steven L. (1999). "Tall Tales: Anthropometric Measures of Well-Being in Imperial
Russia and the Soviet Union, 1821-1960." Slavic Review 58(1): 61-70.
Hoddinott, John (2006). "Shocks and Their Consequences across and within
Households in Rural Zimbabwe." Journal of Development Studies 42(2): 301321.
Honda, Gail (1997). Differential Structure, Differential Health: Industrialization in Japan,
1868-1940. Health and Welfare During Industrialization. R. H. Steckel and R.
Floud. Chicago, University of Chicago Press: 251-84.
Horrell, Sara H., David G. Meredith, et al. (2009). "Measuring Misery: Body Mass,
Ageing and Gender Inequality in Victorian London." Explorations in Economic
History 46(1).
Humphries, Jane (1997). "Short Stature among Coal-Mining Children: A Comment."
Economic History Review 50(3): 531-7.
54

Humphries, Jane and Timothy Leunig (2009a). "Cities, Market Integration and Going to
Sea: Stunting and the Standard of Living in Earlly Nineteenth Century England
and Wales." Economic History Review 49.
Humphries, Jane and Timothy Leunig (2009b). "Was Dick Whittington Taller Than
Those He Left Behind? Anthropometric Measures, Migration and the Quality of
Life in Early Nineteenth Century London?" Explorations in Economic History
46(1).
Jackson, R. V. (1996). "The Heights of Rural-Born English Female Convicts
Transported to New South Wales." Economic History Review 49(3): 584-590.
Jackson, R. V. and Mark Thomas (1995). "Height, Weight, and Wellbeing: Sydney
Schoolchildren in the Early Twentieth Century." Australian Economic History
Review 35(2): 39-65.
Jacobs, Jan, Tomek Katzur, et al. (2008). "On Estimators for Truncated Height
Samples." Economics and Human Biology 6(1): 43-56.
Jacobs, Jan and Vincent Tassenaar (2004). "Height, Income, and Nutrition in the
Netherlands: The Second Half of the 19th Century." Economics and Human
Biology 2(2): 181-95.
Johnson, Paul and Stephen Nicholas (1995). "Male and Female Living Standards in
England and Wales, 1812-1857: Evidence from Criminal Height Records."
Economic History Review 48(3): 470-81.
Johnson, Paul and Stephen Nicholas (1997). Health and Welfare of Women in the
United Kingdom, 1785-1920. Health and Welfare During Industrialization. R. H.
Steckel and R. Floud. Chicago, University of Chicago Press: 201-49.
Jousilahti, Pekka, Jaakko Tuomilehto, et al. (2000). "Relation of Adult Height to CauseSpecific and Total Mortality: A Prospective Follow-up Study of 31, 199 MiddleAged Men and Women in Finland " American Journal of Epidemiology 151(11):
1112-1120
Kirby, Peter (1995). "Causes of Short Stature among Coal-Mining Children, 1823-1850."
Economic History Review 48(4): 687-99
Kirby, Peter (1997). "Short Stature among Coal-Mining Children: A Rejoinder."
Economic History Review 50(3): 538-42.
Koepke, Nikola and Joerg Baten (2008). "Agricultural Specialization and Height in
Ancient and Medieval Europe." Explorations in Economic History 45(2).
Koepke, Nikola and Joerg Baten (2005). "The Biological Standard of Living in Europe
During the Last Two Millenni." European Review of Economic History 9: 61-95.
Komlos, John, Ed. (1995a). The Biological Standard of Living in Europe and America,
1700-1900 : Studies in Anthropometric History Brookfield, Vt., Variorum.
Komlos, John (1995b). "De L'importance De L'histoire Anthropométrique." Annales De
Démographie Historique: 211-223.
Komlos, John (1995c). "Le Statut Nutritionnel Des Eleves De L'ecole Polytechnique (the
Nutritional Status of Pupils at the Ecole Polytechnique)." Histoire, Economie et
Société 14(3): 463-477.
Komlos, John (1996). "Anomalies in Economic History: Toward a Resolution of The
"Antebellum Puzzle"." Journal of Economic History 56(1): 202-14.
55

Komlos, John (1998). "Shrinking in a Growing Economy? The Mystery of Physical
Stature During the Industrial Revolution." Journal of Economic History 58(3): 779802.
Komlos, John (1999). "On the Biological Standard of Living in Russia and the Soviet
Union." Slavic Review 58(1): 71-79.
Komlos, John (2001). "On the Biological Standard of Living of Eighteenth-Century
Americans: Taller, Richer, Healthier." Research in Economic History 20: 223-248.
Komlos, John (2003a). "Access to Food and the Biological Standard of Living:
Perspectives on the Nutritional Status of Native Americans." American Economic
Review 93(1): 252-55.
Komlos, John (2003b). "Histoire Anthropometrique: Bilan De Deux Decennies De
Recherche. (Anthropometric History: The Achievements of Two Decades of
Research. With English Summary.)." Economies et Societes 37(1): 1-24.
Komlos, John (2004). "How to (and How Not to) Analyze Deficient Height Samples - an
Introduction." Historical Methods 37(4): 160-173.
Komlos, John (2006). "The Height Increments and BMI Values of Elite Central
European Children and Youth in the Second Half of the 19th Century." Annals of
Human Biology 33(3): 309-318.
Komlos, John (2007a). "Anthropometric Evidence on Economic Growth, Biological WellBeing and Regional Convergence in the Habsburg Monarchy, C. 1850-1910."
Cliometrica 1(3): 211-37.
Komlos, John (2007b). "On English Pygmies and Giants: The Physical Stature of
English Youth in the Late-18th and Early-19th Centuries." Research in Economic
History 25: 149-68.
Komlos, John (2008). "Stagnation of Heights among Second-Generation U.S.-Born
Army Personnel." Social Science Quarterly 89(2): 445-55.
Komlos, John and Bjorn Alecke (1996). "The Economics of Antebellum Slave Heights
Reconsidered." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 26(3): 437-57.
Komlos, John and Jörg Baten, Eds. (1998). The Biological Standard of Living in
Comparative Perspective. Stuttgart, Franz Steiner Verlag.
Komlos, John and Marieluise Baur (2004). "From the Tallest to (One of) the Fattest: The
Enigmatic Fate of the American Population in the 20th Century " Economics and
Human Biology 2(1): 54-74.
Komlos, John and Peter A. Coclanis (1997). "On the Puzzling Cycle in the Biological
Standard of Living: The Case of Antebellum Georgia." Explorations in Economic
History 34(4): 433-59.
Komlos, John and Timothy Cuff, Eds. (1998). Classics of Anthropometric History: A
Selected Anthology. St. Katharinen, Scripta Mercaturae Verlag.
Komlos, John H., Ed. (1995d). The Biological Standard of Living on Three Continents:
Further Explorations in Anthropometric History. Boulder, Westview Press.
Komlos, John, Michel Hau, et al. (2003). "An Anthropometric History of Early-Modern
France." European Review of Economic History 7(2): 159-189.
Komlos, John and Markus Heintel (1999). "The Threat of a Malthusian Crisis in the
Habsburg Monarchy." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 30(1): 91-98.
56

Komlos, John and Peter Kriwy (2002). "Social Status and Adult Heights in the Two
Germanies." Annals of Human Biology 29(6): 641-648.
Komlos, John and Peter Kriwy (2003). "The Biological Standard of Living in the Two
Germanies." German Economic Review 4(4): 459-473.
Komlos, John and Benjamin E. Lauderdale (2007). "Underperformance in Affluence:
The Remarkable Relative Decline in American Heights in the Second Half of the
20th-Century." Social Science Quarterly 88(2): 283-305.
Komlos, John and Albrecht Ritschl (1995). "Holy Days, Work Days, and the Standard of
Living in the Habsburg Monarchy." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 26(1): 5766.
Kopczynski, Michal (2007). "Agrarian Reforms, Agrarian Crisis and the Biological
Standard of Living in Poland, 1844-1892." Economics and Human Biology 5(3):
458-470.
Lang, Stefan and Marco Sunder (2003). "Non-Parametric Regression with Bayesx: A
Flexible Estimation of Trends in Human Physical Stature in 19th Century
America." Economics and Human Biology 1(1): 77-89.
Lavy, Victor and Et Al. (1996). "Quality of Health Care, Survival and Health Outcomes in
Ghana." Journal of Health Economics 15(3): 333-357.
Leunig, Timothy and Hans-Joachim Voth (1998). "Smallpox Did Reduce Height: A Reply
to Our Critics." Economic History Review 51(2): 372-81.
Leunig, Timothy and Hans-Joachim Voth (2001). "Smallpox Really Did Reduce Height:
A Reply to Razzell." Economic History Review 54(1): 110-14.
Leunig, Timothy and Hans-Joachim Voth (2006). "Comment on 'Seat of Death and
Terror'." Economic History Review 59(3): 607-16.
Linares, Claudia and Dejun Su (2005). "Body Mass Index and Health among Union
Army Veterans: 1891-1905." Economics and Human Biology 3(3): 367-87.
Lintsi, Mart and Helje Kaarma (2006). "Growth of Estonian Seventeen-Year-Old Boys
During the Last Two Centuries." Economics and Human Biology 4(1): 89-103.
Logan, Trevon (2006). "Food, Nutrition, and Substitution in the Late Nineteenth
Century." Explorations in Economic History 43(3).
Lopez-Alonso, M. (2007). "Growth with Inequality: Living Standards in Mexico, 18501950." Journal of Latin American Studies 39: 81-105.
Lopez-Alonso, Moramay and Raul Porras Condey (2003). "The Ups and Downs of
Mexican Economic Growth: The Biological Standard of Living and Inequality,
1870-1950." Economics and Human Biology 1(2): 169-186.
López-Casasnovas, Guillem, Berta Rivera, et al. (2005). Health and Economic Growth :
Findings and Policy Implications. Cambridge, MIT Press.
Louw, G. J. and Maciej Henneberg (1997). "Lack of a Secular Trend in Adult Stature in
White South African Males Born between 1954 and 1975." Homo - Journal of
Comparative Human Biology 48(1): 54-61.
Lundberg, Shelly (2005). "Sons, Daughters, and Parental Behaviour." Oxford Review of
Economic Policy 21(3).
Mahal, Ajay and Anup K. Karan (2008). "Adequacy of Dietary Intakes and Poverty in
India: Trends in the 1990s." Economics and Human Biology 6(1): 57-74.
57

Maloney, Thomas N. and Scott Alan Carson (2008). "Living Standards in Black and
White: Evidence from the Heights of Ohio Prison Inmates, 1829-1913."
Economics and Human Biology 6(2): 237-51.
Martinez-Carrion, Jose. M. and J. Moreno-Lazaro (2007). "Was There an Urban Height
Penalty in Spain, 1840-1913?" Economics and Human Biology 5(1): 144-164.
Meisel, Adolfo and Margarita Vega (2007). "The Biological Standard of Living (and Its
Convergence) in Colombia, 1870-2003." Economics and Human Biology 5(1):
100-122.
Meng, Xin, Xiaodong Gong, et al. (2009). "Impact of Income Growth and Economic
Reform on Nutrition Availability in Urban China: 1986-2000." Economic
Development and Cultural Change 57(2): 261-295.
Meyer, Haakon E. and Randi Selmer (1999). "Income, Educational Level and Body
Height." Annals of Human Biology 26(3): 219-227.
Mironov, Boris N. (1999a). "New Approaches to Old Problems: The Well-Being of the
Population of Russia from 1821 to 1910 as Measured by Physical Stature."
Slavic Review 58(1): 1-26.
Mironov, Boris N. (1999b). "Tall Requirements And "Small" Reality." Slavic Review
58(1): 80-90.
Mironov, Boris N. (2005). The Burden of Grandeur: Physical and Economic Well-Being
of the Russian Population in the Eighteenth Century. Living Standards in the
Past: New Perspective on Well-Being in Asia and Europe. R. C. Allen, T.
Bengtsson and M. Dribe. Oxford, Oxford University Press: 255-75.
Mironov, Boris N. (2007). "Birth Weight and Physical Stature in St. Petersburg: Living
Standards of Women in Russia, 1980-2005." Economics and Human Biology
5(1): 123(21).
Mironov, Boris N. and Brian A'Hearn (2008). "Russian Living Standards under the
Tsars: Anthropometric Evidence from the Volga." Journal of Economic History
68(3): 900-29.
Mokyr, Joel and Cormac O'Grada (1996). "Height and Health in the United Kingdom
1815–1860: Evidence from the East India Company Army." Explorations in
Economic History 33(2).
Moradi, Alexander and Joerg Baten (2005). "Inequality in Sub-Saharan Africa: New
Data and New Insights from Anthropometric Estimates." World Development.
33(8).
Morales, Rolando, Ana María Aguilar, et al. (2003). "Geography and Culture Matter for
Malnutrition in Bolivia." Economics and Human Biology 2(3): 373-89.
Morgan, Stephen L. (2000). "Richer and Taller: Stature and Living Standards in China,
1979-1995." China Journal(44): 1-39.
Morgan, Stephen L. (2004). "Economic Growth and the Biological Standard of Living in
China, 1880–1930." Economics and Human Biology 2(2): 197-218.
Morgan, Stephen L. (2009). "Stature and Economic Development in South China, 18101880." Explorations in Economic History 46(1).
Morgan, Stephen L. and Shiyung Liu (2007). "Was Japanese Colonialism Good for the
Welfare of Taiwanese? Stature and the Standard of Living." China Quarterly 192:
990-1013.
58

Mosk, Carl (1996). Making Health Work: Human Growth in Modern Japan. Berkeley,
University of California Press.
Murray, John E. (1997). "Standards of the Present for People of the Past: Height,
Weight, and Mortality among Men of Amherst College, 1834-1949." Journal of
Economic History 57(3): 585-606.
Neves, Walter Alves and Maria Antonieta Costa (1998). "Adult Stature and Standard of
Living in the Prehistoric Atacama Desert." Current Anthropology 39(2): 278-281.
Nicholas, Stephen and Deborah Oxley (1996). "Living Standards of Women in England
and Wales, 1785-1815: New Evidence from Newgate Prison Records." Economic
History Review 49(3): 591-599.
Nicholas, Stephen and Richard H. Steckel (1997). "Tall but Poor: Living Standards of
Men and Women in Pre-Famine Ireland." Journal of European Economic History
26(1): 105-134.
Olds, Kelly B. (2003). "The Biological Standard of Living in Taiwan under Japanese
Occupation." Economics and Human Biology 1(2): 187-206.
Osmani, Siddiq and Amartya Sen (2003). "The Hidden Penalties of Gender Inequality:
Fetal Origins of Ill-Health." Economics and Human Biology 1(1): 105-21.
Oxley, Deborah (2003). "'the Seat of Death and Terror': Urbanization, Stunting, and
Smallpox." Economic History Review 56(4): 623-56.
Oxley, Deborah (2004). "Living Standards of Women in Prefamine Ireland." Social
Science History 28(2): 271-295.
Oxley, Deborah Jayne (2006). "'Pitted but Not Pittied', or Does Smallpox Make You
Small?" Economic History Review 41(3): 617-35.
Padez, Christina (2002). "Stature and Stature Distribution in Portuguese Male Adults
1904-1998: The Role of Environmental Factors." American Journal of Human
Biology 14(1): 39-49.
Padez, Christina (2003). "Secular Trend in Stature in the Portuguese Population (19042000)." Annals of Human Biology 30(3): 262-278.
Padez, Christina and F. Johnston (1999). "Secular Trends in Male Adult Height 19041996 in Relation to Place of Residence and Parent's Educational Level in
Portugal." Annals of Human Biology 26(3): 287-298.
Pak, Sunyoung (2004). "The Biological Standard of Living in the Two Koreas."
Economics and Human Biology 2(3): 511-521.
Pande, Rohini P. (2003). "Selective Gender Differences in Childhood Nutrition and
Immunization in Rural India: The Role of Siblings." Demography 40(3): 395-418.
Pelletier, David L. and Edward A. Frongillo (2003). "Changes in Child Survival Are
Strongly Associated with Changes in Malnutrition in Developing Countries."
Journal of Nutrition 133: 107-19.
Peracchi, Franco (2008). "Height and Economic Development in Italy, 1730-1980."
American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 98(2): 475-81.
Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postlewaite, et al. (2004). "The Effect of Adolescent Experience
on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height " Journal of Political Economy
112(5): 1019-53.

59

Pongou, Roland, Joshua Salomon, et al. (2006). "Health Impacts of Macroeconomic
Crises and Policies: Determinants of Variation in Childhood Malnutrition Trends
in Cameroon." International Journal of Epidemiology 35(3): 648-656.
Popkin, Barry and Shu Wen Ng (2007). "The Nutrition Transition in High and LowIncome Countries: What Are the Policy Lessons?" Agricultural Economics 37(s1):
199-211.
Prince, Joseph M. and Richard H. Steckel (2003). "Nutritional Success on the Great
Plains: Nineteenth-Century Equestrian Nomads." Journal of Interdisciplinary
History 33(3): 353-84.
Pritchett, Jonathan B. (1997). "The Interregional Slave Trade and the Selection of
Slaves for the New Orleans Market." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 28(1):
57-85.
Pritchett, Jonathan B. and Herman Freudenberger (1992). "A Peculiar Sample: The
Selection of Slaves for the New Orleans Market." Journal of Economic History
52(1): 109-127.
Rashad, Inas (2008). "Height, Health, and Income in the U.S., 1984-2005." Economics
and Human Biology 6(1): 108-126.
Razzell, Peter (1998). "Did Smallpox Reduce Height?" Economic History Review 51(2):
351-9.
Razzell, Peter (2001). "Did Smallpox Reduce Height? A Final Comment." Economic
History Review 54(1): 108-9.
Rees, R., John Komlos, et al. (2003). "Optimal Food Allocation in a Slave Economy."
Journal of Population Economics 16(1): 21-36.
Riley, James C. (1994). "Height, Nutrition, and Mortality Risk Reconsidered." Journal of
Interdisciplinary History 24(3): 465-492.
Rogers, Beatrice Lorge (1996). "The Implications of Female Household Headship for
Food Consumption and Nutritional Status in the Dominican Republic." World
Development 24(1): 113-128.
Roggero, P., V. Mangiaterra, et al. (2007). "The Health Impact of Child Labor in
Developing Countries: Evidence from Cross-Country Data." American Journal of
Public Health 97(2): 271-275.
Rubalcava, Luis N. and Graciela M. Teruel (2004). "The Role of Maternal Cognitive
Ability on Child Health." Economics and Human Biology 2(3): 439-55.
Sahn, David E. and D.C. Stifel (2002). "Parental Preferences for Nutrition of Boys and
Girls: Evidence from Africa." Journal of Development Studies 39(1): 21-45.
Salvatore, Ricardo D. (2004a). "Stature Decline and Recovery in a Food-Rich Export
Economy: Argentina 1900–1934." Explorations in Economic History 41(3): 233255.
Salvatore, Ricardo D. (2004b). "Stature, Nutrition, and Regional Convergence: The
Argentine Northwest in the First Half of the Twentieth Century." Social Science
History 28(2): 297-324.
Salvatore, Ricardo D. (2009). "Stature Growth in Industrializing Argentina: The Buenos
Aires Industrial Belt 1916-1950 " Explorations in Economic History 46(1).

60

Sandberg, Lars G. and Richard H. Steckel (1997). Was Industrialization Hazardous to
Your Health? Not in Sweden! Health and Welfare During Industrialization. R. H.
Steckel and R. Floud. Chicago, University of Chicago Press: 127-159.
Schmidt, I.M., M.H. Jørgensen, et al. (1995). "Height of Conscripts in Europe: Is
Postneonatal Mortality a Predictor?" Annals of Human Biology 22(1): 57-67.
Schneider, Ryan (1996). "Historical Note on Height and Parental Consumption
Decisions." Economic Letters 50(2): 279-283.
Schultz, T. Paul (2002). "Wage Gains Associated with Height as a Form of Health
Human Capital." American Economic Review 92(2): 349-353.
Schwekendiek, Daniel (2008a). "Determinants of Well-Being in North Korea: Evidence
from the Post-Famine Period." Economics and Human Biology 6(3): 446-54.
Schwekendiek, Daniel (2008b). "The North Korean Standard of Living During the
Famine." Social Science and Medicine 66(3): 596-608.
Senauer, Benjamin and Ana L. Kassouf (2000). "The Effects of Breastfeeding on Health
and the Demand for Medical Assistance among Children in Brazil." Economic
Development and Cultural Change 48(4): 719-736.
Shariff, Abusaleh and Namkee Ahn (1995). "Mother's Education Effect on Child Health:
An Econometric Analysis of Child Anthropometry in Uganda." Indian Economic
Review 30(2): 203-222.
Silventoinen, Karri (2003). "Determinants of Variation in Adult Body Height." Journal of
Biosocial Science 35(2): 263-285.
Smith, Patricia K., Barry Bogin, et al. (2003). "Economic and Anthropological
Assessments of the Health of Children in Maya Immigrant Families in the US."
Economics and Human Biology 1(2): 145-60.
Sokoloff, Kenneth L. (1995). The Heights of Americans in Three Centuries: Some
Economic and Demographic Implications. The Biological Standard of Living on
Three Continents: Further Explorations in Anthropometric History. J. Komlos.
Boulder, Westview Press: 133-150.
Solakoglu, Ebru Guven (2007). "The Net Effect of Railroads on Stature in the
Postbellum Period." Research in Economic History 24: 105-117.
Steckel, Richard H. (1983). "Height and Per Capita Income." Historical Methods 16: 1-7.
Steckel, Richard H. (1986). "A Peculiar Population: The Nutrition, Health, and Mortality
of American Slaves from Childhood to Maturity." Journal of Economic History
46(3): 721-741.
Steckel, Richard H. (1995a). "New Perspectives on the Standard of Living." Challenge
38(5): 12-18.
Steckel, Richard H. (1996). "Percentiles of Modern Height Standards for Use in
Historical Research." Historical Methods 29(4): 157.
Steckel, Richard H. (1998). "Strategic Ideas in the Rise of the New Anthropometric
History and Their Implications for Interdisciplinary Research." Journal of
Economic History 58(3): 803-821.
Steckel, Richard H. (1999). "Nutritional Status in the Colonial American Economy."
William and Mary Quarterly 56(1): 31-52.
Steckel, Richard H. (2000). "Diets Versus Diseases in the Anthropometrics of Slave
Children: A Reply." Journal of Economic History 60(1): 247-259.
61

Steckel, Richard H. (2003a). "Assessing Long-Term Trends in Health." Indicators: The
Journal of Social Health 2(3): 5-23.
Steckel, Richard H. (2003b). "What Can Be Learned from Skeletons That Might Interest
Economists, Historians, and Other Social Scientists?" American Economic
Review 93(2): 213-220.
Steckel, Richard H. (2004). "New Light on The "Dark Ages": The Remarkably Tall
Stature of Northern European Men During the Medieval Era." Social Science
History 28(2): 211-229.
Steckel, Richard H. (2005a). "Health and Nutrition in Pre-Columbian America: The
Skeletal Evidence." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 36(1): 1-32.
Steckel, Richard H. (2005b). Health and Nutrition in the Pre-Industrial Era: Insights
from a Millennium of Average Heights in Northern Europe. Living Standards in
the Past : New Perspectives on Well-Being in Asia and Europe. R. C. Allen, T.
Bengtsson and M. Dribe. Oxford, Oxford University Press: 227-53.
Steckel, Richard H. (2005c). "Young Adult Mortality Following Severe Physiological
Stress in Childhood: Skeletal Evidence." Economics and Human Biology 3(2):
314-28.
Steckel, Richard H. (2006). Health, Nutrition and Physical Well-Being. Historical
Statistics of the United States: Millennial Edition. S. B. Carter, S. Gartner, M. R.
Haineset al. New York, Cambridge University Press. 2: 499-620.
Steckel, Richard H. (2008). "Biological Measures of the Standard of Living." Journal of
Economic Perspectives 22(1): 129-152.
Steckel, Richard H. and Roderick Floud (1997). Health and Welfare During
Industrialization. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Steckel, Richard H. and Joseph M. Prince (2001). "Tallest in the World: Native
Americans of the Great Plains in the Nineteenth Century." American Economic
Review 91(1): 287-294.
Steckel, Richard H. and Jerome C. Rose, Eds. (2002a). The Backbone of History :
Health and Nutrition in the Western Hemisphere. Cambridge ; New York,
Cambridge University Press.
Steckel, Richard H. and Jerome C. Rose (2002b). Conclusions. The Backbone of
History: Health and Nutrition in the Western Hemisphere. R. H. Steckel and J. C.
Rose. New York, Cambridge University Press: 583-89.
Steckel, Richard. H. (1995b). "Stature and the Standard of Living." Journal of Economic
Literature 33(4): 1903-1940.
Stegl, Mojgan and Joerg Baten (2009). "Tall and Shrinking Muslims, Short and Growing
Europeans: The Long-Run Welfare Development of the Middle East, 1850-1980."
Explorations in Economic History 46(1).
Stillman, Steven (2006). "Health and Nutrition in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet
Union During the Decade of Transition: A Review of the Literature." Economics
and Human Biology 4(1): 104-46.
Stillman, Steven and Duncan Thomas (2008). "Nutritional Status During an Economic
Crisis: Evidence from Russia." Economic Journal 118(531): 1385-1417.
Strauss, John (1995). "Nutrition and Poverty." Journal of Economic Literature 33(2):
860-862.
62

Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas (1995). Human Resources: Empirical Modeling of
Household and Family Decisions. Handbook of Development Economics. H.
Chenery and T. N. Srinivasan. 3A: 1883-2023.
Sunder, Marco (2003). "The Making of Giants in a Welfare State: The Norwegian
Experience in the 20th Century." Economics and Human Biology 1(2): 267-276.
Sunder, Marco (2004). "The Height of Tennessee Convicts: Another Piece of The
"Antebellum Puzzle"." Economics and Human Biology 2(1): 75-86.
Sunder, Marco (2007). Passports and Economic Development: An Anthropometric
History of the US Elite in the Nineteenth Century. Munich, Ludwig-MaximiliansUniversität. Ph.D.
Sunder, Marco and Ulrich Woitek (2005). "Boom, Bust and the Human Body: Further
Evidence on the Relationship between Height and Business Cycles." Economics
and Human Biology 3(3): 450-66.
Svedberg, Peter (1999). "841 Million Undernourished?" World Development 27(12):
2081-2098.
Svedberg, Peter (2000). Poverty and Undernutrition--Theory, Measurement and Policy.
Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Svedberg, Peter (2002). "Undernutrition Overestimated." Economic Development and
Cultural Change 51(1): 5-36.
Szreter, Simon and Graham Mooney (1998). "Urbanization, Mortality, and the Standard
of Living Debate: New Estimates of the Expectation of Life at Birth in NineteenthCentury British Cities." Economic History Review 51(1): 84-112.
Tadman, Michael (2000). "The Demographic Cost of Sugar: Debates on Slave Societies
and Natural Increase in the Americas " American Historical Review 105(5): 153475.
Tarozzi, Alessandro and Aprajit Mahajan (2007). "Child Nutrition in India in the
Nineties." Economic Development and Cultural Change 55(3): 441-86.
Tarp, Finn, Kenneth Simler, et al. (2002). "The Robustness of Poverty Profiles
Reconsidered." Economic Development and Cultural Change 51(1): 77-108.
Tatarek, Nancy E. (2006). "Geographic Height Variation among Ohio Caucasian Male
Convicts Born 1780-1849." Economics and Human Biology 4(2).
Thomas, Duncan, Victor Lavy, et al. (1996). "Public Policy and Anthropometric
Outcomes in the Côte d'Ivoire." Journal of Public Economics 61(2): 155-92.
Thomas, Duncan and John Strauss (1997). "Health and Wages: Evidence on Men and
Women in Urban Brazil (Analysis of Data on Health)." Journal of Econometrics
77(1): 159-86.
Turrell, Gavin (2002). "Socio-Economic Position and Height in Early Adulthood."
Australian & New Zealand Journal of Public Health 26(5): 468-472.
Twarog, Sophia (1997). Heights and Living Standards in Germany, 1850-1939: The
Case of Wurttemberg. Health and Welfare During Industrialization. R. H. Steckel
and R. Floud. Chicago, University of Chicago Press: 285-330.
Valdivia, Martín (2004). "Poverty, Health Infrastructure and the Nutrition of Peruvian
Children." Economics and Human Biology 2(3): 489-510.

63

Vecchi, Giovanni and Michela Coppola (2006). "Nutrition and Growth in Italy, 18611911: What Macroeconomic Data Hide." Explorations in Economic History 43(3):
438-464.
Vignerová, J., M. Brabec, et al. (2006). "Two Centuries of Growth among Czech
Children and Youth." Economics and Human Biology 4(2): 237-52.
Voss, L.D., J. Mulligan, et al. (1998). "Short Stature at School Entry as an Index of
Social Deprivation? (the Wessex Growth Study)." Child: Care, Health &
Development 24(2): 145-156.
Voth, Hans-Joachim (1995). "Height, Nutrition, and Labor: Recasting The "Austrian
Model"." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 25(4): 627-636.
Voth, Hans-Joachim (1996). "Physical Exertion and Stature in the Habsburg Monarchy,
1730-1800." Journal of Interdisciplinary History 27(2): 263-275.
Voth, Hans-Joachim and Timothy Leunig (1996). "Did Smallpox Reduce Height? Stature
and the Standard of Living in London, 1770-1873." Economic History Review
49(3): 541-560.
Wada, Roy and Erdal Tekin (2007). Body Composition and Wages NBER Working
Paper No. 13595. Cambridge.
Webb, Elizabeth Alice, Diana Kuh, et al. (2008). "Estimation of Secular Trends in Adult
Height, and Childhood Socioeconomic Circumstances in Three Eastern
European Populations." Economics and Human Biology 6(2): 228-236.
Webb, Patrick and Steven Block (2004). "Nutrition Information and Formal Schooling as
Inputs to Child Nutrition." Economic Development and Cultural Change 52(4):
801-820.
Weil, David N. (2007). "Accounting for the Effect of Health on Economic Growth."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3): 1265-1306.
Weir, David R. (1997). Economic Welfare and Physical Well-Being in France, 17501990. Health and Welfare During Industrialization. R. H. Steckel and R. Floud.
Chicago, University of Chicago Press: 161-200.
Wheatcroft, Stephen George (1999). "The Great Leap Upwards: Anthropometric Data
and Indicators of Crises and Secular Change in Soviet Welfare Levels, 18801960." Slavic Review 27(1): 27-60.
Wheatcroft, Stephen George (2009). "The First Thirty Five Years of Soviet Living
Standards: Secular Growth and Conjunctural Crises in a Time of Famine."
Explorations in Economic History 46(1).
Whitwell, Greg, Christine De Souza, et al. (1997). Height, Health, and Economic Growth
in Australia, 1860-1940. Health and Welfare During Industrialization. R. H.
Steckel and R. Floud. Chicago, University of Chicago Press: 379-422.
Whitwell, Greg and Stephen Nicholas (2001). "Weight and Welfare of Australians, 18901940." Australian Economic History Review 41(2): 159-175.
WHO (2001). Macroeconomics and Health: Investing in Health for Economic
Development. Geneva, World Health Organization.
Wilk, Richard (1999). "Quality of Life and the Anthropological Perspective." Feminist
Economics 5(2): 91-93.
Woitek, Ulrich (2003). "Height Cycles in the 18th and 19th Centuries." Economics and
Human Biology 1(2): 243-57.
64

Yamauchi, Futoshi (2008). "Early Childhood Nutrition, Schooling, and Sibling Inequality
in a Dynamic Context: Evidence from South Africa." Economic Development and
Cultural Change 56(3): 657-682.

65

Endnotes
1

The 1995 review omitted a few publications. The current effort attempts to be more comprehensive

within the boundaries noted in the introduction. Books and papers in edited collections are more difficult
than journal articles to interrogate electronically and unfortunately some of these were probably missed,
especially if they made occasional reference to stature.

66

