                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          MISPRICING OF S&P 500 INDEX OPTIONS

                                     George M. Constantinides
                                      Jens Carsten Jackwerth
                                        Stylianos Perrakis

                                        Working Paper 14544
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14544


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by George M. Constantinides, Jens Carsten Jackwerth, and Stylianos Perrakis. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Mispricing of S&P 500 Index Options
George M. Constantinides, Jens Carsten Jackwerth , and Stylianos Perrakis
NBER Working Paper No. 14544
December 2008
JEL No. G12,G13

                                             ABSTRACT

Widespread violations of stochastic dominance by one-month S&P 500 index call options over 1986-2006
imply that a trader can improve expected utility by engaging in a zero-net-cost trade net of transaction
costs and bid-ask spread. Although pre-crash option prices conform to the Black-Scholes-Merton
model reasonably well, they are incorrectly priced if the distribution of the index return is estimated
from time-series data. Substantial violations by post-crash OTM calls contradict the notion that the
problem primarily lies with the left-hand tail of the index return distribution and that the smile is too
steep. The decrease in violations over the post-crash period 1988-1995 is followed by a substantial
increase over 1997-2006 which may be due to the lower quality of the data but, in any case, does not
provide evidence that the options market is becoming more rational over time.


George M. Constantinides                            Stylianos Perrakis
The University of Chicago                           Concordia University
Booth School of Business                            SPerrakis@jmsb.concordia.ca
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
gmc@ChicagoBooth.edu

Jens Carsten Jackwerth
University of Konstanz
Jens.Jackwerth@uni-konstanz.de
A robust prediction of the celebrated Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1973)
(BSM) option pricing model is that the volatility implied by market prices of
options is constant across strike prices. Rubinstein (1994) tested this prediction on
the S&P 500 index options (SPX), traded on the Chicago Board Options Exchange,
an exchange that comes close to the dynamically complete and perfect market
assumptions underlying the BSM model.               From the start of the exchange-based
trading in April 1986 until the October 1987 stock market crash, the implied
volatility is a moderately downward-sloping or u-shaped function of the strike price,
a pattern referred to as the “volatility smile”, also observed in international
markets and to a lesser extent in the prices of individual-stock options. Following
the crash, the volatility smile is typically more pronounced and downward sloping,
often called a “volatility skew”.1
          An equivalent statement of the above prediction of the BSM model, that the
volatility implied by market prices of options is constant across strike prices, is that
the risk-neutral stock price distribution is lognormal. Jackwerth and Rubinstein
(1996), Ait-Sahalia and Lo (1998), Jackwerth (2000), and Ait-Sahalia and Duarte
(2003) estimated the risk-neutral stock price distribution from the cross section of
option prices.2      Jackwerth and Rubinstein (1996) confirmed that, prior to the
October 1987 crash, the risk-neutral stock price distribution is close to lognormal,
consistent with a moderate implied volatility smile. Thereafter, the distribution is
systematically skewed to the left, consistent with a more pronounced skew.
          These findings raise important questions.           Does the reasonable fit of the
BSM model prior to the crash imply that options were rationally priced prior to the



1
    The shortcomings of the BSM model are addressed in the context of no-arbitrage models that
generalize the stock price process by including stock price jumps and stochastic volatility and also
generalize the processes for the risk premia.   Many of these models are critically discussed in
Jackwerth (2004), McDonald (2006), Hull (2006), and Singleton (2006).
2
    Jackwerth (2004) reviews the parametric and non-parametric methods for estimating the risk-
neutral distribution. Ait-Sahalia and Duarte (2003) estimate the implied risk neutral distribution
from a sample of simultaneously-expiring European index option prices while constraining the
option pricing function to be monotonic and convex. This approach may be extended to the
estimation of the pricing kernel also.


                                                                                                  1
crash? Why does the BSM model typically fail after the crash? Were options
priced rationally after the crash?
          Whereas downward sloping or u-shaped implied volatility is inconsistent
with the BSM model, it is well understood that this pattern is not necessarily
inconsistent with economic theory.       Two fundamental assumptions of the BSM
model are that the market is dynamically complete and frictionless. We empirically
investigate whether the observed cross sections of one-month S&P 500 index option
prices over 1986-2006 are consistent with various economic models that explicitly
allow for a dynamically incomplete market and also an imperfect market that
recognizes trading costs and bid-ask spreads. To our knowledge, this is the first
large-scale empirical study that addresses mispricing in the presence of transaction
costs and intermediate trading.
          Absence of arbitrage in a frictionless market implies the existence of a
risk-neutral probability measure, not necessarily unique, such that the price of
any asset equals the expectation of its payoff under the risk-neutral measure,
discounted at the risk free rate. If a risk-neutral measure exists, the ratio of the
risk-neutral probability density to the real probability density, discounted at the
risk free rate, is referred to as the pricing kernel or stochastic discount factor.
Thus, absence of arbitrage implies the existence of a strictly positive pricing
kernel.
          Economic theory imposes restrictions on equilibrium models beyond merely
ruling out arbitrage.      In a frictionless representative-agent economy with von
Neumann-Morgenstern preferences, the pricing kernel equals the representative
agent’s intertemporal marginal rate of substitution over each trading period. If the
representative agent has state independent (derived) utility of wealth, then the
concavity of the utility function implies that the pricing kernel is a decreasing
function of wealth. Furthermore, if the representative agent’s wealth at the end of
each period is monotone increasing in the stock return over the period, then the
pricing kernel is a decreasing function of the market return.
          The monotonicity restriction on the pricing kernel does not critically depend
on the existence of a representative agent.      If there does not exist at least one
pricing kernel that is a decreasing function of wealth over each trading period, then



                                                                                     2
there does not exist even one economic agent with state independent and concave
(derived) utility of wealth and with wealth at the end of each period that is
monotone increasing in the stock return over the period that is a marginal investor
in the market. Hereafter, we employ the term stochastic dominance violation to
connote the nonexistence of even one economic agent with the above attributes that
is marginal in the market.3 This means that, if such an economic agent exists, then
the return on her current portfolio is stochastically dominated (in the second
degree) by the return of another feasible portfolio.
          Under the two maintained hypotheses that the marginal investor’s (derived)
utility of wealth is state independent and wealth is monotone increasing in the
market index level, the pricing kernel is a decreasing function of the market index
level.     Ait-Sahalia and Lo (2000), Jackwerth (2000), and Rosenberg and Engle
(2002) estimated the pricing kernel implied by the observed cross section of prices
of S&P 500 index options as a function of wealth, where wealth is proxied by the
S&P 500 index level.             Jackwerth (2000) reported that the pricing kernel is
everywhere decreasing during the pre-crash period 1986-1987, but widespread
violations occur over the post-crash period 1987-1995. Ait-Sahalia and Lo (2000)
examined the year 1993 and reported violations; Rosenberg and Engle (2002)
examined the period 1991-1995 and reported violations.4
          Several extant models addressed the inconsistencies with the BSM model
and the violations of monotonicity of the pricing kernel. While not all of these
models explicitly addressed the monotonicity of the pricing kernel, they did address
the problem of reconciling option prices with the time-series properties of the index
returns.      Essentially, these models introduced additional priced state variables
and/or explored alternative specifications of preferences.5                  These models are

3
    This line of research was initiated by Perrakis and Ryan (1984), Levy (1985), and Ritchken
(1985).    For more recent related contributions, see Perrakis (1986, 1993), Ritchken and Kuo
(1988), Ryan (2000, 2003), and Oancea and Perrakis (2007).
4
    Rosenberg and Engle (2002) found violations when they used an orthogonal polynomial pricing
kernel but not when they used a power pricing kernel which, by construction, is decreasing in
wealth.
5
    These models are critically discussed in Singleton (2006). Bates (2006) introduced heterogeneous
agents with utility functions that explicitly depend on the number of stock market crashes, over and


                                                                                                  3
suggestive but stop short of endogenously generating the process of the risk premia
associated with these state variables in the context of an equilibrium model of the
macro economy and explaining on a month-by-month basis the cross section of S&P
500 option prices.
           In estimating the statistical distribution of the S&P 500 index returns, we
refrain from adopting the BSM assumption that the index price is a Brownian
motion and, therefore, that the arithmetic returns on the S&P 500 index are
lognormal. We do not impose a parametric form on the distribution of the index
returns and proceed in four different ways. In the first approach, we estimate the
unconditional distribution as the (smoothed) histograms extracted from two
different historical index data samples covering the periods 1928-1986 and 1972-
1986. In the second approach, we estimate the unconditional distribution as the
histograms extracted from two different forward-looking samples, one that includes
the October 1987 crash (1987-2006) and one that excludes it (1988-2006). In the


above their dependence on the agent’s terminal wealth.        The calibrated economy exhibits the
inconsistencies with the BSM model but fails to generate the non-monotonicity of the pricing kernel.
Brown and Jackwerth (2004) suggested that the reported violations of the monotonicity of the
pricing kernel may be an artifact of the maintained hypothesis that the pricing kernel is state
independent but concluded that volatility cannot be the sole omitted state variable in the pricing
kernel.
           Garcia, Luger and Renault (2003), Santa-Clara and Yan (2004), Brennan, Liu and Xia
(2006), and Christoffersen, Heston, and Jacobs (2006), among others, obtained plausible parameter
estimates in models in which the pricing kernel is state dependent, using panel data on S&P 500
options.
           Others calibrated equilibrium models that generate a volatility smile pattern observed in
option prices.    David and Veronesi (2002) modeled the investors’ learning about fundamentals,
calibrated their model to earnings data, and provided a close fit to the panel of prices of S&P 500
options. Liu, Pan, and Wang (2005) investigated rare-event premia driven by uncertainty aversion
in the context of a calibrated equilibrium model and demonstrated that the model generates a
volatility smile pattern observed in option prices. Benzoni, Collin-Dufresne, and Goldstein (2007)
extended the above approach to show that uncertainty aversion is not a necessary ingredient of the
model. They also demonstrated that the model can generate the stark regime shift that occurred at
the time of the 1987 crash.
           Alternative explanations include buying pressure, suggested by Bollen and Whaley (2004),
and behavioral explanations based on sentiment, suggested by Han (2006) and Shefrin (2005).


                                                                                                  4
third approach, we model the variance of the index returns as a GARCH (1, 1)
process and scale the unconditional distribution for each month to have the above
variance. Finally, in the fourth approach, we scale the unconditional distribution
for each month to have standard deviation equal to the Black-Scholes implied
volatility (IV) of the closest ATM option or, alternatively, equal to the VIX index
(1990-2006 only). Clearly, we have not exhausted all possible ways of estimating
the statistical distribution of the S&P 500 index returns. One interpretation of our
empirical results regarding mispricing is simply that the options market is priced
with a different probability distribution than any of our estimated probability
distributions.
       We test the compliance of option prices to the predictions of a model that
allows for market incompleteness, market imperfections, and intermediate trading
over the life of the options. We consider a market with heterogeneous economic
agents and investigate the restrictions on option prices imposed by a particular
class of utility-maximizing agents that we simply refer to as traders. We assume
that traders maximize state-independent increasing and concave utility functions
and that each trader’s wealth at the end of each period is monotone increasing in
the stock return over the period. For example, an investor who holds 100 shares of
stock and a net short position in 200 call options violates the monotonicity
condition, while an investor who holds 200 shares of stock and a net short position
in 200 call options satisfies the condition. Essentially, we assume that the traders
have a sufficiently large investment in the stock, relative to their net short position
in call options, such that the monotonicity condition is satisfied.
       We do not make the restrictive assumption that all economic agents belong
to the class of utility-maximizing traders.       Thus, our results are robust and
unaffected by the presence of agents with beliefs, endowments, preferences, trading
restrictions, and transaction costs schedules that differ from those of the utility-
maximizing traders modeled in this paper.
       Whereas we assume that returns are i.i.d. and that traders have state-
independent preferences, we also carry out tests that relax these assumptions and
accommodate three implications associated with state dependence.           First, each
month we search for a pricing kernel to price the cross section of one-month options



                                                                                     5
without imposing restrictions on the time series properties of the pricing kernel
month by month. Second, we allow for intermediate trading; a trader’s wealth on
the expiration date of the options is generally a function not only of the price of the
market index on that date but also of the entire path of the index level, thereby
rendering the pricing kernel state dependent. Third, we allow the variance of the
index return to be state dependent and employ the forecasted conditional variance.
       The paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, we present a model for
pricing options and state restrictions on the prices of options imposed by the
absence of stochastic dominance violations. One form of these restrictions is a set
of linear inequalities on the pricing kernel that can be tested by testing the
feasibility of a linear program. The second form of these restrictions is a pair of
upper and lower bounds on the prices of options.                       In Section 2, we test the
compliance of bid and ask prices of one-month index call options to these
restrictions and discuss the results. In the concluding Section 3, we summarize the
empirical findings and suggest directions for future research.



1      Restrictions on Option Prices Imposed by Stochastic Dominance


1.1    The model and assumptions
Trading occurs on a finite number of dates, t = 0,1,...,T ,...,T ' .                 The utility-
maximizing traders are allowed to hold and trade only two primary securities in the
market, a bond, and a stock.         The stock has the natural interpretation as the
market index. The bond is risk free and pays constant interest R − 1 each period.
The traders may buy and sell the bond without incurring transaction costs. On
date t, the cum dividend stock price is (1 + δ t ) St , the cash dividend is δ t St , and the
ex dividend stock price is St , where δ t is the dividend yield. We assume that the
rate of return on the stock,        (1 + δ t +1 ) St +1 / St ,   is identically and independently
distributed over time.
       Stock trades incur proportional transaction costs charged to the bond
account as follows. On each date t, the trader pays (1 + k ) St out of the bond
account to purchase one ex dividend share of stock and is credited (1 − k ) St in the


                                                                                               6
bond account to sell (or, sell short) one ex dividend share of stock. We assume that
the transaction costs rate satisfies the restriction 0 ≤ k < 1 .
          On date zero, the utility-maximizing traders are also allowed to buy or sell J
European call options that mature on date T .6 On date zero, a trader can buy the
    j th option at price Pj + k j and sell it at price Pj − k j , net of transaction costs.
Thus 2k j is the bid-ask spread plus the round-trip transaction costs that the trader
incurs in trading the j th option.
          On each date, a trader chooses the investment in the bond, stock, and call
options to maximize the expected utility of net worth at the terminal date T ' . We
make the plausible assumption that utility is state independent and is increasing
and concave in net worth.                 Later on, we relax the assumption of state
independence.
          One may formulate this problem as a dynamic program.7                     As shown in
Constantinides (1979), the value function is monotone increasing and concave in the
dollar values in the bond and stock accounts, properties that it inherits from the
monotonicity and concavity of the utility function. This implies that, at any date,
the marginal utility of wealth out of the bond account is strictly positive and
decreasing in the dollar value of the bond account; and the marginal utility of
wealth out of the stock account is strictly positive and decreasing in the dollar value
of the stock account.             Furthermore, as shown in Fama (1970), the joint
assumptions that (1) the rate of return on the stock is identically and
independently distributed over time and (2) utility is state independent ensure that
the state space on each date is defined solely by the stock return realizations
without additional state variables.
          Finally, we assume that each trader’s wealth at the end of each period is
monotone increasing in the stock return over the period. Essentially, we assume


6
    In this paper we empirically investigate only one-month call options. We first investigate the
case where trading is allowed only once per month by setting T = 1 and considering the time
between trading dates to be of calendar length one month. Later on, we investigate the case
where trading is allowed N times per month by setting T = N and considering the time between
trading dates to be of calendar length 1/ N months.
7
    A detailed description of the model is in an appendix available from the authors upon request.


                                                                                                     7
that the traders do not write naked calls: they have sufficiently large investment in
the stock, relative to their net short position in call options such that the
monotonicity condition is satisfied. The implication of the monotonicity condition
is that a trader’s marginal utility of wealth out of the stock account is strictly
positive and decreasing in the stock return.
       Our model assumptions are weaker than the assumptions made in the
derivation of the capital asset pricing model. Thus, our model implies that the
pricing kernel is monotone decreasing in the index return but, unlike the capital
asset pricing model, does not necessarily imply that the pricing kernel is linearly
decreasing in the index return.
       We search for marginal utilities with the above properties that support the
prices of the bond, stock, and derivatives at a given point in time. If we fail to find
such a set of marginal utilities, then any trader (as defined in this paper) can
increase her expected utility by trading in the options, the index, and the risk free
rate—hence equilibrium does not exist. These strategies are termed stochastically
dominant for the purposes of this paper, insofar as they would be adopted by all
traders, in the same way that all risk averse investors would choose a dominant
portfolio over a dominated one in conventional second degree stochastic dominance
comparisons. Stochastic dominance then implies that at least one agent, but not
necessarily all agents, increases her expected utility by trading. In our empirical
investigation, we report the percentage of months for which the problem is feasible.
These are months for which stochastic dominance violations are ruled out.


1.2    Restrictions in the single-period model
We specialize the general model by setting T = 1 . We do not rule out trading after
the options expire; we just rule out trading over the one-month life of the options.
In Section 1.3, we consider the more realistic case in which traders are allowed to
trade the bond and stock at one intermediate date over the life of the options.
       As stated earlier, the joint assumptions that the rate of return on the stock
is identically and independently distributed over time and utility is state
independent ensure that the state space at the options’ maturity is defined solely by




                                                                                     8
the stock return realizations and not by additional state variables.8 Furthermore,
the joint assumptions that utility is concave and wealth is increasing in the stock
return (the monotonicity condition) ensure that the marginal utility of wealth out
of the stock account is strictly positive and decreasing in the stock return.
          We specialize the general notation as follows. The stock market index has
price S 0 at the beginning of the period; ex dividend price S1i with probability π i in
state i, i = 1,..., I at the end of the period; and cum dividend price (1 + δ ) S1i at the
end of the period. We order the states such that S1i is increasing in i .
          We define M B (0) as the marginal utility of wealth out of the bond account
at the beginning of the period; M S (0) as the marginal utility of wealth out of the
stock account at the beginning of the period; M iB (1) as the marginal utility of
wealth out of the bond account at the end of the period; and M iS (1) as the
marginal utility of wealth out of the stock account at the end of the period. The
marginal utility of wealth out of the bond and stock accounts at the beginning of
the period is strictly positive:


                                             M B (0) > 0                                    (1.1)
and
                                             M S (0) > 0 .                                  (1.2)


          The marginal utility of wealth out of the bond account at the end of the
period is strictly positive: 9


                                     M iB (1) > 0,    i = 1,..., I .                        (1.3)


          The marginal utility of wealth out of the stock account at the end of the
period is strictly positive and decreasing in the stock return:

8
    One may replace the assumption of i.i.d. returns with the assumption that the investment
horizon ends on date one, T = T ' = 1 .
9
    Since the value of the bond account at the end of the period is independent of the state i, we
cannot impose the condition that the marginal utility of wealth out of the bond account is
decreasing in the dollar value of the bond account.


                                                                                                9
                            M 1S (1) ≥ M 2S (1) ≥ ... ≥ M IS (1) > 0 .                            (1.4)


       On each date, the trader may transfer funds between the bond and stock
accounts and incurs transaction costs. Therefore, the marginal rate of substitution
between the bond and stock accounts differs from unity by, at most, the transaction
costs rate:


                            (1 − k )M B ( 0 ) ≤ M S ( 0 ) ≤ (1 + k )M B ( 0 )                     (1.5)
and
                   ( 1 − k ) M iB ( 1 ) ≤ M iS ( 1 ) ≤ ( 1 + k ) M iB ( 1 ) ,    i = 1,..., I .   (1.6)


       Marginal analysis on the bond holdings leads to the following condition on
the marginal rate of substitution between the bond holdings at the beginning and
end of the period:

                                                        I
                                      M B (0) = R      ∑πM
                                                       i =1
                                                              i   i
                                                                   B
                                                                       (1) ,                      (1.7)


where R is one plus the risk free rate. Marginal analysis on the stock holdings
leads to the following condition on the marginal rate of substitution between the
stock holdings at the beginning of the period and the bond and stock holdings at
the end of the period:

                                           I
                                           ⎡S               δS             ⎤
                            M ( 0 ) = ∑ πi ⎢ 1i M iS ( 1 ) + 1i M iB ( 1 ) ⎥ .
                                  S
                                                                                                  (1.8)
                                      i =1 ⎣⎢ S 0            S0            ⎦⎥


       Marginal analysis on the option holdings leads to the following condition on
the marginal rate of substitution between the option holdings at the beginning of
the period and the option holdings ( X ij ) at the end of the period:

                            I
  ( Pj − k j ) M B ( 0 ) ≤ ∑ πi M iB ( 1 ) Xij ≤ ( Pj + k j ) M B ( 0 ),        j = 1,..., J .    (1.9)
                           i =1




                                                                                                    10
       Each month in our empirical analysis, we check for feasibility of conditions
(1.1)-(1.9) by using the linear programming features of the optimization toolbox of
MATLAB 7.0. We report the percentage of months in which the conditions are
feasible and, therefore, stochastic dominance is ruled out.


1.3    Restrictions in the two-period model
We relax the assumption of the single-period model that, over the one-month life of
the options, markets for trading are open only at the beginning and end of the
period; we allow for a third trading date in the middle of the month. We define the
marginal utility of wealth out of the bond account and out of the stock account at
each one of the three trading dates and set up the linear program as a direct
extension of the program (1.1)-(1.9) in Section 1.2. The explicit program is given in
Appendix A.     In our empirical analysis, we report the percentage of months in
which the conditions are feasible and, therefore, stochastic dominance is ruled out.


1.4    Restrictions in the multiperiod model
In principle, we may allow for more than one intermediate trading dates over the
one-month life of the options.    However, the numerical implementation becomes
tedious as both the number of constraints and variables in the linear program
increase exponentially in the number of intermediate trading dates.
       Constantinides and Perrakis (2002) derived testable implications of the
absence of stochastic dominance that are invariant to the allowed frequency of
trading the bond and stock over the life of the options. This generality is achieved
under the assumption that the trader’s universe of assets consists of the bond,
stock, and a one-month call option with a certain strike price.           Specifically,
Constantinides and Perrakis (2002) derived an upper and a lower bound to the
price of a call option of given strike and maturity. The bounds have the following
interpretation. If one can buy the option for less than the lower bound, then there
is a stochastic dominance violation between the bond, stock, and the given option.
Likewise, if one can write the option for more than the upper bound, then again




                                                                                    11
there is a stochastic dominance violation between the bond, stock, and the given
option.10
          Below, we state without proof the bounds on call options. At any time t
prior to expiration, the following is a partition-independent upper bound on the
price of a call:


                                               (1 + k )
                                                           E ⎡⎢[ST - K ] St ⎤⎥ ,
                                                                        +
                            c(St , t) =                                                     (1.10)
                                            (1 − k )RST −t    ⎣              ⎦


where RS is the expected return on the stock per period.
          A lower bound for a call option can also be found, but only if it is
additionally assumed that there exists at least one trader for whom the investment
horizon coincides with the option expiration.                   In such a case, transaction costs
become irrelevant in the put-call parity and the following is a lower bound:11

                                 t-T
             c(St , t) = (1+δ )        St - K / RT −t + E [(K − ST )+ St ]/R ST-t ,         (1.11)


where R is one plus the risk free rate per period. We present the upper and lower
bounds in Figures 1-4 and discuss their violations in Section 2.6.




10
     These bounds on call prices (and the corresponding bounds on put prices) may not be the
tightest possible bounds for any given frequency of trading. However, they are presented here
because of their universality in that they do not depend on the frequency of trading over the life
of the option. For a comprehensive discussion and derivation of these and other, possibly tighter,
bounds that are specific to the allowed frequency of trading, see Constantinides and Perrakis
(2002).     Constantinides and Perrakis (2007) provided bounds for American-style options and
futures options.      These bounds were tested with data on S&P 500 futures options by
Constantinides, Czerwonko, Jackwerth and Perrakis (2007), who identified options violating the
bounds and derived strategies exploiting these mispricings. For alternative approaches to option
bounds under transaction costs see also Constantinides and Zariphopoulou (1999, 2001), Leland
(1985) and Bensaid et al (1992).
11
     In the special case of zero transaction costs, the assumption T = T ' is redundant because the
put-call parity holds.


                                                                                                12
2          Empirical Results


2.1        Data and estimation
We use the historical daily record of the S&P 500 index and its daily dividend
record over the period 1928-2006.                The monthly index return is based on 30
calendar day (21 trading day) returns.                 In order to avoid difficulties with the
estimated historical mean of the returns, we demean all our samples and
reintroduce a mean 4% annualized premium over the risk free rate. Our results
remain practically unchanged if we do not make this adjustment because the prices
of one-month options are insensitive to the expected return on the stock.
           We estimate both the unconditional and the conditional distribution of the
index. The unconditional distribution is extracted from four alternative samples of
thirty-day index returns: two historical returns samples over the periods 1928-1986
and 1972-1986; a forward-looking returns sample over the period 1987-2006 that
includes the 1987 stock market crash; and a forward-looking returns sample over
the period 1988-2006 that excludes the stock market crash.                          The annualized
volatility is 21.0% (1928-1986), 15.8% (1972-1986), 15.2% (1987-2006), and 14.8%
(1988-2006).
           For each sample, we use a discrete state space of 61 values from e-0.60 to e0.60,
spaced 0.02 apart in log spacing. Such span covers all observed returns in any of
our samples. We use the standard Gaussian kernel of Silverman (1986, pp. 15, 43,
and 45). The resulting probabilities for different states can vary greatly in scale
and cause numerical problems in solving the resulting LPs.                       We thus resort to
eliminating states with probabilities smaller than 0.00001 and rescaling the
remaining probabilities (typically 99.998%) to sum to one.
           We estimate the conditional distribution of the index each month over the
period 1972-2006 in three different ways: by GARCH (1,1), as the implied volatility
(IV), and as the revised VIX index.12                  In the first way, we apply the semi-

12
     An alternative Wall Street approach of obtaining a conditional distribution is to bootstrap from 22
day overlapping returns with a rolling window of several months where each day is the beginning of
another 22 day return. 100 days is a common choice. We are indebted to an anonymous referee of
this journal for pointing out this alternative approach.


                                                                                                     13
parametric GARCH (1,1) method of Engle and Gonzalez-Rivera (1991), a method
that does not impose the restriction that conditional returns are normally
distributed, as explained in Appendix C.13                In the second way, we estimate the
conditional volatility as the Black-Scholes IV of the closest ATM 1-month option
and scale the unconditional distribution every month to match the conditional
volatility. In the third way, we estimate the conditional volatility as 0.01 times the
revised VIX index and scale the unconditional distribution every month over the
subperiod 1990-2006 (when the VIX index is available) to match the conditional
volatility.14
          For the S&P 500 index options we use two data sources. For the period
1986-1995, we use the tick-by-tick Berkeley Options Database of all quotes and
trades. We focus on the most liquid call options with K/S ratio (moneyness) in the
range 0.90-1.05. For 107 months we retain only the call option quotes for the day
corresponding to options thirty days to expiration.15 For each day retained in the
sample, we aggregate the quotes to the minute and pick the minute between 9:00-
11:00 AM with the most quotes as our cross section for the month. We present
these quotes in terms of their bid and ask implied volatilities. Details on this
database are provided in Appendix B, Jackwerth and Rubinstein (1996), and
Jackwerth (2000).



13
     The index return sample and the option price sample do not align. We use the conditional
volatility of the 30-day return period which starts before the option sample and covers it partly at
the beginning. We recalculated the results by using the conditional volatility of the 30-day return
period which starts during the option sample and covers it partly at the end and then continues
beyond the option sample. The two sets of results are practically indistinguishable and thus, we
do not report the latter results here.
14
     The scaling of the distribution by the conditional volatility does not change the skewness and
kurtosis. However, our numerical implementation does cause these moments to vary slightly due to
slightly different discretizations. For the 30-day conditional index return distribution, 1972-2006,
based on GARCH (1,1), the average skewness is -0.415765 and kurtosis is 1.693435; based on implied
volatilities, the average skewness is -0.393942 and kurtosis is 1.650050.
15
     We lose 9 months for which we do not have sufficient data, i.e., months with less than five
different strike prices, months after the crash of October 1987 until June 1988, and months before
the introduction of S&P 500 index options in April 1986.


                                                                                                 14
       We do not have options data for 1996. For the period 1997-2006, we obtain
call option bid and ask prices from the Option Metrics Database, described in
Appendix B.     We calculate a hypothetical noon option cross section from the
closing cross section and the index observed at noon and the close. Here we assume
that the implied volatilities do not change between noon and the close. We start
out with 109 raw cross sections and are left with 108 final cross sections. The time
to expiration is 29 days.
       Since the Berkeley Options Database provides less noisy data than the
Option Metrics Database, we expect a higher incidence of stochastic dominance
violations over the 1997-2006 period than over the 1986-1995 period. Thus we are
cautious in comparing results across these two periods.


2.2    Assumptions on bid-ask spreads and trading fees
There is no presumption that all agents in the economy face the same bid-ask
spreads and transaction costs as the traders do. We assume that the traders are
subject to the following bid-ask spreads and trading fees. For the index, we model
the combined one-half bid-ask spread and one-way trading fee as a one-way
proportional transaction costs rate equal to 50 bps of the index price.
       For the options, we model the combined one-half bid-ask spread and one-
way trading fee either as fixed or as proportional transaction costs.       Under the
fixed-costs regime, we set the fixed transaction costs equal to 5, 10, or 20 bps of the
index price. This corresponds to about 19, 38, or 75 cents one-way fee per call,
respectively.   Fixed transaction costs probably overstate the actual transaction
costs on OTM calls and understate them on ITM calls.
       Under the proportional-costs regime, the proportional transaction costs for
an ATM call are set equal to the transaction costs under the fixed-costs regime.
However, for an OTM (or, ITM) call with price equal to fraction (or, multiple) x of
the price of the ATM call, the proportional transaction costs are equal to fraction
(or, multiple) x of the transaction costs of the ATM call. Proportional transaction
costs probably understate the actual transaction costs on OTM calls and overstate
them on ITM calls. In the tables, we present results under both fixed-cost and
proportional-cost regimes.



                                                                                    15
2.3    Stochastic dominance violations in the single-period case
Each month we check for the feasibility of conditions (1.1)-(1.9). Infeasibility of
these conditions implies stochastic dominance: any trader can improve her utility
by trading in these assets without incurring any out-of-pocket costs. If we rule out
bid-ask spreads and trading fees, we find that these conditions are violated in all
months.    Thus, we introduce bid-ask spreads and trading fees as described in
Section 2.2.
       The time series of option prices is divided into seven periods and stochastic
dominance violations in each period are reported in different columns, labeled as
panels A-G in Tables 1-4. The first period extends from May 1986 to October 16,
1987, just prior to the crash. The other six periods are all post-crash and span July
1988 to March 1991, April 1991 to August 1993, September 1993 to December 1995,
February 1997 to December 1999, February 2000 to May 2003 and June 2003 to
May 2006. Note that we do not have options data for 1996 from either data source.
The average annualized implied volatility is 0.1641 and the panel averages are
0.1753 (A), 0.179 (B), 0.1307 (C), 0.1089 (D), 0.2 (E), 0.2173 (F), and 0.1228 (G).
       In Table 1A, the one-way transaction costs rate on the index is 50 bps. The
transaction costs on the options are proportional.      In each row, the one-way
transaction costs rate on the ATM calls is 5 bps of the index price (top entries), 10
bps (bold middle entries), or 20 bps (bottom entries). The number of calls in each
(filtered) monthly cross section fluctuates between 5 and 23 with median 10. The
percentages of months without stochastic dominance violations are the entries
displayed in bold. The bracketed numbers in the first row are bootstrap standard
deviations of the first-row middle entries (10 bps transaction costs), based on 200
samples of the 1928-1986 historical returns. The standard deviations are small and,
therefore, comparisons of the table entries across the rows and columns can be
made with some confidence. We need to be careful when comparing across panels
A-D (Berkeley Options Database) and panels E-G (Option Metrics).


                                   [TABLE 1A]




                                                                                  16
         Most table entries are well below 100%, indicating that there are a number
of months in which the risk free rate, the price of the index, and the prices of the
cross section of calls are inconsistent with a market in which there is even one
risk-averse trader who is marginal in these securities, net of generous transaction
costs.
         In the top left cell, the middle entry of 73% refers to the index return
distribution over the period 1928-1986 and option prices over the pre-crash period
from May 1986 to October 16, 1987. In 27% of these months, conditions (1.1)-
(1.9) are infeasible and the prices imply stochastic dominance violations despite
the generous allowance for transaction costs. The next six entries to the right,
panels B-G, refer to call prices over the six post-crash periods.         Violations
increase in panels C-G. In panel D, all but 4% of the cross sections violate the
stochastic dominance restrictions. The option prices in panel D are drawn from
the reliable Berkeley Options Database and the high incidence of violations
cannot be attributed to data problems.
         We investigate the robustness of the historical estimate of the index return
distribution over the period 1928-1986 by re-estimating the historical distribution
of the index return over the more recent period 1972-1986.         The incidence of
violations increases in all panels except in panels C and D where it decreases but
remains high.
         When we use the forward-looking index sample 1987-2006 that includes
the crash (third row) or the forward-looking index sample 1988-2006 that
excludes it (fourth row), the pre-crash options exhibit substantially more
violations. Our interpretation is that, before the crash, option traders were using
average historical volatility to price options and were not actively forecasting
volatility changes. This interpretation is reinforced in row five, panel A. The
GARCH method in forecasting volatility does worse than the first two rows and
only marginally better than the third and fourth rows.
         In the last three rows, we use the GARCH-based, the IV-based and the
revised VIX-based conditional index distribution, all based on index returns over
1972-2006, as explained in Section 2.1. Of these three methods, GARCH is the
only one that, in the spirit of this paper, uses information exclusively from the



                                                                                  17
time series of index returns to impose restrictions on the prices of options. By
contrast, the IV-based and the revised VIX-based methods use the volatility
implied in the option prices themselves, irrespective of whether this volatility is
rational or not. In particular, implied volatility tends to be higher than realized
volatility.
       The IV-based method performs better than the revised VIX method. This
is surprising because the revised VIX is meant to be a theoretically-motivated
refinement of the IV method. The IV-based method performs well in pricing pre-
crash options.    Nevertheless, violations with the IV-based method remain
surprisingly severe, particularly over 1997-2006.


2.4    Robustness in the single-period case
Floor traders, institutional investors and broker-assisted investors face different
transaction costs schedules in trading options.      Are the results robust under
different transaction costs schedules?        The pattern of violations remains
essentially the same.    In Table 1A, the number at the top of each cell is the
percentage of non-violations when the combined one-half bid-ask spread and one-
way trading fee on one option is based on 5 bps of the index price. We observe a
large percentage of violations for all index and option price periods. The number
at the bottom of each cell is the percentage of non-violations when the combined
one-half bid-ask spread and one-way trading fee on one option is based on 20 bps
of the index price.     Predictably, we observe fewer violations for all index and
option price periods but there are still many violations.


                                     [TABLE 1B]


       Table 1B displays the percentage of violations but now with fixed instead
of proportional transaction costs.    The pattern of violations is similar to the
pattern displayed in Table 1A with proportional transaction costs. In some cells,
violations increase and in others decrease. This is surprising because we would
expect that fixed transaction costs, that imply larger transaction costs for OTM
calls, would result in fewer violations across the board. This begs the question



                                                                                18
whether it is the OTM or the ITM calls that are responsible for the majority of
violations.


                                      [TABLES 2A and 2B]


          Table 2A displays separately violations by ITM calls (top entry) and
OTM calls (bottom entry) under the proportional transaction costs regime. In
almost all cases, there is a higher percentage of violations by OTM calls than by
ITM calls.16 Table 2B displays separately the violations due to ITM calls (top
entry) and OTM calls (bottom entry) under the fixed transaction costs regime.
Since fixed transaction costs imply higher transaction costs for OTM calls than in
Table 2A, the violations by OTM calls substantially decrease.                         Since fixed
transaction costs imply lower transaction costs for ITM calls than in Table 2A,
the violations by ITM calls substantially increase. In Table 2B, there are fewer
violations by OTM calls than by ITM calls.                  The violations persist when we
employ the GARCH-based conditional return distribution but substantially
decrease for both the ITM and OTM calls when we employ the IV-based
distribution. However, the fact remains that there are substantial violations by
OTM calls.         This observation is novel and contradicts the common inference
drawn from the observed implied volatility smile that the problem primarily lies
with the left-hand tail of the index return distribution.
          We further investigate the observation made in Table 1A that, when we
use the IV-based conditional index return distribution, violations remain severe.
We therefore entertain the possibility that the ATM IV is a biased measure of
the volatility of the index return distribution.


                                            [TABLE 3]


16
     This inference is moderated by the fact that the sample of OTM calls is larger than the sample
of ITM calls. Other things equal, the larger the sample, the harder it is to find a monotone
decreasing pricing kernel that prices the calls. However, the figures (discussed later on in Section
2.6) are not subject to this reservation and are consistent with the observation that there is
substantial mispricing of OTM calls.


                                                                                                 19
         In Table 3, we offset the IV by -2, -1, 1, or 2%, annualized. In the last
row, “Best of above”, we report the maximum percentage of feasible month in
each panel, either without IV offset or with any of the four offsets, allowing the
offset to be different in each panel. The one-way transaction costs rate on the
index is 50 bps. The one-way transaction costs on the options are proportional.
The one-way transaction costs rate on the ATM calls is 10 bps of the index price.
All results use the conditional implied-volatility-based index return distribution
over the sample period 1972-2006. In the pre-crash sample, violations disappear
if we increase the implied volatility by 2%, consistent with received wisdom that
sample volatility is lower than implied volatility.        In the other subperiods,
violations persist even under the “Best of above” category. This is surprising
because this heavy-handed adjustment of the IV lacks theoretical justification
and is explicitly designed to eliminate violations. Furthermore, it is no longer
consistently the case that sample volatility is lower than implied volatility.


2.5      Stochastic dominance violations in the two-period model
In the previous sections, we considered feasibility in the context of the single-period
model.     We established that there are stochastic dominance violations in a
significant percentage of the months. Does the percentage of stochastic dominance
violations increase or decrease as the allowed frequency of trading in the stock and
bond over the life of the option increases? In the special case of zero transaction
costs, i.i.d. returns, and constant relative risk aversion, it can be theoretically
shown that the percentage of violations should increase as the allowed frequency of
trading increases. However, we cannot provide a theoretical answer if we relax any
of the above three assumptions. Therefore, we address the question empirically.
         We compare the percentage of stochastic dominance violations in two
models, one with one intermediate trading date over the one-month life of the calls
and another with no intermediate trading dates over the life of the calls. To this
end, we partition the 30-day horizon into two 15-day intervals and approximate the
15-day return distribution by a 61-point kernel density estimate of the 15-day
returns. In this instance we base our kernel method on the 15-day returns instead



                                                                                    20
of the 30-day returns.        The assumed transaction costs are as in the base case
presented in Table 1A. The one-way transaction costs rate on the index is 50 bps.
The transaction costs on the options are proportional; for the ATM calls they are
10 bps of the index price. The results are presented in Table 4.


                                         [TABLE 4]


          We may not investigate the effect of intermediate trading by directly
comparing the results in Tables 1A and 4 because the return generating process
differs in the two tables since the time horizons are different.              Recall that the
results in Table 1A are based on a state space of 61 values for 30-day returns. By
contrast, the results in Table 4 are based on a state space of 61 values of the 15-day
returns. The 30-day return then is the product of two 15-day returns treated as
i.i.d. With this process of the 30-day return, we calculate the percentage of months
without stochastic dominance violations and report the results in Table 4 in
parentheses.
          The effect of allowing for one intermediate trading date over the life of the
one-month options is shown by the top entries in Table 4.                  These entries are
contrasted with the bracketed entries which represent the percentage of months
without stochastic dominance violations when intermediate trading is forbidden.17
In most cases, intermediate trading increases the incidence of violations.                  We
conclude that allowance for intermediate trading strengthens the earlier systematic
evidence of stochastic dominance violations. In the next section, we obtain further
insights on the causes of infeasibility, by displaying the options that violate the
upper and lower bounds on option prices.


2.6       Stochastic dominance bounds
The stochastic dominance violations reported this far are based on the non-
existence of a trader who is simultaneously marginal in the entire cross section of

17
     However, we find that the middle entries in Table 1A are rather similar to the bracketed
entries in Table 4.    This is an indication that the 30-day return used in Table 1A can be
reasonably well approximated by convoluting two 15-day returns as in Table 4, bracketed entries.


                                                                                             21
call prices at the beginning of each month. This requirement effectively rules out
the possibility that the call options market is segmented.           We entertain the
possibility of segmented markets by examining violations of stochastic dominance
through violations of the stochastic dominance bounds (1.10)-(1.11) discussed in
Section 1.4.     These bounds are derived from the perspective of a trader who is
marginal in the index, the risk free rate, and only one call option at a time.
Therefore, these bounds allow for the possibility that the market is segmented. A
second advantage of examining violations through these bounds is that the bounds
apply irrespective of the permitted frequency of trading in the bond and stock
accounts over the life of the option.


                                    [FIGURES 1-4]


       We calculate these bounds and translate them into bounds on the implied
volatility of option prices. In Figures 1-4, we present the upper IV bound based on
(1.10) and the lower bound based on (1.11). We present both the bid (circles) and
ask (crosses) option prices, translated into IVs. A violation occurs whenever an
observed call bid price lies above the upper bound or an observed call ask price lies
below the lower bound.
       In Figures 1 and 2, the 4 panels A-D are based on the Berkeley options data
base, 1986-1995; in Figures 3 and 4, the 3 panels E-G are based on the Option
Metrics data base, 1997-2006. In all cases, the transaction costs rate on the index is
50 bps.
       The bounds are based on the conditional index return distribution. First, we
estimate the unconditional distribution over the period 1972-2006. Then, for each
sub period, we calculate the average IV and rescale the volatility of the
unconditional distribution in each panel accordingly. Since the bounds are adjusted
by the implied volatility, irrespective of whether this volatility is rational or not, we
can draw inferences about the shape of the skew but not about the general level of
option prices.




                                                                                      22
           In Figure 1, panel A, bid prices of some OTM calls lie above the upper
bound and ask prices of some ITM calls lie below the lower bound.18 These findings
are consistent with the results reported in Tables 2A and 2B, panel A, that both
OTM and ITM pre-crash calls violate stochastic dominance.                        The shape of the
upper and lower bounds in Figures 1, panel A, suggests that if call prices exhibited
a smile before the crash, there would be fewer violations. This is a novel finding
because pre-crash option prices have been documented to follow the BSM model
reasonably well and this has been interpreted as evidence that they are correctly
priced.
           Panels B-G dispel another common misconception, namely, that the
observed smile is too steep after the crash. In fact, panel G illustrates that there is
hardly a smile in the period 2003-2006. Post-crash violations are due to both ITM
and OTM calls; sometimes bid prices are above the upper bound and ask prices are
below the lower bound. These findings are consistent with the results reported in
the tables.
           In Figure 2, panels C and D, there are very few violations, consistent with
the results in Tables 1A and 1B, when the conditional index return distribution is
based on IV. The good performance does not carry over into subsequent periods.
In Figures 3, panels E and F, several bid call prices over the period 1997-2003 lie
way above the bounds. This is true for both ITM and OTM calls. This is an
altogether different pattern of violations than in the earlier panels A-D.                          In
interpreting the high incidence of violations of option prices over the period 1997-
2003 in the tables, we were conservative because of concerns regarding the quality
of the Option Metrics database.               The figures provide a clearer picture.           If the
violations were the result of low quality of the data, then we would observe roughly
as many violations of the lower bound as we do of the upper bound. This is not the
case. Most of the violations are violations of the upper bound. The decrease in
violations over the post-crash period 1988-1995 (panels B-D) is followed by a
substantial increase in violations over 1997-2003 (panels E and F). This is a novel

18
     Bids with zero implied volatility (not asks, which are always positive) imply that the price is so
low that there does not exist a positive implied volatility solving the Black-Scholes equation.
These bids do not violate the bounds as they do not present utility-improving opportunities.


                                                                                                    23
finding and casts doubts on the hypothesis that the options market is becoming
more rational over time, particularly after the crash.
       In results not reported, we estimated the bounds of Figures 1-4 with the
unconditional distributions, both historical and forward-looking, and compared the
bounds to the observed option prices. The pattern is broadly similar to the one
exhibited by the conditional distributions presented in the paper. In particular, the
estimated bounds exhibited a smile in the pre-crash period as in Figure 1, panel A.
We also observed a decrease in violations over the post-crash period 1988-1995
followed by an increase in violations over 1997-2003.



3      Concluding Remarks


We document widespread violations of stochastic dominance in the one-month S&P
500 index options market over the period 1986-2006, before and after the October
1987 stock market crash.     We do not impose a parametric model on the index
return distribution but estimate it as the (smoothed) histogram of the sample
distribution, using seven different index return samples: two samples before the
crash, one long and one short; two forward-looking samples, one that includes the
crash and one that excludes it; one sample adjusted for GARCH-forecasted
conditional volatility; one adjusted for implied volatility; and one sample adjusted
for VIX-forecasted conditional volatility. We allow the market to be incomplete
and also imperfect by introducing generous transaction costs in trading the index
and the options.
       Evidence of stochastic dominance violations means that any trader can
increase her expected utility by engaging in a zero-net-cost trade. We consider a
market with heterogeneous agents and investigate the restrictions on option prices
imposed by a particular class of utility-maximizing economic agents that we simply
refer to as traders.   We do not make the restrictive assumption that all agents
belong to the class of the utility-maximizing traders. Thus, our results are robust
and unaffected by the presence of agents with beliefs, endowments, preferences,




                                                                                  24
trading restrictions, and transaction costs schedules that differ from those of the
utility-maximizing traders modeled in this paper.
        Our empirical design allows for three implications associated with state
dependence. First, each month we search for a pricing kernel to price the cross
section of one-month options without imposing restrictions on the time series
properties of the pricing kernel, month by month.           Thus, we allow the pricing
kernel to be state dependent. Second, we allow for intermediate trading; a trader’s
wealth on the expiration date of the options is generally a function not only of the
price of the market index on that date but also of the entire path of the index level
thereby rendering the pricing kernel state dependent. Third, we allow the volatility
of the index return to be state dependent and employ the estimated conditional
volatility.
        Even though pre-crash option prices conform to the BSM model reasonably
well, once the constant volatility input to the BSM formula is judiciously chosen,
this does not speak on the rationality of option prices. Our novel finding is that
pre-crash options are incorrectly priced if the distribution of the index return is
estimated from time-series data even with a variety of statistical adjustments. Our
derived option bounds exhibit a smile and this suggests that pre-crash option prices
would violate these bounds less frequently if they exhibited a smile too.         Our
interpretation of these results is that, before the crash, option traders were
extensively using the BSM pricing model and the dictates of this model were
imposed on the option prices even though these dictates were not necessarily
consistent with the time-series behavior of index prices.
        There are substantial violations by OTM calls under both the fixed and
proportional transaction costs regimes. This observation is novel and contradicts
the common inference drawn from the observed implied volatility smile that the
problem primarily lies with the left-hand tail of the index return distribution. We
do not find evidence that the observed smile is too steep after the crash.
        If the violations by ITM and OTM calls were the result of the low quality of
the data, then we would observe roughly as many violations of the lower bound as
we do of the upper bound.       This is not the case.       Most of the violations are
violations of the upper bound. The decrease in violations over the post-crash period



                                                                                   25
1988-1995 is followed by a substantial increase in violations over 1997-2003. This is
a novel finding and casts doubts on the hypothesis that the options market is
becoming more rational over time, particularly after the crash.
       By providing an integrated approach to the pricing of options that allows for
incomplete and imperfect markets, we provide testable restrictions on option prices
that include the BSM model as a special case. We reviewed the empirical evidence
on the prices of S&P 500 index options. The economic restrictions are violated
surprisingly often, suggesting that the mispricing of these options cannot be entirely
attributed to the fact that the BSM model does not allow for market
incompleteness and realistic transaction costs.
       In this paper, we allowed for some implications associated with non-priced
state variables. Several extant models addressed the inconsistencies with the BSM
model and the violations of monotonicity of the pricing kernel by introducing priced
state variables and/or exploring alternative specifications of preferences.       For
example, Brennan, Liu and Xia (2006) rejected an explanation of index option
prices based on a pricing kernel that is a nonlinear function of the market return,
the interest rate and the Sharpe ratio. It remains an open and challenging topic for
future research to endogenously generate the process of the risk premia associated
with these state variables in the context of an equilibrium model of the macro
economy and explain on a month-by-month basis the cross section of S&P 500
index option prices.
       Our search for a trader who is simultaneously marginal in the stock, risk free
rate, and the entire cross-section of one-month call options does not address the
possibility that equilibrium exists but in a segmented market. In Figures 1-4, we
partially allowed for the possibility that equilibrium exists but the market is
segmented by searching for a trader that is simultaneously marginal in the stock,
risk free rate, and just one one-month call option at a time. Even in this case, we
report several violations. In practice, individual investors (our “traders”) may face
additional restrictions imposed by their brokers in writing options, beyond the
restrictions that we imposed through trading costs and bid-ask spreads. It remains
an open and challenging topic for future research to investigate the extent to which




                                                                                   26
more severe market segmentation or imperfections can reconcile the results
presented in this paper.




                                                                       27
Appendix A


We allow for three trading dates, t = 0,1, 2 , at the beginning, middle and end of the
month-long period ending with the expiration of the options. We define the stock
returns over the first sub-period as z 1i ≡ (1 + δ ) S1i / S 0 , corresponding to the
I states on date one, i = 1,..., I . We assume that the returns over the two sub-
periods are independent.             Thus, the stock returns over the second sub-period,
z 2k ≡ (1 + δ ) S 2ik / S1i , k = 1,..., I , are independent of i . There are I 2 states on date
two, i = 1,..., I , k = 1,..., I .
         We define the state-dependent marginal utility of wealth out of the bond
account on each one of the three trading dates as M B (0) , M iB (1) and M ikB (2) .
Likewise, we define the state-dependent marginal utility of wealth out of the stock
account on each of the three trading dates as M S (0) , M iS (1) and M ikS (2) . The
conditions on positivity and monotonicity of the marginal utility of wealth out of
the bond and stock accounts at t = 0,1 are given by equations (1.1)-(1.4). The
corresponding conditions at t = 2 are:


                                       M ikB (2) > 0,      i, k = 1,..., I                              (A.1)
and
                    M iS1 (2) ≥ M iS2 (2) ≥ ...M ikS (2) ≥ ... ≥ M iIS (2) > 0,        i = 1,..., I .   (A.2)


         On each date, the trader may transfer funds between the bond and stock
accounts and incur transaction costs.                   Conditions (1.5) and (1.6) hold.                 The
corresponding condition at t = 2 is:


                    ( 1 − k ) M ikB ( 2 ) ≤ M ikS ( 2 ) ≤ ( 1 + k ) M ikB ( 2 ) ,   i, k = 1,..., I .   (A.3)


         Conditions (1.7) and (1.8) on the marginal rate of substitution between
dates zero and one hold. The corresponding conditions between dates one and two
are as follows:




                                                                                                          28
                                                    I
                                M (1 ) = R
                                    i
                                     B
                                                  ∑π M
                                                  k =1
                                                         k
                                                              B
                                                             ik   ( 2 ),   i = 1,..., I                   (A.4)

and
                                         I
                      M iS ( 1 ) = ∑ πk [ z 2k M ikS ( 2 ) + δz 2k M ikB ( 2 ) ],    i = 1,..., I .       (A.5)
                                     k =1




Condition (1.9) is replaced by:

                                I    I
 ( Pj − k j ) M   B
                      (0)   ≤ ∑ ∑ πi πk M ikB ( 2 )X ikj ≤ ( Pj + k j ) M B ( 0 ),           j = 1,..., J . (A.6)
                               i =1 k =1




The probability of state (i, k ) is πi πk because, by assumption, the stock returns are
independent over the two sub-periods.
       In our empirical analysis, we report the percentage of months in which
conditions (1.1)-(1.8) and (A.1)-(A.6) are feasible and, therefore, stochastic
dominance is ruled out.




                                                                                                              29
Appendix B


B.1 Berkeley options database
The Berkeley Options Database contains all minute-by-minute quotes and trades of
the European options and futures on the S&P 500 index from April 2, 1986 to
December 29, 1995.      Details on this database are found in Jackwerth and
Rubinstein (1996), Jackwerth (2000) and below.


B.1.1 Index level
Traders typically use the index futures market rather than the cash market to
hedge their option positions. The reason is that the cash market prices lag futures
prices by a few minutes due to lags in reporting transactions of the constituent
stocks in the index. We check this claim by regressing the index on each of the
first twenty minute lags of the futures price. The single regression with the highest
adjusted R2 is assumed to indicate the lag for a given day. The median lag of the
index over the 1542 days from 1986 to 1992 is seven minutes. Because the index is
stale, we compute a futures-based index for each minute from the futures market as
S 0 = ( 1 + δ )−1 RF , where F is the futures price at the option expiration. For each
day, we use the median interest rate R implied by all futures quotes and trades and
the index level at that time. We approximate the dividend yield δ by assuming
that the dividend amount and timing expected by the market were identical to the
dividends actually paid on the S&P 500 index.          However, some limited tests
indicate that the choice of the index does not seem to affect the results of this
paper.


B.1.2 Interest rate
We compute implied interest rates embedded in the European put-call parity
relation. Armed with option quotes, we calculate separate lending and borrowing
interest returns from put-call parity where we use the above future-based index.
For each expiration date, we assign a single lending and borrowing rate to each
day, which is the median of all daily observations across all strike prices. We then
use the average of these two interest rates as our daily spot rate for the particular


                                                                                   30
time to expiration.       Finally, we obtain the interpolated interest rates from the
implied forward curve. If there is data missing, we assume that the spot rate curve
can be extrapolated horizontally for the shorter and longer times-to-expiration.
Again, some limited tests indicate that the results are not affected by the exact
choice of the interest rate.


B.1.3 Option prices
We use only bid and ask prices on call options.                For each day retained in the
sample, we aggregate the quotes to the minute and pick the minute between 9:00-
11:00 AM with the most quotes as our cross section for the month.
         We use only call options with 30 days to expiration which occur once every
month during our sample. We also trim the sample to allow for moneyness levels
between 0.90 and 1.05.         Cross sections with fewer than 5 option quotes are
discarded. We also eliminate the cross sections right after the crash of 1987 as the
data is noisy and restart the sample with the cross section expiring on July 15,
1988.


B.1.4 Arbitrage violations
In the process of setting up the database, we check for a number of errors which
might have been contained in the original minute-by-minute transaction level data.
We eliminate a few obvious data-entry errors as well as a few quotes with excessive
spreads—more than 200 cents for options and 20 cents for futures.                  General
arbitrage violations are eliminated from the data set. We also check for violations
of vertical and butterfly spreads. Within each minute, we keep the largest set of
option           quotes           which            satisfies          the        restriction
S (1 + δ) ≥ C i ≥ max[0, S (1 + δ) − K i / R ] .
         Early exercise is not an issue as the S&P 500 options are European and the
discreteness of quotes and trades only introduces a stronger upward bias in the
midpoint implied volatilities for deep-out-of-the-money puts (moneyness less than
0.6) which we do not use in our empirical work. We start out with 107 raw cross
sections and are left with 98 final cross sections.




                                                                                         31
B.2 Option Metrics database
The Option Metrics Database contains indicative end-of-day European call and put
option quotes on the S&P 500 index from January 2, 1997 to May 31, 2006. In
merging the Option Metrics Database with the Berkeley Options Database, we
follow the above procedure as much as possible, given the closing bid and ask prices
that the Option Metrics Database provides.         Therefore, only departures and
innovations from the above procedure are noted.


B.2.1 Index level
As the closing (noon) index price, we use the price implied by the closing (noon)
futures price.


B.2.2 Interest rate
As we cannot arrive at consistently positive interest rates implied by option prices,
we use T-bill rates instead, obtained from Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Economic Research Database (FRED®).


B.2.3 Option prices
In the final sample, only call and put options with at least 100 traded contracts are
included. We calculate a hypothetical noon option cross section from the closing
cross section and the index observed at noon and the close. Here we assume that
the implied volatilities do not change between noon and the close. We start out
with 109 raw cross sections and are left with 108 final cross sections. The time to
expiration is 29 days.


B.3. S&P 500 information bulletin
We obtain the historical daily record of the S&P 500 index and its daily dividend
record over the period 1928-2006 from the S&P 500 Information Bulletin. Before
April 1982, dividends are estimated from monthly dividend yields.


B.4 VIX index




                                                                                  32
We use the revised CBOE Volatility Index (VIX). The revised VIX is 100 times
the forecast of the annualized 30-day volatility of the S&P 500 index. It is a model-
independent forecast based on S&P 500 index options with 1-month and 2-month
expiration and wide range of in-the-moneyness. The index has been back-filled by
the CBOE and is currently available from 1990 to the present. Note that VIX is
not available for panels A and B.


Appendix C


The GARCH (1,1) special case of the Engle and Gonzalez-Rivera (1991) semi
parametric model applied to the monthly S&P 500 index return, yt , is described by
equations (C.1)-(C.3):


                                            yt = y + ε t                                 (C.1)


                                   h −1/2εt ∼ i.i.d. g ( 0,1)                            (C.2)
and
                                   ht = ω + αεt2−1 + β ht −1 ,                           (C.3)


where g ( 0,1) is an unknown distribution with zero mean and unit variance.
         The parameters (ω, α , β ) are estimated by maximum likelihood under the
(false) assumption that h −1/ 2ε t ∼ i.i.d . N ( 0,1) .    Then the time series   {h
                                                                                   t   ε } is
                                                                                    −1/2
                                                                                         t

calculated and the true density g ( 0,1) is estimated as the histogram of all the time
series observations. The histogram is being smoothed by our kernel methods in the
same way as all the other distributions in order to keep the procedures comparable.
         One may consider re-estimating the parameters            (ω, α, β ) by maximum
likelihood, replacing the assumption that h −1/ 2εt ∼ i.i.d. N ( 0,1) with the assumption
that h −1/ 2εt ∼ i.i.d. g ( 0,1) , where g ( 0,1) is the estimated density in the last step
above.     Engle and Gonzalez-Rivera (1991) showed by simulation that this
additional step is unnecessary in practice.




                                                                                             33
References
Ait-Sahalia, Y. and A. W. Lo, 1998, “Nonparametric Estimation of State-Price
Densities Implicit in Financial Prices,” Journal of Finance, 53, 499-547.


Ait-Sahalia, Y. and A. W. Lo, 2000, “Nonparametric Risk Management and
Implied Risk Aversion,” Journal of Econometrics, 94, 9-51.


Ait-Sahalia, Y. and J. Duarte, 2003, “Nonparametric Option Pricing under Shape
Restrictions,” Journal of Econometrics, 116, 9-47.


Bates, D. S., 2006, “The Market for Crash Risk,” Working paper, University of
Iowa, Iowa City.


Bensaid, B., J-P. Lesne, H. Pagés and J. Scheinkman, 1992, “Derivative Asset
Pricing with Transaction Costs,” Mathematical Finance, 2, 63-86.


Benzoni, L., P. Collin-Dufresne, and R. S. Goldstein, 2007, “Explaining Pre- and
Post-1987 Crash Prices of Equity and Options within a Unified General
Equilibrium Framework,” Working paper, University of Minnesota.


Black, F. and M. S. Scholes, 1973, “The Pricing of Options and Corporate
Liabilities,” Journal of Political Economy, 81, 637-654.


Bollen, N. and R. Whaley, 2004, “Does Net Buying Pressure Affect the Shape of
Implied Volatility Functions?” Journal of Finance, 59, 711-753.


Brennan, M. J., X. Liu and Y. Xia, 2006, “Option Pricing Kernels and the
ICAPM,” Working paper, UCLA.


Brown, D. and J. C. Jackwerth, 2004, “The Pricing Kernel Puzzle: Reconciling
Index Option Data and Economic Theory,” Working paper, University of
Wisconsin, Madison.



                                                                             34
Christoffersen, P., S. Heston and K. Jacobs, 2006, “Option Valuation with
Conditional Skewness,” Journal of Econometrics, 131, 253-284.


Constantinides, G. M., 1979, “Multiperiod Consumption and Investment Behavior
with Convex Transactions Costs,” Management Science, 25, 1127-1137.


Constantinides, G. M. and S. Perrakis, 2002, “Stochastic Dominance Bounds on
Derivatives Prices in a Multiperiod Economy with Proportional Transaction Costs,”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 26, 1323-1352.


Constantinides, G. M. and S. Perrakis, 2007, “Stochastic Dominance Bounds on
American Option Prices in Markets with Frictions,” Review of Finance, 11, 71-115.


Constantinides, G. M., M. Czerwonko, J. C. Jackwerth and S. Perrakis, 2007, “Are
Options on Index Futures Profitable for Risk Averse Investors? Empirical Evidence,”
Working paper, University of Chicago.


Constantinides, G. M. and T. Zariphopoulou, 1999, “Bounds on Prices of
Contingent Claims in an Intertemporal Economy with Proportional Transaction
Costs and General Preferences,” Finance and Stochastics, 3, 345-369.


Constantinides, G. M. and T. Zariphopoulou, 2001, “Bounds on Derivative Prices
in an Intertemporal Setting with Proportional Transaction Costs and Multiple
Securities,” Mathematical Finance, 11, 331-346.


David, A. and P. Veronesi, 2002, “Option Prices with Uncertain Fundamentals,”
Working paper, University of Chicago.


Engle, R. F. and G. Gonzalez-Rivera, 1991, “Semiparametric ARCH Models,”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 9, 345-359.




                                                                                35
Fama, E. F., 1970, “Multiperiod Consumption-Investment Decisions,” American
Economic Review, 60, 163-174.


Garcia, R., R. Luger and E. Renault, 2003, “Empirical Assessment of an
Intertemporal Option Pricing Model with Latent Variables,” Journal of
Econometrics, 116, 49-83.


Han, B., 2006, “Limits of Arbitrage, Sentiment and Index Option Smile,” Working
paper, University of Texas, Austin.


Hull, J. C., 2006, Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives, Prentice Hall.


Jackwerth, J. C., 2000, “Recovering Risk Aversion from Option Prices and Realized
Returns,” Review of Financial Studies, 13, 433-451.


Jackwerth, J. C., 2004, “Option-Implied Risk-Neutral Distributions and Risk
Aversion,” ISBN 0-943205-66-2, Research Foundation of AIMR, Charlottesville,
USA.


Jackwerth, J. C. and M. Rubinstein, 1996, “Recovering Probability Distributions
from Option Prices,” Journal of Finance, 51, 1611-1631.


Leland, H. E., 1985, “Option Pricing and Replication with Transactions Costs,”
Journal of Finance, 40, 1283-1301.


Levy, H., 1985, “Upper and Lower Bounds of Put and Call Option Value:
Stochastic Dominance Approach,” Journal of Finance, 40, 1197-1217.


Liu, J., J. Pan and T. Wang, 2005, “An Equilibrium Model of Rare-event Premia
and Its Implications for Option Smirks,” Review of Financial Studies, 18, 131-164.


McDonald, R. L., 2006, Derivatives Markets, Addison-Wesley.



                                                                                 36
Merton, R. C., 1973, “Theory of Rational Option Pricing,” Bell Journal of
Economics and Management Science, 4, 141-183.


Oancea, I. M., and S. Perrakis, 2007, “Stochastic Dominance and Option Pricing in
Discrete and Continuous Time: an Alternative Paradigm,” Working Paper,
Concordia University, Montreal.


Perrakis, S., 1986, “Option Bounds in Discrete Time: Extensions and the Pricing of
the American Put,” Journal of Business, 59, 119-141.


Perrakis, S., 1993, “Option Pricing for Multinomial Stock Returns in Diffusion and
Mixed Processes,” Canadian Journal of Administrative Sciences, 10, 68-82.


Perrakis, S., and P. J. Ryan, 1984, “Option Pricing Bounds in Discrete Time,”
Journal of Finance, 39, 519-525.


Ritchken, P. H., 1985, “On Option Pricing Bounds,” Journal of Finance, 40, 1219-
1233.


Ritchken, P.H. and S. Kuo, 1988, “Option Bounds with Finite Revision
Opportunities,” Journal of Finance, 43, 301-308.


Rosenberg, J. V. and R. F. Engle, 2002, “Empirical Pricing Kernels,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 64, 341-372.


Rubinstein, M., 1994, “Implied Binomial Trees,” Journal of Finance, 49, 771-818.


Ryan, P. J., 2000, “Tighter Option Bounds from Multiple Exercise Prices,” Review
of Derivatives Studies, 4, No. 2, 155-188.




                                                                                   37
Ryan, P. J., 2003, “Progressive Option Bounds from the Sequence of Concurrently
Expiring Options,” European Journal of Operational Research, 151, 193-223.


Santa-Clara, P. and S. Yan, 2004, “Jump and Volatility Risk and Risk Premia: A
New Model and Lessons from S&P 500 Options,” Working paper, UCLA.


Shefrin, H., 2005, A Behavioral Approach to Asset Pricing, Elsevier/North-Holland,
Amsterdam.


Silverman, B. W., 1986, Density Estimation, Chapman and Hall, London.


Singleton, K. J., 2006, Empirical Dynamic Asset Pricing, Princeton University
Press.




                                                                               38
    Table 1A
    Percentage of months without stochastic dominance violations with proportional
    transaction costs

                                     A:        B:         C:          D:         E:         F:         G:
                                    8605-     8807-      9104-      9309-      9702-      0002-       0306-
                                    8710      9103       9308       9512        9912       0305       0605

Number of Months                     15        29         28          26         35         37         36
Unconditional index return           67        24         21          0          6          11          6
distribution,                      73 (5)    76 (10)    50 (11)     4 (5)      26 (9)     27(6)       17(4)
1928-1986                            80        90         82          35         60         49         39
Unconditional index return           27        28         32          0          3           5          3
distribution,                        53        48         54          15         9           8         11
1972-1986                            67        76         93          81         29         19         47
Unconditional index return           13        38         43          0          0           5          3
distribution,                        20        59         68          35         9          11         14
1987-2006                            33        76         96          88         14         16         47
Unconditional index return            7        38         39          0          0           5          3
distribution,                        20        55         71          27         0           8         11
1988-2006                            47        66         93          81         20         16         61
Conditional index return             13        34         61          42         0           8          6
distribution, 1972-2006,             27        59         82          69         11         27         11
based on GARCH (1,1)                 33        76         86          96         29         43         47
Conditional index return             53        55         71          42         6          14          3
distribution, 1972-2006,             87        83         96          73         29         38         19
based on implied vol.                100       93         86          96         71         84         50
Conditional index return            N/A       N/A         61          23         6           8          3
distribution, 1972-2006,                                  86          54         17         24         19
based on VIX                                              89          92         51         86         58
    The table displays the percentage of months in which stochastic dominance violations are absent in
    the cross-section of option prices. The one-way transaction costs rate on the index is 50 bps. The
    transaction costs on the options are proportional. In each row, the one-way transaction costs rate on
    the ATM calls is 5 bps of the index price (top entries), 10 bps (bold, middle entries), or 20 bps
    (bottom entries). The bracketed numbers in the first row are bootstrap standard deviations of the
    first-row entries, based on 200 runs.



                                                                                                      39
    Table 1B
    Percentage of months without stochastic dominance violations with fixed
    transaction costs

                                   A:         B:         C:         D:         E:         F:        G:
                                  8605-     8807-      9104-      9309-      9702-      0002-      0306-
                                  8710       9103       9308      9512       9912       0305       0605

Number of Months                   15         29         28         26         35        37         36
Unconditional index return         47          7         0          0          9          3          0
distribution,                      67         41         7          0          31        35         11
1928-1986                          87         86         46         0          74        51         25
Unconditional index return         33         21         4          4          3          8          3
distribution,                      53         52         32         4          11        16         14
1972-1986                          60         72         68         15         29        24         53
Unconditional index return         13         38         21         0          6         11          8
distribution,                      40         55         54         8          20        11         17
1987-2006                          47         66         82         38         31        16         58
Unconditional index return         13         31         21         0          0          5          6
distribution,                      33         55         43         4          11        11         17
1988-2006                          47         69         71         35         17        11         53
Conditional index return           20         38         36         42         3          8          6
distribution, 1972-2006,           40         52         61         85         17        24         19
based on GARCH (1,1)               40         79         89        100         34        38         58
Conditional index return           67         48         54         62         14        19          6
distribution, 1972-2006,           100        79         89         88         37        38         28
based on implied vol.              100        93         96         96         74        78         72
Conditional index return          N/A        N/A         21         15         6          3          0
distribution, 1972-2006,                                 75         54         17        19         28
based on VIX                                             93         96         46        73         72
    The table displays the percentage of months in which stochastic dominance violations are absent in
    the cross-section of option prices. The one-way transaction costs rate on the index is 50 bps. The
    transaction costs on the options are fixed. In each row, the one-way transaction costs rate on the
    calls is 5 bps of the index price (top entries), 10 bps (bold, middle entries), or 20 bps (bottom
    entries).




                                                                                                   40
    Table 2A
    Percentage of months without stochastic dominance violations with proportional
    transaction costs—ITM and OTM calls separately

                                   A:         B:         C:         D:         E:         F:        G:
                                  8605-     8807-      9104-      9309-      9702-      0002-      0306-
                                  8710       9103       9308      9512       9912       0305       0605

Number of Months                   15         29         28         26         35        37         36
Unconditional index return         87         90         79         38         69        46         42
distribution,                      73         79         79         19         29        30         17
1928-1986
Unconditional index return         73         52         89         77         26        16         53
distribution,                      53         45         75         46         11        14         11
1972-1986
Unconditional index return         53         66         89         88         20        16         50
distribution,                      20         59         89         62         9         11         17
1987-2006
Unconditional index return         53         62         93         77         17        14         47
distribution,                      20         59         89         54         3          8         14
1988-2006
Conditional index return           53         69         86        100         31        38         44
distribution, 1972-2006,           27         59         79         69         11        30         11
based on GARCH (1,1)
Conditional index return           100        97         93        100         80        81         50
distribution, 1972-2006,           87         83         96         77         34        59         19
based on implied vol.
Conditional index return          N/A        N/A         96         96         69        76         56
distribution, 1972-2006,                                 93         69         34        49         19
based on VIX
    The table displays the percentage of months in which stochastic dominance violations are absent in
    the cross-section of ITM calls (top entry) and OTM calls (bottom entry). The one-way transaction
    costs rate on the index is 50 bps. The one-way transaction costs rate on the index is 50 bps. The
    transaction costs on the options are proportional; for the ATM calls they are 10 bps of the index
    price.




                                                                                                   41
    Table 2B
    Percentage of months without stochastic dominance violations with fixed
    transaction costs—ITM and OTM calls separately

                                     A:          B:          C:         D:      E:        F:        G:
                                    8605-      8807-       9104-      9309-    9702-    0002-      0306-
                                    8710        9103       9308        9512    9912     0305       0605

Number of Months                     15          29          28         26      35       37         36
Unconditional index return           80          55          7           0      54       43         11
distribution,                        80          90          86         27      57       38         39
1928-1986
Unconditional index return           60          59          39          4      14       16         14
distribution,                        67          66          93         81      29       19         58
1972-1986
Unconditional index return           47          62          54         15      17       14         22
distribution,                        47          62          93         96      23       16         44
1987-2006
Unconditional index return           40          59          50         15      17       11         22
distribution,                        40          62          96         92      20       16         33
1988-2006
Conditional index return             40          59          64         88      29       30         28
distribution, 1972-2006,             47          62          82         96      31       41         53
based on GARCH (1,1)
Conditional index return             100         93          89         88      77       65         44
distribution, 1972-2006,             100         93         100         96      69       81         61
based on implied vol.
Conditional index return            N/A         N/A          79         77      26       38         33
distribution, 1972-2006,                                     93         96      60       76         64
based on VIX
    The table displays the percentage of months in which stochastic dominance violations are absent in
    the cross-section of ITM calls (top entry) and OTM calls (bottom entry). The one-way transaction
    costs rate on the index is 50 bps. The one-way transaction costs rate on the index is 50 bps. The
    transaction costs on the options are fixed as 10 bps of the index price.




                                                                                                   42
   Table 3
   Percentage of months without stochastic dominance violations using conditional
   implied-volatility-based index return distributions with ± 2% offset

                                     A:          B:          C:          D:          E:          F:          G:
                                    8605-       8807-      9104-       9309-       9702-       0002-       0306-
                                    8710        9103        9308        9512        9912        0305        0605

Number of Months                     15          29          28          26          35          37          36
Implied Vol - 2%                     13          55          71          50           0           5           0
Implied Vol -1%                      47          72          93          69          29          30           6
Implied Vol                          87          83          96          73          29          38          19
Implied Vol + 1%                     93          76          96          65          26          32          19
Implied Vol + 2%                     100         72          86          65          23          30          19
Best of above                        100         83          96          73          29          38          19
   The table displays the percentage of months in which stochastic dominance violations are absent in
   the cross-section of option prices. The one-way transaction costs rate on the index is 50 bps. The
   one-way transaction costs on the options are proportional. The one-way transaction costs rate on the
   ATM calls is 10 bps of the index price. All results use the conditional implied-volatility-based index
   return distribution over the sample period 1972-2006. Four offsets are used to change the implied
   ATM volatility by -2, -1, 1, or 2%, annualized. The bold results “Best of above” count a monthly
   cross section as feasible if feasibility is established either without implied volatility offset or with any
   of the four offsets.




                                                                                                            43
    Table 4
    Percentage of months without stochastic dominance violations in the two-period case

                                    A:         B:         C:          D:         E:         F:         G:
                                  8605-       8807-      9104-      9309-      9702-      0002-       0306-
                                   8710       9103       9308       9512        9912       0305       0605
Number of Months                       15      29         28          26         35         37         36
Unconditional Index Return             60      52         39          8          17         24         14
distribution,                      (73)       (66)       (46)        (0)        (23)       (22)       (14)
1928-1986
Unconditional Index Return             33      41         43          19         11          3          8
distribution,                      (53)       (48)       (54)        (15)       (9)         (8)       (11)
1972-1986
Unconditional Index Return             13      45         46          23         3           0          8
distribution,                      (27)       (48)       (61)        (27)       (0)         (8)        (8)
1987-2006
Unconditional Index Return             13      45         57          31         6           5          8
distribution,                      (20)       (55)       (75)        (31)       (6)         (8)        (8)
1988-2006
Conditional Index Return               20      34         50          58         3          14          6
distribution, 1972-2006,           (40)       (41)       (82)        (58)       (9)        (11)        (6)
Based on GARCH (1,1)
Conditional Index Return               87      66         61          54         14         27          8
distribution, 1972-2006,           (93)       (66)       (75)        (58)       (14)       (30)       (14)
Based on Implied Vol
Conditional index return           N/A        N/A         64          42         9          14          8
distribution, 1972-2006,                                 (75)        (50)       (9)        (16)       (11)
based on VIX
    The table displays the percentage of months in which stochastic dominance violations are absent in
    the cross section of option prices when one intermediate trading date is allowed over the life of the
    one-month options. The one-way transaction costs rate on the index is 50 bps. The transaction
    costs on the options are proportional; for the ATM calls they are 10 bps of the index price. In
    parentheses, the table displays the percentage of months in which stochastic dominance violations are
    absent in the case when no intermediate trading is allowed over the life of the one-month options.
    Two periods of 15 days are used.




                                                                                                      44
Figure 1: Bound violations over May 1986 to October 1987 and July 1988 to March 1991
The observed bid (circles) and ask (crosses) call prices, as implied volatilities, are plotted as functions
of the moneyness. The upper and lower option bounds are based on the index sample distribution
1972-2006, rescaled with the conditional volatility of the relevant panel. The transaction costs rate
on the index is 50 bps.

                                     May 1986 to October 1987 (Panel A)

                         0.5


                         0.4
    Implied Volatility




                         0.3


                         0.2


                         0.1


                          0
                               0.9          0.95                1                1.05
                                              Moneyness (K/S)



                                      July 1988 to March 1991 (Panel B)

                         0.5


                         0.4
   Implied Volatility




                         0.3


                         0.2


                         0.1


                          0
                               0.9          0.95                1                 1.05
                                              Moneyness (K/S)




                                                                                                        45
Figure 2: Bound violations over April 1991 to August 1993 and September 1993 to December 1995
The observed bid (circles) and ask (crosses) call prices, as implied volatilities, are plotted as functions
of the moneyness. The upper and lower option bounds are based on the index sample distribution
1972-2006, rescaled with the conditional volatility of the relevant panel. The transaction costs rate
on the index is 50 bps.

                                        April 1991 to August 1993 (Panel C)

                         0.5


                         0.4
    Implied Volatility




                         0.3


                         0.2


                         0.1


                          0
                               0.9             0.95                 1            1.05
                                                 M oneyness (K/S)



                                     September 1993 to December 1995 (Panel D)

                         0.5


                         0.4
   Implied Volatility




                         0.3


                         0.2


                         0.1


                          0
                               0.9             0.95                 1            1.05
                                                  Moneyness (K/S)




                                                                                                        46
Figure 3: Bound violations over February 1997 to December 1999 and February 2000 to May 2003
The observed bid (circles) and ask (crosses) call prices, as implied volatilities, are plotted as functions
of the moneyness. The upper and lower option bounds are based on the index sample distribution
1972-2006, rescaled with the conditional volatility of the relevant panel. The transaction costs rate
on the index is 50 bps.

                                    February 1997 to December 1999 (Panel E)

                        0.5


                        0.4
   Implied Volatility




                        0.3


                        0.2


                        0.1


                         0
                              0.9             0.95             1                1.05
                                                Moneyness (K/S)



                                       February 2000 to May 2003 (Panel F)

                        0.5


                        0.4
   Implied Volatility




                        0.3


                        0.2


                        0.1


                         0
                              0.9             0.95                 1              1.05
                                                 Moneyness (K/S)




                                                                                                        47
Figure 4: Bound violations over June 2003 to May 2006
The observed bid (circles) and ask (crosses) call prices, as implied volatilities, are plotted as functions
of the moneyness. The upper and lower option bounds are based on the index sample distribution
1972-2006, rescaled with the conditional volatility of the relevant panel. The transaction costs rate
on the index is 50 bps.

                                    June 2003 to May 2006 (Panel G)

                        0.5


                        0.4
   Implied Volatility




                        0.3


                        0.2


                        0.1


                         0
                              0.9        0.95                1                   1.05
                                           Moneyness (K/S)




                                                                                                        48
