NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BANKRUPTCY: PAST PUZZLES, RECENT REFORMS, AND THE MORTGAGE
CRISIS
Michelle J. White
Working Paper 14549
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14549

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

¸˛This is an expanded version of the talk that I gave as President of the American Law and Economics
Association, which took place at the 18th Annual ALEA Meeting on May 16-17, 2008. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Michelle J. White. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Bankruptcy: Past Puzzles, Recent Reforms, and the Mortgage Crisis
Michelle J. White
NBER Working Paper No. 14549
December 2008
JEL No. E44,G01,K35,R31
ABSTRACT
This paper discusses four bankruptcy-related policy issues. First, what is the economic rationale for
having a bankruptcy procedure at all and what defines an economically efficient bankruptcy procedure?
Second, why did the number of U.S. bankruptcy filings increase so dramatically between 1980 and
2005? Third, a major bankruptcy reform went into effect in the U.S. in 2005—what did it do and
how did it affect credit and mortgage markets? Finally, the paper discusses the mortgage crisis, the
high social cost of foreclosures, and the difficulty of avoiding foreclosure by voluntarily renegotiation
of mortgage contracts, even when such renegotiations are in the joint interest of debtors and creditors.
I also discuss the pros and cons of government programs to refinance mortgages and the possibility
of giving bankruptcy judges new power to change the terms of mortgage contracts in bankruptcy.

Michelle J. White
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
miwhite@ucsd.edu

The number of personal bankruptcy filings in the US rose 5-fold between 1980 and 2005,
from around 300,000 per year in 1980 to over 1½ million in each of the years from 2001 to 2005.
By the early 2000’s, more people were filing for bankruptcy each year than were graduating
from college, getting divorced or being diagnosed with cancer. Many celebrities also filed,
including boxer Mike Tyson (2003), actors Kim Basinger (1993), Burt Reynolds (1995), and
Debbie Reynolds (1997), singers Anita Bryant (2001), Merle Haggard (1993), M.C. Hammer
(1996) and Wayne Newton (1992), and two governors—John Connolly of Texas (1986) and J.
Fife Symington of Arizona (1995).1 Bankruptcy filings by celebrities and those by ordinary
people are related, since celebrity filings generate extensive publicity and send ordinary people
the message that filing for bankruptcy is socially acceptable and does not carry any stigma.
I’ll discuss four different topics in this talk. First, what is the economic rationale for having
a bankruptcy procedure in the first place and what defines an economically efficient bankruptcy
procedure? Second, why did the number of U.S. bankruptcy filings increase so much? Third, a
major bankruptcy reform went into effect in the U.S. in 2005—what did it do? And, fourth, how
can bankruptcy help solve the subprime mortgage crisis?

1.

Why Have Bankruptcy? 2

Personal bankruptcy law is a legal procedure for resolving all of the filer’s unsecured debts at
once. 3 It specifies how much filers must repay and how the repayment (if any) is divided
among creditors. Creditors’ collection efforts against the filer are suspended and, if the
bankruptcy filing is approved, they can collect only what the bankruptcy process entitles them to
receive. Filers are generally obliged to repay pre-bankruptcy creditors from both their assets
and their post-bankruptcy earnings, where specified levels of both assets and earnings are
exempt. The obligation to repay from earnings usually lasts for a fixed number of years.
Whatever debt remains after filers have met their obligation to repay is discharged. This means
that debt is discharged only after filers spend a certain number of years repaying from their
future earnings—or else convince a bankruptcy judge that they can never earn enough to repay.
In France, the obligation to repay from post-bankruptcy earnings lasts for 8 to 10 years, in
Germany it lasts for 6, and in the U.K. it lasts for 3. At the other extreme, U.S. bankruptcy law
1

See www.angelfire.com/stars4/lists/bankruptcies.html for a list of celebrity bankruptcies.
See White (2007a) for discussion and a comparison between personal and corporate bankruptcy procedures.
3
See below for discussion of the treatment of mortgage debt and car loans in bankruptcy.
2

2

prior to 2005 did not require filers to repay from post-bankruptcy earnings at all. Filers were
allowed to choose between a bankruptcy procedure in which they were only obliged to repay
from non-exempt assets (Chapter 7) or a procedure in which they were only obliged to repay
from non-exempt earnings (Chapter 13). Because few bankruptcy filers have any non-exempt
assets, they mainly chose Chapter 7 and were not obliged to repay at all. These provisions made
U.S. bankruptcy law extremely pro-debtor.
In addition to the obligation to repay, some countries also impose “shaming” penalties on
bankruptcy filers. In the U.K., filers are disqualified from becoming Members of Parliament and
from managing a company for three years. In the U.S., filers’ names are made public and the
filing stays on their credit records for 10 years.4
The economic justification for having a personal bankruptcy procedure is that individuals
benefit from borrowing in order to smooth consumption, but they face uncertainty in their
ability-to-repay. Bankruptcy reduces the downside risk of borrowing by discharging some or all
debt when debtors’ ability-to-repay turns out to be low. It therefore provides debtors with partial
consumption insurance. Assuming that debtors are risk-averse, having some consumption
insurance makes them better off and increases their willingness to borrow. The higher the
bankruptcy exemptions for debtors’ assets and earnings and the shorter the obligation to repay
from post-bankruptcy earnings, the more consumption insurance that bankruptcy provides.
Another reason for having a personal bankruptcy procedure is that it encourages
entrepreneurial behavior. Individuals face more risk when they start businesses than when they
work for others, because they are personally liable for their business debts. Having a personal
bankruptcy procedure raises their consumption when business failure occurs by discharging both
their business and personal debts. It therefore makes risk-averse individuals more likely to go
into business in the first place and more likely to start a second business if the first one fails.5
Thus having a personal bankruptcy procedure benefits debtors by reducing the risk they
face and encouraging them to borrow—both to smooth consumption and to start businesses. But
having a bankruptcy procedure also has drawbacks. One is that the more favorable the
bankruptcy procedure is to debtors, the more often they file. In addition, a more favorable
4

In the past, bankrupts were subject to criminal penalties, including banishment, imprisonment, being sold into
slavery, and death (Efrat, 2002). See White (2007b) for a comparison of bankruptcy laws in the U.S. versus several
European countries.
5
Even if a business is incorporated, lenders often require owners to guarantee loans to their corporation. This means
that if the corporation fails, the owner is likely to file for bankruptcy because of business debts.

3

bankruptcy procedure encourages debtors to behave opportunistically by filing even when their
ability-to-repay is high. Debtors may work less before bankruptcy because the cost of losing
their jobs is lower or work less after bankruptcy because they must share their earnings with
creditors. All of these drawbacks cause interest rates to rise and the supply of credit to fall. If
the bankruptcy system is too pro-debtor, the supply of credit could dry up completely.
A number of hypotheses concerning bankruptcy have been empirically tested. Most of the
empirical tests use U.S. data and make use of the fact that U.S. bankruptcy law is uniform all
over the country, except that asset exemptions vary across states. In most states, the largest
asset exemption is the “homestead” exemption for equity in owner-occupied homes, which
ranges from zero in a few states to unlimited in Texas, Florida and four other states. In states
with high homestead exemptions, debtors can keep multi-million dollar homes when they file for
bankruptcy. They can also keep other types of assets, as long as they convert these assets into
home equity before filing. Because states that have higher homestead exemptions provide more
consumption insurance to debtors, debtors in these states are predicted to have higher demand for
credit, lower supply of credit, and more opportunistic behavior by debtors.
In a series of papers, co-authors and I examined how the variation in asset exemptions
across U.S. states affects credit markets. When asset exemptions increase, interest rates are
predicted to rise and more loan applicants are predicted to be turned down for credit, but loan
sizes could either rise or fall depending on whether the increase in loan demand is bigger or
smaller than the decrease in loan supply. Gropp, Scholz and White (1997) found evidence that
interest rates on car loans were higher in high-exemption states. We also found that highincome debtors borrowed more in states with high asset exemptions, because lenders
accommodated the increase in demand for these debtors; while low-income debtors borrowed
less in states with high asset exemptions, because lenders tightened credit standards. Lin and
White (2001) found that applicants were more likely to be turned down for home improvement
loans in states with high asset exemptions. Berkowitz and White (2004) found that small
businesses borrowed less and paid higher interest rates in states with high asset exemptions.
Turning to the effects of the bankruptcy system on entrepreneurial behavior, Wei Fan and I
(2003) examined whether there are more entrepreneurs in US states that have higher asset
exemptions. Support for this hypothesis would imply that individuals’ higher propensity to own
businesses in states with higher asset exemptions more than offsets the deterrent effect of tighter
4

credit supply in these states. We found that states with unlimited homestead exemptions had
around one-third more entrepreneurs than states with low homestead exemptions. Armour and
Cummings (2005) tested the same hypothesis using cross-country data. Because many features
of bankruptcy law differ across countries, they focused on the length of the period during which
bankruptcy filers are obliged to repay from earnings, where a shorter period implies a more prodebtor bankruptcy law. They found that countries with shorter repayment periods in bankruptcy
have more entrepreneurs.
Fay, Hurst and White (2002) examined the hypothesis that pro-debtor bankruptcy laws
encourage opportunistic behavior. Specifically they tested whether debtors are more likely to
file for bankruptcy when their financial gain from filing is higher, where the financial gain from
filing equals the amount of debt discharged in bankruptcy minus the amount debtors must repay.
Their results showed that for every $1,000 increase in debtors’ financial gain from bankruptcy,
the filing rate rose by 7 percent. Grant and Koeniger (2005) used aggregate state-year data for
U.S. states to test whether states with more pro-debtor bankruptcy laws have less variation in
their aggregate consumption levels over time, because consumption is more fully insured. They
found that the variance of consumption over time was lower in states with higher asset
exemption levels.
What do these considerations suggest in terms of formulating an economically efficient
personal bankruptcy law? Consider first the determination of the optimal asset exemption level.
The basic tradeoff is that an increase in the exemption level makes risk-averse debtors better off
because their consumption is more fully insured, but makes all debtors worse off because the
supply of credit falls. If all debtors were risk-neutral, the optimal asset exemption level would
therefore be zero. But as the average debtor becomes more risk-averse, the optimal asset
exemption level rises. Now consider the determination of the optimal earnings exemption. A
higher earnings exemption similarly makes risk-averse debtors better off by partially insuring
their consumption, but makes all debtors worse off because the supply of credit falls. An
additional consideration is that a low exemption for earnings may discourage debtors from
working after bankruptcy, particularly if most or all of their marginal earnings must be paid to
creditors. So an increase in the earnings exemption can improve efficiency by reducing the
distortion to debtors’ post-bankruptcy labor supply. Loosely speaking, these considerations
suggest that the optimal earnings exemption in bankruptcy is relatively high, while the optimal
5

asset exemption is relatively low. Neither exemption should be so high that credit markets break
down.
Finally, consider shaming penalties for bankruptcy. Higher shaming penalties make riskaverse debtors worse off because they do not wish to face the risk of paying these penalties, but
they make all debtors better off by reducing opportunistic behavior, increasing debtors’ labor
supply (since debtors work harder to avoid going bankrupt, and increasing the supply of credit.
This suggests that the optimal level of shaming penalties could be positive rather than zero.

2. Explaining the Rise in US Bankruptcy Filings Since 1980
Figure 1 shows the 5-fold increase in the number of personal bankruptcy filings in the US
between 1980 and 2005 and also shows the large drop in filings that occurred in 2006, following
the adoption of bankruptcy reform. In this section, I consider various explanations for the
increase in filings up to 2005. In the next section, I discuss why filings dropped in 2006 and the
trend since 2006.
There has been quite a bit of controversy about why the number of bankruptcy filings
increased. The fact that the US bankruptcy system was pro-debtor prior to 2005 was necessary
for the increase in filings, since debtors don’t file unless doing so makes them better off. But it
isn’t sufficient to explain why the number of filings increased. Many of the explanations for the
increase in filings involve adverse events. But while adverse events are often positively related
to debtors’ filing decisions in cross-section regression models, they generally cannot explain why
the number of filings increased so dramatically over time.
Consider divorce first. In their model explaining households’ bankruptcy filing decisions,
Fay, Hurst and White (2003) found a significant relationship between getting divorced and filing
for bankruptcy one year later—this may be because people consult lawyers when they get
divorced and the lawyers may suggest filing for bankruptcy. But divorces cannot explain the
large increase in bankruptcy filings over time, since the divorce rate in the U.S. fell over the
period, from 5.2 per thousand people in 1980 to 3.6 in 2005 (Statistical Abstract of the U.S.,
2000, table 77, and later years).
Job loss and health problems are also adverse events that may trigger bankruptcy; their roles
in the bankruptcy decision have been particularly controversial. Using data from surveys of
bankruptcy filers, Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook (2000) argued that 67% of bankruptcy filings
6

were due to job loss and Himmelstein et al (2005) claimed that 55% of bankruptcy filings
occurred because of illness, injury or medical bills not covered by insurance. But the former
study treated job loss as a cause of bankruptcy even if debtors quickly obtained new jobs and the
latter counted uninsured health care expenditures as a cause of bankruptcy even when these
expenditures were quite small.6 Another source of data is a 1996 survey of bankruptcy filers by
the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), which asked a representative sample of filers their
primary reason for filing. In that survey, only 21% of filers gave job loss as their primary reason
and 16% gave illness, injury, or medical costs as their primary reason. These results suggest
much smaller roles for both job loss and health problems. In their model of the bankruptcy
filing decision that used the PSID dataset, Fay et al (2002) did not find a significant relationship
between job loss or health problems and whether debtors filed for bankruptcy.
In any case, job loss and health problems cannot explain the increase in bankruptcy filings
over the 25-year period, because they did not increase substantially over the period. The U.S.
unemployment rate fell from 7.1% in 1980 to 5.5% in 2005, although it fluctuated substantially
over the period (Economic Report of the President 2007, table B-42). The on-the-job-injury rate
as a fraction of population rose from 0.97% in 1980 to 1.6% in 1990, but then fell steadily to
1.2% in 2005 (Statistical Abstract of the US, 2004-05, table 631, and 2008, table 635.).7
Uninsured health care costs rose, but only slightly, as a percent of US median family income
over the period, from 3.5% in 1980 to 3.9% in 2005 (US Census Bureau, 2007, table 120).
Finally, the percentage of Americans not covered by health insurance also rose slightly over the
period, from 14.8% in 1985 to 15.7% in 2004 (U.S. Census Bureau, 1990 and 2007, table 144).
Overall, neither job loss nor health-related problems are able to explain the large increase in
bankruptcy filings over the last 25 years.
Increased availability of casino gambling seems a more promising explanation for the rise
in bankruptcy filings, since gambling was allowed only in Nevada and Atlantic City in 1980 but
had spread over most of the country by 2005. A recent study by Barron, Staten, and Wilshusen
(2002) found that bankruptcy filing rates were significantly higher in counties that contained a
casino or were adjacent to a county with a casino than in counties that were further from casinos.
But the spread of gambling can explain only a small increase in bankruptcy filings: their model

6
7

See Dranove and Millenson (2006) and White (2007) for discussion.
This figure is workers killed or disabled on the job, where disabilities cause at least one full day of work to be lost.

7

predicts that if casino gambling were abolished all over the US, then bankruptcy filings would
fall nationally by only one percent.
Finally, Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook (2000) argue that bankruptcy filings increased
over time because bankruptcy became a middle-class phenomenon. Their argument is that even
middle-class households have become so financially stretched that any small financial reverse
forces them to file for bankruptcy. But surveys in fact show that bankruptcy filers have become
poorer rather than richer over time relative to the median U.S. household. According to
Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook’s (1989) survey of debtors who filed in 1981, the median filer’s
income was 70% of U.S. median family income. But in Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook’s
(2000) survey of debtors who filed in 1991, this ratio had fallen to 50%. And in a recent survey
of debtors who filed in 2003, Zhu (2007) found that the ratio was 49%. Thus evidence suggests
that bankruptcy filers have become poorer—not richer—over time, relative to U.S. families
overall.
Now turn to debt as an alternative explanation for the increase in bankruptcy filings. Figure
2 shows average consumer revolving debt (mainly credit card debt) per household and average
mortgage debt per household, both shown as a fraction of median U.S. family income from 1980
to 2005. Both debt-to-income ratios are scaled to equal one in 1980. Over the period, average
consumer revolving debt increased 4-fold relative to median family income, from 3.2% to
13.0%, and average mortgage debt increased 3-fold relative to median family income, from 57%
to 156%.8 With these large increases, it’s not surprisingly that 33% of respondents in the PSID’s
survey of bankruptcy filers gave “high debt/misuse of credit cards” as their primary reason for
bankruptcy—more respondents gave this reason than any other. Econometric models of the
bankruptcy filing decision by Domowitz and Sartain (1999) and Gross and Souleles (2002a) also
find that higher debt is positively and significantly related to debtors’ filing decisions.
Why did credit card debt increase so much over time? The reasons include both deregulation of credit markets and technological changes in lending. The first general credit cards
were issued in the U.S. in 1966, but the industry remained small because of state usury laws that
limited interest rates. The main regulatory change for the credit card industry was the Supreme
8

Average revolving debt per household increased from $1665 in 1980 to $7530 in 2005, while average mortgage
debt increased from $29,300 in 1980 to $85,600 in 2005 (figures in 2006 dollars). In contrast, installment debt—
mainly automobile loans—increased by only one-third relative to median family income. Debt data are taken from
the Economic Report of the President (2007), tables B76 and B77.

8

Court’s Marquette decision in 1978, which effectively abolished state usury laws and allowed
lenders to charge higher interest rates. However the growth of credit card lending was also held
back by the fact that consumers could only obtain credit cards from the bank where they kept
their checking or savings accounts, because only this bank knew if they were credit-worthy. An
important technological change in consumer lending was the development of credit bureaus and
computerized credit-scoring models in the 1980’s. Credit bureaus broke local banks’ monopoly
on credit card lending by allowing any potential lender to obtain any individual consumer’s
credit score, regardless of whether or not the lender and the consumer had a prior banking
relationship. In particular, credit card lenders began to buy national lists of consumers who had
credit scores above a minimum level and to offer these consumers credit cards by mail. The
resulting increase in competition among lenders improved the terms of credit card loans for
consumers and allowed lenders to operate nationwide and benefit from economies of scale.
Another important technological change in credit card markets was the development of the
secondary market for credit-card-backed securities—around 43% of credit card debt was
securitized as of 2005.9 Securitization both lowered lenders’ cost of funds and reduced their
risk, since buyers and insurers of the securities absorbed some of the risk. 10
With lower costs and diversified risk, lenders increased the supply of funds and offered credit
cards to lower-income consumers. According to data from the Survey of Consumer Finance, the
percentage of households in the lowest quintile of the income distribution who have at least one
credit card rose from just 11% in 1977 to 43% in 2001 (Durkin, 2000; Johnson, 2005). Increased
borrowing on credit cards in turn led to more bankruptcy filings, particularly by lower-income
debtors.
Similar technological changes also occurred in the mortgage market, although the timing was
different. In the 1960’s and earlier, homeowners obtained mortgages from their local banks, for
the same reasons that they later obtained credit cards from their local banks. But the
development of credit bureaus and credit scoring, along with computerized property appraisals,
allowed mortgage lenders to lend to non-customers and to expand nationally. The secondary
9

This is based on data from the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, see
www.sifma.org/research/pdf/ABS_Outstanding.pdf.
10
One reason that securitization of credit card debt lowers lenders’ cost of funds is that, if the securities have a
triple-A debt rating, they can be bought by institutional investors such as pension funds. See Furlett (2002) for
discussion of the market for credit-card-debt-backed securities. Evans and Schmalensee (2005) and Mann (2007)
discuss the credit card industry generally.

9

market for mortgage-backed securities developed earlier than that for credit card-backed
securities, because the Federal government chartered Fannie Mae and later Freddie Mac to buy
mortgages and package them as mortgage-backed securities. The government’s goal was to
increase the supply of mortgage credit and allow more households to become homeowners.
Fannie Mae began purchasing and securitizing conventional mortgages in the 1970’s. In the
1990’s, private banks began purchasing and securitizing non-conventional mortgages, including
adjustable-rate mortgages, jumbo mortgages, negative amortization mortgages, and mortgages
with low or zero down-payments. Except for jumbos, these new types of mortgages were often
marketed to riskier, lower-income debtors who did not qualify for conventional mortgages.
Around 63% of mortgage debt was securitized as of 2005.11
But while additional credit card debt gives debtors a stronger incentive to file for bankruptcy,
the relationship between additional mortgage debt and bankruptcy is less straight-forward. This
is because—under current law—mortgage debt cannot be discharged in bankruptcy and therefore
the only way for debtors to escape their mortgage commitments is to give up their homes. They
can do so regardless of whether they file for bankruptcy. Nonetheless debtors who are in trouble
paying their mortgages can benefit from filing for bankruptcy. I discuss how bankruptcy helps
debtors who are homeowners save their homes in the next section.

3. The 2005 Bankruptcy Reform—What Did It Do?
The dramatic increase in the number of bankruptcy filings caused lenders to lobby long and
hard for bankruptcy reform and they finally succeeded in 2005. To briefly summarize a
complicated piece of legislation, there were two major changes. The first was the adoption of a
“means test” which requires higher-income bankruptcy filers to use some of their future earnings
to repay. The means test specifies a new procedure for calculating each filer’s earnings
exemption. Filers whose earnings exceed the exemption by more than $167 per month (or
$2000 per year) can no longer file under Chapter 7; instead they must file under Chapter 13 if
they file for bankruptcy at all. In Chapter 13, they must use all of their non-exempt earnings for
five years to repay debt. Thus for the first time, U.S. bankruptcy law no longer fully exempts
debtors’ post-bankruptcy earnings from the obligation to repay.
11

This is based on data from the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (see
www.sifma.org/research/pdf/MortgageRelatedOutstanding.pdf).

10

However the procedure for determining the earnings exemption is fairly generous to
debtors. The minimum earnings exemption equals the median family income in the debtor’s
state of residence, so that all debtors in the lower half of the income distribution in their states
are allowed to file under Chapter 7. As the data discussed above suggests, the median filer’s
income is only about half of median U.S. family income, so that the vast majority of bankruptcy
filers still qualify for Chapter 7 based on having below-median income. Filers whose incomes
are above the median compute their earnings exemptions by summing pre-determined
allowances for rent, transportation and personal expenditures and then adding their actual
expenditures for taxes, insurance, care of disabled relatives, telecommunications costs, security
costs, and secured debt payments. The formula is generous enough that most debtors qualify for
Chapter 7 even if their incomes are in the top decile of the income distribution. In addition, filers
whose debts are primarily due to a failed business can bypass the means test entirely and file
under Chapter 7 regardless of their incomes.12
The second major change under the 2005 bankruptcy reform was to raise debtors’ cost of
filing for bankruptcy by imposing a number of new requirements on both debtors and
bankruptcy lawyers. Debtors are now required to submit copies of their past tax returns (even if
they never filed tax returns), take a credit counseling course before they file and a debt
management course before they receive a discharge, and pay higher filing fees. Bankruptcy
lawyers are now subject to new registration requirements, they must certify the accuracy of all
the information that debtors provide on their bankruptcy forms, and they can be found liable if
debtors provide false or misleading formation. These changes caused bankruptcy lawyers to
raise their fees. Overall, the first of the two changes was intended to discourage high-income
debtors from filing by forcing them to repay some of their debts in Chapter 13, while the second
was intended to discourage lower-income debtors from filing by raising their filing costs. What
actually happened as a result of these changes?
First, debtors rushed to file for bankruptcy before the new law went into effect—the number
of bankruptcy filings jumped from 1.5 million in 2004 to 2 million in 2005. Filings then fell
sharply to around 600,000 in 2006, but rose to 800,000 in 2007 and rose even more in the first

12

See White (2007b) for discussion of the earnings exemption and how debtors can increase it by planning in
advance for bankruptcy.

11

half of 2008. Second, the new requirements increased debtors’ costs of filing by about 50%,
from a median level of $700 to $1,100 for Chapter 7 and from a median level of $2,000 to
$3,000 for Chapter 13 (GAO, 2008). These higher costs suggest that the number of bankruptcy
filing is likely to remain at a lower level than before the reform. Third, credit card lending
became more profitable: lenders’ charge-off rates (losses due to default and bankruptcy) fell
from around 6 percent to 3 percent and the share prices of publicly-traded debt collection firms
increased relative to the market (Ashcraft, Dick and Morgan, 2007). Credit card lenders reacted
to favorable conditions by supplying more credit—consumer revolving debt per household rose
by 12% from 2005 to 2007.13 Fourth, the reform did not deter high-income debtors from filing
more than it deterred debtors in general—about 1% of bankruptcy filers in both 2001 and 2007
had incomes above $100,000.14 This may be because the means test allows even high-income
debtors to file under Chapter 7 or because most high-income filers are entrepreneurs who are
allowed to bypass the means test completely. Fifth, the proportion of bankruptcy filings under
Chapter 13 rose from 20% in 2005 to around 40% in 2006 and 2007. Since mortgage defaults
began rising at the same time as bankruptcy reform went into effect, this raises the question of
whether the increased use of Chapter 13 is due to the reform or to the mortgage crisis.
Now consider how bankruptcy helps financially distressed homeowners to save their homes
and how the reform changed this. Debtors who file under Chapter 7 have their unsecured debt
discharged, which frees up additional income to make their mortgage payments. But they can
only use Chapter 7 to save their homes if they are current on their mortgage payments or can pay
off their mortgage arrears quickly, since filing under Chapter 7 does not stop lenders from
foreclosing. In addition, their home equity must be below their state’s homestead exemption,
since otherwise the home must be sold in bankruptcy and the non-exempt portion of home equity
must be used to repay unsecured debt.

Bankruptcy reform reduced the number of debtors who

can use Chapter 7 to save their homes, both because debtors must now pass the means test in
order to file under Chapter 7 and because debtors who moved to their current homes within the
previous 3½ years are limited to a maximum homestead exemption of $125,000 -- even if their

13

Mortgage debt per household rose by even more, 16%, over the same period. But this was probably due to the
housing bubble rather than to bankruptcy reform. Debt data are taken from Economic Report of the President 2008,
tables B76 and B77.

14

Income figures are corrected to 2007 dollars. See Lawless et al (2008).

12

state’s homestead exemption is higher.15 Debtors can alternately file under Chapter 13 to save
their homes. A Chapter 13 filing helps debtors even if they have defaulted on their mortgage
payments and lenders have initiated foreclosure, since filing under Chapter 13 stops foreclosure.
Debtors must repay their mortgage arrears--plus interest—over five years as part of their Chapter
13 repayment plans and they must also make all of their normal mortgage payments. While
debtors are theoretically required to repay unsecured debt in Chapter 13 as well, in practice most
repay only the mortgage. This is because the mortgage payment comes first and debtors are only
required to use their non-exempt incomes to repay. Thus if debtors’ mortgage payments exceed
their non-exempt income, then they are not required to repay any unsecured debt. Chapter 13 as
a strategy for debtors to save their homes existed before the 2005 bankruptcy reform and was not
changed by the reform, except that the costs of filing for bankruptcy rose.
In a recent paper, Ning Zhu and I (2007) examined a sample of debtors who filed under
Chapter 13 in 2006. Our goal was to understand whether debtors file under Chapter 13 to save
their homes or because the means test now forces them to do so. We found that 96% of Chapter
13 filers in our sample were homeowners and 78% passed the means test—meaning that they
could have filed under Chapter 7. About 90% of Chapter 13 filers proposed repayment plans
and only 9% of plans proposed to repay only unsecured debt. 16 Thus while Chapter 13 has
become relatively more important since the adoption of bankruptcy reform, debtors are still using
it to save their homes rather than to repay unsecured debt.
Finally, filing for bankruptcy under either chapter also helps debtors who default on their
mortgages and do not wish to save their homes. This is because, if the house sells in foreclosure
for less than the amount owed, in some states the lender has a claim on the debtor for the
difference. This claim can be discharged in bankruptcy.
Overall, the 2005 bankruptcy reform benefitted creditors by raising the cost of filing for
bankruptcy, but discouraged debtors from behaving opportunistically by introducing a means test

15

Berkowitz and Hynes (1999) first suggested that debtors could use Chapter 7 to save their homes. See Morgan et
al (2008) for discussion of the effect of bankruptcy reform on homeowners’ use of Chapter 7.
16
See White and Zhu (2007). Most debtors who repaid only unsecured debt in Chapter 13 were repaying priority
(tax) claims or student loans or the fees of their bankruptcy lawyers. These debts are not discharged in bankruptcy.

13

for Chapter 7. The reform also made it more costly for debtors to use bankruptcy to save their
homes.

4.

Bankruptcy and the Subprime Mortgage Crisis

My last topic is how bankruptcy relates to the subprime mortgage crisis. About 1.5 million
foreclosures occurred in 2007 and an additional 1.2 million in the first half of 2008. Estimates
suggest that another two million foreclosures may occur in the next two years.17 Foreclosures
are extremely costly. Homeowners lose because they are forced to move, which destroys their
ties to the neighborhood and forces their children to switch to new schools. Some become
homeless. Lenders lose because, by the time foreclosed homes are sold, around one-half of the
value of the loan is lost. Neighborhoods where foreclosures occur suffer because vacant homes
deteriorate and cause blight, reducing the value of nearby properties.18 And local governments
are harmed because property values fall, reducing property tax revenues and forcing cuts in local
public services. Foreclosures also lead to more foreclosures, since sales of foreclosed homes
drive down house prices. This makes additional defaults likely, both because more homeowners
have negative equity and because homeowners who wish to keep their homes cannot refinance
their mortgages.19
Given that foreclosures are costly to both borrowers and lenders, avoiding default is in
both sides’ interest and it might be expected that they would voluntarily renegotiate many
mortgage contracts. But very few renegotiations have in fact occurred—why? The first part of
the answer is that many mortgages are held in mortgage-backed securities. These securities
sometimes do not allow the terms of the underlying mortgages to be modified at all and
sometimes allow only a limited number of mortgages, usually 5%, to be modified. Even when
renegotiation is allowed, owners of mortgage-backed securities often prefer foreclosure because
it is quicker and they fear that debtors will eventually default on the renegotiated mortgage. In
addition, securitized mortgages have multiple sets of owners with differing levels of priority.
17

See Bair (2008).
One recent study found that each foreclosure causes a reduction of $150,000 in the total value of nearby homes.
See Immergluck and Smith (2006).
19
A number of studies have found that reductions in home values are an important determinant of default and
foreclosure. See, for example, Gerardi et al (2007).
18

14

When renegotiations occur, the changes generally make one set of owners better off and others
worse off, so that the latter try to block them. Thus securitization makes renegotiation much
more difficult. Another problem is that many distressed homeowners have second as well as first
mortgages, and second mortgage-holders have the right to prevent modification of first
mortgages unless the second mortgage is paid off. Since the decline in housing values has made
many second mortgages worthless, second mortgage-holders have little incentive to cooperate.
All mortgage securities have a servicer who collects the mortgage payments and
represents the owners in renegotiations. But the contracts between security owners and servicers
also discourage renegotiation. One problem is that servicers are compensated for their costs of
foreclosing, but not for the costs of renegotiating. Another is that servicers impose fees when
debtors pay late or default and servicing contracts allow them to keep these fees if they can
collect them. Since renegotiating a mortgage often involves giving up these fees, they give
servicers an additional incentive to foreclose. Thus most mortgage servicing contracts are
unsuited to dealing with the housing crisis.20
Few renegotiations occurred during 2006 and 2007 and many that did occur merely added
the debtor’s past due payments and fees to the mortgage principle—a change that is unlikely to
prevent foreclosure more than temporarily. The pace of renegotiations increased in 2008, but
still only about one-third of mortgages in default are being renegotiated. Most recent
renegotiation activity involves mortgages that either were retained by the lender (i.e., not
securitized) or were securitized by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Few mortgages that were
securitized by private banks have been renegotiated, even though these banks specialized in
buying and securitizing subprime mortgages. 21
What about government programs to provide new mortgages to distressed homeowners? In
July 2008, Congress passed and the Bush Administration signed the “Housing and Economic
Recovery Act of 2008” (H.R. 3221), which includes the “Hope for Homeowners Act of 2008.”
This program is mainly intended to aid homeowners who obtained subprime mortgages with low
“teaser” interest rates that will rise after an initial period, making their monthly mortgage
payments unaffordable. The main features of the program are as follows: (1) The Federal
20
21

See Cordell et al (2008) for a discussion of mortgage servicing contracts.
See Cordell et al (2008) and Pew Charitable Trust (2008, p. 34) for data on renegotiations.

15

Housing Administration will provide and guarantee new 30-year, fixed-rate mortgages to eligible
homeowners. The new mortgages will be for 90% of the homes’ current market value. (2) In
order to qualify, homeowners’ new mortgage payments must be less than 31% of their income
and the house must be the homeowner’s principle residence. (3) First mortgage-holders will
receive 85% of the current market value of the house, which means that they lose more than the
decline in value of the house. (4) First mortgage-holders must consent to the refinancing. (4)
The government will bear all losses if the debtor defaults on the refinanced mortgage, but it and
second mortgage-holders will receive part of the future capital appreciation of the house. The
Congressional Budget Office (2008) predicts that around 400,000 mortgages will be refinanced
under the program. 22
The feature of this program that is most problematic is the requirement that existing
mortgage lenders consent to the refinancing. The consent requirement inevitably means that
adverse selection will occur, since lenders have an incentive to consent to refinancing only if
they predict that the debtor is likely to default. This suggests that many debtors will default
even on the refinanced mortgages and the government will then bear the costs. The
Congressional Budget Office recently estimated that around one-third of refinanced mortgages
would default (Herzenhorn, 2008). An additional problem is that lenders have an incentive to
frequently refuse their consent in order to discourage strategic behavior by relatively well-off
debtors. These debtors have an incentive to apply for refinancing under the program, but would
repay their original mortgages if lenders refuse. Since lenders cannot perfectly distinguish
between debtors who apply strategically and those who apply because they cannot afford to
repay, they have an incentive to frequently refuse their consent in order to discourage strategic
behavior. As a result, some mortgages will not be refinanced even when debtors cannot afford
to repay and will otherwise default. Requiring lenders’ consent thus means that the “Hope for
Homeowners” program cannot prevent all foreclosures, even in situations where both sides
would gain from participating. Thus from an economic efficiency standpoint, allowing lenders
to block refinancing is socially costly.

22

See Herzenhorn (2008). See thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/F?c110:2:./temp/~c110V7WYMz:e472103: for a
description of the program.

16

A similar approach was recently proposed by Sheila Bair, Chairman of the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation.

The FDIC program also modifies mortgages to reduce debtors’

mortgage payments to 31% of their gross income. Lenders, rather than the government, must
hold the modified mortgages, but the government will absorb up to 50% of the loss if debtors
default on the modified mortgages. This approach has the advantage that lenders’ consent is not
required, but has the problem that strategic behavior will result in too many—rather than too
few--mortgages being modified. 23
A third approach to solving the mortgage crisis is to expand the save-your-home feature of
bankruptcy by allowing bankruptcy judges to modify residential mortgages. Judges would
divide mortgages that are underwater into a secured portion equal to the current market value of
the home and an unsecured portion equal to the difference between the mortgage principle and
the current market value of the home. The latter would be treated like any other unsecured claim
in bankruptcy and could be discharged in Chapter 7 or paid under the debtor’s Chapter 13
repayment plan if the debtor has enough non-exempt income. Bankruptcy judges would also
have the power to discharge excessive fees or penalties imposed by lenders, to reduce interest
rates if they are excessive, and/or to convert variable-interest-rate mortgages to fixed-rate.
Under current law, bankruptcy judges have the power to change the terms of mortgages if they
are secured by vacation homes, multi-family homes, or boats, but not if they are secured by the
debtor’s principle residence. So the proposed reform would make the treatment in bankruptcy of
mortgages secured by a debtor’s primary residence the same as the treatment in bankruptcy of
other secured loans.24
The main advantage of allowing mortgage modification in bankruptcy is that it provides an
alternative route for homeowners whose mortgages cannot be modified under the other
approaches. Homeowners may find themselves in this situation because their loans are part of a
private mortgage-backed security that does not allow modification or because the first- or
second-mortgage lender refuses to consent. Other homeowners may find themselves in this
situation because their mortgage payments are less than 31% of income, but they would
nonetheless default unless modification occurs. These defaults can be avoided by allowing
23

The FDIC is applying this approach to loans held by IndyMac Bank, which it took over in July 2008, and has
argued that it should be applied more broadly. See Bair (2008).
24
See Goodman and Levitin (2008) for discussion.

17

judges to modify mortgages in bankruptcy. Another important advantage of allowing mortgage
modification in bankruptcy is that the costs would be absorbed by mortgage lenders, so that the
bankruptcy route would be available even if government programs exhausted their funding.
What are the drawbacks of allowing mortgage modification in bankruptcy? One is that it
would encourage strategic behavior by debtors who gain from defaulting because their
mortgages are underwater, but who can afford to repay their original mortgages. This cost is
likely to be small, because most strategic behavior can be detected by bankruptcy trustees, who
have extensive information about debtors’ financial situations. An additional way to limit
strategic behavior would be to require all debtors seeking mortgage modification to file under
Chapter 13, where they must follow a court-supervised repayment plan for five years. A second
consideration—forcefully made by lenders—is that allowing mortgage modification in
bankruptcy would reduce the supply of mortgage credit in the future. Levitin and Goodman
(2008) have argued that this is unlikely, since in the past, mortgages that could or could not be
modified in bankruptcy carried virtually the same interest rates.25 A final issue is whether the
bankruptcy system can handle the extra filings by homeowners seeking mortgage modifications.
The number of bankruptcy filings fell by more than 1 million between 2005 and 2006 and the
current filing rate is still well below the peak in 2005. It therefore seems likely that the U.S.
bankruptcy system has substantial excess capacity and would have little difficulty in handling the
additional filings.
These points suggest that adding a bankruptcy route to mortgage modification would be a
useful additional means of addressing the mortgage crisis. Congress rejected legislation that
would have made this change in the fall of 2007, but the Obama campaign expressed support for
it and the proposal is likely to be reconsidered after the new Administration takes office.26

25

Between 1979 and 1993, some bankruptcy districts allowed modification of mortgages on single-family homes,
while others did not. Levitin and Goodman (2008) find that there was no significant difference in mortgage terms
between the two types of districts.

26

For the Obama campaign statement, see http://www.barackobama.com/issues/economy/index.php#homeownership. The proposed law is S.2136: Helping Families Save Their Homes in Bankruptcy Act of 2008.

18

Figure 1:
Number of Personal Bankruptcy Filings in the U.S., 1980-2007

bankruptcy filings
2500000
2000000
1500000

bankruptcy filings

1000000
500000

19

07

20

04

01

20

20

98

95

19

19

92

89

19

19

86

19

83

19

19

80

0

Figure 2:
Growth of Average Consumer Debt and Average Mortgage Debt per Household
Relative to U.S. Median Family Income, 1980 - 2007

5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

consumer debt
/median income
mortgage debt/
median income

Note: both series are scaled to equal one in 1980.

20

References
Armour, John and Douglas Cumming. 2005. “Bankruptcy Law and Entrepreneurship,”
ESRC Centre for Business Research, University of Cambridge, Working Paper
No. 300.
Ashcraft, Adam, Astrid A. Dick, and Donald P. Morgan. 2007. “The Bankruptcy Abuse
Prevention and Consumer Protection Act: Means-Testing or Mean Spirited? Federal Reserve
Bank of New York Staff Report No. 279.
Bair, Sheila C. 2008. “Statement of Sheila C. Bair to Committee on Financial Services; U.S.
House of Representatives,” November 18, 2008
(www.fdic.gov/news/news/speeches/chairman/spnov1808.html).

Barron, John M., Michael E. Staten, and Stephanie M. Wilshusen. 2002. “The Impact of Casino
Gambling on Personal Bankruptcy Filing Rates.” 20 Contemporary Economic Policy 440–45.
Berkowitz, Jeremy, and Richard Hynes, 1999. “Bankruptcy Exemptions and the Market for
Mortgage Loans,” 42 J. of Law & Economics 809-830.
Berkowitz, Jeremy, and Michelle J. White. 2004. "Bankruptcy and Small Firms' Access to
Credit," 35 RAND J. of Economics 69-84.
Cordell, Larry, et al, 2008. “The Incentives of Mortgage Servicers: Myths and Realities,”
Federal Reserve Board, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-46.
Doms, Mark S., and John Krainer. 2005. “Innovations in Mortgage Markets and Increased
Spending on Housing,” Fed. Reserve Bank of San Francisco working paper 2007-05.
Dranove, David, and Michael L. Millenson. 2006. “Medical Bankruptcy: Myth versus Fact,”
25 Health Affairs (online edition) w74-w83.
Efrat, Rafael. 2002. “Global Trends in Personal Bankruptcy,” 76 American Bankruptcy Law
Journal. 81-110.
Evans, David S., and Richard Schmalensee. 1999. Paying with Plastic: The Digital Revolution
in Buying and Borrowing. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Fan, Wei, and Michelle J. White. 2003. “Personal Bankruptcy and the Level of Entrepreneurial
Activity.” 46 Journal of Law & Economics 543-568.
Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst, and Michelle J. White. 2003. “The Household Bankruptcy Decision,”
92 American Economic Rev. 708-718.

21

Furletti, Mark. 2002. “An Overview of Credit Card Asset-Backed Securities,” Discussion
Paper, Payment Cards Center, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Adam Shapiro, and Paul S. Willen. 2007. “Subprime Outcomes: Risky
Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
working paper 07-15.
Government Accountability Office. 2008. “Bankruptcy Reform: Dollar Costs Associated with
the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005,” U.S. GAO-08-697.
Grant, Charles, and Wilfred Koeniger. 2005. “Redistributive Taxation and Personal Bankruptcy
in U.S. States,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 1805.
Gropp, Reint, J. Karl Scholz and Michelle J. White. 1997. “Personal Bankruptcy and Credit
Supply and Demand,” 112 Quarterly Journal of Economics 217-251.
Gross, David B., and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2002. “An Empirical Analysis of Personal
Bankruptcy and Delinquency,” 15 Review of Financial Studies 319-47.
Gross, David B., and Nicholas S. Souleles. 2002. “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates
Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data.” 117 Quarterly J. of Econ.
149-185.
Herszenhorn, David M. 2008. “Sweeping Housing Bill Signed by Bush,” New York Times, July
31, 2008.
Himmelstein, David U., Elizabeth Warren, Deborah Thorne, and Steffie Woolhandler. 2005.
“Illness and Injury as Contributors to Bankruptcy.” 24 Health Affairs (online edition) w5-63w5-73 (Feb. 2, 2005).
Immergluck, Dan, and Geoff Smith. 2006. “The External Costs of Foreclosure: The Impact of
Single-Family Mortgage Foreclosures on Property Values.” 17 Housing Policy Debate 57
(2006).
Lawless, Robert M., et al. 2008. “Did Bankruptcy Reform Fail? An Empirical Study of
Consumer Debtors.” 82 American Bankruptcy Law Journal 349-405.
Levitin, Adam J., and Joshua Goodman. 2008. “Mortgage Market Sensitivity to Bankruptcy
Modification.” Paper presented at the 2008 ALEA Conference, New York.
http://law.bepress.com/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2485&context=alea
Lin, Emily Y., and Michelle J. White, Bankruptcy and the Market for Mortgage and Home
Improvement Loans, J. of Urban Economics, 50, 138-162 (2001).

22

Mann, Ronald J. 2006. Charging Ahead. Cambridge University Press.
Morgan, Donald P., Benjamin Iverson, and Matthew Botsch, 2008. “Seismic Effects of the
Bankruptcy Reform,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no 358.
Pew Charitable Trusts. 2008. “Defaulting on the Dream: States Respond to America’s
Foreclosure Crisis,” 2008, available at www.pewtrusts.org/uploadedFiles/
wwwpewtrustsorg/Reports/Subprime_mortgages/defaulting_on_the_dream.pdf.
Porter, Katherine. 2008. “Misbehavior and Mistake in Bankruptcy Mortgage Claims,” 87 Texas
Law Review. Available at papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1027961.
Sullivan, Teresa, Elizabeth Warren and Jay Lawrence Westbrook. 1989. As We Forgive Our
Debtors. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Sullivan, Teresa, Elizabeth Warren and Jay Lawrence Westbrook. 2000. The Fragile Middle
Class: Americans in Debt. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports, various years.
White, Michelle J. 2007a. “Bankruptcy Law,” in Handbook of Law and Economics, edited by
A.M. Polinsky and Steven Shavell. Elsevier Press.
White, Michelle J. 2007b. “Bankruptcy Reform and Credit Cards,” J. of Economic
Perspectives, Fall 2007b, 175-199.
White, Michelle J. 1998. “Why Don’t More Households File for Bankruptcy?” 14 J. of Law,
Econ. and Org. 205-231.
White, Michelle J., and Ning Zhu. 2008. “Saving Your Home in Chapter 13 Bankruptcy,”
NBER working paper no. 14179.
Zhu, Ning. 2007. “Household Consumption and Personal Bankruptcy, ” SSRN abstract number
971134. Forthcoming, J. of Legal Studies.

23

