NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MORE WOMEN MISSING, FEWER GIRLS DYING:
THE IMPACT OF ABORTION ON SEX RATIOS AT BIRTH AND EXCESS FEMALE MORTALITY IN TAIWAN
Ming-Jen Lin
Nancy Qian
Jin-Tan Liu
Working Paper 14541
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14541

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

Comments and questions are welcome at mjlin@ntu.edu.tw, or nancy.qian@yale.edu. We thank Joshua
Angrist, Abhijit Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Avi Ebenstein, Erica Field, Andrew Foster, Oded Galor, Lawrence
Katz, Michael Kremer, Thomas Lemieux, EbonyaWashington, DavidWeil, Pierre Yared, Noam Yuchtman
and seminar participants at the Harvard University Labor Seminar, University of British Columbia,
the National Taiwan University, the University of Conneticut, the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor;
and the NEUDC for their insights. We are grateful to Avraham Ebenstein for generously sharing the
KAPS data; and to the National Health Research Institutes of Taiwan for partial financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Ming-Jen Lin, Nancy Qian, and Jin-Tan Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

More Women Missing, Fewer Girls Dying: The Impact of Abortion on Sex Ratios at Birth
and Excess Female Mortality in Taiwan
Ming-Jen Lin, Nancy Qian, and Jin-Tan Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 14541
December 2008, Revised March 2010
JEL No. J1
ABSTRACT
This paper presents novel empirical evidence on the impact of access to abortion on sex ratios at birth
(SRB), excess female mortality (EFM) and fertility in Taiwan. For identification, we exploit plausibly
exogenous variation in the availability of sex-selective abortion caused by the legalization of abortion.
Our results show that the legalization of abortion accounts for almost all of the observed increase in
SRB during the 1980s and decreased EFM by approximately 20%. Approximately ten more female
infants survived for every one hundred that were aborted. Interestingly, we find that while abortion
reduced overall fertility, it increased fertility for older mothers.
Ming-Jen Lin
Dept. of Economics
National Taiwan University
21 Hsu-Chow Road, Taipei (100)
Taiwan
mjlin@ntu.edu.tw
Nancy Qian
Department of Economics
Yale University
27 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520-8269
and NBER
nancy.qian@yale.edu

Jin-Tan Liu
Department of Economics
National Taiwan University
21 Hsu-Chow Road
Taipei (100), TAIWAN
and NBER
liujt@ccms.ntu.edu.tw

1

Introduction

Missing women, a term coined by Amartya Sen, refers to the observation that a male-biased
sex imbalance exists in many Asian countries. For example, in China, India, Taiwan and South
Korea, only 48.4% of the existing population is female, whereas in most of Western Europe
and the U.S., the proportion is 50.1%.1 There is much concern that sex imbalance in the
population could lead to increased crime rates or distort the marriage market (Angrist, 2002;
and Samuelson, 1985).2 In countries such as China, Taiwan and South Korea, the phenomenon
has only increased over time, despite rapid economic growth and social “modernization”. A
large part of the increase in the observed male biased sex imbalance is due to an increase
in the fraction of males at birth, a trend particularly stark in Asia in the 1980s and 90s.
Observers have speculated that this is due to improved access to sex-selective abortion in
combination with preferences for smaller family sizes. This is certainly consistent with the
data, which show a tremendous increase in the percentage of males born during this period,
particularly for higher birth parities, and a decrease in family size.3 For example, Figure 1
shows that the fraction of males at birth for Taiwan increased from approximately 0.515 in
the early 1980s (e.g. the same as for countries not known for boy-bias such as the U.S. or
Western European countries) to much higher levels by the 1990s. Almost all of the increase
is observed for higher parity births. By 1990, the fraction of males at births for Taiwan
had risen to approximately 0.54. Given the large potential impact that sex-selective abortion
could have had on sex ratios at birth, it is perhaps surprising that there are no studies to
date which examine the causal impact of sex-selective abortion or quantify its contribution
to the observed imbalance. It is all the more surprising when one notes that all sides in the
recent heated debate on the determinants of the observed sex-imbalance agree on one thing:
the potentially large contribution of access to sex-selective abortion.4
1

It has been observed that the same male-biased sex ratios exists in many Muslim countries.
For example, Angrist (2002) and Samuelson (1985) study the long-run impact of sex imbalance on the
marriage market. More recently, Edlund et al. (2007) finds that increased male-biased sex imbalance increases
crime.
3
Das Gupta and Bhat (1997) refers to the observation of the simultaneous decrease in fertility and increase
in EFM as the “intensification” effect and the fact that boy-biased sex imbalance is higher at higher birth
parities as the “parity” effect.
4
Burgess and Zhuang (2001), Edlund (1999), Grogan (mimeo), Gu and Roy (1995), Li (2002) presents mixed
evidence on the relationship between income and sex imbalance. Ben Porath (1967, 1973, 1976), Burgess and
Zhuang (2002), Clark (2000), Duflo (2002), Das Gupta (1987), Foster and Rosenzweig (2001), Qian (2008),
2

2

Absent concrete evidence, policy makers in many countries (e.g. China, India and South
Korea) have nevertheless attempted to curb sex imbalance by prohibiting pre-natal sexselection.5 They are supported by international policy makers. According to the United
Nations Program of Action, adopted by the International Conference on Population and Development in Cairo, the increasing use of technologies to determine fetal sex and pre-natal
sex selection are “harmful and unethical”. The objective of the Program was to stop such
activities (UN 1994).6 These policy makers do not seem to have considered the potential for
unintended negative consequences of banning sex selective abortion for relative female survival rates (after birth). Forcing parents with strong boy-preferences to give birth to a girl
may force some of those parents to select post-natally.7 Until now, empirical testing of this
potential substitution effect has been hindered by the lack of data and appropriate research
design (Goodkind, 1999).8
This paper addresses these important questions by offering novel empirical evidence on the
causal effects of access to sex-selective abortion on sex ratios at birth (heretofore defined as
the fraction of males at birth) and excess female mortality (EFM or female infant mortality
relative to male infant mortality) after birth. To establish causality, we exploit variation in
access to abortion caused by a legislative reform in Taiwan, when the technology for detecting
sex pre-natally was already available.
The principal methodological contribution of this study is to resolve identification issues
Rholf et. al. (2005), Rosenzweig and Schultz (1982), Thomas (1991) and Thomas et al. (1994) study the effect
of relative female socioeconomic status on outcomes for girls relative to boys. Ebenstein (2007), Li (2002) and
Qian (2006) examine the effect of family planning policies on sex imbalance in China. Lin and Luoh (2008),
Norberg (2004) and Oster (2005) study the effect of biological causes on sex imbalance. Chu (2001) presents a
descriptive analysis of the practice of prenatal sex selection in rural central China using detailed survey data.
Anderson and Ray (2008) describes the age-specific patterns of sex-imbalance across different regions of the
world.
5
For policies in China, see Greenlaugh and Li (1995); for those in India see Balakrishnan (1994), Bumiller
(1990), Nandan (1993), Parikh (1993) and Roggencamp (1985).
6
The Program stated its objectives as “to eliminate all forms of discrimination against a girl child.. which
results in harmful and unethical practices regarding female infanticide and prenatal sex selection” (UN1994,
Article 4.15).
7
The rationale is similar to the one used in Donohue and Levitt’s (2001) study of the impact of legalizing
abortion on crime rates. They argued that because access to abortion allowed parents to avoid having unwanted
children, children born after abortion became legal were on average better treated and less likely to commit
crime.
8
Goodkind (1996) argues that the ability to sex-select post-natally and the high levels of sex imbalance
before abortion was available in some countries makes the subsitiution between prenatal and post-natal sex
selection a troubly concern.

3

that have typically hindered past studies of the effect of sex-selective abortion. A simple crosssectional comparison of observed population sex imbalances between regions with access to this
technology and regions without access faces the problem that adoption of the technology may
be driven by a region’s underlying demand for boys. If regions with stronger boy-preferences
more readily adopt the technology, then the underlying preferences will confound analysis of
the causal effect of access per se. Hence, the correlation will overestimate the true effect of
access to sex-selective abortion on the fraction of males at birth. The bias for estimating
the effect on EFM is ambiguous because there are two possibilities. On the one hand, if
regions that adopt sex-selective abortion also face lower costs in killing girls postnatally, then
a negative cross-sectional correlation between access to sex-selective abortion and EFM will
underestimate the magnitude of the true effect. On the other hand, if regions that adopt sexselective abortion are regions with stronger preferences for substituting pre-natal sex-selection
for post-natal sex selection, then the observed correlation will overestimate the magnitude of
the true effect.
To address the issue of endogenous adoption, we exploit two sources of variation. First,
we exploit the plausibly exogenous variation in access to sex-selective abortion caused by the
legalization of abortion in Taiwan in 1985/86. Technology for pre-natal sex detection was
already available in Taiwan when abortion was legalized. Hence, we interpret the legalization
of abortion as a plausibly exogenous increase in access to sex-selective abortion. Second, we
exploit variation in demand for boys associated with higher birth orders. If parents wish to
have a boy, then the preference should be more binding for parents who face more uncertainty
(for financial or biological reasons) about their ability to have more children.
Using an individual level dataset constructed from birth and death registries for all individuals born in Taiwan during 1982-89, we find that the legalization of abortion significantly
increased the fraction of males born. The effect comes entirely from third and higher-parity
births. For that group, abortion increased the fraction of males born by 0.7 percentage-points
for post-reform cohorts on average (from 51.7 percentage-points in 1982-84 to 53.5 percentagepoints by 1989), accounting for nearly 100% of the observed increase in sex imbalance during
this period. The results on sex-differential mortality show that legalizing abortion decreased
EFM by up to 20%. These two findings together suggest that approximately 10% of parents
selecting post-natally before the reform would have substituted to abortion as a method of
4

sex-selection. Taken literally, this suggests that for every hundred abortions of female fetuses,
approximately ten lives of girls born are saved.
Interestingly, we find that the introduction of abortion had heterogeneous effects on fertility. While it reduced fertility overall, it increased fertility for older mothers. Our evidence
also suggests that older mothers were more likely to have sons and that relative survival rates
for female infants born to older mothers did not improve after abortion was legalized. Together, these results are consistent with the hypothesis that by increasing the option value
of pregnancy for mothers with son-preference, legalizing abortion induced older mothers who
are commonly believed to bear a higher biological cost of child rearing, to have children. See
Sections 2.1 and 5 for more detailed discussions.
Studying the effect of sex-selective abortion in Taiwan has both advantages and disadvantages. On the one hand, the data are much better than many other countries with boy
biased sex imbalances. The legislative reform legalizing abortion allows us to have plausibly
exogenous variation on access to sex-selective abortion.9 Moreover, unlike China and India,
it was legal to reveal the sex of the fetus and there were no family planning policies which
restricted the number of children. This makes it easier to relate the reduced form results to the
reduction in the cost of sex selection. On the other hand, Taiwan is very small geographically.
The majority of the population lives in half of an island that is approximately 275 miles long
and 87 miles wide. Expecting parents effectively have access to health care facilities in the
entire country. Hence it does not make sense to exploit cross-sectional variation for identification purposes. More importantly, Taiwan is wealthier than countries such as mainland China
and India. And relative to those countries, it has a much lower rate of infant mortality and
a significantly lower rate of post-natal sex selection. Our study may underestimate what the
effects of a similar reform in those countries would be. Hence, caution should be used when
applying our results outside of the Taiwanese context.
Our paper makes several important contributions. First, it is the first to provide rigorous
empirical evidence for the enormous role that increased access to sex-selective abortion has
9

Appendix Figures A1 and A2 show that similar trends over time existed for South Korea and China. (The
figures are based on the data shown in Appendix Table A1). This is consistent with the belief that the increase
in sex selective abortion tehcnologies in these countries were increasing the sex imbalance of births. That the
technology diffused slowly and organically (without obvious sources of exogenous variation such as legislative
reforms) is consistent with the observation that the changes in SRB in South Korea and China are not discrete
over time as it is in Taiwan. This also means that it is difficult to establish causality in these other contexts.

5

contributed to the Missing Women phenomenon. In showing that the boy-biased sex imbalance
almost exclusively exists for higher birth parities, our study is most closely related to the recent
work by Abrevaya (2009).10 Second, we provide evidence for two novel insights: that there is a
tradeoff between allowing sex-selective abortion and increasing relative female survival because
parents are no longer forced to have unwanted girls; and that reducing the cost of abortion
can induce women who bear a high cost of child rearing but who have son preference to have
children. To the best of our knowledge, no previous studies have discussed or studied these
two mechanisms. The only other study that has considered the potential for heterogeneous
treatment effects under a rigorous framework in the context of sex-selection is the recent work
by Ebenstein (2009).11
These results have important policy implications. First, they suggest that banning sexselective abortion could increase mortality for female infants. Unless governments can also
incentivize parents to care for girls born, a ban on sex-selective abortion may lead to an
increase in EFM. Our results, taken literally and applied to mainland China and India contexts
suggests that effectively banning sex-selective abortion could increase the number of girls
born each year by approximately 1.6 million but cause female neo-natal mortality to increase
by approximately 161,000 girls in the two countries combined. Second, the results show
that reducing the costs of abortion in a society with son preference and where mothers face
heterogeneous costs for child rearing has an ambiguous a priori effect on total fertility. It
would depend on the reduction in the number of births from unwanted pregnancies relative to
the increase in the number of births from women who have children because abortion lowers
the cost of sex selection.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses background, conceptual framework
and empirical strategy. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents the empirical results.
10

Abrevaya (2009) shows that there is stark inequality for higher parities amongst populations of Asian
decent in the 1980 U.S. Population Census and discusses the role of sex-selective abortion as a contributing
factor to this phenomenon. Studies in demography such as Das Gupta (1987), Das Gupta (1997), Gu and
Roy (1995), Muhri and Preston (2001), Park and Cho (1995) and Pebley and Amin (1991) have described the
changes over time in sex ratios at birth by birth parity in several East Asian countries. Arnold, Kishor and
Roy (2002) have associated access to abortion with increasing sex ratios. While all of these studies remark on
the role of sex-selective abortion, they do not link the changing trends by birth parity to a legislative reform
that would allow causal identification of the impact of sex selective abortion.
11
Ebenstein (2009) estimates a dynamic model of sex selection where parents have access to sex-selective
abortion. Using data on fines for violating the One Child Policy in China, he finds that raising the costs of
fertility and sex selection have heterogenous effects across households of different wealth and education.

6

Section 5 interprets the results. Section 6 offers conclusions.

2

Background

Sex-selective abortion requires two technologies: one that reveals the gender of the fetus
and another that facilitates the miscarriage of the fetus. While there are several procedures
prevalently used during pre-natal care in developed countries today that can also reveal the
sex of the fetus (e.g. amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling), the least expensive and most
available method in both developed and developing countries is Ultrasound B. This study
estimates the effect of legalizing abortions given the existing technologies for sex-detection.
It does not separately identify the effects for different methods of aborting a fetus. Hence,
we will focus the background discussion on Ultrasound B. It is the technology that is most
widely used in developing countries today, and was the most prevalent method in Taiwan for
the period of our study.
Ultrasound B was first introduced into Taiwan during the early 1980s. It can reveal the
sex of the fetus beginning in the 16th week of gestation. Accuracy is greatly increased by the
20th week. Ultrasound B machines are inexpensive to manufacture and relatively easy to use.
The procedure for revealing the sex is not invasive and the results can be easily interpreted
by a trained technician. In Taiwan, Ultrasound B is used in standard pre-natal care and is
available from registered medical doctors. Unlike China and India today, revealing the sex of
the fetus has never been prohibited in Taiwan.
Until the mid-1980s, induced abortion was only legal in Taiwan for a small range of medical
problems as outlined by the Eugenics Protection Law. During the mid-1980s, a growing
demand for safe abortions as a method of family planning, and a growing feminist movement
pushed Taiwanese legislators to make abortion legal. The law was initially relaxed in 1984 to
allow couples with known a genetic disease to induce an abortion. At that time, if a physician
performed an unauthorized abortion, he/she was fined approximately NT$20,000, roughly
15% of the contemporaneous per capita GDP. The law was further relaxed in January 1st,
1985, when it became legal for women to induce an abortion for social as well as medical
reasons up to the 24th week of pregnancy. The service was inexpensive and safely conducted
although it was not covered by medical insurance (Henshaw, 1990). Based on interviews with
7

physicians who performed abortions during the 1980s, the cost of an abortion was on average
1% of average household income at the time.
Our empirical strategy interprets 1985-1989 as the “post” reform period. This will likely
cause us to underestimate the effect of the reform for two reasons. First, the implementation
of the reform was phased in during 1985 and 1986. Officially, the relaxation of the Eugenics
Law passed on January 1, 1985. It stated that women can get an abortion if (a) the woman
was raped (b) the fetus has some genetic disease or (c) the pregnancy would affect the mental
health of the woman and the family. The added clause (c) effectively legalized non-medically
motivated abortions. However, “practicing abortion” was not made explicitly legal. According
to the interviews we conducted, doctors waited to see if they would be prosecuted if they
performed abortions using reason (c). The government also made no attempts to publicize
the reform or the details of implementation. For example, only “certified” hospitals were
allowed to conduct the procedure (Liu, 1995). Hence, the policy was phased in over 1985 as
practitioners gradually learned how and where to conduct legal abortions. Second, the law
was applied to all contemporaneous pregnancies but abortion was allowed only up to the 24th
week (6 months). Therefore, the first cohort that was exposed to sex selective abortion were
not born until 4 months into 1985. 1986, then, was the first year that the legislation was in
effect for the full twelve months.12
To see if the legalization actually affected the number of abortions, we use survey data
from the Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practice of Contraception in Taiwan Series (KAP) on
the cumulative abortion histories of women between the ages of 18-44. This is the only source
of data on abortion that we know of. The KAP data faces all of the problems of self reported
data (e.g. women may not wish to report abortions undertaken for non-medical reasons.) And
the survey does not happen with enough frequency for us to see if there is a trend break in the
increase of abortions after the reform. That said, the data reported supports our argument
that legalizing abortion effectively increased the number of abortions. The two years closest to
12
Changing the cutoff from January 1985 to April 1985 does not affect the main estimates. However,
changing the year-by-year specification to a month-by-month specification creates very noisy estimates due to
the small number of births each month. Hence, for simplicity, we use January 1985 as a cutoff. Note that our
stragey divides individuals according to the calendar year of their birth. We could alternatively define each
yearly cohort to be those born from April 1st - March 31st. Doing so results in very similar estimates as those
reported in this paper. Therefore, for simplicity, we use calendar years and only report these estimates. The
other estimates are available upon request.

8

the reform when the survey was conducted were 1985 and 1992. It asks women about whether
they have ever had an abortion. It does not distinguish abortions for medical reasons from
other abortions. The data show that the percentage of women who have ever had abortions
increased from 23% in 1985 to approximately 27% in 1992. Figure 2A shows the fraction
of women who have ever had an abortion by age group. It shows that abortions increased
between 1985 and 1992 for all age groups. Figure 2B shows the increase in the fraction of
women who have ever had an abortion by age group. It shows that women who were 2935 experienced the largest increase (7.5 percentage-points).13 Figures 2C and 2D plot the
fraction of women who have ever had abortions, and its increase over time for all education
levels. There is no discernible pattern in the increase across different education levels.
At the time of the reform, Ultrasound B, amniocentesis and chronic virilus sampling were
all available as different ways of detecting the sex of the fetus. The legalization of abortion
combined with the use of these technologies enabled parents to use abortion as a method of
sex selection. Hence, the legalization of abortion in Taiwan can be interpreted as a decrease
in the cost of sex-selective abortion. The effect of the reform on the demand for sex-selective
abortions is reflected in both anecdotal evidence and the data on the number of Ultrasound
B machines in Taiwan over time. The legalization of abortion in 1985 was followed by a large
increase in the number of Ultrasound B machines.14 Toshiba, who has had the largest market
share in Ultrasound B machines in Taiwan, reports that doctors were quite open in their desire
to use these machines to reveal the sex of the fetus. To obtain a machine for a private office, a
physician must be a member of the Society of Ultrasound in Medicine. From 1984 to 1989, the
number of doctors in this organization increased from 557 to 3024. While doctors’ primary
reason for increasing the use of Ultrasound B machines was to meet the rising demand for
sex-detection, using Ultrasound B during routine pre-natal care may have also increased the
quality of pre-natal care more generally.
13
Survey data from KAP on abortion should be interpreted very cautiously because the sample size is very
small. For example, in 1985, a total of only 57 women report as ever having had an abortion. Therefore, it is
difficult to further split the data by birth parity and mother’s age. For example, Freedman, Chang and Sun
(1994) show that in the KAP survey, older mothers (age 30-39) on average have more abortions at fourth and
fifth and higher parity births in 1992 ersus 1985. However, this is not true for 3rd parity births.(See Table 16
of Freedman, Chang and Sun, 1994).
14
Hospitals are required to register "precious machines" which in the 1980s largely referred to ultrasound
B. The number of ultrasound B machines registered by hospitals increased by many orders of magnitude.

9

2.1

Conceptual Framework

To motivate the empirical estimates, we provide a simple framework to illustrate how the
effect of a decrease in the cost of abortion caused by the legalization can affect the type of
mothers who choose to give birth, the number of children born, and the fraction of males born.
We consider two extreme cases where only the cost of abortion differs. In the first case, the
cost is infinitely high (e.g. no abortion). In the second case, the cost is zero (e.g. legalization
and free access of abortion).
We assume that in the population, every woman has a cost c of child rearing which include
all costs associated with bearing and raising a child. There are three types of women i =
{1, 2, 3} with costs {0, c, ∞} and they represent populations of size pi and we assume that
P3
i=1 pi = 1 so that the population is normalized to 1. We assume that there is son preference
such that the utility of having a boy is B > 0 and the utility of having a girl is G < 0. The
ex-ante probability of having a boy from nature is 1/2. We make the following assumption:
B > c > .5B + .5G > 0 > G

(1)

This means that Type 1 women always want to have children. Type 2 women have children
if they have a reasonable probability of having a boy. This probability increases as the cost
of sex-selective abortion decreases. Type 3 women never want to have children. The order of
events are as follows.
1. Some women decide to get pregnant. A fraction of women π have accidental and unwanted pregnancies.
2. Nature chooses a signal z which indicates the probability of boy. We will say that this
signal is uniformly distributed between zero and one , z ∼ U [0, 1].
3. Women decide whether or not to have an abortion.
Case #1: No Abortion, c = ∞
Imagine if abortion is not possible. Then only Type 1 women choose to have children. Type
2 and 3 women will have children if they accidentally become pregnant. The total number of
kids is then
10

p1 + (p2 + p3 ) π

(2)

p1 + (p2 + p3 ) π
2

(3)

and the total number of boys is

which implies that the fraction of boys is 1/2.
Case #2: Free Abortion c = 0
In this situation women can freely abort the child if the benefit of having the child exceeds
the cost of rearing them. More specifically, let us define cutoffs z1∗ and z2∗ :
z1∗ B + (1 − z1∗ ) G = 0

(4)

z2∗ B + (1 − z2∗ ) G = η

(5)

Our assumptions ensure that these cutoffs are between 0 and 1 and that z2∗ > z1∗ . Therefore,
all Type 1 and Type 2 women will become pregnant. Type 3 women will become pregnant
with probability π (same as if abortion was not available).
This illustrates the first insight: that a sufficient decrease in the cost of abortion could
induce some women to become pregnant by increasing the option value of pregnancy. In
particular, Type 2 mothers who bear a high cost of child rearing are now willing to become
pregnant because they will be able to abort if it is not a son. (Without abortion, the only
way to reveal whether a child will be a son is to give birth after nine months of pregnancy.
Therefore, access to abortion saves mothers the costs associated with the last few months of
pregnancy and child birth).
Next, we investigate the effect on the number of children born. Mothers of Types 1 and
2 will have an abortion if zi < zi∗ . Type 3 women will always abort if pregnant. Given the
assumption that z is distributed uniformly, the probability of keeping a child for women of
Type i in the population is 1 − zi∗ . It follows that the number of children being born is now:
(1 − z1∗ ) p1 + (1 − z2∗ ) p2

11

(6)

To see the effect of a decrease in the cost of abortion on the total number of children
born, we can compare equation (6) above to equation (2) from the first case. It follows that
a decrease in the cost of abortion will decrease the number of children born if the following is
true.
(p2 + p3 ) π + z1∗ p1 > (1 − z2∗ ) p2

(7)

If the sum of the number of women who were having children due to unwanted pregnancies
and the number of Type 1 mothers who now abort because they do not wish to have a daughter
exceeds the number of Type 2 mothers who are now induced into giving birth, then decreasing
the cost of abortion will decrease the total number of children born.
The second insight follows from the above: because abortion serves both as an instrument
for reducing unwanted births and for improving the technology for sex selection, its effect
on the number of births is ambiguous ex-ante. There are two forces at work here. On the
one hand, abortion will decrease the number of births by allowing unwanted pregnancies to
be aborted. On the other hand, by increasing the expected value of giving birth (e.g. the
probability of having a son), it has increased the number of births from mothers who bore
a high cost of child bearing and who otherwise would not have had children. Therefore, the
net effect of a decrease in the cost of abortion on the number of children born will depend on
parameter values in equation (7): the probability of an unwanted pregnancy, the thresholds
z1∗ and z2∗ , and the relative size of the population of each type of women. For example, if the
probability of an unwanted pregnancy is very high relative to the number of women that are
induced to giving birth, then the reduction in unwanted births from decreased costs of abortion
will more likely dominate the increase in the number of births from the latter mechanism. In
this case, the net effect of a decrease in abortion costs will likely be to reduce the number of
births.
Third, we can investigate the effect on the fraction of boys born. The number of boys born
will be revealed by the conditional distributions for each group of mothers. Because Type
3 mothers always abort if pregnant, we only need to consider Type 1 and Type 2 mothers
here. Amongst these mothers, those who received signals above zi∗ such that zi > zi∗ will
have children, where the probability of each mother getting a boy is zi and the probability for

12

getting a girl is 1 − zi∗ . This is true for all zi > zi∗ . The probability of having a boy for this
population on average will be E[z | zi > zi∗ ]. Since the distribution of z is uniform, this will
equal

1+z ∗
.
2

Therefore, the total number of boys will be:
(1 + z2∗ ) (1 − z2∗ )
(1 + z1∗ ) (1 − z1∗ )
p1 +
p2
2
2

(8)

which simplifies to
2

2

1 − z1∗
1 − z2∗
p1 +
p2
2
2

(9)

so that the fraction of boys born now equals:
2

2

1 − z1∗
1 − z2∗
p1 +
p2
2
2
(1 − z1∗ ) p1 + (1 − z2∗ ) p2

(10)

Therefore decreasing the cost of abortion to zero will increase the fraction of boys born if the
expression above in equation (10) is greater than the fraction of boys born in Case 1, which
was 1/2. In other words, the following needs to be true for the legalization of abortion to
cause an increase in the fraction of boys born.
2

2

(1 − z1∗ )p1 + (1 − z2∗ )p2
>1
(1 − z1∗ ) p1 + (1 − z2∗ ) p2

(11)

Note that this will always be true because we have assumed that z2∗ > z1∗ and zi∗ ∈ [0, 1]
for all i. Therefore, the third insight is that the decrease in the cost of abortion will lead to
an increase in the fraction of boys born. In particular, equation (11) shows that the effect of
decreasing the cost of abortion on the fraction of males born is increasing in threshold values
for having children zi∗ ’s (which can also be interpreted as the probability of having a son,
or very loosely as son preference). It is also increasing in the proportion of Type 2 mothers
relative to the proportion of Type 1 mothers.
In summary, the stylized framework in this section illustrates several insights on the effect
of decreasing the cost of abortion and sex-selective abortion in an environment where there
is son preference and heterogeneity in the cost of bearing children. First, it will increase
the option value of pregnancy and therefore induce mothers who bear a high cost of child
bearing to become pregnant and try to have a son. Our empirical results will test for this
13

by examining whether abortion increased the number of children born to older mothers, who
bear a much larger biological cost in child bearing according to existing medical studies.15
Second, the framework illustrates how the reduction in unwanted births and the increase in
births from mothers that we described in the first mechanism have opposing effects on the total
number of births. The empirical results will estimate the net of these two effects by estimating
the effect of the decrease in the cost of abortion on the total number of births. Third, the
framework illustrates how the decrease in the cost of abortion, by improving the technology
for sex-selection, will increase the fraction of males born. The empirical analysis will estimate
the magnitude of this effect by examining the impact of the legalization of abortion on the
fraction of males at birth.
Finally, there is an important effect that we have not formally described: decreasing
the cost of abortion can increase the quality of children more generally. Thus far, the only
dimension of quality in our framework is the sex of the child. Another potential dimension
is the health of the child. The mechanism is straight-forward. If children that result from
unwanted births receive lower investment, then the decrease in unwanted births will increase
in the average quality of children (Donahue and Levitt, 2001). More specifically, because
there will be a disproportionately larger decrease in the births of girls, we would expect to see
quality increase disproportionately for girls born after abortion is legalized. The section on
the empirical analysis will test for this by examining the effect of the legalization of abortion
on relative female infant mortality.16

2.2

Empirical Strategy

The empirical strategy exploits the legalization of abortion in 1985/86, when Ultrasound B
was already available, to estimate the causal effect of sex-selection on the fraction of males
15

For example, studies such as Augensen and Bergsje (1984), Dundaram, Liu and Laraque (2005) and
Marmol et al. (1967) find that women over the age of 35 are significantly more likely to experience pregnancyrelated deaths. Studies have also found that women over the age of 35 are more likely to experience pregnancyrelated complications such as gestational diabetes, high blood pressure, placental problems, premature birth
and stillbirths (Cleary-Goldman et al., 2005; Joseph, 2005; Usta and Nassar, 2008; Bahtiyar, 2008).
16
Note that the empirical analysis with look at outcomes of interest by birth parity, a dimension which has
been omitted from the conceptual framework. This omission for was done for the sake of simplicity. In the
empirical analysis, we will find that all of the effects of abortion occurs for third and higher parity births.
Therefore, we have made the simplifying assumption that births of lower parity children are exogenous and
mothers only make decisions regarding the third and higher parity births.

14

born. In addition to birth year/cohort variation, we also exploit the variation in birth order.
For parents who wish to have a boy, they are more likely to sex-select if their desire to have
another child and try for a boy is lower. This decrease in ability may reflect either biological
constraints due to the mother’s age or financial constraints due to the existing household
size.17 Note that because Ultrasound B was already available when abortion was legalized,
it would have been possible for parents to select the sex of the child using abortion illegally
prior to the reform. Hence, our analysis examines the effect of increasing access to abortion
by legalizing abortion rather than the effect of introducing abortion.
The identification for estimating the effect of sex-selective abortion on sex ratios at birth
relies on the assumption that no other changes occured at the time that abortion was legalized
that would decrease the cost of sex-selection and decrease the cost more for higher birth
parities. For example, the increased use of Ultrasound B improved the quality of overall prenatal care. If male fetuses are more vulnerable, then males may respond more positively to
this improvement. In this case, the fraction of males at birth may increase even absent sexselective abortion. However, this should be independent of birth order. In other words, the
identification assumption is only violated if the improvement in pre-natal care affects males
more positively than females and has larger effects at higher birth parities. There is no reason
to believe this is true. To be cautious, we will investigate this possibility by examining the
effect of the reform on the composition of boys born relative to girls born across birth parities.
Similarly, the identification for estimating the effect of sex-selective abortion on sexdifferential mortality relies on the assumption that there was no improvement in medical
technology that would have affected infant mortality for higher-parity births more and affect
girls and boys differentially.
We first estimate the effect of legalizing abortion by birth order and birth year. This has an
advantage over a simple differences-in-differences specification in that it allows us to observe
the timing of the effect of access to abortion. For example, if there was latent demand for
sex-selective abortion, then we would expect the reform to affect sex ratios of individuals born
close to 1985/86. The simpler pre-post differences-in-differences specification has the pitfall
17

The assumption that older mother’s and higher birth-parities are more likely to be affected is consistent
with the findings of Chu (2001).

15

that it would capture changes that occurred at any time after the reform.

M aleit =

3
1989
X
X

βit (Ordi × Bornt ) + γi + ρt + εit

(12)

i=2 t=1983

We regress the fraction of males of birth order i and birth year t, M aleit , on: the interactions of dummy variables for being the second birth and the third or higher-parity birth, Ordi ,
and dummy variables for being born in year t, Bornt ; birth order fixed effects, γi ; and birth
year fixed effects, ρt . Robust standard errors are reported for all estimations in this paper. The
reference group is comprised of first-born children. It and all of its interactions are excluded
from the regressions. If access to abortion increased boy-biased sex selection, then the coefficients for β2t and β3t should be larger for individuals born after 1985. If parents are more likely
to sex select at higher birth orders, then β3t > β2t . More specifically, the difference should be
larger in magnitude for cohorts born after 1985 (β3,t>=85 − β2,t>=85 ) > (β3,t<85 − β2,t<85 ).
To examine whether the effect differs by mothers’ age, we separate mothers into four
age groups: 18-22, 23-28, 29-35 and 35 and above, and re-estimate equation (12) for each
subsample of mothers. If older mothers who are more uncertain about the possibility of
having more children are more likely to take up abortion as a method of selection, then
the effect will be increasing in mothers’ age. In the main specification, we address this by
controlling for mothers’ age and the interaction terms between mothers’ age and post reform
dummy variables. These interaction terms allow the effect of mother’s age to vary over time.
After we check that the timing of the effect is consistent with our identification strategy,
we estimate a simpler specification where we group individuals to those born before the reform
and those born afterwards to better assess the magnitude and statistical significance of the
effect.
M aleimt =

3
X

βi (Ordi × P ostt )

(13)

i=2

+

4
X

αm (M age × P ostt )

m=2

+Xit ψ + φm + γi + ρt + εit
We regress the fraction of males for individuals of birth order i, born to mothers that are age
16

m, in birth year t, M aleimt , on: the interaction terms between birth parity dummy variables,
Ordi , and a dummy variable for being born in 1985 or afterwards, P ostt ; the interaction term
between a dummy variable indicating that the mother is 22 to 28, 29 to 35, or 35 years of age
and over, M age, and P ostt ; a vector of controls such as mother’s education, Xit ; mother’s age
fixed effects, γm ; birth order fixed effects, γi ; and birth year fixed effects, ρt . The reference
group is comprised of first-born children. It and all of its interactions are excluded from the
regressions.
To estimate the effect of abortion on fertility, we repeat the previous estimates and replace
the dependent variable with the natural logarithm of the number of births. The birth registries
are at the birth level and we are not able to link mothers and calculate the total fertility rate
of each woman. The total number of births is a reasonable proxy in the context of our study
as the population of women of child bearing age does not significantly change in size during
the seven years of our study.
To estimate the effect of sex-selective abortion on sex-differential mortality rates, estimate
the following equation with the fraction of deaths within x months after birth as the dependent
variable..

Deathimts =

3
X

βi (Ordi × P ostt ∗ M ales ) +

+
+

i=2
3
X

αm (M agem × P ostt × M ales ) (14)

m=2

i=2
3
X

3
X

δit (Ordi × P ostt ) + ϕ (M agem ∗ P ostt ) + πt (M ales × P ostt )
λi (M ales × Ordi ) + $ (M agem × M ales )

i=2

+Xit ψ + θs + γi + ρt + φm + εimts
We regress the fraction of deaths within x months of life for individuals of birth order
i, born to mothers of age m in birth year t, and who are sex s, Deathimts on: the triple
interaction terms between dummy variables for birth order, Ordi , a dummy for post, P ostt ,
and sex, M ales ; the triple interaction terms between dummy variables for mothers’ age,
M agem , P ostt , and M ales ; the full set of double interaction terms; a vector of controls
such as mother’s education, Xit ; birth order fixed effects, γi ; mothers’ age fixed effects,φm ;
17

a dummy for being male, θs ; and birth year fixed effects, γi . If legalizing abortion increased
relative female survival, then β̂3 > β̂2 .
There are two main concerns for the identification strategy. First is the worry that the
trend break in the fraction of males at birth for higher parity births or older mothers reflects
a general trend in Asian countries during this period rather than the legalization of abortion
in Taiwan. To examine this, we collected data on sex at birth by parity from South Korea and
China. This data shows that while there is a general trend towards more males being born
over time, and that this increase is larger for higher parities, the trend break we observe in
Taiwan is unique in both its timing and its distinct discontinuity. The divergence in fraction
of males born in South Korea and China begin earlier in 1980 and 1982, respectively. More
importantly, in both cases, the divergence is gradual. This is consistent with the fact that the
introduction of sex selective abortion into Taiwan was largely brought by a legislative reform,
whereas in the other two countries, technological adoption was organic and thereby arguably
more gradual. See Figure 1 and Appendix Figures A1 and A2. The y-axes of the latter are
scaled for comparison. Hence, we believe that our strategy is unlikely to be confounded by
general regional trends.
Second is the concern that the reform induced parents with certain characteristics to give
birth, or that the increased use of ultrasound during prenatal care during this time changed
the characteristics of higher parity children born such that an improvement in relative female
survival will reflect these factors rather than the decrease in the cost of sex selection. We will
investigate whether this was the case by re-estimating equation (14) with characteristics of
parents and births as dependent variables.

3

Data

This study uses the universe of data from Taiwan’s National Birth Registries from 19821989 and Death Registries from 1982-1991 which is comprised of approximately 2.8 million
individuals. The data is linked at the individual level. It reports region and year of birth, sex,
birth weight, birth order, whether the child was part of a multiple birth, whether the birth
was premature, mothers’ marital status, mothers’ and fathers’ age and level of education.
The data from the death registry reports whether a child dies within one, two, three, four,
18

five, six, nine, eighteen, twelve and twenty-four months after birth. Both for the sake of
brevity and because EFM is more likely to occur soon after birth, we focus on death within
one month but also present results for death within six and twelve months. We restrict our
sample to individuals born to mothers who were 18-45 years of age at the time of birth. For
examining the effect of sex-selective abortion on the fraction of males born by birth order, the
data is aggregated to birth order (first, second, and third and higher), birth year and birth
county cells. For examining the effect of sex-selective abortion on the fraction of males born
by mother’s age, the data is aggregated to mother’s age (18-21, 22-28, 29-35 and over 35),
birth year and birth county cells. For the analysis on survival, the data is aggregated to sex,
birth order, birth year and birth county cells; and sex, mother’s age, birth year, and birth
county cells. Cell sizes are always retained so that all regressions are weighted. The weighted
regression results are numerically identical to regressions using data at the individual level.
See Chou et al. (2007) for a detailed discussion of the microdata.
In this study, we take the birth and death registries at face value. According to these data,
over 97% of children are born in hospitals. And to the best of our knowledge, there have been
no controversies surrounding misreporting in these data, systematic misreporting due to sex
selection or any changes in reporting patterns due to the increase in sex-selective abortion.
Table 1 shows the total number of births before and after the reform. Panel A shows
that the number of births have decreased over time in all birth parities; and the decrease is
disproportionately large in third and higher parity births. Both facts are consistent with the
observation of an increasing preference for smaller family sizes during this period. Panel B
shows the number of births by mother’s age. Interestingly, it shows that while the number of
births have decreased for younger mothers, older mothers have had more children after the
reform. Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics by birth order for individuals born before the
reform (Panel I) and after the reform (Panel II). Panel III is the difference in means. It shows
that on average, there are more males born after abortion was legalized, especially for higherorder births. There is also an increase in the occurrence of low birth weight and multiple
(non-singleton) births, which may reflect an improvement in pre-natal care that facilitated
more difficult births during this period. Column III also shows that mothers of children born
after the reform are older, more educated and less likely to be married at the time of birth.
Figure 3A plots the fraction of males by birth order and birth year. It shows that the fraction
19

of males is similar across parities before the reform at approximately 0.517. This is slightly
higher than the 0.51-0.515 fraction of males at birth observed in countries not known to have
male-biased sex preferences such as the U.S. (Matthews and Hamilton, 2005).18 But it is still
within the range that demographers typically accept as “natural”. For first and second births,
there is no change over time. However, for third and higher-parity births, there is a clear trend
break: the fraction of males increases steadily for children born after abortion was legalized,
up to approximately 0.535 in 1989. Figure 3B plots the fraction of males by mother’s age and
birth year. It shows that before the reform, the fraction of males born was similar for all age
groups. After the reforms, there is no change for young mothers (under 28). However, for
mothers who were 29 to 35, the fraction of males born increased for cohorts born after the
reform.
Figure 4A plots the natural log of total births over time by birth parity. It shows that
there is a steady decrease in the number of higher parity births during the early 1980s, which
flattens out in 1986. To see if the stop in the decline of total births for higher parity births
is due to the increase in the number of births that we observe for older mothers, we plot
the natural log of total births for young and old mothers in Figures 4B and 4C, respectively.
Figure 4B shows that the total number of births for mothers under 28 years of age is declining
steadily throughout the 1980s. Interestingly, Figure 4C shows that for mothers over 28, the
total number of births decreases gradually during the early 1980s, but increases dramatically
after abortion is legalized. Together with the fact that older mothers are more likely to have
higher parity births, this suggests that the halt in decline of the number of higher parity births
is produced by the offsetting effect of older mothers having more children after the reform.
Note that in examining the unconditional sample means, we cannot distinguish the effect of
mothers’ age from the effect of birth parity as the two are highly correlated. In the regression
analysis, we will control for mother’s age.
Table 3 shows the fraction of deaths within one month and twelve months for children
born before and after the reform by sex and birth order. Note that mortality within the first
month accounts for approximately half of mortality within twelve months. This suggests that
neo-natal mortality is an important contributor to total infant mortality rates. The means
18

Table A in Matthews and Hamilton (2005) show that fraction of males at birth in Western Europe during
1999-2002 typically ranges from 0.51 to 0.514.

20

show that Taiwan had very low rates of infant mortality, approximately 3 deaths per 1,000
births. At the same time, Taiwan’s higher income neighbors, South Korea and Japan, had
infant mortality rates of approximately 6 per 1,000 births.19 Columns (1)-(2) and (4)-(5) show
that mortality rates were higher for boys across birth orders for all cohorts. This is consistent
with the widely held belief that males are more vulnerable during infancy. Columns (3) and
(6) show changes in mortality over time for girls and boys, respectively. For the post-reform
cohort, mortality rates decreased for both boys and girls, which could reflect an improvement
in medical technology and/or the post-natal benefit of not forcing parents to have unwanted
children. Column (7) is the sex-differential changes in mortality after the reform (column
(3) subtracted from column (6)). The differences show that while mortality rates decreased
more for boys for all birth parities, the difference for death within one month was smaller in
magnitude for higher-parity births.

4

Empirical Results

4.1

The Effect on Fertility

To investigate whether abortion was used as a method of birth control as suggested by the
descriptive statistics, we estimate the effect of legalizing abortion on the number of births.
We do this by placing the natural logarithm of the number of births as the dependent variable
in equation (13). The estimates with and without controls are shown in Table 4. Column (5)
shows that legalizing abortion decreased the number of second and third parity births. The
decrease is larger for the latter group. This supports the claim that abortion was used as a
form of birth control. The estimates for the interaction of mother’s age and post show that the
legalization caused older mothers to have more children relative to younger mothers. In fact,
the effect is monotonically increasing with mother’s age. All the estimates are statistically
significant at the 1% level.
19

Source: World Development Indicators.

21

4.2

The Effect on Fraction of Males at Birth

We first estimate the effect of legalizing abortion on the fraction of males by birth order by
estimating equation (12). The estimates for β̂2t and β̂3t and their robust standard errors are
shown in Appendix Table A2 column (1). They are statistically significant for post-reform
cohorts at the 1% and 5% levels. The coefficients are plotted in Figure 5A. The figure shows
that sex ratios were similar for second births and higher-parity births relative to first births
before the reform. After the reform, the fraction of males increased dramatically for third and
higher-parity births while staying the same for second births. The coefficients for the third
and higher-parity births are plotted with their 95% confidence intervals in Figure 5B. Note
that for third and higher-parity births, the reform had increased the fraction of males born
by two percentage-points by 1989, which is the observed increase in fraction of males at birth
in Figure 3A.
Next, we estimate the same equation for mothers of different ages. The coefficients and
their standard errors are reported in Appendix Table A2 columns (2)-(4). We plot the coefficients in Figures 6A-6C. Figures 6A and 6B show that abortion had the same effect, that
is to say – no effect, on second and third parity births for young mothers. However, Figure
6C shows that for older mothers, abortion increases the fraction of boys for third and higher
parity births. The y-axes of the figures are scaled for comparison. These figure shows that
it is older mothers having their third or higher parity children who are using abortion to sex
select after abortion is legalized.
To assess the statistical significance and the average effect of the reform, we estimate the
simpler difference-in-difference equation (13). The estimates for β̂2 , β̂3 , α̂2 , α̂3 and α̂4 and
their robust standard errors are shown in Table 5. We focus our discussion on the estimates
in column (5). They show that legalizing abortion has no effect on the fraction of males born
at lower parities. For third and higher parities, the reform increased the fraction of boys born
by 0.7 percentage points. The estimate is statistically significant at the 1% significance level.
There was no effect on younger mothers. But for older mothers, abortion seemed to have
increased the fraction of males born; the magnitude of the coefficient shows as 0.4 percentage
point increase, though the estimate is not statistically significant.
In these estimates, we use first born children as the reference group and exclude them
from the regressions. Alternatively, we could exclude the birth year dummy variables and
22

examine the effect of the fraction of males amongst first born children. The results from both
the yearly estimate and the pre and post estimate show that the reform had no effect on the
sex ratios at birth for first born children. For brevity, these results are not reported from the
paper.20 But they are evident from the plot of sex ratios at birth by parity in Figure 1.

4.3

The Effect on Sex-differential Infant Mortality

To estimate the effect on EFM, we first examine the effect of abortion by birth order. We
estimate equation (14) with the fraction of deaths occurring within one, two, three, four, five,
six, nine and twelve months as dependent variables. For brevity, we only report estimates
for deaths within one, three, six, and twelve months. Table 6 Panels A and B present the
estimates not controlling and controlling for mother’s age. We will focus our discussion on
the latter.
Panel B shows that the coefficients are negative and often near zero in magnitude for
second parity groups. In contrast, the estimated coefficients for third and higher parity births
are consistently positive. The estimates for deaths within one and six months of life, shown in
columns (1) and (3), are statistically significant at the 1% and 10% levels. Those in columns
(2) and (4) are not significant. But they are very similar in magnitude as those in columns (1)
and (3). These estimates show that legalizing abortion increased relative female survival rates
by approximately 0.062-0.074 percentage points. The coefficients shown in columns (1)-(5)
are relatively stable in magnitude, meaning that most of the deaths occur within the first
month of life. The results show that overall, legalizing abortion, and presumably the increase
in usage of ultrasound increased relative survival rates of male infants, who have often been
observed to be more fragile. However, third and higher parity births, the group we know to for
which abortion is being used to sex select, relative survival rates increased for female infants.
Note that the estimated coefficients for the interaction of mother’s age and post are negative, often statistically significant, and typically increasing in magnitude with mother’s age.
And that the estimates of the interaction terms of birth parity and post are only stable across
the number of months of life if we control for the interaction terms with mother’s age (as we
do in Panel B). This reflects the fact that having higher parity births is strongly correlated
20

They are available upon request.

23

with mother’s age, and that older mothers behave differently with respect to investment in the
health of their sons relative to their daughters. We will explore this further in the following
sections of the paper.

4.4

The Effect on Birth Composition

To examine whether the reform affected the composition of children born for higher parity
boys differently than for higher parity girls, we estimate equation (14). The coefficients and
their standard errors are reported in Table 7. First, we focus on the characteristics of parents.
Columns (1)-(2) show that the reform induced more unmarried mothers and educated mothers
to have more higher parity births sons. The estimates are statistically significant at the 1%
level. The former may reflect the fact that unmarried mothers, like others, prefer sons to
daughters. And the latter may reflect that more educated mothers are more willing to take up
new technologies. The estimates show that there is little difference in the marital status across
mothers’ age groups after the reform. Interestingly, column (2) shows that older mothers who
had sons after the reform were less educated. This is consistent with the estimates in column
(3) which show that sons born to older mothers after the reform typically had less educated
fathers.
Next, we investigate whether the reform had differential effects on the composition of male
and female infants along biological characteristics. The outcomes we examine are the fraction
of LBW and multiple births. LBW and multiple births are more fragile during pregnancy
and infancy. Hence, if the increased use of ultrasound during prenatal care increased the
number of LBW and multiple births for higher parity males more than for females, then the
often observed fact that males are more fragile during infancy could cause us to find that the
reform improved relative female survival. The estimates in columns (4) and (5) show that this
does not appear to be the case. Abortion has no effect on the fraction of LBW or multiple
births for higher parity births. The estimates are very small in magnitude and statistically
insignificant. Hence, the increase in relative female survival for third and higher parity births
cannot be caused by the changes in composition induced by the reform (to the extent that
those changes are captured by LBW and multiple births).
Interestingly, the estimates in column (4) suggests that sons born to mothers over 35 after

24

the reform are more likely to have LBW. The estimate is only statistically significant at the
15% level, but the coefficient is rather large in magnitude. We will discuss this in the section
on interpretation.

4.5

Quantifying the Results

The increase in the fraction of boys born and the decrease in the relative female mortality
implies that female mortality is decreasing because parents who really want a son are no longer
forced to have a daughter. To quantify the extent of this effect, we calculate the fraction of
parents who substitute from post-natal to pre-natal selection when abortion is legalized. The
calculation is very straightforward. See Table 8. Since the effects we find are mainly for
3+ parity births, we use data for 3+ parity births for our calculations. We assume that the
natural fraction of males at birth is 51% (the lowest observed fraction of males at birth in
the U.S.).21 Hence, the natural fraction of girls is 49%. Using the natural rate of 49%, the
fraction of girls that are actually born in the pre and post period (48.3% and 47.6%), and the
number of children born in each period, we can calculate the number of missing girls. Next,
using the number of girls born and the mortality rate in each period, we can calculate the
number of girls that die in each period.
For mortality rate in the pre-reform period, we use the average for 3+ girls, 0.003, reported
in Table 3. For the post-reform period mortality rate, we subtract from the pre-reform rate the
estimate for the effect of legalizing abortion on 3+ mortality (the coefficient for bord3 × post ×
sex in column (1) of Table (6)), 0.0006. Hence, the post-reform mortality rate is 0.003-0.0006
= 0.0024. The fraction of parents who used to select post-natally and switch to abortion after
it is legalized is the absolute value of the change in the number of girls dying divided by the
number of girls missing in the pre-reform period, 73/757= 0.10. Conversely, if abortion was
banned in the post period, then the fraction of parents who would switch from abortion to
21

To be conservative, we use 0.51 males at birth as the benchmark for the natural fraction absent intervention
rather higher fractions (0.51-0.52) that are often accepted as natural in the literature. Because the biology of
sex determination of a fetus is not yet perfectly understood, benchmarks are made by observing the fraction
of males at birth in countries that are assumed to have no son-preference. However, as many demographic
studies have pointed out, this number varies widely across countries and over time (e.g. see Mathews and
Hamilton, 2005); and recent studies such as Abrevaya (2008) have even asserted that there is evidence of
boy-biased sex selective abortion by certain populations in the U.S. Hence, to be conservative, we used the
lowest observed fraction of males at birth in the U.S. as the benchmark.

25

post-natal selection is the absolute value of the change in the number of girls dying divided
by the number of girls missing in the post-reform period, 73/1029=0.07.

5

Interpretation

The results show that the legalization of abortion increased the fraction of males born in higher
birth-orders and to older mothers. The estimates show that access to abortion increased the
fraction of males for higher-order births by 0.7 percentage-points on average, approximately
100% of the observed increase in the fraction of males during the late 1980s in Taiwan. The
finding that the reform did not alter the average health characteristics of higher parity boys
relative to girls supports the interpretation that the increase in number of boys born is due
to parents using abortion to select for sex rather than the possibility that the increased use
of Ultrasound B has larger benefits for male fetuses of higher birth parities.
Mortality rates for third and higher-parity births for girls were on average 0.3 percentagepoints before abortion was legalized (see Table 3 Panel A3). The results on neo-natal mortality
show that the reform decreased female mortality relative to male mortality at higher birth
orders by 0.06 percentage-points, approximately a 20% reduction in neo-natal mortality. Like
Ebenstein (2007), we find that almost all of the mortality occurs in the first month of life.
There is very little additional mortality afterwards.
While it is beyond the scope of this paper to show the cause of death, we have strong priors
that intentional female infanticide does not play an important role in this context. Studies
such as Banister (2004) suggest that there is no evidence of this extreme method of selection
in South Korea or Taiwan. A more likely cause of differential mortality in a country where
overall infant mortality is so low is marginal differential neglect.22 For example, when a child
is unwell at night and the symptoms do not obviously suggest a serious illness, parents may
decide to take a child to the hospital if he is a son, but wait until morning if she is a daughter.
For infants, who can experience large biological fluctuations within a very short period (e.g.
fluctuations of body temperature from 98.4 to 104 degrees Fahrenheit within a few hours), and
more importantly, extreme outcomes within hours of displaying mild symptoms, this small
22

There is evidence that parents in Taiwan do discriminate against girls relative to boys. For example, Lin,
Liu and Chou (2007) find evidence for parental neglect of LBW girls relative to LBW boys.

26

level of differential neglect could have extreme results and be reflected in the mortality data.23
“Neonates who die tend to die quickly” (Lantos, Mokala and Meadow, 1997).
One of the interesting findings of this study is that older mothers respond very differently to
the legalization of abortion relative to younger mothers. They are more likely to have children
after abortion is legalized, and at the same time, there is less improvement in relative female
mortality for children born to older mothers and they are more likely to use sex-selective
abortion once it is legalized. (The estimates for the last effect are not statistically significant
at conventional levels and therefore should be interpreted cautiously as suggestive evidence
only. See Table 5 columns (4) and (5)). The results are consistent with the predictions we
outlined in the conceptual framework in Section 2.1 and provides evidence for the insight
that older mothers base their decision to have children on the availability of abortion as a
method of sex-selection. This is consistent with the widely-held belief that the physical costs
of pregnancy and child delivery increases with age. Access to sex-selective abortion reduces
the number of months necessary for learning the sex of the child from nine to six months
of pregnancy, effectively cutting out the most physically taxing and risky three months of
pregnancy.
We can investigate this argument further. If abortion induces mothers who face higher
health risks for themselves and for the child to be more willing to give births, then we may find
that the children born to theses mothers are “weaker”. Medical studies have consistently shown
that women over the age of 35 are more likely to experience pregnancy-related complications
such as gestational diabetes, high blood pressure, placental problems, premature birth and
stillbirths (Cleary-Goldman, 2005; Joseph, 2005; Usta and Nassar, 2008; Bahtiyar, 2008).
The crudeness of our data limits our health measure to birth weight, which has been linked
to many of the conditions listed above and has been shown to adversely affect outcomes later
in life.24 Indeed, we find suggestive evidence that legalizing abortion causes older mothers
to be more likely to have LBW babies (see Table 7 Column (4)). (The estimate is large in
23

The Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics (2008) give a long list of conditions that can change within a short
period of time.
24
Birth weight is very commonly used as the outcome variable of interest in studies of the effects of policy
interventions such as welfare reform, health insurance, and food stamps on infant welfare (see, for example,
Currie and Gruber, 1996), and in analyses of the impact of maternal behavior on infant health (see, for example,
Currie and Moretti, 2003). See Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2007) for a discussion on the literature on LBW.

27

magnitude but only significant at the 15% significance level). To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first study that we know of to have ever noticed that the availability of abortions, by
allowing parents to select the “quality” of children, may potentially induce certain parents to
have more children. The heterogeneous effects of abortion would be an extremely interesting
avenue of future research.
Caution should be used in interpreting these results beyond the context of this study. This
study estimates the impact of sex-selective abortion for the first few years after abortion is
legalized, when the technology is still being phased in. This is evident from Figure 1, which
shows that legalized abortion caused the fraction of males at births at third and higher parties
to begin a steady climb from 1986 until 1990, and then stabilize at the new higher level. It is
clear then that if we compared the fraction of males at birth in the 1990s to the pre-reform
fraction, the estimated impact of legalizing abortion would be much larger.
One should also carefully consider the Taiwanese context. Taiwan during the 1980s was
a society with both strong son-preference and a secular decline in the preferred number of
children. Our results will obviously overestimate the effect of legalizing sex-selective abortion
on sex ratios at birth in places where there is less son-bias or places where parents are less
constrained on the number of children. On the other hand, there are contexts for which our
estimates will underestimate the true effect. Taiwan has extremely low infant mortality rates
relative to the rest of the world and we believe that the mortality results are being driven
by very small changes in marginal differential neglect. It is difficult to predict the effect in a
place where there is more extreme differential neglect or a place where infant mortality rates
are higher overall (e.g. India). Very likely, the effect will be greater there than in Taiwan. In
places such as China, where strict family planning policies constrain parents in the number
of children to only one or two, changes in access to sex-selective abortion will likely have
a much larger effect than in Taiwan. That said, for the purpose of discussion, we will in
our concluding remarks make the simplifying assumption that parents in China and India
face similar constraints as parents in Taiwan to broadly understand the implications of our
estimates for those other contexts.

28

6

Conclusion

This paper uses a straightforward empirical strategy to provide evidence for the impact of sexselective abortion on sex ratios at birth, EFM and fertility. The results show that legalizing
abortion had little effect on sex ratios for parents who can reasonably expect to have more
children (e.g. those with low birth parities). However, for parents who faced relatively more
uncertainty in their ability to have more children, legalizing abortion dramatically increased
the male-biased sex imbalance at birth. For third and higher-parity births, access to abortion
increased the fraction of males from 51.7% to 53.5% in the late 1980s, which accounts for nearly
100% of the observed increase in sex imbalance at birth during this period. This leaves little
doubt that access to sex-selective abortion has been by far the most important contributor to
the recent increase in the observed population sex imbalance.
The stark results on relative female mortality show that access to abortion decreased female
neo-natal mortality by 20% relative to males. They show that up to 10% of parents who were
selecting post-natally before the reform substituted to pre-natal sex selection using abortion.
In other words, for every one hundred abortions, ten lives of born girls are saved. If these
results are interpreted literally for purely illustrative purposes, they suggest that in China and
India, strictly enforcing the ban on sex-selective abortion would cause there to be 1.6 million
more girls born but 161,000 more girls will die after birth each year.25 The relatively low
amount of substitution is not surprising considering how traumatic a death of a child can be
to parents.
Interestingly, our results also show that the legalization of abortion does not decrease
fertility for all women. Older mothers, who bear a higher cost of child rearing, actually have
more children after the legislative reforms. The most obvious explanation for this is that sex
selective abortion increased the option value of pregnancy, which induced older mothers with
son preference to give birth.
25

China in 2000 had about 17.7 million births. At least 57% were boys. Hence, there is a seven percentage
point deficit of girls. If the effect of sex selective abortion in China is the same as Taiwan, then approximately
3 percentage-points is due to sex selective abortion. Hence, banning sex selective abortion will increase the
number of girls born in China by 17.7 mil * 0.03= 531,000. And it will increase the number of girls dying by
approximately 53,100.
India’s statistics are similar to those of China. So, banning sex selective abortion in both countries will
increase the number of girls born by almost 1.61 million, and the number of female neonatal mortality by
approximately 161,000 annually.

29

Our findings provide three important facts for policy makers. First, the results suggest
that the enormous psychological cost of selecting post-natally will probably prevent the vast
majority of parents from substituting from pre-natal to post-natal sex selection if the former is
banned. (It is beyond the scope of this paper to estimate the welfare implications of banning
sex-selective abortion more precisely. That will depend on the weight placed on the welfare
of unborn female fetuses relative to newly born girls and the additional disutility for parents
to select the sex post- rather than pre-natally, as well as the weights placed on the potential
economic and social consequences from having unbalanced sex ratios). Second, for increasing
relative female welfare, policies which restrict access to sex-selective abortion complement
policies that subsidize the cost of raising daughters. In other words, policies that prohibit the
use of sex-selective abortion should be coupled with policies that increase parents’ incentives
to invest in daughters after they are born.26 Finally, the introduction of abortion will have
heterogeneous effects on fertility in contexts where there is son-preference and pre-natal sex
detection technology is readily available. On the one hand, it will reduce the number of
children born from unwanted pregnancies. On the other hand, a decrease in the costs of sexselection from sex-selective abortion could induce women who bear a high cost of child rearing
to have children.
26

An example is a policy implemented in India which gives cash awards to parents who give births to
daughters and also promises an award for parents when their daughters reach age 18 (Holla et al., 2007).

30

References
[1] Abrevaya, Jason “Are there missing girls in the United States? Evidence on gender
preference and gender selection”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2009,
1:2, 1–34.
[2] Anderson, Siwan and Ray, Debraj (2008) “Missing Women: Age and Disease” New York
University Working paper.
[3] Angrist, Joshua “How Do Sex Ratios Affect Marriage and Labor Markets? Evidence from
America’s Second Generation.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3), 2002, pp.
997-1038.
[4] Arnold, Fred, Sunita Kishor, and T.K. Roy (2002) “Sex-Selective Abortions in India”.
Population and Development Review, Vol. 28(4), pp. 759-785.
[5] Augensen, K. and Bergsje, P. (1984) “Maternal Mortality in Nordic Countries 1970-79”
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scad. Vol 63, pp. 115-21.
[6] Bahtiyar, M.O. et al. (2008) “Stillbirth at term in women of advanced maternal age in
the United States: When could the antenatal testing be initiated?” American Journal of
Perinatology. Vol 25(5), ppp.301-4.
[7] Balakrishna, R. (1994) “The social context of sex selection and the politics of abortion
in India”, in G. Sen and R. C. Snow (Eds.), Power and Decision: The Social Control of
Reproduction. Cambridge, MA: Harvard School of Public Health.
[8] Black, Sandra, Paul Devereux and Kjell Salvanes “From the Cradle to the Labor Market?
The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, March
2007.
[9] Bumiller, E. (1990) “No more little girls: female infanticide among the poor of Tamil
Nadu and sex-selective abortion among the rich of Bombay," Chapter 5 in May You
be the Mother of a Hundred Sons: A Journey Among the Women of India. New York:
Random House, pp. 101-124.

31

[10] Burgess, Robin and Zhuang, Juzhong “Modernisation and son preference.” London School
of Economics Working Paper, 2001.
[11] Clark, S. “Son preference and sex composition of children: Evidence from India.” Demography, 31(1), 2000, pp. 21-32.
[12] Cleary-Foldman, J. et al. (2005) “Impact of Maternal Age on Obstetric Outcome” Obstetrics and Gynecology, Vol 105(5), pp.983-90.
[13] Shin-Yi Chou, Jin-Tan Liu, Michael Grossman, and Theodore J. Joyce. “Parental Education and Child Health: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in Taiwan,” NBER Working
Paper 13466.
[14] Chu, Junhong “Prenatal Sex Determination and Sex-Selective Abortion in Rural Central
China.” Population and Development Review, 2001, 27 (2), 259–281.
[15] Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber (1996). “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of
Recent Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women.” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 104, No 6, pp. 1263-1296.
[16] Currie, Janet, and Enrico Moretti (2005), “Biology as Destiny? Short and Long-Run Determinants of Inter-Generational Transmission of Birth Weight”, NBER Working Paper
#11567.
[17] Das Gupta, Monica (1987) “Selective Discrimination Against Female Children in Rural
Punjab, India” Population and Development Review, Vol. 13, pp. 77-100.
[18] Das Gupta, Monica and P. N. Mari Bhat (1997) “Fertility Decline and Increased Manifestation of Sex Bias in India”, Population Studies, Vol. 51, pp. 307-315.
[19] Donohue, John III. and Levitt, Steven. “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116(2), pp. 379-420.
[20] Duflo, Esther “Grandmothers and granddaughters: Old age pension and intra-household
allocation in South Africa.” World Bank Economic Review, 17 (1),2003, pp. 1-25.

32

[21] Ebenstein, Avraham “Fertility Choices and Sex Selection in Asia: Analysis and Policy.”
University of California at Berkeley Working Paper, 2007.
[22] Ebenstein, Avraham “Estimating a Dynamic Model of Sex Selection” Hebrew University
Working Paper, 2009.
[23] Edlund, L. “Son preference, sex ratios and marriage patters.” Journal of Political Economy, 107(6), 1999, pp. 1275-1304.
[24] Lena Edlund, Junjian Yi, Hongbin Li, and Junsen Zhang (2007) “Sex Ratios and Crime:
Evidence from China” IZA Discussion Paper 3214.
[25] Foster, Andrew D. and Rosenzweig, Mark R. “Missing women, the marriage market, and
economic growth.” Brown University Working Paper, 2001.
[26] Freedman, Ronald, Ming-Cheng Chang and Te-Hsiung Sun “Taiwan’s Transition from
High Fertility to Below-Replacement Levels”. Studies in Family Planning, Vol. 25(6), pp.
317-331.
[27] Goodkind, Daniel (1996) “On Substituting Sex Preference Strategies in East Asia: Does
Prenatal Sex Selection Reduce Postnatal Discrimination?” Population and Development
Review, Vol. 22 (1), pp. 111-125.
[28] Goodkind, Daniel (1999) “Should prenatal sex selection be restricted? Ethical questions
and their implications for research and policy” Population Studies, Vol. (53), pp. 49-61.
[29] Greenlaugh, S. and Li, J. (1995)“Engendering Reproductive Policy and Practice in Peasant China - For a Feminist Demography of Reproduction”, Signs, Vol. 20: pp. 601-641.
[30] Grogan, Louise “Sex Selection and the Nutritional Status of Boys and Girls” University
of Guelph Working Paper, Mimeo.
[31] Gu, B. and Roy, K. “Sex ratios at birth in China with reference to other areas in East
Asia: What we know.” Asia-pacific Population Journal, 10(3), pp. 17-42, 1995.
[32] Henshaw, Stanley K. “Induced Abortion: A World Review, 1990” International Family
Planning Perspectives, Vol. 16, No. 2. (Jun., 1990), pp. 59-65+76.
33

[33] Holla, Alaka, Robert Jensen and Emily Oster "Daughters as wealth? The Effects of Cash
Incentives on Sex Ratios." Brown University Working Paper, 2007.
[34] John D. Lantos, Mani Mokala and William Meadow “Resource Allocation in Neonatal and
Medical ICUs Epidemiology and Rationing at the Extremes of Life” American Journal of
Respiratory Critical Care Medicine, Volume 156, Number 1, July 1997, 185-189.
[35] Joseph, K.S. et al. “The Perinatal Effects of Delayed Childbearing”. Obstetrics and Gynecology. Vol 105(6), pp.1410-18.
[36] Li, Guanghui “Effects of the One-Child policy on the Number and Sex Composition of
Children in China,” Mimeo, 2002.
[37] Lin, Ming-Jen and Luoh, Ming-Ching. “Can Hepatitis B Account for Missing Women?
Evidence from 300 Million Newborns in Taiwan.” American Economic Review, 2008.
[38] Liu, Chung- tung (1995), “Female Body under Government Policy”. Situation of Women
in Taiwan: 1995 report, edited by Liu, Yu-Hsiu, Chinatimes Publication, pp. 219 to 254
(in Chinese)
[39] Jose Marmol et al. (1967)“Maternal Death and High-Risk Pregnancy: An Analysis of 40
Maternal Deaths in the Collaborative Project” Obstetrics and Gynecology. Vol 30(6): pp.
816-820.
[40] Matthews, J. and Hamilton, Brady E. “Trend Analysis of the Sex Ratio at Birth in the
United States” National Vital Statistics Report, Volume 53, Number 20, June 14, 2005.
[41] Muhuri, Pradip and Preston, Samuel (1991) “Effects of Family Composition on Mortality
Differentials by Sex Among Children in Matlab, Bangladesh” Population and Development Review, Vol. 17: pp. 745-782.
[42] Nandan, G. (1993) “India to Ban Prenatal Sex Determination” British Medical Journal,
Vol. 206: pp. 353.
[43] Nelson

Textbook

of

Pediatrics,

18th

http://www.nelsonpediatrics.com/, Chapter 60, page 1.
34

edition

online,

Elsevier,

[44] Norberg, Karen ”Partnership Status and the Human Sex Ratio at Birth.” NBER Working
Paper 10920, 2004.
[45] Oster, Emily “Hepatitis B and the case of the Missing Women.” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 113(6), 2005.
[46] Parikh, M. (1993) “Morass of sex-selective abortions: Legal inefficiencies and the continued tragedy of unwanted daughters,” Abstracts of the 1993 Annual Meeting of the
Association for Asian Studies, Ann Arbor, MI.
[47] Park, Chai Bin and Cho, Nam-Hoon “Consequences of Son Preference in a Low-Fertility
Society: Imbalance of the Sex Ratio at Birth in Korea” Population and Development
Review, Vol. 21, No. 1 (Mar., 1995), pp. 59-84
[48] Pebley, Ann and Amin, Sajeda (1991) “The impact of a public health intervention on sex
differentials in childhood mortality in rural Punjab, India”. Health Transition Review,
Vol. (1): pp. 143-169.
[49] Qian, Nancy “Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The effect of sex-specific
income on sex imbalance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2008.
[50] Qian, Nancy “Quantity-Quality and the One Child Policy: The Positive Effect of Family
Size on School Enrollment.” Brown University Working Paper, 2006.
[51] Rholf, Chris, Alexander Reed and Hiroyuki Yamada “Missing Women and the Year of the
Fire Horse: Changes in the Value of Girls and Child Avoidance Mechanisms in Japan,
1846, 1906 and 1966.” University of Chicago Working Paper, 2005.
[52] Roggencamp, V. (1985) “Abortion of a special kind: Female sex selection in India”, in R.
Arditti, R. Kleing and S. Mindan (Eds.), Test-tube Women. London: Pandora Press, pp.
266-277.
[53] Rosenzweig, Mark. R. and Schultz, T. P. “Market opportunities, genetic endowments, and
intrafamily resource distribution: Child survival in rural India.” The American Economic
Review, 72(4), 1982, pp. 803-815.

35

[54] Samuelson, Paul “Models of Thought in Economics and Biology.” American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings, 75, 1985, pp. 166-172.
[55] Sen, Amartya “More than 100 million women are missing.” New York Review of Books,
1990.
[56] Sen, Amartya “Missing women.” British Medical Journal, 304, 1992, pp. 587-588.
[57] Sundaram, V., Liu, K.L., and Laraque, F. (2005) “Disparity in Maternal Mortality in
New York City” The Journal of American Medicne Womens Association. Vol 60(1), pp.
52-7.
[58] Thomas, Duncan “Like father, like son; like mother, like daughter: Parental resources
and child height.” Journal of Human Resources, 29(4), 1994, pp. 950-988.
[59] Thomas, D., Strauss, T. and M. Henriques “How does mother’s education affect child
height?” The Journal of Human Resources, 26(2), 1991, pp. 183-211.
[60] United Nations (UN) (1994) Programme of Action. United Nations Population Conference, Cairo.
[61] Usta, I.M. and Nassar, A.H. (2008) “Advanced Maternal Age. Part I: Obstetric Complications” American Journal of Perinatology. Vol 25(8), pp.521-34.

36

Figure 1: Fraction of Males at Birth by Parity over Time in Taiwan (1980-1998)

Figure 2A: Fraction of Women Reported to Have Ever Had an
Abortion by Age

Figure 2C: Fraction of Women Reported to Have Ever Had an
Abortion by Education

Figure 2B: Change in Fraction of Women who Ever Had an Abortion
by Age

Figure 2D: Change in Fraction of Women who Ever Had an Abortion
by Education Level

Figure 3A: The Fraction of Males by Birth Year and Birth Order

Figure 3B: The Fraction of Males by Birth Year and Mother’s Age

Figure 4A: Log (Total Births) by Birth Year and Birth Order

Figure 4B: Log (Total Births) by Birth Year and Mother’s Age for Young Mothers (18-28)

Figure 4C: Log (Total Births) by Birth Year and Mother’s Age for Old Mothers (29+)

Figure 5A: The Effect of Abortion on Fraction of Males by Birth Order
Coefficients of the interaction terms of birth year dummy variables and birth order dummy variables

Figure 5B: The Effect of Abortion on Fraction of Males on 3+ Births
Coefficients of the interaction terms of birth year dummy variables and 3+ birth order dummy variable and their 95%
Confidence Intervals

Figure 6A: The Effect of Abortion on Fraction of Males by Birth Order (Mothers 18-22)
Coefficients of the interaction terms of birth year dummy variables and birth order dummy variables

Figure 6B: The Effect of Abortion on Fraction of Males by Birth Order (Mothers 23-28)
Coefficients of the interaction terms of birth year dummy variables and birth order dummy variables

Figure 6C: The Effect of Abortion on Fraction of Males by Birth Order (Mothers 28+)
Coefficients of the interaction terms of birth year dummy variables and birth order dummy variables

Table 1: The Change in Number of Births by Birth Order and Mother’s Age

Total Number of Births Annually
1982-84

1985-89

Change

%Change

1

146861

133755

-13106

-8.92%

2

125896

113699

-12198

-9.69%

3+

108162

73500

-34662

-32.05%

A. Birth Order

B. Mother's Age
18-22

80799

52252

-28546

-35.33%

23-28

213459

178130

-35329

-16.55%

29-35

81042

83381

2339

2.89%

35+

6093

7537

1444

23.69%

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics on Birth and Parental Characteristics
by Birth Year and Birth Order
I. Born 1982-84

II. Born 1985-89
Std.
Obs
Mean
Err.

III.

Obs

Mean

Std.
Err.

Male (Fraction)

99

0.518

0.001

165

0.518

0.001

0.001

Mother's Age

99

24.072

0.051

165

24.855

0.041

0.784

Mother's Education (Years)

99

9.378

0.044

165

9.954

0.028

0.576

Father's Education (Years)

99

10.172

0.043

165

10.542

0.027

0.370

LBW (Fraction)

99

0.065

0.000

165

0.066

0.000

0.001

Birth Weight (Grams)

99

3196.233

1.170

165

3185.754

0.921

-10

Singleton Birth (Fraction)

99

0.993

0.000

165

0.989

0.000

-0.004

Mother Married (Fraction)

99

0.976

0.000

165

0.969

0.000

-0.007

Death within 1 Month (Fraction)

198

0.003

0.001

330

0.002

0.001

-0.001

Death within 6 Months (Fraction)

198

0.005

0.002

330

0.004

0.002

-0.001

Death within 12 Months (Fraction)

198

0.006

0.002

330

0.005

0.002

-0.001

Variable

Diff

A. Birth Order = 1

B. Birth Order = 2
Male (Fraction)

100

0.516

0.001

165

0.517

0.001

0.000

Mother's Age

100

25.735

0.057

165

26.741

0.050

1.005

Mother's Education (Years)

100

8.884

0.048

165

9.653

0.035

0.769

Father's Education (Years)

100

9.778

0.047

165

10.373

0.032

0.595

LBW (Fraction)

100

0.054

0.001

165

0.055

0.000

0.001

Birth Weight (Grams)

100

3270.391

1.222

165

3257.464

1.089

-13

Singleton Birth (Fraction)

100

0.991

0.000

165

0.987

0.000

-0.004

Mother Married (Fraction)

100

0.991

0.000

165

0.989

0.000

-0.003

Death within 1 Month (Fraction)

199

0.003

0.002

330

0.003

0.001

-0.001

Death within 6 Months (Fraction)

199

0.006

0.002

330

0.005

0.002

-0.001

Death within 12 Months (Fraction)

199

0.008

0.002

330

0.006

0.002

-0.001

C. Birth Order = 3+
Male (Fraction)

100

0.517

0.001

165

0.524

0.001

0.007

Mother's Age

100

27.984

0.043

165

28.773

0.046

0.789

Mother's Education (Years)

100

7.005

0.043

165

7.964

0.037

0.959

Father's Education (Years)

100

8.128

0.040

165

8.903

0.034

0.776

LBW (Fraction)

100

0.043

0.000

165

0.048

0.000

0.005

Birth Weight (Grams)

100

3352.349

1.638

165

3331.444

1.473

-21

Singleton Birth (Fraction)

100

0.990

0.000

165

0.985

0.000

-0.005

Mother Married (Fraction)

100

0.992

0.000

165

0.987

0.000

-0.005

Death within 1 Month (Fraction)

199

0.003

0.002

330

0.003

0.002

-0.001

Death within 6 Months (Fraction)

199

0.007

0.002

330

0.006

0.002

-0.001

Death within 12 Months (Fraction)

199

0.008

0.003

330

0.007

0.003

-0.001

Observations for all variables except mortality are birth year x birth order x birth county cell.
Observations for mortality variables are birth year x birth order x birth county x sex cells.

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics on Neo-natal Mortality by Birth year, Birth Order and Sex
A. Girls

Death Within
X Months

B. Boys

(1)

(2)

Born 1982-84

Born 1985-89

Obs

Mean

Obs

Mean

(3)
Diff
(2)-(1)

(4)

(5)

Born 1982-84

Born 1985-89

Obs

Mean

A1. Birth Order =1
1 Month

99

0.0028

165

(0.0001)
12 Months

99

0.0057

0.0022

165

0.0047

-0.0006

99

0.0037

99

-0.0010

99

(0.0001)

0.0032

165

(0.0001)
12 Months

99

0.0070

0.0025

165

0.0057

0.0070

100

12 Months

100

0.0030

-0.0007

100

(0.0001)
0.0077
(0.0003)

0.0023

-0.0012

100

0.0069

0.0025

-0.0012

-0.0006

0.0052

-0.0017

-0.0007

-0.0010

-0.0004

-0.0015

-0.0002

-0.0007

-0.0001

-0.0016

-0.0008

(0.0001)

0.0038

165

0.0080

0.0028
(0.0001)

165

(0.0002)

0.0066
(0.0002)

B3. Birth Order=3
-0.0007

99

-0.0008

99

(0.0001)
165

165

(0.0002)

(0.0002)
165

DD: (6)(3)

B2. Birth Order=2

A3. Birth Order=3
1 Month

Diff
(5)-(4)

(0.0001)

(0.0002)

(0.0001)

(0.0002)

165

(0.0001)

A2. Birth Order=2
1 Month

Mean

(7)

B1. Birth Order=1

(0.0001)

(0.0002)

Obs

(6)

0.0035

165

(0.0002)

(0.0002)

Data are aggregated into cells by sex, birth year, birth county and birth order.

0.0088
(0.0003)

0.0028
(0.0001)

165

0.0072
(0.0002)

Table 4: The Effect of Abortion on Number of Births by Birth Order and/or by Mother’s Age
Dependent Variable: Ln(Number of Births)
2nd Born * Post

3rd+ Born * Post

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.00365

0.05272

-0.30231

(4)

-0.47547

(0.18472)

(0.14688)

(0.11922)

(0.11823)

-0.27445

-0.14960

-1.07289

-1.49228

(0.16827)

(0.14252)

(0.10843)

(0.11682)

Mage 23-28 * Post

0.20874

0.50636

(0.00181)

(0.10252)

Mage 29-35 * Post

0.31626

1.01467

(0.00417)

(0.11297)

Mage 35+ * Post

Birth Order
Dummies
Mother's Age
Dummies
Mother's Education
Observations

Y

(5)

0.50773

1.91630

(0.00635)

(0.13727)

N

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

N

Y

N

Y

3159

3159

3159

3159

3159

All regressions control for birth year and birth county fixed effects.
Robust standard errors in parentheses

Table 5: The Effect of Abortion on Fraction of Males by Birth Order and/or by Mother’s Age

2nd Born * Post

3rd+ Born * Post

(1)
-0.00002
(0.00142)
0.00692
(0.00166)

Dependent Variable: Fraction of Males
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.00013
-0.00080
(0.00141)
(0.00145)
0.00685
(0.00165)

0.00511
(0.00171)

(5)
-0.00010
(0.00143)
0.00658
(0.00170)

Mage 23-28 * Post

-0.00084
(0.00176)

-0.00173
(0.00177)

Mage 29-35 * Post

0.00188
(0.00210)

-0.00025
(0.00212)

Mage 35+ * Post

0.00695
(0.00435)

0.00389
(0.00438)

Birth Order Dummies
Mother's Age
Dummies
Mother's Education

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

N
N

Y
N

Y
Y

Y
N

Y
Y

3159

3159

Observations
3159
3159
3159
All regressions control for birth year and birth county fixed effects.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.

Table 6: The Effect of Abortion on Sex-differential Neo-Natal Mortality by Birth Order
Coefficients of the interaction terms of birth order dummy variables and a dummy variable
indicating if an individual was born after the reform.

Dependent Variable: Death within `X' Months
1 Month

3 Months

6 Months

12 Months

(1)

(2)

(3)

(5)

0.00020

0.00014

0.00021

0.00051

(0.00023)

(0.00029)

(0.00037)

(0.00041)

0.00051

0.00024

-0.00032

-0.00005

(0.00018)

(0.00031)

(0.00043)

(0.00053)

6258

6258

6258

6258

A. Not Controlling for Mother's Age * Male * Post
Born 2nd * Male * Post

Born 3rd+ * Male * Post

Observations

B. Controlling for Mother's Age * Male * Post
Born 2nd * Male * Post

Born 3rd+ * Male * Post

Mage 23-28 * Male * Post

Mage 29-35 * Male * Post

Mage 35+ * Male * Post

Observations

-0.00004

-0.00092

-0.00057

-0.00018

(0.00018)

(0.00013)

(0.00024)

(0.00035)

0.00062

0.00074

0.00060

0.00074

(0.00028)

(0.00053)

(0.00037)

(0.00054)

-0.00052

-0.00060

-0.00077

-0.00101

(0.00025)

(0.00019)

(0.00024)

(0.00030)

-0.00060

-0.00034

-0.00013

-0.00047

(0.00031)

(0.00029)

(0.00032)

(0.00032)

-0.00215

-0.00229

-0.00284

-0.00255

(0.00047)

(0.00072)

(0.00078)

(0.00086)

6258

6258

6258

6258

All regressions control for birth order, mother's age and birth year fixed effects.
Regressions in Panel B also control for the full set of interaction terms.
Robust standard errors are reported in the parenthesis.

Table 7: The Effect of Abortion Legalization on the Composition of Children Born and Parental Characteristics
Coefficients of the interaction terms of birth order dummy variables, birth year dummy variables and a dummy variable for male

Dependent Variables

2nd Born * Post * Sex

3rd+ Born * Post * Sex

Mage 23-28 * Post * Sex

Mage 29-35 * Post *Sex

Mage 35+ * Post *Sex

Observations

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Single Mother

Mother's Edu

Father's Edu

LBW

Multiple Birth

0.0041

0.0054

-0.0067

0.0028

-0.0004

(0.0016)

(0.0089)

(0.0066)

(0.0023)

(0.0012)

0.0082

0.0456

0.0089

0.0000

-0.0021

(0.0020)

(0.0124)

(0.0098)

(0.0038)

(0.0021)

0.0028

0.0042

-0.0031

0.0009

-0.0007

(0.0017)

(0.0082)

(0.0073)

(0.0019)

(0.0009)

0.0008

0.0044

-0.0182

0.0001

-0.0002

(0.0022)

(0.0099)

(0.0082)

(0.0026)

(0.0013)

-0.0041

-0.0278

-0.0245

0.0108

-0.0015

(0.0065)

(0.0153)

(0.0134)

(0.0064)

(0.0032)

6258

6258

6258

6255

6258

All regressions control for birth order, mother's age and birth year fixed effects.
Robust standard errors in parentheses.

Table 8: Calculating the % of Parents who Substitute from Post- to Pre-natal Sex Selection

1982-84
(1)
108162

1985-89
(2)
73500

Changes
(2) - (1)
-34662

A.

3rd+ Parity Births
Average Number of Total Annual Births

B.

Fraction of Boys

0.517

0.524

0.007

C.

Fraction of Girls = 1-B

0.483

0.476

-0.007

D.

# of Girls Born = A x C

52242

34986

-17256

E.

Fraction of Missing Girls= 0.49 - C

0.007

0.014

0.007

F.

# of Missing Girls = E x A

757

1029

272

G.

Girl's Mortality (Fraction)

0.003

0.0024

-0.0006

H.

# of Girls Dying = D x G

157

84

-73

I.

Fraction of Parents Substituting from post- to pre-natal selection = 73/757

0.096

J.

Fraction of Parents who would Select Post-natally if Abortion was Banned =73/1029

0.071

Table A1: Fraction of Males by Parity for Taiwan, China and South Korea

Sex Ratios at Birth (# Boys/ # Girls)
S Korea

China

Taiwan

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Year

1

2

3+

3+/1

1

2

3+

3+/1

1

2

3+

3+/1

1980

0.514

0.510

0.504

0.490

0.512

0.516

0.527

0.514

0.516

0.516

0.516

0.500

1981

0.515

0.516

0.522

0.507

0.516

0.513

0.522

0.506

0.516

0.517

0.518

0.501

1982

0.513

0.515

0.526

0.513

0.519

0.517

0.523

0.504

0.516

0.518

0.516

0.500

1983

0.514

0.515

0.534

0.520

0.506

0.531

0.531

0.524

0.518

0.515

0.516

0.498

1984

0.515

0.517

0.547

0.532

0.516

0.537

0.533

0.517

0.519

0.516

0.519

0.500

1985

0.515

0.519

0.573

0.559

0.513

0.539

0.552

0.539

0.518

0.515

0.516

0.498

1986

0.518

0.527

0.586

0.569

0.516

0.530

0.543

0.527

0.520

0.515

0.517

0.497

1987

0.511

0.522

0.580

0.568

0.504

0.534

0.541

0.537

0.517

0.520

0.526

0.508

1988

0.517

0.531

0.627

0.611

0.513

0.548

0.554

0.542

0.518

0.517

0.528

0.511

1989

0.510

0.529

0.649

0.640

0.513

0.548

0.559

0.547

0.517

0.517

0.534

0.518

1990

0.520

0.539

0.658

0.640

0.516

0.521

0.547

0.531

1991

0.514

0.529

0.646

0.633

0.518

0.520

0.546

0.528

1992

0.515

0.529

0.660

0.647

0.519

0.518

0.542

0.523

1993

0.516

0.534

0.674

0.660

0.517

0.516

0.530

0.513

1994

0.514

0.533

0.672

0.659

0.519

0.518

0.533

0.514

1995

0.514

0.528

0.643

0.630

0.517

0.513

0.534

0.517

1996

0.513

0.523

0.624

0.612

0.519

0.517

0.533

0.514

1997

0.512

0.515

0.575

0.563

0.519

0.517

0.536

0.518

1998

0.514

0.519

0.593

0.579

0.517

0.516

0.539

0.522

1999

0.514

0.518

0.589

0.575

2000

0.515

0.518

0.590

0.575

2001

0.513

0.516

0.586

0.573

2002

0.516

0.518

0.585

0.570

2003

0.512

0.517

0.577

0.566

0.516

0.516

0.517

0.557

0.585

0.603

0.559

0.607

0.614

0.543

0.592

0.598

2004 0.513 0.515 0.570 0.558
S. Korea Data Source: South Korea National Statistical
Office.
China Data Source: Data covering the period from 1960 to 1989 are taken from Gu and Xu (1994) and Gu and Roy
(1995), with their calculations having been drawn from the Data Volumes of the National Reproduction and Birth
control Sample Surveys, Chapter 3. The 1990 (census results), 1995 (1% population survey results) and 2000
(census results) data are taken from Yuan and Tu (2005). The 1992 data is the result of a 0.1% sample which was
taken from the Chinese Population Statistical Yearbook.
Taiwan Data Source: Taiwan National Birth
Registries

Table A2: The Effect of Abortion on Fraction of Males by Birth Order and by Mother’s Age
Coefficients of the interaction terms of birth year dummy variables and birth order dummy variables;
or the interaction terms of birth year dummy variables and mother’s age dummy variables

Dependent Variable: Fraction of Males at Birth

Second Born * Born 1983
Second Born * Born 1984
Second Born * Born 1985
Second Born * Born 1986
Second Born * Born 1987
Second Born * Born 1988
Second Born * Born 1989

Third+ Born * Born 1983
Third+ Born * Born 1984
Third+ Born * Born 1985
Third+ Born * Born 1986
Third+ Born * Born 1987
Third+ Born * Born 1988
Third+ Born * Born 1989

(1)
Full
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.003)
-0.007
(0.003)
0.000
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.003)

(2)
Mage 18-22
0.003
(0.006)
-0.005
(0.006)
0.000
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.007)
0.010
(0.007)
0.005
(0.006)
0.011
(0.006)

(3)
Mage 23-28
-0.007
(0.004)
-0.003
(0.003)
-0.007
(0.004)
-0.009
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.006
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.004)

(4)
Mage 29+
-0.010
(0.007)
-0.010
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.007)
-0.005
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.006)
-0.004
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.003)
0.007
(0.003)
0.011
(0.003)
0.018
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.008)
-0.002
(0.010)
-0.015
(0.010)
0.015
(0.010)
0.003
(0.014)
-0.001
(0.011)
0.012
(0.012)

-0.006
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.011
(0.004)
0.001
(0.004)
0.003
(0.004)
0.008
(0.004)

-0.005
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.007)
0.000
(0.007)
0.006
(0.007)
0.012
(0.007)
0.016
(0.007)
0.026
(0.007)

794

1573

Observations
3159
792
All regressions control for birth order fixed effects and birth year fixed effects.
Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.

APPENDIX Figure A1: Fraction of Males by Birth Parity in China (1980-90)

Figure A2: Fraction of Males by Birth Parity in South Korea (1980-90)

