                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CAN STRUCTURAL SMALL OPEN ECONOMY MODELS ACCOUNT FOR THE
                  INFLUENCE OF FOREIGN DISTURBANCES?

                                          Alejandro Justiniano
                                             Bruce Preston

                                         Working Paper 14547
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14547


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2008




First Draft: September 2005. We are grateful to Gunter Coenen, Charles Engel, Jordi Gali, Paulo Giordani,
Thomas Lubik, Adrian Pagan, Giorgio Primiceri and two anonymous referees for discussions and
detailed comments. We also thank seminar participants at the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Cleveland Federal Reserve Bank Conference on "DSGE and
Factor Models", Duke University conference on "Identification and estimation of structural models",
the joint ECB, Lowy Institute and CAMA conference on "Globalization and Regionalism", Reserve
Bank of Australia, The Riksbank conference on "Structural Analysis of Business Cycles in the Open
Economy" and University of Washington. Preston thanks the PER Seed Grant at Columbia University
for financial support. The usual caveat applies. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors'
and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, any
other person associated with the Federal Reserve system or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Alejandro Justiniano and Bruce Preston. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Can Structural Small Open Economy Models Account for the Influence of Foreign Disturbances?
Alejandro Justiniano and Bruce Preston
NBER Working Paper No. 14547
December 2008
JEL No. F41

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper demonstrates that an estimated, structural, small open economy model of the Canadian
economy cannot account for the substantial influence of foreign-sourced disturbances identified in
numerous reduced-form studies. The benchmark model assumes uncorrelated shocks across countries
and implies that U.S. shocks account for less than 3 percent of the variability observed in several Canadian
series, at all forecast horizons. Accordingly, model-implied cross-correlation functions between Canada
and U.S. are essentially zero. Both findings are at odds with the data. A specification that assumes
correlated cross-country shocks partially resolves this discrepancy, but still falls well short of matching
reduced-form evidence.


Alejandro Justiniano
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S. LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
Alejandro.Justiniano@chi.frb.org

Bruce Preston
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
bp2121@columbia.edu
1        Introduction

This paper investigates whether an estimated microfounded semi-small open economy model
can reproduce the observed comovements in international business cycles. Focusing on Canada
as the small open economy, the starting point for the analysis is the large body of empirical
work that identi…es a signi…cant in‡uence of U.S. shocks on Canadian economic ‡uctuations.
        There has been ample theoretical work seeking to replicate the observed comovements in
economic activity across countries. Until recently, the empirical validation of these models
largely relied on calibrations aimed at matching selected moments in the data — see the con-
tributions of Backus et al. (1992, 1995), Stockman and Tesar (1995) and Baxter (1995) for
a review. The New Open Economy Macroeconomics (NOEM) has since produced signi…cant
theoretical advancements in international macroeconomic modeling. Given the empirical suc-
cess of closed economy models built on similar foundations, it is not surprising that there is
a growing literature estimating NOEM models. These include amongst others: Ambler et al.
(2003), Bergin (2003, 2004), Del Negro (2003), Ghironi (2000), Lubik and Schorfheide (2003,
2005), Lubik and Teo (2005) and Rabanal and Tuesta (2005).
        To our knowledge, the ability of these NOEM models to explain the observed comovement
in economic ‡uctuations has not been previously systematically analyzed in this empirical
literature. This paper …lls this gap by evaluating a workhorse semi-small NOEM model in
this particular dimension. The focal point is the model’s ability to replicate the fraction of
the variance in Canadian macroeconomic series attributed to U.S. shocks. We also contrast
the cross-country correlation functions in the model and data, particularly for output.
        The analysis is pursued using generalizations of the small open economy framework pro-
posed by Gali and Monacelli (2005).1 Following Monacelli (2005), we allow for deviations from
the law of one price. In addition, we consider incomplete asset markets, a large set of dis-
turbances, and incorporate other real and nominal rigidities (e.g., wage stickiness, indexation
and habits) which have been found crucial in …tting closed economy models as documented
by Christiano et al. (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007).
        The model is estimated using Bayesian methods with data for Canada and the United
    1
     The model is technically a semi-small open economy model, where domestic goods producers have some
market power, but we shall nonetheless refer to it as a small open economy. Note also that our analysis appeals
to an earlier interpretation in Gali and Monacelli (2005) of a small-large country pair, rather than as an analysis
of a continuum of small open economies.


                                                        1
States. Our baseline speci…cation assumes that shocks across these two countries are indepen-
dent. This contrasts with much of the international real business cycle literature which often
assumes correlated cross-country technology shocks, but is consistent with all of the empirical
NOEM studies cited above.2 Under independent shocks, the channels of transmission embed-
ded in the model (e.g. risk sharing and expenditure switching e¤ects) must account for the
cross-country comovement in aggregate ‡uctuations.
       The main contribution of this paper is to document that the baseline speci…cation fails to
account for the in‡uence of foreign shocks. A structural variance decomposition reveals that
all U.S. shocks combined cannot explain more than 3 percent of the variability in Canadian
output, interest rates or in‡ation. Furthermore, model-implied cross-correlation functions
between these two countries are estimated to be essentially zero. Both …ndings are in stark
contrast with reduced-form empirical evidence in the same data. These results are shown to
be robust across alternative priors and detrending methods.
       As comovement readily obtains when the model is calibrated with plausible parameter
values, our …ndings indicate that the inability to reproduce international correlations in output
— known as the quantity anomaly in Baxter and Crucini (1995) — is exacerbated in estimated
models. Our results also suggest caution in extrapolating to the international dimension the
empirical success of related closed economy models. This is important considering the growing
reliance on models of this kind for policy analysis.
       A second contribution of this paper is to document that the comovement problem can only
be partially resolved by introducing disturbances that are correlated across countries. To do
this, each Canadian structural shock is written as the sum of two orthogonal components: a
disturbance common to the U.S. block and a country-speci…c shock. This decomposition can
be viewed as a rough approximation to reduced-form dynamic factor models that have been
used for business cycle analysis.3
       When all U.S. shocks are common to the domestic block the DSGE model gets closer
to matching the reduced-form variance decomposition. However, there are at least three
reasons for not viewing this speci…cation as a panacea for the model’s inability to replicate
   2
     For example, Gali and Monacelli (2005) consider the role of technology spillovers in their calibration study.
But likelihood-based empirical studies have typically excluded this possibility.
   3
     In a closed economy setting, Boivin and Giannoni (2006) establish a formal link between DSGE and dynamic
factor models.



                                                        2
the observed in‡uence of foreign disturbances. First, at medium to long horizons, the fraction
of output variation explained by U.S. disturbances is still below the reduced-form evidence.
Second, this speci…cation engenders an extreme version of the exchange rate disconnect — see
Devereux and Engel (2002). Third, some of the induced correlations are di¢ cult to rationalize
on structural grounds. Hence, our results indicate ample scope to improve the transmission
mechanism of foreign disturbances in this class of models.
       This paper broadly relates to the international business cycle literature and recent empir-
ical work with NOEM models. More closely related is Adolfson et al. (2007) who presents a
state-of-the-art model, more richly speci…ed than the one considered here. While their model
performs very well in several dimensions, an earlier version, Adolfson et al. (2005), reported
variance decompositions revealing little transmission of foreign sourced disturbances from the
European Union to Sweden — a property that is not remarked upon. Similar observations
apply to de Walque et al. (2005) in a two-country model for the U.S. and the Euro Area. We
also build on Schmitt-Grohe (1998) who evaluates whether a calibrated small open economy
real business cycle model can replicate impulse responses to a single foreign output shock, ex-
tracted from a bivariate U.S.-Canada vector autoregression.4 Our results suggest once again
that in estimation the failure to capture international linkages may be worse than when the
model is calibrated.
       The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides statistical evidence of
comovement between the U.S. and Canadian business cycles. Section 3 lays out the theoretical
model. Section 4 describes the data and estimation methodology. Parameter estimates are
brie‡y discussed. Section 5 shows that the model fails to account for the in‡uence of foreign
disturbances. Section 6 presents robustness checks. Section 7 considers speci…cations with
common shocks. We conclude with some thoughts on the implications of our …ndings for
future work.
   4
    Schmitt-Grohe (1998) concludes that …nancial and trade linkages are not capable of reproducing the strong
response of Canadian hours, output and investment to innovations in U.S. GNP. She suggests that these
di¢ culties might be alleviated by the introduction of sticky prices. Our analysis reveals that the inability to
capture the in‡uence of foreign shocks persists in an estimated model even when various nominal rigidities are
considered.




                                                       3
2        Evidence on International Linkages

A central empirical regularity that international business cycle models seek to explain is the
observed cross-country comovement amongst economic variables. This section documents a
number of statistics suggesting comovement is a salient feature of U.S. and Canadian business
cycles, understanding that earlier literature testi…es to the generality of these insights in other
economies. This close link is not surprising considering the U.S. accounts for 75 percent of
Canada’s average trade share.5

2.1       Data

We use data for twelve series that in section 4 constitute the observable states in the estimated
DSGE model. These are: real per-capita output, in‡ation, nominal interest rates, real wages
and hours in both the U.S. and Canada, as well as the bilateral terms of trade and the real
exchange rate. Details of the data are in appendix A. Consistent with the model presented
later, output and real wages are expressed in log-deviations from a common linear trend. The
real exchange rate and the terms of trade are given in log-di¤erences. Section 6 evidences the
robustness of our results to alternative detrending of these series. In‡ation and interest rates
are expressed as percentages and, like hours, are not transformed, except that all series are
demeaned. The sample runs from 1982q1 to 2007q1, although the …rst 8 quarters are used to
initialize the Kalman …lter.

2.2       Reduced-Form Evidence

The solid black lines in …gure 1 give the sample cross-correlations between U.S. and Canadian
series at lags zero through four. The remaining lines correspond to the estimated DSGE model
and are discussed in section 4. For presentation purposes only we exclude these statistics for
the terms of trade and the real exchange rate but discuss them later on.
        For many series these cross-correlations are large at various lags and rarely equal to zero.
For example, the contemporaneous correlations between Canadian and U.S. output, in‡ation,
nominal interest rates and wages are: 0.69, 0.45, 0.83 and 0.72, respectively. This is consistent
with earlier studies on international comovement, such as Backus et al. (1992), Stockman and
    5
   In our sample, adding 1/2 the share of U.S. imports in total Canadian imports plus 1/2 the share of total
Canadian exports oriented to the U.S. equals 75.1 percent.



                                                     4
Tesar (1995) and Ambler at al. (2004).
      We rely on two statistical models to compute the variance share of these Canadian series
that is attributable to U.S. shocks. The …rst model is a VAR subject to the exclusion restriction
of no feedback from Canada to the U.S. that is embedded in the DSGE model. Hence, it is
formally a seemingly unrelated regression (SUR). Variance decompositions are obtained with
a Cholesky decomposition of the SUR innovations with no attempt to identify any particular
shock. We only wish to infer the variance shares explained by disturbances also a¤ecting the
U.S. block.6 The SUR is estimated with the e¢ cient block-recursive Gibbs algorithm proposed
by Zha (1999). Details are in appendix B.
      Table 1 reports variance shares attributable to all foreign shocks in a SUR (with 4 lags) at 1,
4, and 8 quarter horizons, and the stationary (long-horizon) variance. We report medians and
90 percent posterior probability bands. In the short, medium and long run, U.S. disturbances
account for a substantial fraction of variation in Canadian series. For example, at a 4 quarter
horizon, shares vary from 25 percent for hours to 44 percent for output. At long horizons,
contributions vary from 65 percent for in‡ation to 76 percent for output. The latter is almost
identical to the 74 percent share for U.S. shocks in the smaller, but overidenti…ed, structural
SUR model of Cushman and Zha (1997).
      The SUR analysis is limited by sample considerations to a dozen series. An alternative
is to estimate a dynamic moving average factor model, which can encompass richer sources
of shocks and channels of transmission by accommodating a larger number of series. Hence,
we also mention variance decomposition estimates from such a model, estimated for the U.S.
and Canada on a similar sample. The reader is referred to an earlier version of this paper,
Justiniano and Preston (2006), which builds on Justiniano (2007), for further details.
      To explain a panel of 32 series (16 for each country) formal model comparisons dictate
including four factors, two of which are common to both countries (foreign factors), with the
remaining two exclusive to the Canadian economy (domestic). The factors and idiosyncratic,
series-speci…c, components follow independent autoregressive processes of order three. Mea-
sures of …t also suggest the presence of moving average dynamics in the loadings, indicating
that spillover e¤ects may be important for some variables.
      Justiniano and Preston (2006) show that the median share of the long-horizon variance
  6
      The results obtained with this identi…cation procedure are invariant to re-ordering of the series.


                                                         5
of Canadian output, in‡ation, interest rates, the terms of trade and the real exchange rate
explained by the two foreign factors is 0:71, 0:15, 0:31, 0:22 and 0:11. While di¤erences in
sample and data preclude direct comparisons with the SUR results, this distinct methodology
clearly indicates an important role for U.S. shocks in explaining Canadian business cycles,
particularly for output. Similar …ndings are reported by Kose et al. (2003, 2008), Lumsdaine
and Prasad (2003) and Bowden and Martin (1995) with related methodologies.
    Taken together, these various statistics suggest strong comovement between Canadian and
U.S. business cycles. The remainder of the paper explores whether structural models can
similarly capture these international linkages.


3     The Model

Building on Gali and Monacelli (2005) and Monacelli (2005), the following section details a
small open economy model, allowing for habit formation, indexation of prices, labor market
imperfections and incomplete markets. These papers extend the microfoundations described
by Clarida et al. (1999) and Woodford (2003) for analyzing monetary policy in a closed
economy setting to an open economy context.

3.1   Households

Each household maximizes
                                1
                                                   "                                                    #
                                X                      (Ct    Ht )1      1=
                                                                                     ~"l;t Nt1+'
                                       t
                           E0              ~"g;t
                                                             1 1=                       1+'
                                t=0

where Nt is the labor input; Ht                hCt         1   is an external habit taken as exogenous by the
household and 0 < h < 1;        1; '   > 0 are the inverse elasticities of intertemporal substitution
and labor supply; and ~"g;t and ~"l;t denote preference and labor supply shocks respectively. Ct
is a composite consumption index
                               h                   1                 1        1                 1   i       1
                           Ct = (1             ) (CH;t )                 +        (CF;t )

where CH;t and CF;t are Dixit-Stiglitz aggregates of the available domestic and foreign pro-
duced goods given by
                     21                       3                                       21                             3
                      Z                                1                               Z                                  1
                                       1                                                                        1
            CH;t   = 4 CH;t (i)            di5                 and           CF;t   = 4 CF;t (i)                    di5
                       0                                                                    0


                                                                6
where      > 0 gives the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods;                       > 1 is
the elasticity of substitution between types of di¤erentiated domestic or foreign goods; and
the relative weight of these goods in the overall consumption bundle.
   Assuming the only available assets are one-period domestic and foreign bonds, optimization
occurs subject to the ‡ow budget constraint

        Pt Ct + Dt + St Bt = Dt     1 Rt 1   + St Bt   1 Rt 1 t (At )   +    H;t   +    F;t   + Wt N t + Tt

for all t > 0, where Dt and Bt denote holdings of one-period domestic and foreign bonds with
gross interest rates Rt and Rt . St is the nominal exchange rate. The price indices Pt , PH;t and
Pt correspond to the domestic CPI, domestic goods prices and foreign prices and are de…ned
below. Households receive wages Wt for labor supplied and                   H;t   and   F;t   denote pro…ts from
equity holdings in domestic and retails …rms. Tt denotes taxes and transfers.
   Following Benigno (2001), Kollmann (2002) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003), the
function    t(   ) is interpretable as a debt elastic interest rate premium given by
                                   h              i                    St 1 Bt 1
                           t = exp       At + ~ t       where At
                                                                        CF Pt 1
is the real quantity of outstanding foreign debt expressed in terms of domestic currency as a
fraction of steady state consumption of the imported good and ~ t a risk premium shock. This
ensures stationarity of the foreign debt level in a log-linear approximation to the model.
   Implicitly underwriting this expression for the budget constraint is the assumption that
all households in the domestic economy receive an equal fraction of both domestic and retail
…rm pro…ts and that labor income risk is pooled across agents. Absent this assumption, which
imposes complete markets within the domestic economy, the analysis would require modeling
the distribution of wealth across agents. This assumption also ensures that households face
identical decision problems and choose identical state-contingent plans for consumption.
   The household’s optimization problem requires allocation of expenditures across all types
of domestic and foreign goods both intratemporally and intertemporally. This yields the
following set of optimality conditions. The demand for each category of consumption good is

             CH;t (i) = (PH;t (i) =PH;t )     CH;t and CF;t (i) = (PF;t (i) =PF;t )              CF;t

for all i with associated aggregate price indexes for the domestic and foreign consumption
bundles given by PH;t and PF;t : The optimal allocation of expenditure across domestic and

                                                       7
foreign goods implies the demand functions

                CH;t = (1           ) (PH;t =Pt )           Ct       and    CF;t = (PF;t =Pt )        Ct                    (1)
            h                                 i       1
                        1             1           1
where Pt = (1        ) PH;t    +     PF;t                 is the consumer price index. Allocation of expendi-
tures on the aggregate consumption bundle satis…es

                                                                              1=
                                                  t   = ~"g;t (Ct      Ht )                                                 (2)

and portfolio allocation is determined by the optimality conditions


                                   t S t Pt   =           E t Rt     t+1 t+1 St+1 Pt+1                                      (3)

                                      t Pt    =           Et [Rt     t+1 Pt+1 ]                                             (4)

for Lagrange multiplier       t.   The latter when combined with (2) gives the Euler equation.
   The household problem in the foreign economy is similarly described with the exceptions
now noted. Because the foreign economy is approximately closed (the in‡uence of the domestic
economy is negligible), the available consumption bundle comprises the continuum of foreign
produced goods CF;t (j) for j 2 [0; 1] : Foreign households need only decide how to allocate
expenditures across these goods in any time period t and also over time. Foreign debt in the
foreign economy is in zero net supply, using the property that the domestic economy engages
in negligible …nancial asset trade. There is no access to domestic debt markets for foreign
agents. Conditions (2) and (4) continue to hold with all variables taking superscript “*”.

3.2   Optimal Labor Supply

Following Erceg et al. (2000) and Woodford (2003, chap. 3), assume a single economy-wide
labor market and that producers of the domestic good hire the same bundle of labor inputs
at common wage rates. Firm j produces good j with technology Yt (j) = ~"a;t f (Nt (j)) where
~"a;t is a neutral technology shock and f ( ) satis…es the usual Inada conditions.                                    The labor
input used in the production of each good j and associated aggregate wage index are given
by the CES aggregators
                                                           w                                                  1
                        R1              w 1               w 1                      R1        1   w
                                                                                                          1       w
            Nt (j)           Nt (k)      w    dk                 and       Wt =         Wt (k)       dk
                        0                                                          0




                                                                 8
for    w       > 1. Firm j’s demand for each type of labor k is determined by maximizing the former
index for a given level of wage payment. This gives the demand function
                                                                                            w
                                                                               Wt (k)
                                                         Nt (k) = Nt (j)                        :                                 (5)
                                                                                Wt
      Households supply their labor under monopolistic competition. They face a Calvo-style
wage-setting problem, having the opportunity to re-optimize their wage with probability 1                                          w

each period, where 0 <                    w   < 1. As in Christiano et al. (2005) and Woodford (2003, chap. 3),
households not re-optimizing adjust their wage according to the indexation rule

                                                 log Wt (k) = log Wt           1 (k)   +   w t 1


where 0               w        1 measures the degree of indexation to the previous-period’s in‡ation rate
and        t   = log (Pt =Pt       1 ).   Since all households having the opportunity to reset their wage face
the same decision problem, they set a common wage, Wt .
      The household’s wage-setting problem in period t is to maximize
                                 "                                             #
                                                                           1+'
                   P1                        P T 1
                                                     w
                                                                ~
                                                                "    N
                                                                  l;t T (k)
                Et      ( w )T t T Wt (k)              NT (k)
                   T =t                      P t 1                    1+'

by choice of Wt (k) subject to the labor demand function (5). The …rst-order condition for
this problem is
           P
           1                              PT         1
                                                           w
                                                                                       @NT (k)                     @NT (k)
      Et          (   w   )T   t
                                     T                         NT (k) + Wt (k)                         ~"l;t NT'           = 0:   (6)
           T =t                           Pt     1                                     @Wt (k)                     @Wt (k)
Households in the foreign block face an identical problem, with appropriate substitution of
foreign variables and technology and preference parameters.

3.3        Domestic Producers

There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive domestic …rms producing di¤erentiated
goods. Calvo-style price setting is assumed, allowing for indexation to past domestic goods-
price in‡ation. In any period t, a fraction 1                              H   of …rms set prices optimally, while a fraction
0<         H    < 1 of goods prices are adjusted according to the indexation rule

                                              log PH;t (i) = log PH;t          1 (i)   +   H H;t 1 ;                              (7)

where 0               H        1 measures the degree of indexation to the previous-period’s in‡ation rate
and        H;t    = log(PH;t =PH;t            1 ).       Since all …rms having the opportunity to reset their price in

                                                                       9
                                                                                                     0
period t face the same decision problem, they set a common price PH;t . Firms setting prices
in period t face a demand curve

                                         PH;t (i)       PH;T       1
                                                                             H
                          yH;T (i) =                                                     CH;T + CH;T                 (8)
                                          PH;T          PH;t       1

for all t and take aggregate prices and consumption bundles as parametric.
   The …rm’s price-setting problem in period t is to maximize the expected present discounted
value of pro…ts
                   1
                   X
                          T t                      PH;T      1
                                                                   H
                                                                                                 1       yH;T (i)
              Et          H Qt;T       PH;t (i)                         yH;T (i)         WT f
                                                   PH;t      1                                             ~"a;t
                   T =t

subject to the demand curve (8), where Qt;T is interpreted as a stochastic discount factor
evaluated at aggregate income. This implies the …rst-order condition
                   1
                   X
                          T t                                    PH;T    1
                                                                                 H
             Et           H Qt;T yH;T     (i) PH;t (i)                                          PH;T M CT = 0        (9)
                                                                 PH;t   1                   1
                   T =t

where M Ct is the marginal cost function of …rm i.
   Foreign …rms face an analogous problem. Thus the optimality condition takes an identical
form, with all variables taking the superscript “*” and the subscript H being changed to F .
Preferences and shocks are allowed to di¤er and the small open economy assumption implies
that Pt is equivalent to PF;t .

3.4   Retail Firms

Retail …rms in the small open economy import foreign di¤erentiated goods for which the law
of one price holds at the docks. In determining the domestic currency price of imported goods
they are monopolistically competitive. Pricing power leads to a violation of the law of one
price in the short run.
   Like domestic …rms, retail …rms face a Calvo-style price-setting problem allowing for in-
dexation to past in‡ation. A fraction 1                      F    of …rms set prices optimally, while a fraction
0<    F   < 1 of goods prices are adjusted according to an indexation rule analogous to (7) with
indexation parameter 0 <           F   < 1. Firms setting prices in period t face a demand curve

                                                  PF;t (i)         PF;T      1
                                                                                     F
                               CF;T (i) =                                                   CF;T                    (10)
                                                   PF;T            PF;t      1




                                                             10
and take aggregate prices and consumption bundles as parametric. The …rm’s price-setting
problem in period t is to maximize the expected present discounted value of pro…ts
                      1
                      X
                              T t                             PF;T   1
                                                                            F
                 Et           F Qt;T CF;T   (i) PF;t (i)                           ST PF;T (i)
                                                              PF;t   1
                      T =t

subject to the demand curve, (10), and implies the …rst-order condition
                    1
                    X
                             T t                   PF;T   1
                                                              F
               Et            F Qt;T   PF;t (i)                                 ST PH;T (i) = 0:
                                                   PF;t   1                1
                    T =t

In the foreign economy there is no analogous optimal pricing problem. Because imports form
a negligible part of the foreign consumption bundle, variations in the import price have a
negligible e¤ect on the evolution of the foreign price index, Pt ; and need not be analyzed.

3.5   International Risk Sharing and Prices

Optimality conditions for domestic and foreign bond holdings imply the uncovered interest
rate parity condition
                               Et   t+1 Pt+1 [Rt    Rt (St+1 =St )       t+1 ]   = 0;                      (11)

placing a restriction on the relative movements of domestic and foreign interest rates, and
changes in the nominal exchange rate.
   The terms of trade is de…ned as PF;t =PH;t . The real exchange rate is given by St Pt =Pt :
Since Pt = PF;t , when the law of one price fails to hold ~ F;t                   St Pt =PF;t 6= 1, which de…nes
what Monacelli (2005) calls the law of one price gap. The models of Gali and Monacelli (2005)
and Monacelli (2005) are respectively characterized by whether or not ~ F;t = 1.

3.6   Monetary and Fiscal Policy

Monetary policy is conducted according to a Taylor-type rule
                            "                                        #(1                     i)
           Rt       Rt 1 i      Pt        Yt y Yt            S t
               =                                (      ) y(      ) S                              ~"m;t
            R         R        Pt 1       Y       Yt 1      St 1

where R and Y are steady state values of gross nominal interest rates and output and ~"m;t
is an exogenous disturbance. Policy responds to contemporaneous values of in‡ation, output,
output growth and the growth rate in the nominal exchange rate. Evidence for rules that
respond to exchange rates in various small open economies is found in Lubik and Schorfheide
(2005b). Fiscal policy is speci…ed as a zero debt policy.

                                                      11
3.7      Exogenous Disturbances

All shocks have unit means. In log deviations from steady the following assumptions are
made. In the foreign block, the technology, preference and labor disutility shocks are …rst-
order autoregressive processes. The monetary policy innovation is i.i.d. In the domestic block,
technology, preference and labor disutility shocks are …rst-order autoregressive processes. The
monetary policy shock is i.i.d. Finally, the risk premium shock is a …rst-order autoregressive
process. In estimation we allow for additive disturbances in the Phillips curves for foreign
goods-price in‡ation, domestic goods-price in‡ation and imported goods-price in‡ation. The
former two are i.i.d. processes, while the latter is a …rst-order autoregressive process. These
shocks can be interpreted as exogenous variation in …rm mark-ups.

3.8      General Equilibrium

Equilibrium requires that all markets clear. Goods market clearing requires

                                   YH;t = CH;t + CH;t and Yt = Ct                                          (12)

in the domestic and foreign economies respectively. The model is closed assuming foreign
demand for the domestically produced good is speci…ed as
                                                      PH;t
                                           CH;t =                Yt
                                                       P
where      > 0. This demand function is standard in small open economy models (see Kollmann
(2002) and McCallum and Nelson (2000)) and nests the speci…cation in Monacelli (2005)
by allowing      to be di¤erent from , the domestic elasticity of substitution across goods in
the domestic economy, to give additional ‡exibility in the transmission mechanism of foreign
disturbances to the domestic economy. Our results are una¤ected by the parametrization of
this demand function.7 The dynamics of Yt and other foreign variables remain speci…ed by
the structural relations developed above. Domestic debt is in zero net supply so that Dt = 0
for all t.8
       The analysis considers a symmetric equilibrium in which all domestic producers setting
prices in period t set a common price PH;t . Similarly, all domestic retailers and foreign …rms
   7
      Constraining to equal results in identical insights from the estimation, and, therefore, we report results
based on this more general speci…cation.
    8
      A similar condition holds for the foreign economy once it is noted that domestic holdings of foreign debt,
Bt , is negligible relative to the size of the foreign economy.


                                                      12
each choose a common price PF;t and Pt . Analogous conditions hold for wage setters in the
domestic and foreign economies. Finally, we assume households have identical initial wealth,
so that each faces the same period budget constraint and make identical consumption and
portfolio decisions.


4         Estimation Methodology and Data
4.1        Estimation and Priors

Model parameters are estimated using Bayesian methods now used extensively in the empirical
macroeconomics literature — see Schorfheide (2000) for a seminal reference and Justiniano
and Preston (2006) for further details in the context of the model estimated here. We work
with a log-linear approximation of the model in a neighborhood of a non-stochastic steady
state.9 The observables used in estimation were described in section 2.
         The …rst column of table 2 presents the priors for the coe¢ cients, indicating the density,
median and standard deviation. They are motivated by earlier work, are fairly uncontroversial,
and accord with other studies adopting Bayesian inference. Several parameters, not well
identi…ed, are calibrated. The discount factor is …xed at 0.99. The elasticities of demand
across varieties of goods and labor inputs in both the domestic and foreign block are set equal
to 8, as in Woodford (2003). Following Benigno (2001), the parameter governing the interest
rate elasticity of debt is …xed at 0.01.10
         Priors that are particularly germane to the transmission of foreign shocks deserve further
comment. The densities for the degree of openness, , and the the elasticity of substitution
between home and foreign goods, , are chosen to generate a tight distribution for the steady
state share of imports to GDP, centered at 0.27 as in the data.11 For                      we specify a beta
density with mean 0.29, matching the average trade share in our sample, and a tight standard
deviation of 0.1. For       we choose a normal with mean 0.9 and also small dispersion of 0.1. Our
results are even stronger with looser priors on ; which produce implausibly low estimates.12
         For the exogenous shocks, priors are guided both by closed economy estimates of similar
     9
     Details of these calculations are available on request.
    10
     In the working paper version we evidenced the robustness of our results to alternative calibrations with the
elasticities of demand equal to 4 or when setting the interest elasticity of interest rate debt to 1e-4.
  11
     We are grateful to one of the referees for this suggestion.
  12
     None of our results are a¤ected when actually calibrating at 0.29.




                                                       13
disturbances for the U.S. and consistency of the implied degree of volatility and persistence
with the corresponding observables in each country. Our baseline speci…cation also includes
a “tilt” towards foreign block disturbances, which are assumed twice as volatile and more
persistent than their domestic counterparts.
       To jointly evaluate the economic content of these priors, table 3 presents their implications
for the variance share of the domestic observable variables attributed to foreign disturbances.
This analysis is more useful than commenting on speci…c priors and at the heart of our analysis.
“Foreign” denotes shocks originating in the U.S. block, as only these disturbances can poten-
tially explain comovement. Risk-premium and import cost-push shocks could be labelled as
“open economy”disturbances, but would not account for the correlation with U.S. series. The
prior speci…cation permits a substantial role for U.S. shocks in driving Canadian ‡uctuations
and comovement readily obtains with plausible calibrations of the model.13 Moreover, the
[5,95] prior probability bands indicate that this speci…cation can in principle easily replicate
the variance shares reported with the SUR.

4.2      Estimates and Model Fit

Table 2 reports parameter estimates for the baseline model, determined after extensive in-
vestigation of alternative speci…cations.14 These included various combinations of endogenous
and exogenous persistence mechanisms, and alternative combinations of shocks, e.g. cost-push
shocks in price setting of all three markets or correlated technology shocks. The robustness
of our results to alternative speci…cations is addressed later.
       Parameter estimates are reasonable. The degree of price stickiness in the production of
home produced goods, both in the domestic and foreign blocks of the model, is high. However,
estimates for the foreign block agree with Levin et al. (2005). Note that cost-push shocks to
the domestic and foreign Phillips’curve are white noise and we do not rely on a time-varying
in‡ation target to impart in‡ationary inertia. The Calvo adjustment parameters for wages in
the domestic and foreign economies are similar to those reported in Del Negro et al. (2007)
  13
     The variance decomposition at the prior means is almost identical to the means in table 3 for output, hours
and the terms of trade, while 10% larger for in‡ation and interest rates, but smaller for wages by a similar
amount.
  14
     We initialize multiple chains using random starting values after launching 50 optimization runs to ensure
they all converge to the same mode. Convergence of the MCMC chains is diagnosed looking at trace plots and
the potential scale reduction factors for variances and 90% posterior bands.



                                                      14
on a longer sample for the U.S. Imported goods prices are re-optimized most frequently, every
2 quarters.
         The degree of habit persistence is close to 0.6 in both countries, tightly estimated and
in line with values in Boldrin et al. (2001). The intertemporal elasticity of substitution
and elasticity of labor supply accord with earlier macroeconomic studies of this kind. The
estimated coe¢ cients of the Taylor rule align with conventional wisdom. Technology and
preference shocks are highly persistent in both countries. This is also true of risk premium
and imported goods cost-push shocks in Canada. The median estimate for the elasticity of
substitution across home and foreign goods is 0.86, below the value of 1.5 used in calibrations
by Chari et al. (2002) and Schmitt-Grohe (1998), but consistent with estimates in Gust et al.
(2008). Finally, the posterior density for the degree of openness lies well in the left tail of our
very tight prior.
         In Justiniano and Preston (2006) we show that the model matches the volatility and
persistence of the data within blocks.15 The rest of the paper is devoted to the model’s
performance across blocks.


5         Accounting for the In‡uence of Foreign Shocks

This section documents the central result of the paper: the baseline model with independent
shocks is unable to account for the transmission of foreign disturbances and international
comovement. Two pieces of evidence are adduced. First, variance decompositions reveal that
U.S. disturbances explain a negligible fraction of variation in the domestic economy. Second,
model-implied bivariate correlations between foreign and domestic series are very close to zero.
Both …ndings are clearly at odds with the reduced-form evidence discussed in section 2.

5.1         Variance Decompositions in the DSGE model

Using the draws from the posterior density of model parameters, Table 4 reports the posterior
variance shares in the domestic series — including the real exchange rate and terms of trade
— that is attributable to all …ve foreign disturbances, at several forecast horizons. We report
medians and 90 percent posterior probability bands.
    15
         This is also evident from the unreported cross-correlation functions within each block.




                                                          15
   Regardless of forecast horizon, virtually none of the observed variation in domestic series
is attributable to foreign disturbances. For output, interest rates, in‡ation, hours and wages,
their maximum contribution at a horizon of 1 quarter is 3 percent. At longer horizons U.S.
shocks explain at most 1 percent. Furthermore, the 95 percentiles for the variance shares of
these series never exceeds 4 percent. For the real exchange rate and terms of trade, these
statistics reveal a slightly larger contribution of foreign shocks, but never greater than 7
percent. Compared with the reduced-form evidence in table 1, it is clear that this speci…cation
of the model cannot account for the in‡uence of foreign shocks.

5.2   Cross-Country Correlations in the DSGE Model

Section 2 discussed the empirical cross-correlations between Canadian and U.S. series shown in
…gure 1 (black). Here we revisit that …gure focusing on the moments implied by the estimated
model. These statistics are computed by taking draws from the posterior distribution of the
DSGE parameters and simulating arti…cial samples of length equal to the data. We report
median (grey) and [5,95] percent posterior probability bands (dashed).
   The median model-implied cross-correlations are virtually zero at all horizons. An im-
mediate consequence is that the DSGE model cannot replicate the common ‡uctuations of
domestic series with U.S. variables. For many Canadian series, the data cross-correlations lie
outside the (wide) posterior probability bands of the corresponding model statistics. This is
evident in the cross-correlations between Canadian output, nominal interest rates and wages
and their U.S. counterparts. Similarly the contemporaneous correlation between in‡ation in
the two countries is poorly …t. In general, many of the remaining cross-correlations are not
well matched. Even for moments where the posterior bands encompass the data, it is rarely
true (except for hours) that the data correlation is close to zero. This mismatch between
model and data is far less evident for the real exchange rate and the terms of trade (not shown
for space considerations).
   Recall that the lack of meaningful e¤ects from foreign shocks in the domestic series is not
an inherent feature of the DSGE model (compare tables 3 and 4). Moreover, the inability
to explain the in‡uence of foreign disturbances is not unique to the estimated model of this
paper. Adolfson et al. (2005) estimate a richer model which …ts the data very well in several
dimensions but also reveals, for Sweden, negligible variance shares for shocks originating in


                                              16
the rest of the world. While the authors do not comment on this issue, their estimated model
includes features such as a stochastic trend, investment, variable capital utilization and a
working capital channel, whose absence here could have been suspected as culprit for our
results. Similarly, de Walque et al. (2005) fail to identify signi…cant cross-country linkages
in an estimated two-country model for the U.S. and the Euro area, suggesting that the small
open economy assumption is not responsible for our …ndings either.


6    Robustness

The benchmark speci…cation makes a range of assumptions, both on model structure and
its match with data. Table 5 presents the estimated contribution of foreign disturbances to
the variability of Canadian series for a number of alternative speci…cations. A larger set of
robustness checks is conducted in Justiniano and Preston (2006). To present a worst-case
scenario against our …ndings, the numbers reported are for the horizon at which the share
for output is greatest. A comparison with the …rst column, which replicates our baseline
speci…cation, makes clear that our central result remains intact.
    Column 2 presents the decomposition when the prior standard deviations of all shocks are
uniform between 1e-4 and 10. Compared with the benchmark results there is clearly little
di¤erence in the variance decompositions. The next two columns evaluate the sensitivity of
our conclusions to the choice of observables used to confront the model with data. Column 3
reports shares when output and wages are in …rst di¤erences rather than in level deviations
from a common trend. The results are unchanged. Column 4 includes the observed terms of
trade and the real exchange rate in levels rather than di¤erences. This matters little for the
contribution of U.S. shocks in Canada, except for a somewhat larger share for the terms of
trade and real exchange rate.
    Coordinated policy responses could perhaps explain part of the comovement in Canadian
and U.S. business cycles. In the baseline speci…cation monetary policies are assumed to be
independently determined. However, interest rate decisions in Canada might be in‡uenced
by changes in U.S. interest rates beyond what can be accounted for with an explicit response
to the exchange rate. Given the estimated degree of price stickiness, explicitly including a
link between U.S. and Canadian monetary policy decisions may better capture international
comovement. In this spirit, a log-linearized alternative speci…cation for Canadian monetary

                                              17
policy is
                         it =   i it 1   + (1   i)   i   it   1   +    t   +   y yt   +   y   yt + "m;t

where there is now an explicit dependence on lagged realizations of U.S. interest rates. All
remaining modeling equations are unchanged.16 With a posterior mode estimate for                                i   of
0.04, it is not surprising that the variance decompositions are largely unchanged (last column).
Identical conclusions obtain even when policy responds to contemporaneous U.S. interest rates.


7         Common Shocks

The benchmark model assumes that all shocks in the U.S. and Canada are independent. How-
ever, the empirical evidence presented in section 2 is consistent with both spillovers from
U.S. speci…c disturbances and the existence of common shocks a¤ecting both countries. This
section presents alternative model speci…cations that accommodate the latter. Such speci…-
cations are unusual in the new open economy macroeconomics literature. Notable exceptions
are Adolfson et al. (2007) and de Walque et al. (2005) which include a common stochastic
trend in neutral technology.

7.1         Speci…cation

Common shocks are introduced by expressing the Canadian disturbances in the model as the
sum of two orthogonal shocks. The …rst one is shared with the same disturbance in the U.S.
block and referred to as the common shock. The second component a¤ects only the domestic
block and is labelled a country-speci…c shock. There is still no spillover from the Canadian to
the U.S. economy given the small open economy assumption.
         As an illustration, when modeling a common shock in aggregate neutral technology this
disturbance in Canada is written as at = at + adt where the common shock, at , and country-
speci…c shock, adt , evolve as independent AR(1) processes. The common shock is the corre-
sponding structural disturbance in the U.S. block. Its share of variability in Canadian neutral
technology, V ar(a )=V ar(a), and implied correlation, corr(a; a ), can be readily computed.
         In this way, common components are introduced between Canadian disturbances to prefer-
ences, labor disutility, home-goods in‡ation and monetary policy, and their respective counter-
parts in the U.S. This can be viewed as a DSGE structural approximation to the decomposition
    16
         The prior for   i   is normal with mean 0.3 and dispersion 0.2, allowing it to take negative values.


                                                                  18
into common and idiosyncratic components using reduced-form dynamic factor models, as in
Kose et al. (2003, 2008). An advantage of this speci…cation relative to the direct estimation
of the correlations, corr(a; a ), is that it allows for a clean decomposition of the variance of
all series attributed to each component.
    Given the emphasis on technology shocks in the international RBC literature, a natural
starting point for adding common shocks would have been to introduce a common unit root
in neutral technology. A di¢ culty with this approach is strong evidence against a common
stochastic trend in U.S. and Canadian output, at least in our sample. Tests for cointegration
between log output per-capita in both countries do not reject the null hypothesis of no coin-
tegration, regardless of the speci…cation of lags and deterministic components.17 Similarly,
the null of a unit root in the di¤erence in levels of these two series cannot be rejected, while
the null of stationarity is rejected.18 These results accord well with a persistent gap in labor
productivity across these two countries; a topic that has been the subject of substantial re-
search and policy discussion in Canada — see Eldridge and Sherwood (2001) and references
therein.19

7.2    Posterior variance shares with common shocks

For each U.S. shock and Canadian counterpart we re-estimate the model when common com-
ponents are initially introduced one at a time. This permits identifying which common distur-
bances can account for the comovement in the data. A speci…cation with a common component
in all shocks is also presented.
    Priors are as in the baseline model with one exception. For both common and country-
speci…c shocks we specify the same density: a B(0:6; 2) for the autoregressive coe¢ cients, and
an IG for their standard deviations equal to that of the corresponding U.S. shock in table 1.
   17
      We use both the trace and maximum eigenvalue tests, allowing for 1-6 lags while also varying the pres-
ence/absence of an intercept in the VAR or the cointegrating relationship. That is, we searched over 24 possible
speci…cations while gauging their relative …t using both the BIC and AIC. For each lag length, both information
criteria prefer a speci…cation with an intercept in the VAR and cointegrating equation (as expected) in which
case the null of no cointegration cannot be rejected with either test (for all lags considered). The p-values for
the null of no cointegration are never below 0.2 and close to 0.5 if the preferred lag lengths are used.
   18
      The null of a unit root is not rejected at the 10 percent signi…cance level when using the test of Elliot et
al. (1996) or any of the test statistics proposed by Ng and Perron (2001), both with automatic lag selection.
The null of stationarity under the KPSS tests is rejected at the 5 percent level.
   19
      Labor productivity is an observed state in our model since we are using data on output and hours for each
country. The …ltered series matches labor productivity from Statistics Canada (Table 383-0012).




                                                       19
Common and country-speci…c disturbances are on equal footing.20 Relative to table 3, this
further increases the prior variance share explained by the sum of all U.S. shocks, which now
includes the fraction attributed to the common components. Results would be very similar
using the prior from the baseline speci…cation.21
       Panel A in table 6 reports posterior variance shares for speci…cations with a single common
shock. We report the horizon with the largest share for output. Comparing these results with
the baseline variance decomposition, yields several interesting …ndings.
       Introducing a common component in neutral technology alone does little to alter the
contribution of U.S. shocks, except for hours (column 1). Spillovers in neutral technology here
play a small role in reproducing comovement. The intuition for this …nding is that in our
model neutral technology shocks induce a negative comovement between output and hours, as
documented in closed economy models by Gali (1999), Ireland (2004) and Gali and Rabanal
(2004). However, as noted by Rios-Rull et. al. (2007) the generality of this result across
methodologies is still a matter of debate in closed economies.
       A common shock to the disutility of labor only (column 2) has a negligible e¤ect on the
variance decomposition of output, in‡ation and interest rates, but helps improve the foreign
share in wages. Cost-push shocks (column 3) similarly have small e¤ects, though assist in
bumping up the foreign contribution to in‡ation variability.
       With a common shock only in the monetary policy rules (column 4), the fraction of the
variance in Canadian interest rate and output attributable to foreign shocks climbs to 23 and
10 percent, respectively. The largest increase in the share of output variability explained by
U.S. disturbances occurs with a common component in preference shocks (column 5), but even
in this case only 11 percent of output ‡uctuations are accounted for by all foreign shocks.
       Panel B reports shares at various horizons in a speci…cation with common components in all
U.S. shocks and their respective Canadian counterparts. The fraction of variability attributed
to all foreign disturbances is now larger than in the baseline, particularly for output and
  20
     The implied prior distribution of the correlation coe¢ cient between the (aggregate) Canadian disturbance
and its common component, is quite dispersed with a mean and median of roughly 0.7, standard deviation of
0.23 and 5-95% bands covering 0.08 to 0.99. This is also the prior correlation with the country-speci…c part of
the shock, e.g. corr(a; ad ). By construction the sum of these two squared correlations equals 1.
  21
     In this case with the tilt towards the foreign block, the mean and median prior variance shares of the U.S.
shocks would have jumped to 90% or above. Also, for each composite disturbance the median prior correlation
with its common component would have been tightly centered around 0.95. Nonetheless, the variance shares
are only 1 to 3 percentage points higher with this alternative, extreme prior.



                                                      20
interest rates. These results show that the comovement observed in the data can be partly
reproduced by correlating domestic disturbances with all U.S. shocks.
         There are at least three reasons why this last speci…cation should not be viewed as panacea
for the model’s failure in accounting for the in‡uence of foreign shocks. First and foremost,
while shares in panel B align well with those from the SUR (table 2) at a 1 quarter horizon,
for longer horizons the SUR posterior bands do not encompass the smaller DSGE estimates.
Second, some of the common components are hard to rationalize on structural grounds. Recall
that neither a speci…cation of the Canadian policy rule including a direct response to the ex-
change rate nor to U.S. interest rates could explain comovement, unless shocks are correlated.
This suggests that cross-equation restrictions prevent the model from structurally explaining
the cross-correlation in these two series. Third, panel B demonstrates an extreme manifesta-
tion of the exchange rate disconnect analyzed by Devereux and Engel (2002). Fluctuations
in the real exchange rate and the terms of trade are completely disconnected from the U.S.
block and only somewhat less so from the real domestic variables.22 In summary, even with
common shocks there is ample scope to improve the model’s ability to capture the contribution
of foreign shocks.


8         Conclusion

This paper shows that an empirical new open economy model fails to account for one im-
portant dimension of Canadian data: the in‡uence of U.S. disturbances. We initially assume
uncorrelated shocks across countries, as it is done in almost all the empirical literature with
this class of models. Variance decompositions reveal that the fraction of variation in Canadian
series attributed to all shocks originating in the U.S. economy is negligible at all forecast hori-
zons. Accordingly, the cross-country correlation functions implied by the model are close to
zero. These …ndings contrast sharply with earlier work documenting strong linkages between
these two countries and reduced-form evidence presented here.
         Alternative speci…cations with common shocks can only partially resolve this problem. A
model in which all U.S. shocks have a common component with the corresponding Canadian
    22
     Risk-premium and import cost-push shocks account for roughly 90 and 85 percent of the variance of the
real exchange rate and the terms of trade, respectively, at all horizons, while explaining only about 5 percent
of the variability in domestic output, real wages and hours.




                                                      21
disturbances begins to reconcile the in‡uence of foreign shocks in the model and the data.
However, the variance shares explained by all U.S. shocks still fall short of those observed
in the data at medium and long horizons. While the empirical evidence is consistent with
both common shocks and spillovers, there remains the question of what economic e¤ects do
these common shocks capture in the model. In particular, whether they correspond to purely
exogenous disturbances or are instead simply capturing model misspeci…cation. Finally, any
gains with common shocks come at the expense of fully detaching ‡uctuations in the exchange
rate and the terms of trade from the foreign block.
    Overall our …ndings suggest that additional work on the international transmission mech-
anisms of various shocks could improve the empirical performance of these models in this
crucial dimension. An interesting exercise in this vein would be to alter the supply side of
the model to account for cross-country linkages at multiple stages of production as in Huang
and Liu (2007) and Burstein et al. (2008). Alternatively, expanding on international …nancial
linkages and the role of asset prices will likely help explain the importance of U.S. disturbances
abroad, as made evident by the current …nancial crisis.

9    Appendix A: Data

All series are downloaded from Haver Analytics. For the U.S., real per-capita GDP measures
output, in‡ation corresponds to the log-di¤erence in the GDP de‡ator, and the e¤ective federal
funds rate taken for interest rates. Nominal compensation per hour in the non-farm business
sector divided by the GDP de‡ator measures wages. Total hours in the non-farm business
sector is divided by population.
    For Canada, real per-capita GDP is constructed with data from Statistics Canada (Stat-
Can). The quarterly log di¤erence in the consumer price index excluding food and energy
(StatCan) measures overall in‡ation. The o¢ cial discount rate published by the Bank of
Canada corresponds to interest rates. Hours worked in the total economy (StatCan table
383-0012) is divided by population. From the same table we obtain total compensation and
convert it into real terms. In accordance with the model, the GDP de‡ator proxies for the
price of home produced goods, while CPI in‡ation represents the aggregate price index.
    For consistency, the log di¤erence in the bilateral real exchange rate is constructed as the
sum the log growth rates in the U.S. GDP de‡ator and the nominal exchange rate (Canadian


                                               22
dollars per U.S. dollars) minus Canadian aggregate in‡ation, as measured above. An earlier
version of the paper used the bilateral real exchange rate constructed by the IMF with identical
…ndings.
     Finally, for the terms of trade we take the ratio of the de‡ator for imports to exports
(Statcan) matching in our model, log (PF;t =PH;t ). According to Canada’s national accounts
data, this measure of the terms of trade would correspond more closely to log PF;t St =PH;t ,
but this would not be consistent with the real exchange rate using aggregate U.S. in‡ation.
As there is no perfect match between model variables we adopted the former measure for
estimation. Inference with the latter interpretation does not a¤ect our results.

10      Appendix B: SUR model

To match the reduced-form representation of the DSGE model we impose on a VAR the same
zero restrictions of no feedback from Canada to the U.S. The resulting SUR model is estimated
on the same sample of twelve series used for inference with the DSGE model.
     Inference is substantially more involved than with a standard VAR, as the explanatory
variables are not the same across all series. However, the estimation is feasible with the e¢ cient
block-recursive Gibbs algorithm proposed by Zha (1999), who documents the distortions to
inference from not imposing the exclusion restrictions in a SUR between Canada and the U.S.
    We simply outline the model and refer the readers to Zha (1999) for details. Partitioning
the vector of observables yt into U.S. and Canadian variables, ytU S and ytCN , respectively, the
two blocks of the SUR are given by

            AU S;U S (0)       ApU S;U S (L)         0                ytU S          US
                                                                                     t
                                                                              =
            ACN;U S (0)        ACN;U S (L) ACN;CN (0) ApCN;U S (L)
                                 p
                                                                      ytCN           CN
                                                                                     t

for matrices of conformable size, where Ai;j (0) corresponds to the impact matrix and Api;j (L)
denotes a matrix of lag-polynomials, of order p, in the positive powers of L: The structural
errors [   0U S ; 0CN ]0   are orthogonal with unit variance.
           t      t

     Our goal is not to identify each of the structural disturbances but simply to compute
the variance shares of the Canadian series attributed to the sum of all U.S. disturbances,
 US.   To this end, we impose a lower triangular structure in the impact matrices AU S;U S (0)
 t

and ACN;CN (0). This is equivalent to a Cholesky decomposition of the reduced-form SUR
covariance matrix. Results on the sum of all block-speci…c disturbances are invariant to
ordering.

                                                     23
      We report results with p = 4 in light of recent work by Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (2007)
and Del Negro et al. (2007) who have brought attention to the issue of lag truncation in VARs
as approximations to DSGE models. To deal with the large number of parameters relative
to sample length, we use priors that shrink coe¢ cients at distant lags. More speci…cally,
we specify the priors Aij (1)         N (0:9; 0:2) for i = j and N (0; 0:4) for i 6= j:23 There’s no
distinction between own and others’ lags for k > 1 and assume a normal prior centered at
zero with a dispersion equal to 0.2 for k = 2, 0:15 for k = 3; and 0:1 for k = 4: The lower
triangular elements of the contemporaneous matrices are Aij (0)             N (0; 10): Results are largely
insensitive to looser priors, and, when feasible (p is 1 or 2), pretty much identical to sampling a
single block SUR with an uninformative Inverse-Wishart prior on the reduced-form covariance
matrix.
      The Gibbs sampler is initialized at random starting values from the prior (or a classical
SUR with 2 lags) and we run 3 chains, discarding, for each, the …rst 40,000 draws, and retaining
1 in 10 of the remaining 50000. For each draw we compute the fraction of the variability in
ytCN ; explained by the sum of all …ve U.S. shocks, at di¤erent horizons.


References
Adolfson, M., S. Laseen, J. Linde, and M. Villani (2005): “Bayesian Estimation of an
 Open Economy DSGE Model with Incomplete Pass-Through,” Working Paper Series 179,
 Sveriges Riksbank.

        (2007): “Bayesian Estimation of an Open Economy DSGE Model with Incomplete
  Pass-Through,” Journal of International Economics, 72(2), 481–511.

Ambler, S., E. Cardia, and C. Zimmerman (2004): “International Business Cycles: What
 are the Facts?,” Journal of Monetary Economics, (51), 257–276.

Backus, D. K., and P. J. Kehoe (1992): “International Evidence on the Historical Prop-
 erties of Business Cycles,” American Economic Review, 82, 864–888.

Backus, D. K., P. J. Kehoe, and F. E. Kydland (1992): “International Real Business
 Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 100, 745–773.

        (1995): “Internation Business Cycles: Theory and Evidence,”in Frontiers of Business
  Cycle Research, ed. by T. F. Cooley, pp. 331–356.

Baxter, M. (1995): “International Trade and Business Cycles,” in Handbook of Internation
 Economics, ed. by G. Grossman, and K. Rogo¤. North Holland.
 23
      For the exchange rate and terms of trade the mean is 0:3, since these are expressed in log-di¤erences.


                                                     24
Baxter, M., and M. Crucini (1995): “Business Cycles and the Asset Structure of Foreign
 Trade,” International Economic Review, 36, 821–854.

Benigno, P. (2001): “Price Stability with Imperfect Financial Integration,” unpublished,
  New York University.

Bergin, P. (2003): “Putting the ‘New Open Economy Macroeconomics’to a Test,” Journal
  of International Economics, 60(1), 3–34.

        (2004): “How well can the New Open Economy Macroeconomics Explain the Ex-
  change Rate and the Current Account,” unpublished, University of California Davis.

Boivin, J., and M. Giannoni (2006): “DSGE Models in a Data-Rich Environment,”NBER
 Working Paper no. 12772.

Boldrin, M., L. J. Christiano, and J. D. M. Fisher (2001): “Habit Persistence, Asset
 Returns, and the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 91(1), 149–166.

Bowden, R., and V. Martin (1995): “International Business Cycles and Financial Integra-
 tion,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 77, 305–320.

Burstein, A., C. Kurz, and L. Tesar (2008): “Trade, Production Sharing, and the Inter-
 national Transmission of Business Cycles,” unpublished, UCLA.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities and
 the Dynamic E¤ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,”Journal of Political Economy, 113, 1.

Cushman, D. O., and T. Zha (1997): “Identifyiung monetary policy in a small open economy
 under ‡exible exchange rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 39, 433–448.

de Walque, G., F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2005): “An Open Economy DSGE Model
  Linking the Euro Area and the US Economy,” unpublished, National Bank of Belguim.

Del Negro, M. (2003): “Fear of Floating? A Structural Estimation of Monetary Policy in
 Mexico,” unpublished, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

Devereux, M. B., and C. Engel (2002): “Exchange rate pass-through, exchange rate
 volatility, and exchange rate disconnect,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 913–940.

Eldridge, L. P., and M. K. Sherwood (2001): “A Perspective on U.S.-Canada Manufac-
  turing Productivity Gap,” Monthly Labor Review, pp. 31–48.

Elliot, G., J. Stock, and T. Rotehnberg (1996): “E¢ cient Tests for An Autoregressive
  Unit Root,” Econometrica, (64), 813–836.

Erceg, C. J., D. W. Henderson, and A. T. Levin (2000): “Optimal Monetary Policy
  with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(281-313).

Fernandez-Villaverde, J., J. F. Rubio-Ramirez, M. Watson, and T. Sargent
  (2006): “A, B, C’s and (D)’s For Understanding VARS,” American Economic Review,
  97(3), 1021.


                                          25
Gali, J. (1999): “Technology, Employment and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks
 Explain the Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 249, 249–271.

Gali, J., and T. Monacelli (2005): “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a
 Small Open Economy,” Review of Economic Studies, 72.

Gali, J., and P. Rabanal (2004): “Technology Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations: How
 Well Does the RBC Model Fit Postwar U.S. Data?,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

Ghironi, F. (2000): “Towards and New Open Economy Macroeconometrics,”Boston College
 Economics Department Working Paper No. 469.

Huang, K., and Z. Liu (2007): “Business Cycles with Staggered Prices and International
 Trade in Intermediate Goods,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 1271–1289.

Ireland, P. (2004): “Technology Shocks in the New Keynesian Model,” The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 86(4), 923–936.

Justiniano, A. (2007): “Factoring In Canadian Cycles,” in Northern Star - Canada’s Path
  to Economic Prosperity, ed. by T. Bayoumi. International Monetary Fund.

Justiniano, A., and B. Preston (2006): “Can Structural Small Open Economy Models
  Account for the In‡uence of Foreign Shocks,” CAMA Working Paper Series no. 12.

Kollmann, R. (2002): “Monetary Policy Rules in the Open Economy: E¤ects on Welfare
 and Business Cylces,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 989–1015.

Kose, M. A., C. Otrok, and C. H. Whiteman (2008): “Understanding the Evolution of
 World Business Cycles,” Journal of International Economics, 75(1), 110–130.

Lubik, T. A., and F. Schorfheide (2005a): “A Bayesian Look at New Open Economy
  Macroeconomics,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by M. Gertler. NBER.

         (2005b): “Do Central Banks Respond to Exchange Rate Movements? A Structural
  Investigation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(4), 1069–1087.

Lubik, T. A., and W. L. Teo (2005): “Do World Shocks Drive Domestic Business Cycles?
  Some Evidenec from Structural Estimation,” unpublished, Johns Hopkins University.

Lumsdaine, R., and E. Prasad (2003): “Identifying the Common Component if Interna-
  tional Fluctuations: A New Approach,” The Economic Journal, 113, 101–127.

McCallum, B. T., and E. Nelson (2000): “Monetary Policy for an Open Economy: An
 Alternative Framework with Optimizing Agents and Sticky Prices,”Oxford Review of Eco-
 nomic Policy, (16), 74–91.

Monacelli, T. (2005): “Monetary Policy in a Low Pass-through Environment,” Journal of
 Money, Credit and Banking, 37, 1047–1066.

Ng, S., and P. Perron (2001): “Lag Selection and the Construction of Unit Root Tests
 with Good Size and Power,” Econometrica, 69(6), 1519–1554.


                                          26
Rabanal, P., and V. Tuesta (2005): “Euro-Dollar Real Exchange Rate Dynamics in an
 Estimated Two-country Model: What is Important and What is Not,” unpublished, Inter-
 national Monetary Fund and Banco Central de Reserva del Peru.

Rios-Rull, J.-V., C. Fuentes-Albero, R. Santaeulalia-Llopisand, M. Kryshko,
  and F. Schorfheide (2007): “Methods versus Substance: Measuring the E¤ects of Tech-
  nology Shocks,” .

Schmitt-Grohe, S. (1998): “The International Transmission of Economic Fluctuations: Ef-
  fects of US Business Cycles on the Canadian Economy,”Journal of International Economics,
  44, 257–287.

Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe (2003): “Closing Small Open Economy Models,”Jour-
  nal of International Economics, 61, 163–195.

Schorfheide, F. (2000): “Loss Function-Based Evaluation of DSGE Models,” Journal of
  Applied Econometrics, 15, 645–670.

Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: a
  Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Association, 97(3), 586–606.

Stockman, A. C., and L. L. Tesar (1995): “Tastes and Technology in a Two-country
  Model of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,”American Economic
  Review, 85(1), 168–185.

Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
 Princeton University Press.

Zha, T. (1999): “Block Recursion and Structural Vector Autoregression,”Journal of Econo-
  metrics, 90, 291–316.




                                           27
                                  Figure 1: Data and model implied cross−correlations Canada−U.S.
                                 Data (dark), DSGE median (grey) and [ 5, 95] posterior bands (dashed)
             y CNt , y USt−k                      y CNt , dp USt−k                      y CNt , nom USt−k                      y CNt , w USt−k                     y CNt , hours USt−k
                                                                            0.6                                    0.6                                  0.6
 0.6                                  0.4
                                                                            0.4                                    0.4                                  0.4
 0.4
                                      0.2                                                                          0.2
                                                                            0.2                                                                         0.2
 0.2
                                       0                                     0                                      0                                    0
  0
                                                                           −0.2                                   −0.2                                 −0.2
−0.2                                 −0.2
−0.4                                                                                                              −0.4
                                                                           −0.4                                                                        −0.4
                                     −0.4
       0      1    2      3      4          0      1     2     3       4          0       1    2     3        4          0      1     2    3       4          0       1    2     3        4
            dp CNt , y USt−k                     dp CNt , dp USt−k                     dp CNt , nom USt−k                     dp CNt , w USt−k                    dp CNt , hours USt−k

                                                                            0.4
 0.4                                  0.4                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                            0.2
 0.2                                  0.2                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                         0
  0                                                                          0
                                       0                                                                            0

−0.2                                                                       −0.2                                                                        −0.2
                                     −0.2                                                                         −0.2

       0      1    2      3      4          0      1     2     3       4          0       1    2     3        4          0      1     2    3       4          0       1    2     3        4
           nom CNt , y USt−k                    nom CNt , dp USt−k                    nom CNt , nom USt−k                    nom CNt , w USt−k                    nom CNt , hours USt−k
 0.6                                                                                                               0.6                                  0.5
                                      0.4
 0.4                                                                                                               0.4
                                                                            0.5
 0.2                                  0.2                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                         0
  0                                                                                                                 0
                                       0                                     0
−0.2                                                                                                              −0.2
                                     −0.2
−0.4                                                                                                              −0.4
                                                                           −0.5                                                                        −0.5
       0      1    2      3      4          0      1     2     3       4          0       1    2     3        4          0      1     2    3       4          0       1    2     3        4
            w CNt , y USt−k                      w CNt , dp USt−k                      w CNt , nom USt−k                      w CNt , w USt−k                      w CNt , hours USt−k
 0.6                                  0.4                                                                                                               0.6
                                                                            0.6
 0.4                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                      0.2                                   0.4                                    0.5
 0.2                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                            0.2
                                       0
  0                                                                          0                                                                           0
                                                                                                                    0
−0.2                                 −0.2                                  −0.2                                                                        −0.2

−0.4                                                                       −0.4                                                                        −0.4
                                     −0.4                                                                         −0.5
       0      1    2      3      4          0      1     2     3       4          0       1    2     3        4          0      1     2    3       4          0       1    2     3        4
           hours CNt , y USt−k                  hours CNt , dp USt−k                  hours CNt , nom USt−k                  hours CNt , w USt−k              hours CNt , hours USt−k
 0.6                                  0.4                                                                          0.5
                                                                            0.5                                                                         0.5
 0.4
                                      0.2
 0.2
  0                                    0                                     0                                      0                                    0

−0.2                                 −0.2
−0.4
                                     −0.4                                                                         −0.5                                 −0.5
                                                                           −0.5
       0      1    2      3      4          0      1     2     3       4          0       1    2     3        4          0      1     2    3       4          0       1    2     3        4

Legend: y (output), dp (inflation), nom (nominal interest rate), w (real wage) and hours. X−axis: K lags of U.S. variables, 0 through 4.
         Table 1: Posterior Variance Shares1 of Canadian Series
             Attributed to All U.S. Shocks in a SUR model

         Median variance shares and [5,95] posterior bands for all U.S. shocks 2



                               1 quarter horizon                       4 quarter horizon
Series


Output                        0.22     [ 0.07 , 0.41 ]                 0.44    [ 0.19 , 0.68 ]

Inflation                     0.20     [ 0.06 , 0.39 ]                 0.37    [ 0.14 , 0.63 ]

Interest Rate                 0.14     [ 0.03 , 0.31 ]                 0.37    [ 0.14 , 0.63 ]

Real Wages                    0.13     [ 0.03 , 0.28 ]                 0.34    [ 0.12 , 0.59 ]

Hours                         0.07     [ 0.02 , 0.16 ]                 0.25    [ 0.08 , 0.48 ]

Real Exchange Rate            0.07     [ 0.01 , 0.17 ]                 0.17    [ 0.06 , 0.35 ]

Terms of Trade                0.12     [ 0.03 , 0.26 ]                 0.22    [ 0.08 , 0.40 ]



                               8 quarter horizon                     Stationary Variance 3
Series


Output                        0.52     [ 0.25 , 0.76 ]                 0.76    [ 0.44 , 0.98 ]

Inflation                     0.42     [ 0.20 , 0.69 ]                 0.65    [ 0.33 , 0.95 ]

Interest Rate                 0.47     [ 0.21 , 0.73 ]                 0.71    [ 0.40 , 0.97 ]

Real Wages                    0.49     [ 0.22 , 0.74 ]                 0.79    [ 0.49 , 0.98 ]

Hours                         0.42     [ 0.16 , 0.69 ]                 0.75    [ 0.43 , 0.98 ]

Real Exchange Rate            0.26     [ 0.10 , 0.49 ]                 0.62    [ 0.29 , 0.95 ]

Terms of Trade                0.29     [ 0.13 , 0.49 ]                 0.57    [ 0.27 , 0.92 ]

Notes:
1 Variance shares cover [0,1] interval. Hence 0.01 corresponds to 1 percent.

2 Median of the sum of all five U.S. shocks computed for each draw of the SUR parameters
obtained with a Gibbs simulator. Details of the SUR are given in Appendix B. Mean shares are
very similar and if anything slighlty higher in some cases.
3 Stationary refers to the long-horizon variance.
           Table 2: Prior densities and posterior estimates for baseline model (domestic block)
                                                                                                            2
                                                                  Prior                         Posterior

Coefficient Description                               Prior Density 1     Mean   Std   Median   Std     [       5   ,   95 ]

     φ         Inverse Frisch                               N             1.00 0.30     1.27    0.27    [ 0.84 , 1.72 ]

     σ         Intertemporal ES                             N             1.00 0.40     1.43    0.30    [ 0.98 , 1.95 ]

    αH         Calvo domestic prices                        B             0.60 0.10     0.86    0.04    [ 0.78 , 0.92 ]

    αF         Calvo import prices                          B             0.50 0.20     0.42    0.06    [ 0.33 , 0.52 ]

    αW         Calvo wages                                  B             0.60 0.10     0.88    0.04    [ 0.79 , 0.93 ]

    γH         Indexation domestic prices                   B             0.50 0.20     0.42    0.12    [ 0.25 , 0.63 ]

    γW         Indexation wages                             B             0.50 0.20     0.22    0.11    [ 0.07 , 0.44 ]

     h         Habit                                        B             0.50 0.10     0.64    0.06    [ 0.53 , 0.73 ]

     τ         Openess                                      B             0.29 0.02     0.24    0.02    [ 0.21 , 0.27 ]

     η         Elasticity H-F goods                         N             0.90 0.10     0.86    0.09    [ 0.70 , 1.01 ]

    θπ         Taylor rule, inflation                       N             1.80 0.30     2.00    0.26    [ 1.57 , 2.42 ]

     θy        Taylor rule, output                          G             0.25 0.13     0.21    0.08    [ 0.09 , 0.34 ]

    θ dy       Taylor rule, output growth                   N             0.30 0.20     0.70    0.18    [ 0.42 , 1.00 ]

    θ de       Taylor rule, nominal exchange rate           G             0.30 0.20     0.31    0.10    [ 0.17 , 0.50 ]

     θi        Taylor rule, smoothing                       B             0.60 0.20     0.88    0.02    [ 0.84 , 0.91 ]

    ρa         Technology                                   B             0.60 0.20     0.94    0.02    [ 0.91 , 0.96 ]

    ρg         Preferences                                  B             0.60 0.20     0.92    0.02    [ 0.88 , 0.95 ]

    ρL         labor disutility                             B             0.60 0.20     0.51    0.12    [ 0.30 , 0.70 ]

   ρ cp,F      Cost-push imports                            B             0.60 0.20     0.92    0.03    [ 0.87 , 0.96 ]

    ρ rp       Risk premium                                 B             0.60 0.20     0.98    0.01    [ 0.96 , 0.99 ]

    σa         sd technology                                 I            0.50 1.00     0.52    0.04    [ 0.46 , 0.59 ]

     σi        sd monetary policy                            I            0.15 1.00     0.21    0.02    [ 0.18 , 0.25 ]

    σg         sd preferences                                I            1.00 1.00     4.32    0.96    [ 3.05 , 6.10 ]

   σ cp,H      sd cost-push domestic                         I            0.15 1.00     0.70    0.07    [ 0.61 , 0.83 ]

    σL         sd labor disutility                           I            2.00 1.00     3.51    1.79    [ 1.68 , 7.37 ]

   σ cp,F      sd cost-push imports                          I            1.00 1.00     2.12    0.60    [ 1.37 , 3.32 ]

    σ rp       sd risk premium                               I            1.00 1.00     0.31    0.03    [ 0.26 , 0.38 ]
(continued in the next page with the foreign block)
              Table 2: Prior densities and posterior estimates for baseline model (foreign block)
                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                          Prior                                          Posterior
    Coefficient Description                                Prior Density 1 Mean Std                       Median          Std      [       5   , 95 ]

       φ*        Inverse Frisch                                     N             1.00 0.30                  1.19         0.27     [ 0.77 , 1.65 ]

       σ*        Intertemporal ES                                   N             1.00 0.40                  0.99         0.27     [ 0.62 , 1.48 ]

       α H*      Calvo prices                                       B             0.60 0.10                  0.91         0.02     [ 0.86 , 0.94 ]

      α W*       Calvo wages                                        B             0.60 0.10                  0.87         0.03     [ 0.81 , 0.91 ]

       γ H*      Indexation prices                                  B             0.50 0.20                  0.58         0.12     [ 0.40 , 0.79 ]

       γ W*      Indexation wages                                   B             0.50 0.20                  0.29         0.16     [ 0.09 , 0.60 ]

       h*        Habit                                              B             0.50 0.10                  0.56         0.07     [ 0.45 , 0.68 ]

       λ*        Elasticity foreign demand                          N             1.50 0.50                  0.54         0.11     [ 0.38 , 0.74 ]

       θ π*      Taylor rule, inflation                             N             1.80 0.30                  1.76         0.26     [ 1.35 , 2.19 ]

       θ y*      Taylor rule, output                                G             0.25 0.13                  0.19         0.06     [ 0.09 , 0.28 ]

      θ dy*      Taylor rule, output growth                         N             0.30 0.20                  0.77         0.15     [ 0.54 , 1.02 ]

       θ i*      Taylor rule, smoothing                             B             0.60 0.20                  0.85         0.02     [ 0.81 , 0.88 ]

       ρ a*      Technology                                         B             0.80 0.15                  0.93         0.02     [ 0.90 , 0.97 ]

       ρ g*      Preferences                                        B             0.80 0.15                  0.90         0.03     [ 0.85 , 0.94 ]

       ρ L*      labor disutility                                   B             0.80 0.15                  0.37         0.08     [ 0.23 , 0.51 ]

       σ a*      sd technology                                      I             1.00 2.00                  0.47         0.04     [ 0.42 , 0.53 ]

       σ i*      sd monetary policy                                 I             0.25 2.00                  0.13         0.01     [ 0.11 , 0.15 ]

       σ g*      sd preferences                                     I             2.00 2.00                  2.55         0.44     [ 1.92 , 3.35 ]

       σ g*      sd cost-push                                       I             0.25 2.00                  0.22         0.02     [ 0.19 , 0.26 ]

       σL*       sd labor disutility                                I             4.00 2.00                  3.41         0.89     [ 2.33 , 5.22 ]

Relative to the text, the standard deviations of the innovations are scaled by 100 for the estimation, which is reflected in the prior and posterior
estimates.
1
    N stands for Normal, B Beta, G Gamma and I Inverted-Gamma1 distribution
2
  Median and posterior percentiles from 4 chains of 100,000 draws generated using a Random walk Metropolis algorithm, where we discard the
initial 50,000 and retain one in every 5 subsequent draws. For convergence we monitor trace plots as well as the potential scale reduction factors both
for the variances and 90% posterior probability bands.
Table 3: Prior Variance Shares1 of Canadian Series Attributed
            to All U.S. Shocks in Baseline DSGE

            Mean variance shares and [5,95] prior bands for all U.S. shocks 2

                               1 quarter horizon                        4 quarter horizon
Series

Output                        0.37     [ 0.01 , 0.96 ]                 0.38     [ 0.01 , 0.97 ]

Inflation                     0.47     [ 0.01 , 0.98 ]                 0.55     [ 0.02 , 0.99 ]

Interest Rate                 0.43     [ 0.02 , 0.97 ]                 0.55     [ 0.03 , 0.99 ]

Real Wages                    0.19     [ 0.00 , 0.80 ]                 0.24     [ 0.00 , 0.83 ]

Hours                         0.31     [ 0.01 , 0.93 ]                 0.36     [ 0.01 , 0.96 ]

Real Exchange Rate            0.41     [ 0.02 , 0.96 ]                 0.51     [ 0.04 , 0.96 ]

Terms of Trade                0.47     [ 0.02 , 0.97 ]                 0.56     [ 0.03 , 0.97 ]



                               8 quarter horizon                      Stationary Variance3
Series

Output                        0.37     [ 0.00 , 0.97 ]                 0.39     [ 0.00 , 0.98 ]

Inflation                     0.57     [ 0.02 , 0.99 ]                 0.59     [ 0.02 , 1.00 ]

Interest Rate                 0.58     [ 0.03 , 0.99 ]                 0.60     [ 0.02 , 1.00 ]

Real Wages                    0.30     [ 0.00 , 0.91 ]                 0.37     [ 0.00 , 0.97 ]

Hours                         0.36     [ 0.00 , 0.96 ]                 0.38     [ 0.00 , 0.98 ]

Real Exchange Rate            0.52     [ 0.05 , 0.97 ]                 0.54     [ 0.05 , 0.97 ]

Terms of Trade                0.56     [ 0.03 , 0.97 ]                 0.58     [ 0.03 , 0.97 ]

Notes:
1 Variance shares cover [0,1] interval. Hence 0.37 corresponds to 37 percent.
2 Mean of the sum of the shares for all five U.S. shocks computed for each 100,000
parameters drawn randomly from the priors in table 1. We report means since domestic and
foreign shares add up to one for each draw, but medians are very similar and slighlty higher in
some cases.
3 Stationary refers to the long-horizon variance.
     Table 4: Posterior Variance Shares1 of Canadian Series
        Attributed to All U.S. Shocks in Baseline DSGE

         Median variance shares and [5,95] posterior bands for all U.S. shocks2

                               1 quarter horizon                        4 quarter horizon
Series


Output                        0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.02 ]                  0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.02 ]

Inflation                     0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.02 ]                  0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.02 ]

Interest Rate                 0.03     [ 0.02 , 0.04 ]                  0.02     [ 0.01 , 0.03 ]

Hours                         0.00     [ 0.00 , 0.01 ]                  0.00     [ 0.00 , 0.01 ]

Real Wages                    0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.01 ]                  0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.01 ]

Real Exchange Rate            0.03     [ 0.02 , 0.03 ]                  0.03     [ 0.02 , 0.04 ]

Terms of Trade                0.04     [ 0.02 , 0.06 ]                  0.04     [ 0.03 , 0.06 ]



                                                                                              3
                               8 quarter horizon                      Stationary Variance
Series


Output                        0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.02 ]                  0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.02 ]

Inflation                     0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.02 ]                  0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.02 ]

Interest Rate                 0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.02 ]                  0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.02 ]

Hours                         0.00     [ 0.00 , 0.01 ]                  0.01     [ 0.00 , 0.02 ]

Real Wages                    0.01     [ 0.01 , 0.02 ]                  0.01     [ 0.00 , 0.02 ]

Real Exchange Rate            0.03     [ 0.02 , 0.04 ]                  0.03     [ 0.02 , 0.04 ]

Terms of Trade                0.05     [ 0.03 , 0.07 ]                  0.05     [ 0.03 , 0.07 ]

Notes:
1 Variance shares cover [0,1] interval. Hence 0.01 corresponds to 1 percent.
2 Median of the sum of the shares for all five U.S. shocks computed with the posterior
simulators of model parameters. We report means since domestic and foreign shares add up to
one for each draw, but clearly given the tight posterior bands the medians are almost identical.
3 Stationary refers to the long-horizon variance.
Table 5: Variance Shares1 of Canadian Series Attributed to All U.S. Shocks
                      in Alternative Specifications

                                                                                                        Response
                                                                  Output and                            to foreign
                                              Uniform                                 RER and
                                      2                            wages in                              interest
Specification               Baseline          prior on                                TOT in
                                                                      first                               rate in
                                             volatilities3                             levels
                                                                                                          policy
                                                                  differences
                                                                                                           rule4

    Series \ Horizon        Horizon 1          Horizon 1           Horizon 12         Horizon 12        Stationary5



Output                         0.01              0.02                 0.01               0.01              0.01

Inflation                      0.01              0.01                 0.01               0.02              0.02

Interest Rate                  0.03              0.03                 0.01               0.01              0.01

Real Wages                     0.00              0.01                 0.01               0.01              0.03

Hours                          0.01              0.01                 0.01               0.01              0.01

Real Exchange Rate             0.03              0.03                 0.03               0.05              0.03

Terms of Trade                 0.04              0.05                 0.04               0.14              0.06


Notes:
1 Variance shares cover [0,1] interval. Hence 0.01 corresponds to 1 percent. These are computed at the mode of
each specification. We select the horizon with the highest share for output. All shocks are independent from one
another.
2 Reproduced from table 4

3 Prior for all domestic and foreign standard deviations is Uniform [1e-4,10].
4 Policy rule in Canada includes a direct response to lagged U.S. interest rates. The results are identical if we
include instead a contemporaneous response to U.S. interest rate realizations.
5 Stationary refers to the long-horizon variance.
                                     1
Table 6: Variance Shares of Canadian Series Attributed to All U.S. Shocks in Specifications
                                 with Common Shocks

                                                        Panel A. One Common Shock Only 2
                                                        Labor                                     Monetary
                               Technology                                    Cost-Push                                 Preference
                                                       Disutility                                  Policy

Series \ Horizon                  1 Period             Stationary              1 Period             1 Period            1 Period


Output                              0.02                   0.02                  0.02                 0.10               0.11
Inflation                           0.01                   0.06                  0.11                 0.00               0.02
Interest Rate                       0.03                   0.04                  0.05                 0.23               0.04
Real Wages                          0.00                   0.13                  0.04                 0.00               0.01
Hours                               0.21                   0.01                  0.01                 0.06               0.08
Real Exchange Rate                  0.02                   0.04                  0.02                 0.01               0.04
Terms of Trade                      0.04                   0.08                  0.03                 0.01               0.06

                                                                                                                  3
                                                  Panel B. All Common Shocks Simultaneously

Series \ Horizon5                 1 Period              4 Periods             8 Periods            Stationary


Output                              0.23                   0.20                  0.18                 0.16
Inflation                           0.11                   0.13                  0.13                 0.13
Interest Rate                       0.26                   0.22                  0.18                 0.12
Real Wages                          0.13                   0.16                  0.17                 0.16
Hours                               0.30                   0.26                  0.24                 0.23
Real Exchange Rate                  0.00                   0.00                  0.00                 0.00
Terms of Trade                      0.00                   0.01                  0.01                 0.01

Notes:
1 Variance shares cover [0,1] interval. Hence 0.01 corresponds to 1 percent. Disturbances in Canada are given by the
sum of two orthogonal components: a country-specific shocks and a disturbance in common with the corresponding
U.S. shock. These shares now include the variability attributed to the common component(s) of the corresponding
Canadian composite disturbance.
2 Each specification has a common component in that disturbance only. These are computed at the mode. We report
the horizon with the highest share for output.
3 All 5 shocks from Panel A now have a common component with the corresponding U.S. disturbances. These
variance shares are computed at the mode. We report the same horizons as in tables 1, 3 and 4.
