NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY ARE SAVING RATES OF URBAN HOUSEHOLDS IN CHINA RISING?
Marcos Chamon
Eswar Prasad
Working Paper 14546
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14546

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

We thank China’s National Bureau of Statistics and, in particular, Chen Xiaolong, Yu Qiumei, Wang
Xiaoqing, and Cheng Xuebin for their collaboration on this project. This paper has benefited from
the comments of Olivier Blanchard, Chris Carroll, Steve Davis, Angus Deaton, Karen Dynan, Charles
Horioka, Marcelo Medeiros, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Nicholas Lardy, Junmin Wan, two anonymous referees,
numerous IMF colleagues, and seminar participants at the IMF, the NBER China Workshop, the University
of California at Berkeley, the NBER Summer Institute, Hong Kong University, and Hong Kong University
of Science and Technology. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent those of the IMF or the National Bureau of Economic Research, nor IMF policy. A revised
version of this paper is forthcoming in American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Marcos Chamon and Eswar Prasad. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Why are Saving Rates of Urban Households in China Rising?
Marcos Chamon and Eswar Prasad
NBER Working Paper No. 14546
December 2008
JEL No. D12,E21,O16
ABSTRACT
From 1995 to 2005, the average urban household saving rate in China rose by 7 percentage points,
to about one quarter of disposable income. We use household-level data to explain why households
are postponing consumption despite rapid income growth. Tracing cohorts over time indicates a virtual
absence of consumption smoothing over the life cycle. Saving rates have increased across all demographic
groups although the age profile of savings has an unusual pattern in recent years, with younger and
older households having relatively high saving rates. We argue that these patterns are best explained
by the rising private burden of expenditures on housing, education, and health care. These effects and
precautionary motives may have been amplified by financial underdevelopment, as reflected in constraints
on borrowing against future income and low returns on financial assets.

Marcos Chamon
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
MCHAMON@imf.org
Eswar Prasad
Department of Applied Economics and
Management
Cornell University
440 Warren Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
eswar.prasad@cornell.edu

1
I. Introduction
Chinese households save a lot and their saving rates have increased in recent years.
After remaining relatively flat during the early 1990s, the average saving rate of urban
households relative to their disposable income rose from 17 percent in 1995 to 24 percent in
2005. This increase took place against a background of rapid income growth and a real interest
rate on bank deposits that has been low over this period (and even negative in some years, as
nominal deposit rates are capped by the government). In this paper, we attempt to understand
the reasons behind this phenomenon of a rising household saving rate. To this end, we use data
from the annual Urban Household Surveys conducted by China’s National Bureau of Statistics
to analyze the evolution of the urban household saving rate over the period 1990-2005. We
believe this is the first detailed examination of Chinese household saving behavior using micro
data over a long span.2
It is worth noting at the outset that the increase in household saving is not simply
compensating for reduced saving by other sectors of the economy. Figure 1 shows that gross
domestic saving in China has surged since 2000, climbing to over 50 percent of GDP in 2005.
In particular, enterprise saving—including that of state-owned enterprises—has risen sharply in
recent years. Government saving (which is subsequently used for public investment) has also
increased. Household saving has declined as a percentage of national income even as it has
increased as a share of household disposable income, but this is mainly because of a fall in the
share of household income in national income.3 The aggregate (urban and rural) household
saving rate has in fact risen by six percentage points over the last decade.
It is difficult to reconcile the phenomenon of a rising household saving rate with
conventional intertemporal models of consumption. When trend income growth is high,
households seeking to smooth their consumption should borrow against future income,
especially if real interest rates are low. If that is not possible, households (particularly younger
ones) should at least postpone their savings. But, as we show in this paper, saving rates have

2

Most previous studies have relied on aggregate data (e.g., Modigliani and Cao, 2004; Kuijs, 2006) or
provincial-level data (e.g., Qian, 1998; Kraay, 2000; Horioka and Wan, 2007)

3

In China, state-owned enterprises did not distribute profits to households or the government in the
form of dividends. Starting in 2008, the government has begun to require modest dividend payments.

2
increased across all demographic groups, including those that can expect rapid income growth
in the future.
We estimate how saving rates vary with time, age, and cohort (year of birth) of the
household head, using a variant of the decomposition in Deaton and Paxson (1994). The most
interesting result is that we find a U-shaped pattern of savings over the life cycle, wherein the
younger and older households have the highest saving rates. This is the opposite of the
traditional “hump-shaped” profile of savings over the life cycle in which young workers save
very little (in anticipation of rising income), saving rates tend to peak when earnings potential
is the highest (middle age) and then fall off as workers approach retirement. This relationship
between age and saving rates differs considerably from the norm for other countries.
Demographic shifts do not go very far in explaining saving behavior. For instance, the
cohorts most affected by the one-child policy are not among the highest savers. Even after we
control for broader demographic shifts, there remains a substantial time trend in household
saving rates, implying that the rising saving rates must be the result of economy-wide changes
affecting all households. As with most other studies using household data, we also find very
limited consumption smoothing over the life cycle.4
What can account for these patterns? Habit formation could drive up saving rates by
restraining consumption growth despite high income growth (Carroll and Weil, 1994).
However, we find little empirical support for that channel as consumption growth does not
seem to have much persistence once we control for other factors. Instead, the declining public
provision of education, health, and housing services (the breaking of the “iron rice bowl”)
appears to have created new motives for saving. While health and education expenditures
together accounted for only 2 percent of consumption expenditures among the households in
our sample in 1995, this share rose to 14 percent by 2005.5 This can contribute to rising
savings, as younger households accumulate assets to prepare for future education expenditures,
and older households prepare for uncertain (and lumpy) health expenditures.
4

See, for instance, Paxson (1996). Horioka and Wan (2007) use provincial-level data and also find a
limited role for variables related to the age structure in explaining saving behavior. Modigliani and Cao
(2004) find evidence in favor of the life cycle hypothesis using aggregate (national level) data.

5

These expenditures are superior goods, with an income elasticity greater than one. Rapid income
growth and the aging of the population have amplified the trend towards direct private expenditures on
those services. The share of government (central and local) expenditures accounted for by expenditures
on culture, education, science and health care has fallen from 22 percent in 1995 to 18 percent in 2005.

3
Moreover, there has been an extensive privatization of the housing stock. Only 17
percent of households in our sample owned their homes in 1990; by 2005, that figure had risen
to 86 percent. Most house purchases were financed by the withdrawal of past savings,
suggesting that this has been an important motive for household savings over the past decade.
Simple back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that housing related motives could account
for nearly a 3 percentage point increase in saving rates since the early 1990s. Many houses
purchased under the housing reform process are of low quality, however, suggesting that as
income levels rise and the capacity to buy better houses increases, saving rates could stay high
on account of this motive as the mortgage market is still underdeveloped. Indeed, given the
durable nature of houses, households with good income growth prospects may continue to have
high savings in order to make down payments on higher quality houses commensurate with
their future income.
The overall macroeconomic uncertainty associated with the transition to a market
economy has contributed to precautionary saving motives, although we do not find strong
evidence that the effect of macro uncertainty has been quantitatively important. One interesting
result is that the cohorts that were in their 40s and 50s in 1990 tend to save more, perhaps
because they are the ones most exposed to the uncertainties generated by the market-oriented
reforms and do not have many working years ahead to benefit from those reforms.
We also investigate the target saving hypothesis, according to which households have a
target level of saving. Since bank deposits are the primary financial assets for Chinese
households, their saving rates are then negatively correlated with real returns on bank deposits.
We find some weak suggestive evidence that, even if taken at face value, points to only a small
effect. While cultural factors are often considered a promising explanation for the high saving
rates observed in East Asian economies, they cannot account for the trend in saving rates,
which is our primary focus in this paper.6
After examining the empirical relevance of various hypotheses individually, we
estimate a composite regression to evaluate the relative importance of the most promising ones.
We find that the risk of large health expenditures can explain high savings among households
headed by older persons, and that savings are also higher for households whose composition
6

Carroll, Rhee, and Rhee (1994) compare the saving behavior of different immigrant groups in Canada
and find no evidence of cultural effects on savings.

4
portends large education expenditures in the future. These and other strands of evidence
suggest that precautionary motives and the rising private burden of social expenditures has
driven the increase in household saving rates. In the composite regression, the effects of home
ownership status on savings are somewhat muted on average, although we do find that owners
of poor-quality homes (homes with values below the respective provincial median) have higher
saving rates than those with better homes. More interestingly, we find that owning a home is
associated with sharply lower saving rates (4-7 percentage points) among young households,
but not among older ones. The relatively high income levels of younger households also help
explain their high saving rates. All of these effects are amplified in an environment of financial
repression, which has resulted in the lack of instruments for borrowing against future income,
limited opportunities for portfolio diversification, and low real returns on bank deposits.7 Of
course, these channels can only account for an increase in the saving rate during an adjustment
period; they cannot by themselves sustain high saving rates in the long run.
In the final section of the paper, we combine the empirical results with some
macroeconomic data to discuss possible implications for the evolution of household saving in
China. Our estimates suggest a modest role for projected demographic changes on household
savings. Since our preferred explanations for the high and rising saving rates are related to
China’s transition to a market economy and the underdeveloped financial system, it is possible
that saving rates will decline as new financial instruments (for borrowing and for portfolio
diversification) become prevalent and once households have accumulated a sufficiently large
stock of assets to cope with the new economic environment. The shift from public to private
provision of education, health, and housing can help explain rising saving rates during an
adjustment period. Government policy towards social expenditures will be relevant for
determining the longer-term trajectory of saving based on this motive (Blanchard and Giavazzi,
2006, emphasize this point). Thus, the insights obtained by moving from aggregate to
household-level data and the analysis in this paper can inform the debate on how to “rebalance”
growth in China by stoking private consumption growth.

7

A previous version of this paper has a simple model that highlights these points. The model builds on
the work of Jappelli and Pagano (1994), who illustrate how the interaction of rapid income growth and
borrowing constraints due to financial underdevelopment can drive up saving rates.

5
II. Dataset
We begin by discussing our dataset. The availability of household-level data from
China is limited. A subset of the annual Urban Household Survey (UHS) conducted by the
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) is available through the Databank for China Studies at the
Chinese University of Hong Kong. The data cover the entire UHS for 1986-1992 and a subset
of 10 provinces/municipalities for 1993-1997.8 We have extended the coverage of that subset
until 2005 through a collaboration agreement with the NBS. Unfortunately, no similar
arrangement is available for the NBS Rural Household Survey. Appendix Table A1 provides a
comparison of income levels and saving rates in the Urban and Rural Household Surveys as
well as in the Flow of Funds Accounts of the National Accounts.
The UHS is based on a probabilistic sample and stratified design. It provides householdlevel information for a number of variables, including detailed information on income and
consumption expenditures. It also provides demographic and employment information about
household members, living conditions, and a number of other household characteristics. The
data are collected over the course of the year. Households are asked to keep a record of their
income and expenditures, which is collected every month by a surveyor. Table 1 reports
summary statistics for household income, consumption and the resulting saving rates. The
sample size goes up in 2002; in that year, the survey instrument was also refined to obtain more
detailed responses to some questions. Households should (in principle) remain in the sampling
frame for three years; this provides a limited panel component, although consistent coding of
repeat households is available only starting in 2002.
The measure of disposable income that we focus on includes labor income, property
income, transfers (both social and private, including gifts), and income from household sideline
production. The consumption expenditure variable covers a broad range of categories.9
Appendix Table A2 describes the changes in the distribution of consumption across different
groups of goods. Neither income nor consumption measures capture the consumption value of

8
9

Anhui, Beijing, Chongqin, Ganshu, Guangdong, Hubei, Jiangsu, Liaoning, Shanxi, and Sichuan.

Food; clothing and footwear; household appliances, goods and services; medical care and health;
transport and communications; recreational, educational, and cultural services; housing; and sundries.

6
owner-occupied housing.10 All flow variables are expressed on an annual basis and, where
relevant, nominal variables are deflated using the provincial CPI. We measure savings as the
difference between disposable income and consumption expenditures.11
A potential concern at this juncture is that the micro data indicate household saving
rates lower than those suggested by the aggregate data taken from the Flow of Funds Accounts.
The Flow of Funds data indicate a household saving rate of 32 percent in 2004, the last year for
which those data are available. This is about 7 percentage points higher than the householdsurvey based estimate of the saving rate. The discrepancies between micro and macro data on
saving ratios are an issue in virtually every country where both types of data are available.
Deaton (2005) documents systematic discrepancies whereby survey-based measures of income
and consumption are different than those from the national accounts in most countries. Some of
these differences can be traced to definitional issues.
Perhaps more importantly, it is usually difficult to get adequate survey response rates
from high-income households. These households tend to have high saving propensities—Figure
2 (left panel) shows that saving rates are higher for the top deciles of the household income
distribution covered in our sample. The shares of total saving accounted for by each income
decile (Figure 2, right panel) show that the top two deciles alone account for over half of total
savings.12 The increase in saving rates was also more pronounced among the richer households.
Thus, an under-sampling of rich households could understate average savings.13
10

Households report their estimate for the rental value of owner-occupied housing from 2002 onwards.
Later in the paper, we discuss how we separately estimate the rental value of owner-occupied houses for
all years and incorporate it in the saving rate and income measures. These estimates are noisy, however,
since it is rare for households to live in a rented private house. Hence, we use those estimates only in a
few specifications to test the sensitivity of our main results.
11

This residual measure of savings includes transfer expenditures; this is appropriate to the extent that
these expenditures reflect implicit risk sharing contracts among households. These transfer expenditures
are fairly well spread across household demographic groups and different income levels. Our results are
robust to their exclusion from savings (although the level of saving rates would decline).

12

The results were similar when we sorted households by a crude measure of permanent income, which
we estimated by regressing household income on dummies for education, occupation, and type of
employment of the household head, as well as the household head’s age and its square.

13

In the UHS, the ratio of income at the 99th percentile to median income is about 4.6 in 2005. Annual
income at the 99th percentile is about 120,000 yuan (about $14,560). It is possible that the coverage of
very high-income households is limited; this could be important for reconciling micro and macro data.

7
One other issue is whether our 10-province sample is a representative subset of the full
UHS sample. Table 2 compares the saving rates in our sample with those from available
tabulations of the entire UHS sample. The figures are quite comparable. By arrangement with
the NBS, we also checked many of our results reported in subsequent sections with data for the
full sample for selected years. There were no major discrepancies in the results.14
III. Stylized Facts
We now provide a basic empirical characterization of saving patterns based on the
micro data. Figure 3 shows, for selected years from 1990 to 2005, cross-sectional averages of
disposable income and consumption (all in 2005 constant prices) as a function of the age of the
household head. There has been an enormous increase in average income over this period, with
consumption closely following both measures of income. These figures suggest that Chinese
households did not borrow against expected future income growth in order to smooth their
lifetime consumption. These plots do not seem consistent with the life cycle/permanent income
hypothesis, which predicts that consumption should be smoothed over the life cycle.
The age profiles of income (Figure 3) exhibit a familiar hump-shaped pattern in 1990
and 1995. That is, income initially increases with age but, after peaking in the mid- to late-50s,
begins to decline. Interestingly, that pattern changes over time and by 2005 the profile has two
peaks, with younger households enjoying a relatively high level of income. Based on related
work using the same dataset where we analyze the evolution of labor earnings inequality, we
conjecture that improvements in educational attainment can explain much of the increase in
income for younger households.15 This phenomenon of rising returns to human capital is quite
typical for transition economies (see, e.g., Keane and Prasad, 2006, for the case of Poland). But
14

Our analysis sample covers about 45 percent of the total number of observations (using sampling
weights) in the full UHS sample. As a further check on the reliability of our data, we obtained data from
the China Household Income Project. Unfortunately, that survey was conducted only once every few
years and the last publicly available data from that survey are for 1995. For that year, the average urban
household saving rate and other patterns in that survey were very similar to those in our sample.

15

In our sample, as of 1995, 24.0% of the household heads in their 30s had attended college or junior
college, while 20.0% of those in their 40s, 50s and 60s had. By 2005, those figures had risen to 45.6%
and 25.3%, respectively. The Cultural Revolution, which disrupted schools and universities in the 1960s
and 1970s, may have affected the educational attainment of older cohorts. The subsequent increase in
education levels may reflect rising skill premia and also the rise in income levels.

8
what is truly striking about the last panel of this figure is that, rather than the traditional humpshaped age-savings profile, we find that saving rates have become highest in the early stages of
the life cycle and a second local peak occurs near the age of retirement.
It is possible that Figure 3 may be picking up differences across cohorts in saving
propensities. Since our dataset consists of repeated cross-sections rather than panel data, we can
investigate this issue only by constructing “synthetic” cohorts. That is, we treat household
heads in different survey years who share the same birth year as being part of the same cohort,
even though we are not tracking the same households over time.
Figure 4A plots income and consumption against the age of the household head, with
each line corresponding to a different cohort (for example, the first line traces the income and
consumption paths over time for those households whose heads were 25 years old in 1990).
This figure shows that consumption tracks income over the life cycle across cohorts,
confirming the lack of consumption smoothing over the life cycle. Controlling for the
demographic characteristics of households does not alter the consumption profiles, which still
increase substantially over time (Figure 4B).16
Figure 5 plots the saving rate as a function of the age of the head of household in the
cross-section of households for 1990, 1995, 2000 and 2005. In 1990, the age-saving profile
exhibits a hump-shaped pattern, with the saving rate increasing with age, peaking at around age
50, and then declining with age. Such behavior is close to what life-cycle theory would predict,
given borrowing constraints that limit borrowing against future income and rising labor
earnings over some range of the working life. However, the age-saving profile starts to shift to
a U-shaped pattern in the mid-1990s, and this pattern becomes more pronounced in the 2000s.
That is, young households save a lot more of their income than was the case a decade ago.
Saving rates then decline with age with a trough around the 40s, before rising as the household
head approaches retirement age. This type of saving behavior—the relatively high saving rates
at the early and late stages of the life cycle—is puzzling as it does not conform to the standard
life cycle model, especially in the context of a fast-growing economy.
We have so far separately discussed cohort, age and time effects and their roles in
driving saving behavior. Of course, these are all operating simultaneously in the data and
16

This exercise follows Attanasio and Browning (1995), who show that demographic controls can
account for much of the variation in consumption over the life cycle in the U.K.

9
jointly determine aggregate household savings. In the next section, we use a simple
econometric approach to disentangle these effects.
IV. Demographic Effects on Household Saving Rates: A Decomposition Analysis
Like many other countries, China is undergoing a major demographic transition. The
one-child policy and the aging of the population have increased the old-age dependency ratio
and are projected to increase it further in coming years. Hence, a more careful analysis of
demographic factors seems warranted in accounting for the rise in savings; indeed, it seems
plausible that these factors could be of first-order importance.
The cross-sectional age and cohort profiles of household saving in Section III represent
a composite of age, cohort, and time effects. Different age and cohort groups are likely to have
very different savings behavior and these are likely to change over time. It is therefore
necessary to separate out age, cohort and time effects in order to more clearly characterize the
effects of demographic variation on changes in saving patterns. We decompose the contribution
of these effects to savings by adapting the approach of Deaton and Paxson (1994).
IV.1 Estimation Strategy
If there are no shocks to income and the real interest rate is constant, then the life cycle
hypothesis predicts that consumption at any given age should be proportional to lifetime
resources, with the constant of proportionality depending on the age of the household head and
the real interest rate. That is,
cha = f h (a)Wh

where cha denotes the consumption of household h headed by an individual of age a and with
lifetime resources Wh . Taking logs of the expression above and averaging it based on age and
year of birth b yields:

ln cab = ln f (a) + ln Wb

10
In our estimation, the age effects ln f (a ) are captured by a vector of age dummies, and
the lifetime resources ln Wb by a vector of cohort (year of birth) and time dummies. The
estimated consumption equation is:
ln cab = D a α c + Db γ c + Dt θc + ε c

(1)

where Da, Db and Dt are matrices of age, year of birth and year dummies, αc,γc and θc are the
corresponding age, cohort and year effects on consumption, and εc is the error term. The year
fixed effects should capture differences in consumption resulting from aggregate shocks, and
from China’s steady income growth. Each observation in this regression is weighted by the
square root of the number of original observations that its average is based on.
Since age minus cohort equals year plus a constant, in the absence of constraints on
these dummies any trend could be the result of different combinations of year, age, and cohort
effects. Deaton and Paxson (1994) identify age and cohort effects by imposing the constraint
that the year effects must add up to zero and be orthogonal to a time trend. This constraint
forces the decomposition to attribute the rising income and consumption over time to age and
cohort effects (e.g., younger cohorts being much richer than older ones and, for a given cohort,
income and consumption rising rapidly with age), overwhelming most of the other variation in
consumption and savings behavior. Our objective is to disentangle differences in saving
behavior across age and cohort groups, controlling for the rising economy-wide income level.
Hence, rather than constraining the year effects, we restrict the cohort effects to add up to zero
and be orthogonal to a trend.17 That is, we impose the constraints:

∑γ
b

c

= 0, and

∑γ b = 0
c

b

If the age profile of income is invariant to economic growth—i.e., if economic growth
raises the lifetime resources of younger cohorts but does not alter the manner in which income

17

The life cycle hypothesis predicts how consumption should vary with age but does not have
implications for how it should vary with the year of birth (after controlling for age and rising incomes
over time). Hence, our identifying restriction doesn’t prevent us from testing that hypothesis.

11
is distributed over their life cycle—then income can also be expressed as a function of age and
lifetime resources.18 We estimate an equation for disposable income that is analogous to the
one for consumption:
ln yab = D a α y + D b γ y + Dt θ y + ε y

(2)

where αy,γy and θy correspond to the age, cohort and year effects on income, and εy is the error
term. Once we have estimated the effects of a variable on consumption and income, we can
then compute its resulting effect on the household saving rate. When estimating these
equations, we also include the following demographic controls: log (family size) and the share
of individuals in the household aged: 0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-19 and 20 or above.19
IV.2 Age, Cohort and Time Effects in Household Saving Rates
Figure 6 shows the estimated age and cohort profiles of income, consumption and
saving rates. The profile for one type of effect assumes that the others are kept constant. We
take as our baseline household one whose head was 25 years old in 1990. For example, the age
profile shows how income and consumption would vary with age holding the cohort effect
constant at the level for the cohort born in 1965 and the year effect at its 1990 level (as if it was
possible to change the age while holding the year and year of birth constant). Similarly, the
cohort profile shows how income and consumption would vary with year of birth holding
constant the age effect at its level for 25 year olds and the year effect at its 1990 level. Finally,
the year profile shows the variation over time holding constant the age effect at its level for 25
year olds and the cohort effect at the level of those born in 1965.
The results confirm that consumption (dashed line) tends to track income (solid line).
The age effects show that income and consumption initially increase with age before steadily
18

While this may seem at odds with the descriptive plots presented above, the latter combine age with
cohort and time effects and are not directly comparable. This separability assumption provides a rough
approximation for the decomposition of income in a parsimonious manner.

19

Later in the paper, we also control for the share of household members aged 60 or above. We omit
that control here as it is correlated with the age of the head, one of the main variables of interest in this
section. We assume that a household headed by an individual with age a will have income and
consumption patterns similar to those of an individual of age a. In an earlier version of this paper, we
showed that the two variables are closely related in our data, except at the tails of the age distribution.

12
declining. The implied effect on the saving rate, approximated as log (Y) – log (C), is similar to
the saving rate profile as a function of age observed in the cross-section for the recent years
(although the amplitude of the movements is smaller).20 It indicates that young households save
substantially, but then saving rates gradually decline (by about 10 percentage points), reaching
a trough around age 45. Saving rates increase rapidly after the age of the household head
crosses the mid-40s and remain high even among much older households.21 The increase from
age 45 to age 65 is about 6 percentage points. This U-shaped pattern of savings is highly
unusual and is a striking departure from the traditional hump-shaped pattern found in most
other economies. It is also inconsistent with the life cycle/permanent income hypothesis.22
The cohort profiles of income, consumption and savings suggest that younger and older
cohorts had relatively higher income than those that were in their 20s and 30s in 1990. The
resulting effect on savings suggests that the higher saving cohorts are those that were in their
40s and 50s in 1990 (saving about 7.5 percentage points more than later cohorts). This is an
interesting result, and may be capturing the fact that those cohorts may have been particularly
hard hit by the reform process and bore the brunt of the increase in uncertainty associated with
the move towards a market economy. The sharp increase in the saving rate in the later working
years is also consistent with postponing retirement savings until retirement is near, which is the
optimal response to rapid expected income growth.
It is worth noting that cohorts that were in their thirties in 1990, arguably the ones most
affected by the one-child policy adopted in the late 1970s, are not high saving cohorts. In fact,
their average cohort effect on savings is close to the average for all cohorts. This is not to say

20

This approximation allows us to linearly separate the different effects in the estimated regressions. It
yields saving rates slightly higher than we would get using 1 – C/Y.

21

Gourinchas and Parker (2002) estimate that young U.S. households behave as buffer-stock savers, and
they start to save for retirement when the household head is around age 40. McKenzie (2006) finds that
precautionary behavior in the face of rising income uncertainty may have reduced the incentives for
younger cohorts in Taiwan to borrow in anticipation of rising lifetime incomes.

22

We reiterate that this pattern can not be explained simply by rising income and consumption over
time, since our decomposition already allows for that (through the unrestricted time effects).

13
that the one-child policy had no effects on savings, but simply that we cannot find a distinct
effect on different cohorts based on the time of introduction of the policy.23
Finally, we turn to the time profile. As expected, the (unrestricted) time effects point to
upward trends in both income and consumption. Income grows more rapidly than consumption,
resulting in a strong increasing trend in savings. The time effects explain a 9 percentage points
increase in the saving rate from 1990 to 2005. This is a large figure, particularly considering the
host of life-cycle and demographic characteristics we are controlling for. This suggests a
limited role for demographic changes in explaining the rise in Chinese household savings over
the last decade and a half. The results were similar when we dropped the controls for family
composition, or dropped cohort effects.
V. Potential Explanations
Since demographic shifts related to changes in the relative sizes of cohorts do not seem
to be able to account for the increase in household savings, we now discuss a variety of
alternative hypotheses that could account for the deviations from the predictions of the
traditional life cycle permanent income hypothesis. We also present some data and preliminary
evidence of the quantitative relevance of these hypotheses in explaining the patterns we have
documented. We first investigate these hypotheses individually in order to ascertain their
empirical relevance before turning (in Section VI) to a framework that allows us to assess their
relative importance.
V.1 Habit Formation
Habit formation implies that consumption reacts slowly to rising income; this could
explain why saving rates may increase during a period of rapid income growth. This hypothesis
has been used to explain why rapidly-growing countries have high saving rates (Carroll and
Weil, 1994) but the evidence in favor of it is weaker in household data (see, e.g., Dynan, 2000;
Rhee, 2004).

23

The one-child policy could still have affected other cohorts. For example, younger cohorts will not be
able to share the burden of supporting elderly parents with siblings. On the other hand, rapid income
growth would increase the ability of that single child to support the parents.

14
Ideally, one would like to have panel data to test this hypothesis. The UHS rotates onethird of surveyed households out of the sample every year, implying that most households are
in the survey for three years. This gives us a limited panel component to study household
consumption behavior. The identification codes for tracking households over time are,
however, kept consistent over time only from 2002. Prior to that year, household identifier
codes were often reset or assigned to replacement households when original households
dropped out of the survey. Hence, we have to match households based on other characteristics
as well. We make very conservative assumptions to ensure that we are indeed picking up the
same households over time, yielding a far smaller sample before 2002.24
Habit formation implies that current consumption growth is positively correlated with
past consumption growth. Following Dynan (2000), we estimate the following equation:
Δ log(ci ,t ) = α + β Δ log(ci ,t −1 ) + γ i θi ,t + ε i ,t

where Δlog(ci,t) is the log-change in nondurables consumption for household i and θi ,t is a
vector of household characteristics.25 We estimate this regression using the panel of households
in our sample, as well as different pseudo-panels. We restrict the sample to households whose
head is 25-69 years old, and exclude those where the head is a student, has lost the ability to
work, is unemployed or waiting for an assignment. Table 3 presents the estimates for the
coefficient on lagged consumption growth. The first sample covers the households in the 200205 surveys for which three consecutive observations are available. We initially estimate this
regression using OLS, and controlling only for levels and changes in demographic variables
(age, age squared, the log of household size, and shares of household members in different age
ranges). The estimated coefficient on lagged consumption growth is negative (-0.27). That is,
when a household experiences consumption growth above (conditional) average, it tends to
have consumption growth below (conditional) average in the following year, and vice-versa.
24

In addition to using the household identifier codes, we ensure matching of household composition and
characteristics of the household head and spouse (if present)—age (shifted by one year), education level
and type of employment.

25

Nondurables consumption is defined as total consumption minus expenditures on durables related to
household appliances, transportation and educational and recreational goods.

15
The results are similar if province, education and time dummies are added as controls. This
pattern is the opposite of what one would expect in the presence of habits. We obtain similar
results if we consider all consumption expenditures as opposed to focusing on nondurable
consumption (this applies to all methods and samples in Table 3).
There are two sources of potential bias in these OLS estimates--time averaging and
measurement error. The first difference of a time-averaged random walk has a first-order
autocorrelation coefficient that approaches 0.25 as the time-averaging period becomes large
relative to the decision interval (Working, 1960). Since our measure of consumption is an
yearly figure, we would expect a positive coefficient on lagged consumption growth if
instantaneous consumption did indeed follow a random walk (and a larger coefficient if there
was persistence in consumption growth due to habits). If we could properly account for this
bias, it would presumably increase the absolute magnitude of the negative coefficient on lagged
consumption growth, which would in fact strengthen the evidence against habit formation.
Our estimates may also be influenced by measurement error in consumption, which
could bias the estimates downward. For example, an unusually high measurement error at time
t-1 would raise the measured Δlog(ci,t-1) and lower the measured Δlog(ci,t), contributing to a
negative correlation between the two. Suppose that consumption as measured in the survey is
equal to the true consumption times a multiplicative measurement error:
log(ci ,t ) = log(citrue
,t ) + ν i ,t ,

in which case the equation being estimated is:
Δ log(ci ,t ) = α + β Δ log(ci ,t −1 ) + γ i θi ,t −ν i ,t + (1 + β )ν i ,t −1 − βν i ,t − 2 + ε i ,t ,

which is misspecified under OLS.
In order to address this measurement problem, we use the third lag of consumption
growth as an instrument for the first lag (the second lag would not be a valid instrument since
measurement error at t-2, which would affect both the first and second lags of consumption
growth, would make it correlated with the errors in the second-stage regression). Since our

16
panel only covers three years, we can only estimate this specification using synthetic cohorts in
a pseudo-panel.26
The second sample in Table 3 covers the households in 1992-2001 for which three
consecutive observations are available. The results are qualitatively similar to those in the first
sample. Given the relatively limited panel coverage in our data, we complement this panel
estimation with pseudo-panels. As in Section IV, we construct the pseudo-panel by averaging
the observations from the same cohort of households in each year (we take the average of
log(c), not the log of the average c). We consider cohorts based on: (i) year of birth of the
household head, (ii) 5-year range for the year of birth of the household head interacted with
province and (iii) 5-year range for the year of birth of the household head interacted with his or
her education (6 categories) and province. The number of observations increases as we move
towards finer synthetic cohorts; this comes at the cost of having fewer households in each cell.
To adjust for this, each observation in the pseudo-panel regressions is weighted by the square
root of the number of observations that its average is based on. All OLS estimates yield a
negative coefficient on lagged consumption growth. Some of the IV estimates yield positive
coefficients, but they are not statistically significant.27 This may be partly driven by the fact
that the instrument used is very weak in the first stage (its coefficient is not significant at the 5
percent level in any of the regressions, and is only significant at the 10 percent level for the
finest of the three cohort definitions). While the use of synthetic cohorts can reduce the
measurement error due to idiosyncrasies in the way households record their expenditures, it
creates an additional measurement problem stemming from the fact that different households
are being averaged together over time to yield the synthetic cohort’s consumption measure.28
Finally, to construct the last sample in Table 3, we use consecutive surveys to regress
the log of nondurables consumption on time dummies interacted with dummies for province;
household head’s age (5-year ranges); education, type of ownership of the workplace, sector of
26

If we use lagged income growth as an instrument for lagged consumption growth, we continue to find
a negative coefficient for the latter (although smaller in absolute magnitude than the OLS coefficients).
27
28

The results were similar when we used GMM estimation.

For example, the cohort’s average for a given year may be based on an unusually rich group of
households, which would increase our measured consumption growth while lowering the one in the
following period.

17
employment, and type of occupation of the head and spouse; and demographic controls. Based
on the coefficients for the interaction of the different dummies with the second time period, we
obtain the fitted consumption growth for a household with those characteristics. The results
using this variable continue to point to a negative relationship between current and lagged
consumption growth.
To summarize, our results suggest that habit formation cannot account for the saving
behavior of households despite the sustained high income growth. However, this evidence
remains only suggestive since measurement problems in consumption could be driving these
results, and the nature of the data limits our ability to more fully address this problem.
In order to gauge the possible effect that habit formation could have on saving rates, we
use the same synthetic cohorts to regress saving rates, approximated as log(income) –
log(consumption), on lagged income growth. We use the same controls as the regressions
above (including time and fixed effects). We consider up to 5 lags, and choose the specification
that would yield the largest sum of the point estimates on the lagged income growth variables.
Based on these results, a 1 percentage point increase in income growth, if sustained, would
increase the saving rate by at most about 0.2 percentage points. While not negligible, that effect
appears quantitatively small (the average income growth in our sample is about 5.5 percent),
although it could also be biased downwards by measurement problems in income.
V.2 Shifts in Social Expenditures
Private expenditures on education and health have increased significantly in recent
years, partly because demand has increased with rising income levels and aging of the
population, and also because the government has been shifting these expenditures to
households. Figure 7 shows how the expenditures on health and education have varied over
time for different age groups. Both have increased substantially over time. Education
expenditures peak at around age 45 for the household head, which could help explain low
saving rates for that age group. Health expenditures account for a rising share of consumption
expenditures, particularly among older households. The uncertainty and lumpiness of those
expenditures may be driving much of the increase in savings among older households (this may

18
also be affected by a selection bias, whereby elders who remain heads of households are on
average better off and have a higher demand for private health care).29
The fraction of households in our sample for which health expenditures exceed 20
percent of total consumption expenditures—a reasonable threshold for measuring the risk of
large private health expenditures—has risen from 1 percent in 1995 to 7 percent in 2005. To
examine the vulnerability of older households, we constructed a dummy equal to one if health
expenditures exceed this threshold. We then estimate a probit for that variable, using as
predictors the log of non-health consumption expenditures, demographic controls, and province
and year dummies. Our measure of a household’s vulnerability to health risk equals one if the
fitted probability exceeds 10 percent. For households with at least one individual above the age
of 60, this measure of vulnerability to health shocks jumps from 0.3% in 1995 to 19.1% in
2005. We also find that the share of total expenditures devoted to education expenditures is
highest for households with children in the 15-19 age range (after controlling for compositional
and other characteristics of the household). Adding one child in this age range to a two-person
household increases the share of education expenditures in total expenditures by about 5
percentage points in 1995; this marginal effect increases to nearly 8 percentage points by 2005.
In Section VI, we will formally investigate the effects of these factors on household savings.
V.3 Durables Purchases and Savings
Even at present, consumer financing remains limited in China.30 As a result, instead of
borrowing against future income to purchase durable goods, Chinese households are more
likely to rely on their savings. This could cause households to postpone some of those desired
purchases and to save more in the process. The high saving rates among young households, in

29

In the absence of natural experiments, it is difficult to quantify the precautionary saving motives
stemming from limited public health insurance. But experiences of other high saving economies can
help gauge its potential effects. Chou, Liu and Hammitt (2003) estimate that the universalization of
health insurance in Taiwan lowered the household savings rate by about 2.5 percentage points.

30

Total consumer loans issued by all financial institutions in China increased from near zero in 1997 to
about 2.2 trillion yuan by end-2005 (12 percent of GDP). Real estate loans account for about 80% of
total consumer loans outstanding and auto loans account for about 7.5%. Household consumption (from
the national accounts) amounted to 7 trillion yuan in 2005.

19
particular, may be driven by the desire to finance purchases of major consumer durables (or
housing). These expenditures tend to be larger for younger households, as would be expected.
We construct a measure of durables consumption using the detailed information on
consumption expenditures available in the UHS.31 We then use the limited panel element of the
dataset for the post-2002 period. A regression of the household saving rate at time t on durable
good purchases at time t+1 suggests a negligible impact (results not reported here).
The lack of a relationship between savings and future durable good purchases is not
surprising given the high saving rates. On average, Chinese households spent 7 percent of their
disposable incomes on durable goods in 2005. Most households could have financed such
purchases just by saving less during that year, without needing to draw on past savings. In
2005, the 95th percentile of the ratio of durables purchases to disposable income was 20
percent, so only the largest (and rare) purchases would require a depletion of past savings.
Moreover, since a significant share of Chinese households’ wealth is in liquid assets such as
bank deposits, even large purchases could be financed by drawing on those liquid savings.
Table 4 reports the ownership rates for some of the major durable goods in urban China.
These are surprisingly high considering average income levels, with the notable exception of
automobiles (only 3.4 per 100 households in 2005). Automobile purchases are likely to become
more common as Chinese households become increasingly affluent. The net effect on savings
is, however, hard to predict as it will depend on the rate of increase in the demand for cars
(which could increase the saving rate in the cross section if households have to self-finance
auto purchases) versus the rate of development of consumer financing for cars.
V.4 Housing Purchases and Savings
The most important “durable good” is housing. Table 5 shows the average home
ownership rate for the households in our sample. The proportion of households that own or
partially own their homes increased dramatically from 17 percent in 1990 to 86 percent in 2005
(the increase in the full UHS sample is very similar), largely as a result of the housing reforms
that took place over the last decade. In the past, housing was often provided by state enterprises
to their employees. As part of the housing reform, much of that stock was sold to the workers,
31

Defined as the durable goods components of three broad categories of consumption: household
appliances, goods and services; transportation; and recreational, educational and cultural services.

20
typically at below-market rates. In 2005, 58 percent of the households in our sample that owned
or partially owned a home had purchased it through the housing reform. Figure 8 (left panel)
plots average home ownership rates by age group. The home ownership rate among households
with heads aged 25-35 years is nearly identical to that for the average household. Figure 8
(right panel) plots, by age group, the share of households in 2005 that bought their homes
through the housing reform. As expected, a smaller share of the younger households obtained
their home through the housing reform (for example, 40 percent of households headed by 25-35
year olds, compared with 57 percent for the full sample average).
This privatization of the housing stock could help explain rising household saving rates,
since home purchase and construction expenditures are considered household savings. Table 5
also reports the ratio of home purchase and construction expenditures to disposable income.
That ratio has averaged about 6.5 percent in the last ten years. We estimate how much of those
expenditures were financed by depleting past savings by computing the average of:
Min [Housing purchase and construction expenditures, Saving deposit withdrawals].
If a household did not have any housing purchase or construction expenditures in a
given year, as is typically the case, this variable will equal zero. If the household had positive
housing purchase and construction expenditures in that year, this variable will equal the lower
of that expenditure and its savings withdrawals. Thus, this variable shows approximately how
much of the observed housing purchase and construction expenditure could have been financed
by saving withdrawals.32
In order to gauge the magnitude of housing-related savings, we take the ratio of this
variable (including the majority of observations for which its value is zero) to the average
disposable income in that year. This ratio suggests that in recent years aggregate housing
purchase/construction related saving withdrawals correspond to about 5 percent of aggregate

32

We implicitly assume that the withdrawals were used to finance the house purchase, which seems
reasonable since a household is unlikely to buy a house following an adverse shock to its income.
Moreover, such a household could have smoothed its (non-housing) consumption by postponing or
adjusting the house purchase/construction expenditure instead of depleting its savings.

21
household income, up from 2 percent in 1990-95.33 Of course, that ratio is much higher if we
focus only on households reporting non-zero home construction and purchase expenditures. For
that group, our estimate of housing-related saving withdrawals corresponded to over 120
percent of those households’ income in 2005, up from an average of about 25 percent in 19901995. We can not specifically identify households that purchase a house (or constructed a new
unit) in a given year. But if we further restrict the sample to households for which construction
and purchase expenditures exceed consumption in a given year, our estimate of housing-related
saving withdrawals would correspond to 200 percent of income in 2005, up from an average of
about 60 percent in 1990-1995. These calculations suggest that the rapid privatization of the
housing stock contributed significantly to the rising saving rates over the last decade and a half.
Table 5 also reports the ratio of the average repayment of home loans with respect to the
average income. That ratio is small since, despite a rapid increase in recent years, the
proportion of households that have used mortgage financing and are repaying a home loan is
still low, standing at only 5 percent in 2005 (that proportion is 11 percent among households
whose head is 25-35 years old). But while relatively few households are repaying home loans,
the ones that are making repayments devote a substantial share of their income to those
payments: 20 percent in 2005. Unfortunately, we cannot separate interest payments (which
should not be considered savings) from amortization of principal on those loans.
If home ownership motives have indeed been an important contributor to savings, the
high ownership rates that have now been attained point to a potential decline in saving rates in
the near future. But anecdotal evidence suggests that many households would like to upgrade
their living conditions (which seems particularly relevant for owners of older units obtained
through the housing reform) and that, despite the high home ownership rate, the housing market
in China remains very active. We explore the empirical implications in Section VI. This
discussion indicates that developments in mortgage markets could affect household saving
behavior. Perhaps more importantly, if households were able to tap their illiquid housing
wealth, the need for precautionary savings would decline (since, in the event of an adversity,
households would be able to borrow against their housing equity, using the house as collateral).

33

To the extent that the real return on savings is lower than average real income growth, this ratio will
in fact understate the relative size of past savings that were made for housing motives.

22
V.5 Effects of State Enterprise Restructuring on Saving Behavior
Increased precautionary saving due to uncertainties stemming from China’s transition to
a market economy could potentially help explain the increase in saving.34 The high saving rates
among young households may be driven by the need to build an adequate buffer stock of
savings to smooth adverse shocks to their income. This factor could also explain why we find
that the higher saving cohorts are those that were in their 40s and 50s in 1990. These cohorts
bore much of the increase in uncertainty related to the move towards a market economy and do
not have as many years ahead of rapid income growth as the younger cohorts to reap the
benefits of those reforms. Moreover, they may have found themselves in a situation where their
past savings were no longer appropriate in an environment of increased uncertainty, and as a
result had to re-evaluate their savings plans and make up for past savings that were not made.
It is difficult to quantify the magnitude of the effect of uncertainty on savings using
repeated cross-sections of micro data, however, since that increase in aggregate uncertainty
affects all households (and we need some variation across households in order to identify an
effect). But insights can be obtained by analyzing variations in saving behavior across different
groups of households that faced different dimensions of this “transition risk.”
One relevant dimension is based on SOE employment. In most economies, SOE
employment is likely to be more stable so, all else being equal, workers employed in the state
sector should save less. In the case of China, concerns related to SOE reforms could have
contributed to an increase in saving rates of households reliant on SOE labor income relative to
other households. An implicit assumption underlying this argument is that, while the level of
uncertainty may be higher in the private sector and overall macro uncertainty may also have
increased, the relative increase in uncertainty has been greater for SOE employees.35
How large could this effect be? The restructuring of state enterprises has been
accompanied by an erosion in the share of employment accounted for by SOEs and collective
units and an increase in the share of the private sector. Table 6 shows that, among heads of
household in the 25-59 age range, SOEs accounted for 78 percent of employment in 1995; this
34

Fuchs-Schundeln (2008) finds that the precautionary motive plays an important role in explaining
saving behavior of East German households around the time of German reunification.
35

Prior to the SOE reforms, workers received a number of housing, health, education and pension
benefits through their employer. As some benefits are reduced or their future becomes more uncertain
due to SOE restructuring, households have stronger motives to save.

23
share had dropped to 54 percent by 2005. The drop in SOE employment is similarly large (from
68 to 43 percent) if we also consider other household members. Hence, by comparing the
savings of SOE and non-SOE households over time, we can gauge whether the shift in
employment patterns and the uncertainties induced by SOE restructuring can help account for
the rising saving rates. That estimation, which is discussed in greater detail in Section VI,
suggests that this factor is statistically significant but quantitatively not very important.
V.6 Target Savings
Another possible explanation for why Chinese household saving rates have risen from
already high levels even as real interest rates have turned negative is the target saving
hypothesis. The basic idea is that households have a target level of saving that they want to
achieve by the end of their working life, which means that saving rates will tend to be
negatively correlated with the real returns on savings. This is of course just a way of restating
the relative importance of substitution and income effects of changes in interest rates on
intertemporal consumption decisions. The usual presumption is that the substitution effect
dominates, so that a lower real rate of return on savings leads to a lower saving rate.
It is difficult to test this hypothesis using time series data since the span of available
data is limited and the economy has been undergoing numerous changes over the last decade
and a half. It is also difficult to test this at the household level since different households may
face different rates of return on their savings, depending on the composition of their financial
wealth. We do not have this information in our dataset.
Given these constraints, we devise an indirect test by exploiting cross-province
differences in inflation rates. The vast majority of household financial savings takes the form of
bank deposits and, since the deposit rate is fixed by the central bank, all households face the
same nominal rate of return on their savings. Thus, inflation differentials across provinces can
be interpreted as a proxy for differences in real interest rates.
We use published UHS data on per capita income and consumption averages for 31
Mainland provinces/municipalities for the period 1992-2006 (yielding a total of 421
observations). We regress the provincial/municipality average saving rate on the log of the
average disposable income, the ex-post one-year-ahead inflation rate, province dummies, and
year dummies (to capture differences in the nominal interest rate across years and trends in
savings). Our estimates indicate that a one percentage point increase in the one-year-ahead ex-

24
post inflation rate is associated with an increase of 0.24 percentage points (standard error: 0.08)
in the household saving rate. This correlation provides some indirect support for the view that
lower real interest rates are associated with higher saving rates.36 We re-estimated the
regression using our ten-province sample, which yields similar results (0.22; std. error: 0.13).
These results should of course be interpreted with caution as there are other reasons
why expected inflation could affect savings. Furthermore, by construction we can tease out
only a cross-province effect rather than an aggregate nation-wide effect of a change in interest
rates on savings. Even if taken at face value, our point estimates suggest that the effect is not
quantitatively important. For example, based on the province-level results, it would take an
inflation rate 4 percentage points above the national average in that year to raise provincial
saving rates by 1 percentage point. Thus, even if our estimated correlation held up at national
level, it would not explain the large (and rising) household national saving rates. Hence, we do
not pursue this further here. Nevertheless, we find it intriguing that, based on our rather crude
and indirect test, we cannot refute the target saving hypothesis altogether.
VI. A Composite Sketch
We now develop an estimation framework for jointly analyzing the importance of some
of the key hypotheses in driving the increase in the household saving rate. The evidence in
Section V suggests that savings for durables purchases, consumption persistence due to habit
formation, and target savings behavior are not major contributors to this increase. Hence, we
begin by focusing on the other motives for saving that seem quantitatively most relevant—
housing purchases, shifts in social expenditures, and SOE restructuring.
We estimate composite median regressions (quantile regressions estimated at the
median) for the household saving rate using the following controls:
Demographics: Dummies for the age of the head of household being 25-29, 30-34, ...,
60-64, and 65-69 years old, the log of the household size, and the share of household members
aged 0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-19, 20-59, and 60 or above. These controls can inform us about how
the presence of elderly persons and children of different ages affects savings, helping us to
gauge saving motives related to future expenditures on health and education.
36

Detailed estimation results are available from the authors. The estimated coefficient on the log of
disposable income is 0.16, which is in line with the other estimates in this paper.

25
Income: The log of disposable income. We also include dummies for the education,
occupation, and industry of the household head and the spouse (if present), and province and
year dummies. These dummies can capture, among other things, the permanent income of a
household with given characteristics. Thus, when reading the coefficient on log income, one
should bear in mind that the estimated effect includes these other controls.
SOE employment: This effect is captured by two dummies. The first equals one if there
is one SOE employee in the household, and the second equals one if there are two or more SOE
employees. This specification allows us to capture possible nonlinearities in the effect—i.e., for
a given level of income, the marginal effect could be different depending on whether some or
all of the household’s labor income comes from the SOE sector.37
Home ownership: A dummy equal to one if the household owns its dwelling.
Health risk: The measure of vulnerability to large health expenditures described in
Section V.2—it is essentially a dummy variable that takes the value unity if the fitted
probability (from a first-stage probit) of a large health expenditure exceeds 10 percent.38
Table 7 presents the regression results. To abstract from year-to-year variations, we
present results for the following periods: 1992-96, 1997-2001 and 2002-05. For each period, we
first present the results from a specification including only the income and demographic
controls (and also year and province dummies), and then a second specification that also
controls for SOE employment, home ownership and health expenditure risk. Since we use fitted
values of the health expenditure risk as a control in these regressions, we bootstrap the data in
both stages to adjust the standard errors in the relevant specifications of this table.
It is worth noting that the estimated year dummies (not reported in the table for
presentation purposes) do not imply a rising trend. That is, changes in the variables that we
consider in our regressions can explain the rising savings rate. For example, if we drop year
37

The results that we report here were similar if, instead of these dummies for SOE employment, we
used the share of household income from SOE earnings as a regressor. Fuchs-Schundeln and Schundeln
(2005) note that differences in risk aversion could result in self-selection into occupations with different
risk characteristics, which could affect estimates of precautionary saving behavior.

38

Note that this dummy structure is more appropriate than adding the fitted probability as a control in
the main regression, since the latter’s effect is nonlinear (once a household faces a sufficiently high
probability of that risk, it should start provisioning for it). It is possible that households start saving in
advance of health risk but, since such anticipatory behavior is likely to be closely correlated with age,
we cannot disentangle it from the overall life cycle effects that we estimate with age dummies.

26
dummies altogether, the fitted values from specification (1) would imply a median saving rate
of 24 percent in 2005, which is slightly above the level of 22 percent observed in the data.
The effect of income on the saving rate has grown stronger over time. All else equal, a
one percent increase in disposable income increases saving rates by 0.17 to 0.19 percentage
points in 2002-05 (up from about 0.15 in 1992-1996). This higher saving propensity of richer
households combined with rapid income growth may seem like a promising explanation for the
increase in savings. But one should bear in mind that this coefficient is capturing the effect of
income after controlling for a host of household characteristics (e.g. education, occupation,
province, year, among others), so one cannot simply multiply this coefficient by income growth
to read an effect on the saving rate. But this rising coefficient does suggest that, all else equal,
households tend to save more of the idiosyncratic components of their income, which is
consistent with stronger precautionary saving motives.
The age dummies confirm that households with relatively very young or very old heads
tend to save more, although the magnitude of the difference in savings is more muted than the
age effects estimated in Section IV. This suggests other controls may be capturing the
differences by age shown in those plots (for example, high savings among the young being
partly captured by their higher income levels). One striking feature of our results is how
strongly the introduction of the health risk variable affects the demographic controls related to
old age in the 2002-05 sample. For example, the results in column (5) indicate that a household
consisting of two adults in the age range 65-69 would have saved, all else equal, 5 percentage
points more than a household consisting of two adults in the age range 25-29. But in the
specification with the health risk control (column 6), the difference due to the demographic
dummies goes from plus 5 percentage points to minus 14 percentage points.
The reason for this change is that the health risk dummy (which mainly applies to older
households) has almost a 20 percentage point effect on the saving rate.39 Once we factor in the
effect of the health risk on savings, an older household for which that risk is present will still
save 5 percentage points more of its income than the younger household (i.e., this control does
not alter the fact that the elderly save more; it just attributes that higher saving to a health
39

While we add three additional controls when going from specification (5) to (6), the effect on the
savings rate of the elderly is driven almost entirely by the health risk control (which is also clear from
the magnitudes of the other two controls).

27
motive as opposed to demographic controls). While the magnitude of the coefficient on health
risk in column 6 is actually comparable to the one in the earlier samples (columns 2 and 4), the
importance of that variable in the 1992-1996 sample is in fact negligible. The health risk
dummy was equal to one for only 0.2 percent of the households in that period, compared to 8.0
and 16.8 percent of the households in 1997-2001 and 2002-2005, respectively. This explains
why the inclusion of that control has such a small effect on elderly savings when going from
regression (1) to (2), compared to the change from regressions (3) and (4), and particularly the
large change from (5) to (6).
While we do not have controls directly related to education expenditures, their
importance can be gauged by the household composition controls. For example, we can
compare households with children aged 5-9 and 10-14 years with those aged 15-19 for which
education expenditures tend to be higher. All else equal, a three person household with one
child in the 5-9 age group saved about 2 percentage points more of its income than one with a
member in the 15-19 age group in 1992-96, and 4 percentage points more in 2002-05. If we
compare the 10-14 with the 15-19 age group, the difference is negligible in 1992-96 and 3
percentage points in 2002-05.40 This pattern is consistent with higher savings in anticipation of
future education expenditures (and with a dip in savings when education expenditures tend to
be highest). Note that while education can explain why some households save more than
others, the effects on aggregate savings may be muted (as the savings of one group are
compensated by the dissavings of the other). This may not be the case for health related savings
given the more lumpy and uncertain nature of those expenditures.41
As discussed earlier, we use differentials in saving rates between SOE and non-SOE
employees to tease out the magnitude of precautionary motives for saving. Our maintained
40

For these comparisons, we divide the difference between the respective coefficients on the household
composition dummies by three (since we shift the age group of one member in a 3-person household).
We chose to use the 5-9 age group rather than the 0-4 age group as the basis for comparison since
saving behavior may be atypical following the birth of a child. There has also been an increase in health
expenditures among families with small children. The average value of the health expenditure risk
dummy in 2005 is 0.38 for families with children aged 0-4, but only 0.09 for families with children aged
5-9. In 1995, those figures were 0.02 and 0.00 respectively. This may explain why the coefficient on the
share of household members aged 0-4 becomes so negative in 2002-2005 from specification (5) to (6).

41

For example, many households may be compelled to accumulate savings but relatively few may
actually get hit by health shocks so the net effect can increase aggregate savings.

28
assumption is that, while overall macro uncertainty has increased and the level of uncertainty
may be higher in the private sector, the relative increase in uncertainty has been greater for
SOE employees due to restructuring. Having one SOE employee in the household increases the
saving rate by almost 1 percentage point in 1992-1996, but only by half a percentage point in
2002-05. Having two or more SOE employees rises saving rates by about 2 percentage points
in the first period. In the later periods that effect declines to about 1 percentage point. This
suggests that SOE reforms by themselves do not account for a significant portion of the
increase in aggregate saving rates. Of course, our results have little to say about the effects of
aggregate uncertainty on saving rates. One could argue that in theory SOE households should
be saving substantially less than their private counterparts, and the fact that they save slightly
more on average already suggests strong precautionary motives from the reform process.
Without knowing what the counterfactual saving rates would have been, however, it is difficult
to assess the overall impact of SOE reforms on saving behavior.
Finally, we turn to the home ownership dummy. Households that own their homes save
about 2 percentage points more of their income in 1992-96 and 1997-2001 than those that do
not. The sign is the opposite of what one would expect based on our contention of households
saving for house purchases. This effect disappears in the 2002-05 sample.
Panel A of Table 8 presents estimates for the same regressions as the ones above, but
with income and consumption adjusted by an estimated value of owner-occupied housing
obtained by regressing, for the sample of renters, rent expenditures on non-rent consumption
expenditures, demographic controls, and province and SOE employment dummies (since SOE
workers often had access to subsidized housing). We then use the fitted values to impute rents
for the homeowners. Again, we bootstrap the data (in both stages) to construct the standard
errors. We continue to estimate a positive effect of home ownership on saving rates in 1992-96
and 1997-2001 (columns 1 and 2), but the effect is now minus 2 percentage points for 2002-05
(column 3). For comparability with the previous samples, we have used our estimates for the
rental values of owner-occupied homes in 2002-05 even though those surveys do report
imputed rent values. Using the reported rather than estimated values increases the coefficient
on the home ownership dummy to minus 1 percentage point (column 5).
The 2002-05 surveys report an estimated value of the dwellings at market prices. We
use that variable to create dummies for value quartiles (by province and year). Column 4
reports the results of a regression including those dummies. Having a home in the bottom

29
quartile raises the saving rate by 1.5 percentage points, and one in the second quartile by 0.3
percentage points. Having a home in the third and top quartiles lowers the saving rate by 1.6
and 3.9 percentage points, respectively (after controlling for income and other household
characteristics used in the regression). If we use the imputed rents reported in the 2002-05
surveys instead of the ones we construct (column 6), the estimated effects of owning a home in
the bottom and second quartiles imply increases in the savings rate of 2.4 and 0.8 percentage
points, respectively. Owning a home in the third and top quartiles continues to lower the saving
rate, by 1.4 and 3.9 percentage points, respectively.
As noted in Section V, anecdotal evidence suggests much of the privatized housing
stock is unappealing and many households may be saving to improve/purchase new dwellings.
This is consistent with the results from this last regression, whereby households in higher
valued homes save substantially less than those that do not own a home or live in a low value
one. Unfortunately, the estimated housing value variable is not available in earlier surveys (so
we cannot test whether this is indeed what is driving the housing-related results in those years).
The effects of home ownership on savings may depend on the age of the household
head. For example, a young household head who does not own a dwelling is more likely than a
65 year old to be saving to purchase one. Panel B of Table 8 presents regressions similar to
those of Panel A, but with interactions of the home ownership dummy with dummies for fiveyear ranges of the age of the household head (the 25-29 age group dummy is omitted). Home
ownership continues to have a positive effect on saving rates in 1992-96, and 1997-2001,
although the coefficients on the age interactions are not statistically significant (columns 1-2).
The expected pattern does emerge in the 2002-05 sample, where home ownership
implies a large reduction in savings for younger households but not for older ones (column 3).
In that sample, the coefficient on the home ownership dummy is -7.6 percentage points. But the
coefficients on its interaction with age are positive, and the combined effect gradually declines
as we move from the 25-29 age group towards older households. The point estimates imply
effects of -4.7, -3.3 and -2.5 percentage points for 30-34, 35-39 and 40-44 year old household
heads, respectively (with the effect for 30-34 year olds not being statistically significantly
different than the one for 25-29 year olds). For the 45-49 year and higher age groups, the effect
of home ownership on savings seems to fade. The point estimates still imply a negative effect
for 50-54 year old household heads, and a positive effect for the older households (but we

30
cannot reject the hypothesis of zero effect of home ownership on savings among the elderly).
The results are similar when the imputed rents reported in the survey are used (column 4).
The results are also similar if we interact the age of the household head with home
ownership by housing quartile (not reported in Table 8). Using the fitted imputed rents, for a
household with its head in the 25-29 age range the point estimates imply a negative effect on
savings of 4.7, 6.3, 7.0 and 7.7 percentage points for houses in the bottom, second, third and
top quartiles of home values, respectively. The results are again similar if we use the imputed
rents from the survey (the point estimates for 25-29 year olds imply declines of 2.9, 4.6, 6.1 and
7.2 percentage points as we move from the bottom to the top quartile of home values).42
For completeness, we augmented our baseline regressions with variables to capture the
effects of habit formation (lagged consumption growth) and target savings (nominal deposit
rates deflated by province-specific inflation rates). The coefficients on these variables were
small, confirmed the results of the univariate analysis in Section V, and did not affect the other
coefficients by much.43
VII. Discussion and Implications for Aggregate Saving Patterns
To conclude, we review our main findings and discuss their implications in light of
other macroeconomic data. Despite rapid income growth and prospects of sustained high
income growth, the urban household savings rate in China has risen by about 7 percentage
points over the period 1995-2005. This is not consistent with the predictions of the standard
version of the permanent income life cycle hypothesis. We find that demographic factors play
at best a minor role in explaining this increase. After controlling for time and cohort effects, we
find a surprising U-shaped age-savings profile, with households headed by young persons and
42

We also experimented with interactions of the SOE employment dummies with age, but the
coefficients were noisy and not statistically significant. We could not meaningfully estimate the
interaction of the health risk variable with age, since age is one of the main variables used when
constructing that risk measure.
43

The coefficients on lagged consumption growth still tend to have a mild negative effect on savings.
Using the subsample of households with three consecutive observations, a 10 percent increase in lagged
consumption growth would raise savings by 0.2 percentage points in 1992-96 and lower savings by 0.4
and 0.7 percentage points in 1997-2001 and 2002-05, respectively. The coefficients on provincial
inflation suggest that a 1 percentage point decline in the real rate of return would increase saving rates
by 0.15-0.35 percentage points.

31
those headed by old persons having the highest saving rates. This is different from the
traditional hump-shaped age-savings profiles that have been estimated for most countries (and
that we see even for China in the late 1980s and early 1990s).
Taken at face value, the estimated age profile of savings suggests negligible changes in
the saving rate as China’s population ages since both the young and the old have among the
highest saving rates (so population aging would just replace one group of high savers with
another). Combining our estimated age-profile of savings for the 25-69 age group with U.N.
projections for the evolution of the Chinese population (Figure 9) implies a change of less than
0.2 percentage points in the average saving rate from now to 2050.44 Of course, the age-profile
of savings that we have found in Chinese data is unusual and could well have been influenced
by one-off effects of China’s transition to a market economy.
Habit formation considerations could in theory help explain the rise in saving rates
during a period of high income growth, but we do not find evidence supporting that channel.
The massive privatization of the housing stock seems a more promising explanation for this
surge in savings, with simple back-of-the-envelope calculations suggesting that savings driven
by the motive of home ownership could account for about 3 percentage points of the increase in
the household saving rate from 1995 to 2005. Since this is a one-off event (albeit one that has
been playing out over several years), the proportion of savings driven by this factor should
decline over time. Within our composite regression framework, a comparison of saving
behavior between households that own their dwellings and those that rent suggests a more
limited effect of this factor; it comes out clearly only when we make a distinction between
households with younger and older heads, or between owners of high-value and low-value
homes (the latter may save to upgrade to better homes).
The increasing private burden of education and health expenditures seem among the
strongest candidates for explaining the increase in saving rates, at least during a transition
period. Our estimates show that health expenditure-related risks can largely explain the
dramatic increase in saving rates among elderly households. The uncertainty related to those

44

This back-of-the-envelope exercise involves a number of simplifying assumptions. It ignores the fact
that the age-profiles estimated are for the head of the household while the projected population shares
are for individuals. Moreover, our estimates are based on urban households, whereas the demographic
projections also cover rural areas.

32
expenditures can also increase aggregate saving rates despite the higher consumption
expenditures of the households suffering an adverse health shock.45 Our estimates suggest that
the elimination of the risk of health expenditures exceeding 20 percent of income (through a
catastrophic insurance scheme) would have lowered the median saving rate in 2005 by 3.5
percentage points, assuming no behavioral responses to such a scheme. Differences in saving
behavior by households with children of different ages are consistent with expected future
education expenditures increasing savings (or at least lowering consumption).
The effects of these shifts, together with precautionary motives stemming from state
enterprise restructuring and market-oriented reforms, should eventually fade as households
adjust their consumption plans and build-up a level of assets appropriate for this post-transition
environment. This build-up in savings could have been smaller if financial markets were more
developed. Financial frictions also strengthen precautionary saving motives, and borrowing
constraints can play an important role in driving up saving rates despite rapid income growth,
especially among younger households. Finally, we also found some weak indirect evidence in
support of the “target saving” hypothesis, whereby Chinese households have high saving rates
because they are targeting a certain level of wealth and the real return on their savings, most of
which goes into bank deposits, is small (and has recently become negative).
What are the implications of our findings for the debate about how to “rebalance”
China’s growth by boosting domestic consumption? As financial markets develop, households
should benefit from being able to borrow against future income, better opportunities for
portfolio diversification, and better rates of return on their savings. Improvements in the social
safety net would pool the risks associated with idiosyncratic income shocks and health
expenditures, reducing the need for households to save in order to self-insure against these
risks. Increasing public provision of education could also lower household savings by reducing
the need to accumulate assets to finance future education expenditures. Thus, policies that
foster financial sector development and increased social expenditures could play an important
role in helping to smooth consumption over the life cycle (Blanchard and Giavazzi, 2005). This
would moderate household saving rates and help in rebalancing growth towards consumption.
45

During the transition to a steady state with a higher level of saving for these reasons, the short-run
cross-sectional dynamics would indeed imply an increase in saving as most households would have net
saving, with only a small fraction of them drawing down their savings to meet these expenditures

33
References
Attanasio, Orazio, and Martin Browning, 1995, “Consumption over the Life Cycle and over the
Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 5, pp. 1118-37.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Francesco Giavazzi, 2005, “Rebalancing Growth in China: A ThreeHanded Approach,” MIT Department of Economics Working Paper 05-32.
Carroll, Christopher, and David Weil, 1994, “Saving and Growth: A Reinterpretation,”
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 40, pp. 133-92.
Carroll, Christopher, Byung-Kun Rhee, and Changyong Rhee, 1994, “Are There Cultural
Effects on Saving? Some Cross-Sectional Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 109, No. 3, pp. 685-99.
Carroll, Christopher, 1997, “Buffer Stock Savings and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income
Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 112, No. 1, pp. 1-56.
Chou, Shin-Yi, Jin-Tan Liu, and James K. Hammitt, 2003, “National Health Insurance and
Precautionary Saving: Evidence from Taiwan” Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 87,
No. 9-10, pp. 1873-94.
Deaton, Angus, 1991, “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica, Vol. 59, pp. 1221-48.
Deaton, Angus, 2005, “Measuring Poverty in a Growing World (or Measuring Growth in a
Poor World),” Review of Economics and Statistics, February, Vol. 87, No. 1, pp. 1-19.
Deaton, Angus, and Christina Paxson, 1994, “Saving, Growth, and Aging in Taiwan,” Studies
in the Economics of Aging, National Bureau of Economic Research Project Report
Series, pp. 331-57, (University of Chicago Press: Chicago and London).
Deaton, Angus, and Christina Paxson, 2000, “Growth and Saving among Individuals and
Households,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 82, No. 2, pp. 212-25.
Dynan, Karen, 2000, “Habit Formation and Consumer Preferences: Evidence from Panel
Data,” American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No. 3, pp. 391-406.
Fuchs-Schundeln, Nicola, and Matthias Schundeln, 2005, “Precautionary Savings and SelfSelection: Evidence from the German Reunification Experiment,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. 120, No. 3, pp. 1085-1120.
Fuchs-Schundeln, Nicola, 2008, “The Response of Household Savings to the Large Shock of
German Reunification,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Jonathan Parker, 2002, “Consumption Over the Life Cycle”
Econometrica, Vol. 70, No. 1, pp. 47-89.

34
Horioka, Charles Yuji, and Junmin Wan, 2008, “The Determinants of Household Saving in
China: A Dynamic Panel Analysis of Provincial Data,” Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking, forthcoming.
Jappelli, Tullio, and Marco Pagano, 1994, “Saving, Growth, and Liquidity Constraints,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 109, No. 1, pp. 83-109.
Keane, Michael, and Eswar S. Prasad, 2006, “Changes in the Structure of Earnings During the
Polish Transition,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 80, pp. 389-427.
Kraay, Aart, 2000, “Household Saving in China,” World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 14, No.
3 (September), pp. 545-70.
Kuijs, Louis, 2006, “How Will China’s Saving-Investment Balance Evolve?” World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper #3958.
McKenzie, David J., 2006, “Precautionary Saving and Consumption Growth in Taiwan,” China
Economic Review, Vol. 17, pp. 84-101.
Meng, Xin, 2003, “Unemployment, Consumption Smoothing, and Precautionary Saving in
Urban China,” Journal of Comparative Economics, Vol. 31, No. 3 (September).
Modigliani, Franco, 1970, “The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving and Intercountry Differences
in the Saving Ratio,” Introduction, Growth and Trade, Essays in Honor of Sir Roy
Harrod. W.A. Elits, M.F. Scott, and J.N. Wolfe, eds. (Oxford).
Modigliani, Franco, and Shi Larry Cao, 2004, “The Chinese Saving Puzzle and the Life Cycle
Hypothesis,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 42, pp. 145-70.
Paxson, Christina, 1996, “Saving and Growth: Evidence from Micro Data,” European
Economic Review, Vol. 40, pp. 255-88.
Qian, Yingyi, 1998, “Urban and Rural Household Saving in China,” International Monetary
Fund Staff Papers, Vol. 35, No. 4, pp. 592-627.
Rhee, Wooheon, 2004, “Habit Formation and Precautionary Saving: Evidence from the Korean
Household Panel Studies,” Journal of Economic Development, Vol. 29, No. 2, pp. 119.
Working, Holbrook, 1960, “Note on Correlation of First-Differences of Averages of a Random
Chain,” Econometrica, Vol. 28, pp. 916-918.

Table 1. Summary Statistics
Year

Observations

Income
(2005 RMB)

Consumption
(2005 RMB)

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

4846
4913
6273
6109
6290
6297
6288
6242
6255
6294
6261
6300
16607
19351
20680
21849

12795
13221
14890
15879
17306
17677
18232
19065
20250
21237
23179
24344
25324
26824
29068
31450

10897
11332
12556
13412
14517
14964
15193
15806
16721
17485
19031
19354
20378
21257
22755
24412

Transfer
Expenditures
(2005 RMB)
915
995
1070
1119
1188
1256
1362
1525
1696
1815
1993
2093
2708
2805
3037
3084

Household
Size
3.4
3.3
3.3
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.1
3.1
3.1
3.1
3.0
3.1
3.0
3.0

Saving Rate
(% of
Income)
14.8
14.3
15.7
15.5
16.1
15.4
16.7
17.1
17.4
17.7
17.9
20.5
19.5
20.8
21.7
22.4

Notes: Data for 1990-1997 are from the subset of the Urban Household Survey available through the
Databank for China Studies of the Chinese University of Hong Kong. Data for 1998 onwards are from
the National Bureau of Statistics. Income and consumption are converted to constant 2005 prices based
on the Urban CPI. Saving rate defined as 1-consumption/income. Definition of consumption
expenditures does not include transfer expenditures.

Table 2. Representativeness of 10 Provinces/Municipalities Sub-Sample
Year

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

Saving Rate in
10 Province/Municipalities
Sub-Sample
(% of Income)

Saving Rate in
Entire Sample

15.7
15.5
16.0
15.2
16.7
16.8
17.3
17.6
17.9
20.7
20.0
21.4
22.3
22.8

17.5
18.1
18.4
17.4
19.0
18.9
20.2
21.1
20.4
22.6
21.7
23.1
23.8
24.3

Income in SubSample/Income in
Entire Sample

(% of Income)

1.15
1.15
1.16
1.13
1.13
1.13
1.15
1.12
1.16
1.14
1.06
1.02
1.04
1.04

Notes: Saving rates based on 1 – average per capita consumption/average per capita disposable
income. Taking per capita averages (as opposed to household averages) yields results slightly
different from those in Table 1, but this is necessary for purposes of comparison with the published
tabulations of the entire survey.

Table 3. Consumption Growth and Habit Formation
(Dependent Variable: Non-Durable Consumption Growth)
Regression
Type

Controls

Adj
R2

Number
Obs

OLS
OLS

Coefficient and S.E. on Lagged
Non-Durable Consumption Growth
Sample: True Panel of Households (2002-2005)
Demographics
-0.268
[0.011]
Demographics + Prov.+ Ed. + Year
-0.272
[0.011]

0.101
0.108

5166
5166

OLS
OLS

Sample: True Panel of Households (1992-2001)
Demographics
-0.404
[0.021]
Demographics + Prov.+ Ed. + Year
-0.410
[0.021]

0.156
0.174

1919
1919

OLS
OLS
IV

Sample: Pseudo Panel, Birth Cohorts (1992-2005)
Demographics
-0.301
[0.037]
Demographics + Year
-0.293
[0.040]
Demographics + Year
0.030
[0.409]

0.279
0.431

516
516
410

OLS
OLS
IV

Sample: Pseudo Panel, Birth Cohorts (5-year) and Province (1992-2005)
Demographics
-0.175
[0.038]
0.212
Demographics + Prov. + Year
-0.197
[0.041]
0.270
Demographics + Prov. + Year
-0.453
[0.341]

OLS
OLS
IV

Sample: Pseudo Panel, Birth Cohorts (5-year) and Province and Education (1992-2005)
Demographics
-0.276
[0.017]
0.176
5823
Demographics + Prov. + Ed. + Year
-0.290
[0.018]
0.200
5823
Demographics + Prov. + Ed. + Year
0.265
[0.149]
4538

1116
1116
889

Sample: Fitted Consumption Growth from Pairwise Regression s(1992-2005)
OLS
Demographics
-0.103
[0.003]
0.014
117824
OLS
Demographics + Prov. + Ed. + Year
-0.122
[0.003]
0.139
117824
IV
Demographics + Prov. + Ed. + Year
-0.298
[0.036]
106019
Notes: Results reported in this table are from regressions of non-durable consumption growth on lagged nondurable consumption growth. Standard errors are shown in brackets adjacent to the corresponding coefficients.
Demographic controls include the level and the change in: age, age squared, the log of household size, and
shares of household members aged 0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-19 and 60 plus (except for the last sample, where these
variables enter only in levels). Province, education and year controls are dummies for each of the 10
provinces/municipalities, household head's educational attainment (6 categories) and year. Observations in the
true panel and last sample are weighted by their sampling weights. Observations in the pseudo-panels are
weighted by the square root of the number of observations used to construct the averages in each pseudo-panel
observation. The third lag of consumption growth is used as an instrument for lagged consumption growth in
the IV regressions. Sample is restricted to households whose head was aged 25-69 and excludes those where the
head was a student, lost the ability to work, was unemployed or waiting for an assignment.

Table 4. Ownership of Durable Goods per 100 Urban Households
Durable Good

2000

2005

Washing Machine
Refrigerator
Color TV
DVD Player
Mobile Phone
Automobile

90.8
80.5
116.7
37.1
18.3
0.63

95.5
90.7
134.8
68.1
137
3.4

Source: CEIC (based on NBS Urban Household Survey data—full sample).

Table 5. Home Purchase and Construction Expenditures Financed By Saving Withdrawals
Year

Home
Ownership
(%)

Average Home
Purchase or
Construction
Expenditures/Average
Income (%)

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

17.0
18.5
16.6
20.6
28.3
30.9
35.5
47.7
55.4
64.6
72.7
76.7
79.5
79.9
83.5
86.0

0.8
1.2
2.4
3.8
5.6
2.3
4.2
4.2
8.4
7.1
6.9
6.0
6.5
7.0
8.0
6.6

Average of
Min(Home Purchase
or Construction
Expenditures, Savings
Withdrawals)/
Average Income (%)
0.3
0.7
1.5
2.5
3.7
1.4
3.0
2.8
6.3
5.2
4.9
4.1
4.5
4.4
5.4
4.5

Average
Repayment of
Home Loans/
Average Income
(%)

Share of
Households
Repaying a
Home Loan (%)

Average Housing
Loan/Average
Income Among
Households
Repaying Housing
Loan (%)

0.0
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.5
0.6
0.7
1.1
1.4
1.7

0.3
0.3
0.5
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.2
1.3
1.3
0.9
1.8
2.3
2.7
3.5
4.0
5.2

13.3
9.9
6.9
7.5
7.6
7.4
7.5
13.0
12.3
22.2
16.7
17.5
18.7
20.1
21.4
20.0

Notes: High ownership rates partly reflect the housing reform. For example, 65% of the households that owned a home in 2005
purchased it through the housing reform. All ratios reported are based on the ratio of the averages of each variable (not the
average of the ratios). Min(Home Purchase or Construction Expenditures, Savings Withdrawals) is a measure of how much of
the observed home purchase and construction expenditures were financed from saving withdrawals. For example, if a
household draws down its savings but does not report any such expenditure, the value is zero. If a household reports a home
purchase or construction expenditure, this variable is the smaller of (i) the expenditure and (ii) the saving withdrawal (in the
latter case, we assume that the entire withdrawal is used to finance the housing expenditure).

Table 6. Type of Employer for Households With a Head in the Age Range 25-59
(all figures in percentage terms)
Type of
Employer

1995
2000
2005
Heads of household

1995

77.6

70.7

54.4

67.8

61.9

42.9

11.9

9.3

4.5

18.0

12.2

6.1

1.5

4.6

11.7

1.7

5.3

11.9

Entrepreneurs

0.5

2.9

7.8

1.0

3.1

6.7

Employees of
individuals

0.3

1.3

6.5

0.8

3.1

9.2

1.5

1.7

2.3

1.3

1.8

2.6

0.1

0.5

2.9

0.4

1.1

4.3

Retirees

6.5

8.8

9.7

8.5

10.9

14.7

Other

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.5

0.6

1.7

SOEs
Collective
Units
Other types of
units
(including
private)

Re-employed
retirees
Other
employed

2000
2005
All members

Notes: Breakdown excludes households where head is a student, has lost the
ability to work, is unemployed, or is waiting for an assignment. Breakdown
among household members also excludes those categories.

Table 7. Median Regressions for the Saving Rate
1992-1996
(1)
(2)
Log(Income)
0.148
0.145
[0.007]
[0.007]
1 SOE Worker
0.008
[0.006]
2 or more SOE Workers
0.018
[0.005]
Health Risk
0.320
[0.073]
Owns Home
0.021
[0.004]
Age 30-34
0.000
-0.001
[0.009]
[0.010]
Age 35-39
-0.003
-0.005
[0.009]
[0.010]
Age 40-44
-0.003
-0.006
[0.010]
[0.011]
Age 45-49
0.003
0.001
[0.011]
[0.012]
Age 50-54
0.026
0.023
[0.012]
[0.012]
Age 55-59
0.003
0.005
[0.015]
[0.015]
Age 60-64
0.019
0.017
[0.02]
[0.022]
Age 65-69
-0.011
0.003
[0.055]
[0.055]
Log Household Size
-0.072
-0.076
[0.012]
[0.011]
Share aged 0-4
-0.007
-0.003
[0.030]
[0.030]
Share aged 5-9
-0.003
0.001
[0.025]
[0.025]
Share aged 10-14
-0.053
-0.047
[0.021]
[0.021]
Share aged 15-19
-0.062
-0.057
[0.017]
[0.017]
Share aged 60 plus
-0.006
0.001
[0.021]
[0.021]
Observations
21926
21926

1997-2001
(3)
(4)
0.154
0.167
[0.005]
[0.005]
0.004
[0.004]
0.013
[0.005]
0.154
[0.011]
0.023
[0.004]
-0.007
-0.007
[0.012]
[0.011]
-0.037
-0.038
[0.010]
[0.01]
-0.039
-0.043
[0.010]
[0.011]
-0.039
-0.039
[0.010]
[0.011]
-0.027
-0.030
[0.010]
[0.011]
-0.013
-0.037
[0.010]
[0.011]
0.006
-0.002
[0.013]
[0.015]
0.008
-0.002
[0.016]
[0.022]
-0.037
-0.045
[0.006]
[0.007]
-0.019
-0.004
[0.023]
[0.023]
-0.069
-0.040
[0.022]
[0.022]
-0.076
-0.038
[0.017]
[0.017]
-0.154
-0.113
[0.020]
[0.020]
0.008
-0.040
[0.012]
[0.012]
29366
29366

2002-2005
(5)
(6)
0.173
0.194
[0.005]
[0.007]
0.004
[0.004]
0.012
[0.005]
0.202
[0.011]
-0.005
[0.004]
-0.003
-0.010
[0.010]
[0.018]
-0.010
-0.015
[0.011]
[0.016]
-0.009
-0.012
[0.01]
[0.016]
-0.010
-0.013
[0.011]
[0.014]
0.011
-0.008
[0.011]
[0.016]
0.023
-0.042
[0.013]
[0.019]
-0.007
-0.101
[0.019]
[0.029]
-0.005
-0.108
[0.020]
[0.032]
-0.098
-0.087
[0.013]
[0.011]
-0.021
-0.076
[0.025]
[0.025]
-0.021
-0.012
[0.017]
[0.017]
-0.054
-0.043
[0.017]
[0.017]
-0.138
-0.134
[0.013]
[0.013]
0.054
-0.039
[0.014]
[0.014]
53403
53403

Notes: Health risk indicates a (fitted) 10% or higher probability of an annual health expenditure of 20% or more of
total consumption expenditures. Bootstrapped standard errors in brackets. All specifications include dummies for
the head and spouse education (6 categories), occupation (9 categories) and industry of employment (16
categories). Sample is restricted to households whose head was aged 25-69 and excludes those where the head was
a student, lost the ability to work, unemployed or waiting for an assignment.

Table 8. Median Regressions for the Saving Rate Including Imputed Value
of Owner-Occupied Housing
1992-96

1998-2001
2002-05
2002-05
2002-05 2002-05
Imp. Rents from Regression
Imp. Rents from Survey
Panel A: Dummy for Home Ownership
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Log(Income)
0.144
0.166
0.201
0.211
0.197
0.21
[0.004]
[0.005]
[0.004]
[0.004]
[0.004]
[0.004]
Owns Home
0.018
0.019
-0.017
-0.009
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.003]
[0.004]
Own Home
0.015
0.024
Value Q1
[0.004]
[0.004]
Own Home
0.003
0.008
Value Q2
[0.004]
[0.004]
Own Home
-0.016
-0.014
Value Q3
[0.004]
[0.004]
Own Home
-0.039
-0.039
Value Q4
[0.004]
[0.004]
Observations
29464
29549
70504
70504
70501
70501
Panel B: Dummy for Home Ownership Interacted with Age Dummies
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log(Income)
0.144
0.167
0.203
0.198
[0.004]
[0.005]
[0.004]
[0.004]
Owns Home
0.03
0.002
-0.076
-0.064
[0.014]
[0.014]
[0.02]
[0.02]
Owns Home*Age 30-34
-0.014
0.02
0.029
0.028
[0.017]
[0.017]
[0.024]
[0.023]
Owns Home*Age 35-39
-0.015
0.025
0.043
0.037
[0.016]
[0.016]
[0.022]
[0.023]
Owns Home*Age 40-44
-0.009
0.015
0.051
0.046
[0.014]
[0.017]
[0.022]
[0.021]
Owns Home*Age45-49
-0.013
0.014
0.072
0.066
[0.017]
[0.017]
[0.019]
[0.021]
Owns Home*Age 50-54
-0.012
0.017
0.06
0.055
[0.018]
[0.018]
[0.021]
[0.022]
Owns Home*Age55-59
0.005
0.034
0.091
0.087
[0.017]
[0.019]
[0.023]
[0.022]
Owns Home*Age60-64
-0.018
0.007
0.075
0.072
[0.017]
[0.019]
[0.029]
[0.028]
Owns Home*Age65-69
-0.014
0.007
0.092
0.083
[0.02]
[0.021]
[0.026]
[0.026]
Observations
29464
29549
70504
70501

Notes: Regressions include same controls as the regressions in columns (2), (4) and (6) of Table 7, but only
selected coefficients are reported here. Saving rates and income are adjusted by the imputed values of owneroccupied housing. Imputed values are obtained by regressing rents on non-rent consumption, demographic
controls and province dummies for each year. Bootstrapped standard errors are in brackets. Own Home Value
Q1 is a dummy equal to one if the value of the home (available only in the 2002-05 surveys) is in the bottom
quartile of the owner occupied homes in the respective province. Own Home Value Q2, Q3 and Q4 are the
corresponding dummies for the second, third and top quartiles. In Panel B, interactions of home ownership with
age omitted for Age 25-29, so effect of home ownership for 25-29 year old household heads is given by “Own
Home”, and combined effect for other age groups is given by the sum of “Own Home” with their respective age
group interaction term.

Table A1. Saving Rates and Household Income in Household Surveys and National Accounts

Year

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Household Saving Rate (% of income)
Household Survey
National
Urban Rural Average Accounts
17.5
18.1
18.4
17.4
19.0
18.9
20.2
21.1
20.4
22.6
21.7
23.1
23.8
24.3
26.0

15.9
16.5
16.7
16.9
18.4
22.6
26.4
28.6
25.9
26.4
25.9
25.9
25.6
21.5
21.1

16.7
17.3
17.6
17.2
18.7
20.6
22.9
24.3
22.5
24.0
23.1
24.0
24.3
23.5
24.7

31.1
29.9
32.6
N/A
30.8
30.5
29.9
27.6
25.5
25.4
28.6
28.9
31.6
35.6

Household Per Capita Income
(current RMB)
Household Survey
National
Urban Rural Average Accounts
2,027
2,577
3,496
4,283
4,839
5,160
5,425
5,854
6,280
6,860
7,703
8,472
9,422
10,493
11,760

784
922
1,221
1,578
1,926
2,090
2,162
2,210
2,253
2,366
2,476
2,622
2,936
3,255
3,587

1,125
1,385
1,870
2,363
2,814
3,070
3,250
3,478
3,712
4,059
4,519
4,993
5,645
6,367
7,175

1,544
1,888
2,575
N/A
3,795
4,054
4,223
4,321
4,542
4,819
5,329
5,733
7,184
8,459

Urban
Population
(% of total)
27.5
28.0
28.5
29.0
30.5
31.9
33.4
34.8
36.2
37.7
39.1
40.5
41.8
43.0
43.9

Notes: Household survey data based on tabulations for per capita income and consumption available through
CEIC. Saving rates from the Urban and Rural Household Surveys expressed as a share of disposable income
and net income, respectively. Saving rates from National Accounts (Flow of Funds) expressed as a share of
disposable income. The large increase in household income from 2003 to 2004 in the National Accounts is
partly driven by data revisions (and matched by a similar, albeit smaller, increase in household consumption).

Table A2. Breakdown of Consumption Expenditures Across Different Categories
(all figures in percentage terms).
Year

Food

Housing

Health

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004

52.8
50.1
49.9
49.9
48.6
46.4
44.5
41.9
39.2
37.9
37.7
37.1
37.7

6.0
6.6
6.8
7.1
7.7
8.6
9.4
9.8
10.0
10.3
10.4
10.7
10.2

2.5
2.7
2.9
3.1
3.7
4.3
4.7
5.3
6.4
6.5
7.1
7.3
7.4

Education Transportation
and
and
Recreation Communication
8.8
9.2
8.8
8.8
9.6
10.7
11.5
12.3
12.6
13.0
15.0
14.4
14.4

2.6
3.8
4.7
4.8
5.1
5.6
5.9
6.7
7.9
8.6
10.4
11.1
11.7

Other
27.2
27.5
27.0
26.2
25.4
24.5
23.9
24.0
24.0
23.7
19.5
19.4
18.6

Notes: Based on tabulations of the entire Urban Household Survey (available through CEIC).

Figure 1. Contributions to Gross Domestic Savings as a Percentage of GDP
55
50
45
40

Government

35

%

30
25

Enterprises
20
15

Households

10
5
0
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Year

Source: CEIC and IMF.
Notes: Household savings shown here are based on national accounts data, which imply
higher saving rates than those based on household survey data (see Table A1).
Figure 2. Saving Rate and Share of Total Savings by Income Quintile
Cumulative Share of Total Savings

0

0

.2

.1

.4

.6

.2

.8

1

.3

Saving Rate

1

2

3
1995

4

5
6
7
Income Decile
2000

8

9
2005

10

1

2

3
1995

4

5
6
7
Income Decile
2000

8

9
2005

10

Figure 3. Average Disposable Income and Consumption by Age of Head of Household.

25

30

35

40

45 50
Age

55

60

65

70

30

35

40

45 50
Age

25

30

35

40

55

60

65

70

45 50
Age

55

60

65

70

55

60

65

70

2005

2005 RMB
10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000

2005 RMB
10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000

2000

25

1995

2005 RMB
10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000

2005 RMB
10000 15000 20000 25000 30000 35000 40000

1990

25

30

35

40

45 50
Age

Notes: In all plots, disposable income corresponds to the top line and consumption to the
bottom line. Income and consumption profiles were smoothed by a 3-year moving average
(the averages for each age were combined with those for the ages immediately above and
below).

Figure 4. Income and Consumption for Different Cohorts Over Time

9

Log 2005 RMB
9.5
10

10.5

Figure 4A. Income (Solid Line) and Consumption (Dashed Line)

25

30

35

40

45

Age

50

55

60

65

70

8.5

9

Log 2005 RMB
9.5

10

Figure 4B. Consumption (Solid Line) and Consumption Adjusted for Changes in
Demographics (Dashed Line)

25

30

35

40

45

Age

50

55

60

65

70

Notes: Consumption adjusted for changes in demographics obtained by regressing, at the
synthetic cohort level, log(consumption) on: log(household size), number of children,
number of adults, and a dummy for whether the household has a children. Results for
adjusted consumption reported correspond to a household consisting of two adults.

Figure 5. Average Saving Rates by Age of Head of Household

0

.05

.1

.15

.2

.25

.3

(Saving Rate = 1 – Consumption/Disposable Income)

25

30

35

40
1990

45

Age

1995

50

55
2000

60

65

70

2005

Notes: Income and consumption profiles were smoothed by a 3-year moving average (the
averages for each age were combined with those for the ages immediately above and
below).

Figure 6. Age, Cohort, and Year Effects on Income, Consumption, and Saving Rates
Age Effect on Savings

.1

8.5

.15

Saving Rate
.2
.25

Log 2005 RMB
9
9.5

.3

10

.35

Income and Consumption

25

30

35

40

45

Age

50

55

60

65

70

25

30

35

45

Age

50

55

60

65

70

Cohort Effect on Savings

.1

8.5

.15

Saving Rate
.2
.25

Log 2005 RMB
9
9.5

.3

10

.35

Income and Consumption

40

10

15

20

25

30

35 40 45
Age in 1990

50

55

60

65

70

10

20

25

30

35 40 45
Age in 1990

50

55

60

65

70

Year Effect on Savings

.1

8.5

.15

Saving Rate
.2
.25

Log 2005 RMB
9
9.5

.3

10

.35

Income and Consumption

15

1990

1995

Year

2000

2005

1990

1995

Year

2000

2005

Note: Effects based on a regression of average log(Y) and log(C) on a vector of age, cohort dummies and time
dummies. Cohort dummies constrained to add to zero and be orthogonal to a linear trend. Log(Household Size),
and share of household members aged 0-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-19 and 20+ used as controls. Reference household is
one that was 25 years old in 1990. Each profile displayed holds the other two effects constant at their respective
levels for the baseline household. For example, the age profile shows how income, consumption, and savings
vary with age holding the cohort effect constant at its level for households aged 25 in 1990, and the year effect
constant at its 1990 level.

Figure 7. Average and Standard Deviation of the Shares of Consumption Expenditures on
Education and Health as a Function of Age of the Head of the Household

.1
.05
0

0

.05

.1

.15

Education 1995

.15

Health 1995

30

40

50
Age

60

70

30

40

60

70

60

70

60

70

.1
.05
0

0

.05

.1

.15

Education 2000

.15

Health 2000

50
Age

30

40

50
Age

60

70

30

40

Education 2005

0

0

.05

.05

.1

.1

.15

.15

Health 2005

50
Age

30

40

50
Age

60

70

30

40

50
Age

Notes: Solid line corresponds to average share of consumption expenditures on health
(education) and dashed line to its standard deviation.

Figure 8. Home Ownership by Age of the Head of Household

.8
.6
.4
.2

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Housing Reform Purchases

1

Home Ownership Rates

25

30

35

40

45
50
Age
1995
2005

55

60
2000

65

70

25

30

35

40

45
50
Age

55

60

65

Ownership in 2005...
...Of Which Housing Reform Purchases

70

Figure 9. Age Distribution of the Chinese Population: Estimates and Projections

0.125

1985
0.105

2015
2005

2025

0.085

0.065

2050
0.045

0.025

10

95-

90-

85-

80-

75-

70-

65-

60-

55-

50-

45-

40-

35-

30-

25-

20-

15-

10-

5-9

0-4

0.005

-0.015

45%

40%

1985

1995

2005

2015

2025

2035

2045

35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%
0-19

20-34

35-49
Age Range

Source: U.N. Population Division

50-64

65+

