                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WHAT IS A COMPANY REALLY WORTH? INTANGIBLE CAPITAL AND THE
                    "MARKET TO BOOK VALUE" PUZZLE

                                          Charles R. Hulten
                                            Xiaohui Hao

                                        Working Paper 14548
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14548


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008




The research reported in this paper was sponsored by the Economics Program of The Conference Board,
as part of its Program on Intangibles. It is derived from an earlier Economics Program working paper,
#08-02. Hulten is Senior Fellow to The Conference Board. We would like to thank Wesley Cohen,
Martin Fleming and Baruch Lev for their comments on earlier drafts, as well as Gail Fosler, Bart Van
Ark, Carol Corrado, and other colleagues at the Conference Board. Kathleen Miller and Mary Sinclair
provided valuable assistance in preparing this paper. Opinions and interpretations, and any remaining
errors, are solely the responsibility of the authors, and should not be attributed to any organization
with which they are affiliated, nor to the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Charles R. Hulten and Xiaohui Hao. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
What is a Company Really Worth? Intangible Capital and the "Market to Book Value" Puzzle
Charles R. Hulten and Xiaohui Hao
NBER Working Paper No. 14548
December 2008
JEL No. G3,M41,O30

                                              ABSTRACT

"What is a company really worth?" is a question asked repeatedly during the recent financial crisis.
Attention has been focused on short-term valuation issues, like the "mark-to-market" controversy.
Sorting out these issues is complicated by the fact that the market puts a value on shareholder equity
that is consistently more than twice the reported book value of a company. Numerous observers have
pointed to the absence of most intangible assets from financial statements as an important source of
this puzzle. We use Compustat financial data for 617 R&D intensive firms to test this possibility. We
find that conventional book value alone explains only 31 percent of the market capitalization of these
firms in 2006, and that this increases to 75 percent when our estimates of intangible capital are included.
The debt-equity ratio also falls from 1.46 to 0.61. These findings suggest that financial reports tend
to substantially understate the long-run intrinsic value of corporate America.


Charles R. Hulten
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
Room 3105, Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hulten@econ.umd.edu

Xiaohui Hao
The Conference Board
845 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10022
Janet.Hao@conference-board.org
                                      I. Introduction


       “What is a company really worth?” is a question that has been asked repeatedly

during the recent financial crisis. The market place provides a compelling answer: a

company and its assets are worth only what the highest bidder is willing to pay. In

theory, this value should equal the expected discounted present value of the future

earnings, sometimes thought of as the intrinsic or “holding” value of the assets. In

practice, it does not. During periods of market turbulence, the two valuations can

diverge significantly because of asymmetrical information and liquidity constraints. The

recent “mark-to-market” debate is largely about which approach provides the more

accurate reflection of fair value when markets are volatile. This debate is complicated

by the fact that, even in calmer times, there is the “market-to-book value” puzzle to

explain.

       This puzzle arises because the market consistently puts a higher value on

shareholder equity than the value appearing on corporate balance sheets. The average

price-to-book ratio for the companies of the S&P 500 index ranged from around 2.0 to

3.5 in the period 1990-1995, and increased to the 3.5-7.5 range during the “tech boom”

period 1996-2000 (Lev (2001)). Even during the recent stock market slump, the ratio

has remained in the range of 1.5 to 2.0.

       This price-to-book gap is too large to be attributed solely to the mismeasurement

of conventional equity or to the vicissitudes of the stock market. Numerous observers,

including Lev, have pointed to absence of intangible assets from corporate balance

sheets as an important source of the puzzle. The billions of dollars companies spend




                                            1
on R&D and brand development are treated as current expenses by their accountants

largely because there are no market transactions to measure the value of R&D and

brand created within the company. The current success of many companies and their

prospects for the future, however, depend on their ability to develop and market

products, not just the ability to manufacture them. Portraying the product development

only as a current expense without recognizing its contribution to future value conceals

much of what makes a company successful and valuable in the long run.1

        How much of the market-to-book value puzzle can be explained by intangible

assets is the question examined in this paper. We approach the problem by applying

procedures similar to those used by Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2006) to financial data

for 617 R&D-intensive corporations complied by Standard and Poor’s in its Compustat

database.2 We construct estimates of the cost of in-house investment in R&D and

organizational capital using data for the period from 1988 to 2006, and then estimate

the corresponding stocks in current prices. We find that the addition of these

intangibles to the conventional financial accounts increases shareholder equity by 141

percent and total assets by 57 percent in 2006, and increases the earnings per share

from an average of $2.48 to $3.54.

1
   A growing literature explores the problem of accounting for intangibles in financial reports and valuing
intangibles in the stock market, building on an earlier literature that examined the impact of R&D and
advertising on the rate of profit (e.g., Grabowski and Mueller (1978)). Important overviews are provided by
Lev (2001) and Blair and Waldman (2001). The literature on the economics of intangibles is reviewed in
Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2005, 2006), and in the introductory comments of Corrado, Haltiwanger, and
Sichel (2005).
2
  Recent estimates by Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (CHS (2005, 2006)) suggest that there were
approximately $3.6 trillion in intangible assets in the U.S. nonfarm business sector in the period 2000-
2003, compared with some $11 trillion in tangible plant and equipment. These estimates cover both
corporate and noncorporate companies, although corporations accounted for some three-quarters of the
total, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis figures. The large size of the aggregate effect
suggests that the average impact on the individual corporations in the non-farm business sector is also
large.



                                                    2
       As for the market-to-book value puzzle, we find that conventionally-defined equity

alone explains 31 percent of market capitalization, and this increases to 75 percent

when intangible capital is added to the balance sheets. This fills a significant part of the

valuation gap and, more importantly, suggests that current financial practice

understates the long-run intrinsic value of corporate America by a substantial amount.

       Another implication of this line of analysis is that the degree of leverage, a closely

watched indicator of financial health during the financial crisis, is significantly lower

when intangibles are counted. For our sample of R&D intensive companies, largely

outside the financial sector, the debt-equity ratio falls from 1.46 to 0.61 when intangible

assets are added to both numerator and denominator of the ratio. In other words, when

the equity hidden in intangibles is put on display, the presence of debt on the balance

sheet takes on a different significance for long-run valuation.

       The following sections of this paper describe the details underlying these

estimates. We start with the case of a representative company in one year as a

concrete illustration of the issues in capitalizing internally produced intangibles. We

then move to a parallel analysis of the universe of R&D-intensive companies included in

the S&P database. Finally, we use our data to examine the correlation between our

intangible capital stocks and market valuation to establish that intangibles are, indeed,

capital.




                                              3
                 II. The Case of a Representative R&D-Intensive Company

                           A. Revenue With and Without Intangibles

        The case of a pharmaceutical company, PHARMA, illustrates the problems of

recognizing intangibles. PHARMA operates in the pharmaceutical industry, one of the

most R&D-intensive industries of the U.S. economy.3 According to the composite

annual financial statements, PHARMA revenues totaled $29.6 billion in 2006. The cost

of goods sold was $6.4 billion. R&D and sales and administrative expenses (SG&A)

totaled $13.7 billion, or nearly half of total sales. After subtracting depreciation, taxes,

and other adjustments, after-tax income was $5.5 billion and earnings per share (EPS)

amounted to $2.03. PHARMA reported total assets of $50.9 billion on its balance sheet

in 2006, of which property, plant and equipment accounted for $10.1 billion. These data

are shown in summary in Tables 1 and 2, in the first column labeled “10k”.4

        This is the standard version of PHARMA’s 2006 financial report, following the

convention that financial reports treat R&D expenditures as a current expense and

subtracts them from the sales figure on the top line. In this paper, we treat R&D as an

investment in the company instead of a pure cost and examine what effect this has on

3
   PHARMA is a composite of six large companies in the U.S. pharmaceutical industry: Abbott
Laboratories, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Eli Lilly and Company, Johnson and Johnson, Pfizer
Inc., and Wyeth. The financial statements of PHARMA are based on an average of the publicly available
income statement and balance sheets of these six companies, supplemented by external estimates and
assumptions. This averaging procedure attenuates the effects of firm-specific events like mergers and
acquisitions, and special items on the financial statements of the individual companies. The name
PHARMA is an expository invention of this paper and should not be associated with the Pharmaceutical
Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA), or any other organization or company.

Other R&D-intensive industries could have been used for expositional purposes, but the pharmaceutical
industry was selected because it has a rich publicly available data and because it has an impressive track
record of innovation. The pharmaceutical industry also illustrates the problem that R&D investment has
long gestation lags.
4
  We refer to PHARMA as a pharmaceutical company in this paper, but the pharmaceutical segment of
PHARMA accounted for 75 percent of total 2006 revenue, while other segments, including other medical
and consumer products, accounted for the rest.


                                                    4
the company’s financial accounts. We will show that this alternative view of R&D

involves an expanded concept of “output” and “revenues,” and, since this shift involves

a significant departure from current practice, we illustrate the issues involved with the

following thought experiment.

        First, suppose that PHARMA were to purchase $10 million in tangible capital

from another company, for example, a technologically advanced piece of laboratory

equipment. The standard economic assumption underlying this purchase is that

PHARMA invests up to the point that the $10 million cost of the new equipment equals

the discounted present value of the expected future profits created by the investment.5

Under conventional accounting practice, the investment would be added to PHARMA’s

balance sheet at its cost of $10 million and amortized over time.

        PHARMA’s accountants do not treat the $10 million tangible capital investment

as an expense before figuring profit, but the company that sells the equipment to

PHARMA does recognize the cost of producing the investment good as an expense and

adds the $10 million sale to its revenues. If the cost is, say, $8 million, it records a

before-tax profit of $2 million.




5
   This is the usual “neoclassical” formulation, in which arbitrage across alternative investments equates
the opportunity cost of an investment, the $10 million, with the discounted present value of the expected
income generated by the investment. As noted in the introduction, the recent crash in the equity and
credit markets is a reminder that the ex ante expectations built into the original cost of an investment are
not necessarily equal to ex post outcomes (the mark-to-market versus intrinsic value approach to asset
valuation). In the best of worlds, it would be helpful to have accurate information on both ex ante and ex
post asset values, because it would also give estimates of the implied ex ante and ex post rates of return
on intangible projects. Unfortunately, it is hard to “mark to market” assets for which there is no market at
all, and the present value approach is impossible to implement from externally available data. We
therefore use the original cost of the owner-produced intangibles as our valuation metric.


                                                     5
       Now suppose that PHARMA contracts with another company, call it R&DCOR, to

conduct $10 million in research on PHARMA’s behalf.6 How does this situation differ

from the case of the laboratory equipment? One possibility is that the purchased R&D

is an intermediate input to PHARMA’s production, that is, an input that is used up like

office supplies in the year in which they are delivered. However, this is inconsistent with

the evidence presented in DiMasi (2001), who shows that the gestation period for a

drug to make through the FDA approval process was 14.2 years during the 1980s and

1990s (3.8 years for the pre-clinical phase, 8.6 for the clinical trials, and 1.8 for the

approval phase). These gestation lags essentially refute the idea that R&D is an

intermediate input that disappears within a year, and virtually force the recognition that

the $10 million in purchased R&D is an investment made in order to earn future profits.

From an economic standpoint, it is no different than a $10 million investment in tangible

laboratory equipment.

       As with the laboratory equipment, the company producing the R&D (R&DCOR)

treats the $10 million received from PHARMA as revenue and allocates $8 million to the

cost of producing the R&D and records a $2 million before-tax profit. Moreover, if the

financial statements of PHARMA and R&DCOR were combined for reporting purposes,

the $10 million R&D transaction would appear as part of the combined revenue of the

companies.7


6
  As before, R&DCOR is name used only for expositional purposes, and does not correspond to any
actual company.

7
  At the macroeconomic level, the $10 million R&D transaction would be treated as investment in the
U.S. national income and product accounts, though not as part of the core GDP accounts until 2013
(Robins and Moylan (2007)). The United Nation’s System of National Accounts has also endorsed the
capitalization of R&D.



                                                  6
           Both of the preceding scenarios deal with externally purchased technology.

Consider, now, the following situation in which R&DCOR is actually a subsidiary of

PHARMA. R&DCOR produces exactly the same R&D as in the preceding case, worth

the same $10 million, but now the R&D is produced inside PHARMA and there is no

external market transaction to validate the internal flow of value. Under current

accounting practice, the $10 million disappears from the revenue line of the income

statement, because current practice treats the internal production of the R&D as an

intermediate input, not as the output of an investment good. Thus, the accountants

record a current R&D expense of $8 million and suppress the $2 million profit earned by

the independent R&D producer of the preceding scenario into the overall operating

surplus. In other words, there is a fundamental asymmetry in accounting practice: R&D

is capitalized when the R&D is produced externally but expensed when it is produced

internally.

           What do PHARMA’s books look like when this asymmetry is removed? By

analogy with the hypothetical example above, the $4.9 billion in current R&D outlays,

reported on line 6 of Table 1, would be treated as an investment and added to top-line

revenues. Also by analogy with the example, the $4.9 billion outlay would be increased

by the return to the capital used in producing the R&D (the analogue of $2 million

R&DCOR profit of the hypothetical example). The actual magnitude of this return is

unknown, and we therefore use an imputation procedure that allocates total operating

surplus to R&D according to R&D’s share in current expenses. This procedure

attributes a further $2.3 billion to the cost of R&D, giving a total investment cost of $7.2

billion.




                                               7
       This is the cost side of the investment and if PHARMA is assumed to make its

investment decisions using the discounted present value approach, the $7.2 billion is

also the present value of the future profits on the investment. By symmetry with

tangible capital, we combine the $7.2 billion with PHARMA’s $29.6 billion revenue from

goods sold to get a new top-line figure of $36.9 billion in the column labeled “+R&D" in

Table 1.



               B. The “New” View of Financial Accounting: A Closer Look



       We have made the case that tangible and intangible assets should be treated

symmetrically for accounting purposes, but the case of R&D investment is actually more

complicated because of the long gestation lags noted by DiMasi (2008) and because of

the greater uncertainty about the expected income stream than tangible investment.

Berndt et. al. (2006) show that only 40 percent of drugs that start the pre-clinical

process make it to the clinical stage (the Phase I, II, and III trials of the FDA regulatory

process), and only 8 percent of the drugs make it into the market place. Given these

odds, much of PHARMA’s $7.2 million R&D investment will disappear before it earns a

return. The very high degree of uncertainty about outcomes, particularly in the early

stages of a research project, might be better characterized by a Schumpeterian or

“animal spirits” model of the investment decision, with only a tenuous link between ex

ante cost and ex post returns.

       Our $7.2 billion estimate does not include the opportunity cost of the money tied

up in the investments during the long gestation period. This opportunity cost depends




                                              8
on the costs and survival experience of individual drug development project, and is

therefore hard to estimate. An important piece of evidence, in this regard, is provided

by DiMasi, Hansen, and Grabowski (2003), who estimate that the average cost of

bringing a drug to market is $802 million, and that about half of that amount reflects the

time-value of money.8 We should in principle adjust the $7.2 billion for the time value of

money, but the adjustment suggested by the results of DiMasi et. al. is so large that we

decided to err on the side of conservatism and note only that our estimate of the annual

cost is probably underestimated by a significant amount.



                              C. Depreciation and Asset Valuation



        As with plant and equipment, R&D investments depreciate in value over time.

There is, however, an important difference. Machines lose value because they are

used up in production due to wear, tear, and accident, or because of the obsolescence

arising from the development of superior types of machinery. R&D capital, on the other

hand, is more closely tied to the output it generates and is therefore subject to

obsolescence arising from competition from superior types of output, not superior

inputs, as in the machinery case. There is also another dimension not shared with

tangible capital. R&D knowledge is largely a non-rival public good whose benefits can


8
   These issues are also problems for tangibles, but to a lesser degree. For example, structures often
take several years to build, from the planning through the construction stages of development, and money
is tied up in the investment that imposes additional costs (and risk). However, the problems posed by the
gestation lags in tangible assets are generally not of the same magnitude as the lags in pharmaceutical
R&D. The value of the tangible investment is normally recorded at the point at which it is completed and
ready for transfer to the buyer. The transaction price thus includes a time-value adjustment in the final
cost. R&D investments, on the other hand, are self-constructed by the firm, and what is reported on the
financial statement is the cost of the R&D in progress, and not the complete project. There is thus no
point at which an actual market-based time-value adjustment is made.


                                                   9
accrue to other users without diminishing the quantity available to the originator. The

value of the R&D to the originator, on the other hand, is limited to the commercial value

that can be extracted from the investment. If the knowledge diffuses to competitors,

that value is eroded as competition leads to lower product prices. Some degree of

protection to the originator is promoted, but not assured, by copyrights and patents, and

by secrecy, but diffusion almost always occurs at some point, and this leads to the

deprecation in the original cost of the investment.

       The commercial life-cycle of the products developed by R&D is the primary

determinant of the depreciation rate of successful R&D programs, and there is also the

depreciation arising from the unsuccessful programs. It is therefore not surprising that

the literature on this subject has produced a broad range of estimates that vary from

around 10 percent to 25 percent (CHS (2006), Mead (2007)). The recent study by Hall

(2007) suggests that the range of uncertainty could be even wider. Faced with this

problem, we somewhat arbitrarily select an amortization procedure near the midpoint of

the range in the literature and amortize each investment dollar (as it is spent) over a

ten-year average life, using a pattern that declines slowly in the early years of the period

and accelerates at the end.

       The amortization of the R&D stock adds a depreciation charge of $3.2 billion to

the income statement of Table 1 (column 2, line 11). This offsets some of the $7.2

billion increase in “revenue” and results in before-tax income of $10.9 billion (line 15).

Taxes are assumed to be unaffected when R&D is capitalized (that is, R&D is assumed

to be expensed for tax purposes), so after-tax income on line 17 is now $9.5 billion (a

73 percent increase over the after-tax income of conventional accounting). Earnings




                                             10
per share increase from $2.03, the amount when R&D is expensed, to $3.52 when R&D

is capitalized.9

        We also use our amortization procedure to estimate stock of R&D capital on the

balance sheet. We use a perpetual inventory method in which each year’s investment

in R&D (e.g., $7.2 billion in 2006) added to the preceding year’s stock, and adjust for

the depreciation of that stock. R&D investments are initially recorded in the historical

prices, and, as prices change, each year’s investment needs to be expressed in

constant prices in order to insure comparability. We use the price deflator in BEA’s

R&D satellite account (see Robbins and Moylan (2007)) to convert R&D investment

from historical prices to current prices.10 We also adjust the annual depreciation

estimates for price changes.11 This procedure yields an estimate of the constant price

R&D stock in each year, which we then reflate to current (not historical) prices using the

BEA R&D price series. The result is the $38.6 billion R&D stock recorded in Table 2

(column 2, line 9). This is important to emphasize the expected commercial value to

PHARMA of its R&D stock.

        The assumption of a 10-year write-off period is, at best, a guess based on the

bits of econometric evidence in the literature on R&D, and may not apply to the case of

9
  It is important to note that capitalizing intangibles does not necessarily increase after-tax incomes and
EPS. In companies where R&D programs are declining, the amortization cost may exceed the amount
added to the top line from current expenditures. In this situation, capitalizing R&D may reduce EPS (see
Lev (2001)).
10
    We do not adjust the value of tangible assets from historical prices to current prices, because current
accounting practice records tangible assets only at historical prices, with only occasional revaluation for
price changes. This introduces a potential bias in the balance sheet estimate of assets. The size of the
bias is suggested by BEA estimate that the current value of the fixed assets in the U.S. corporate
business sector in 2006 was some 50 percent greater than the corresponding historical cost.
11
   We use our depreciation estimates to adjust both the income statement and the balance sheet. Strictly
speaking, this is an inconsistent procedure unless depreciation has the geometric (declining-balance)
form. Our procedure is not geometric and this introduces an inconsistency into the analysis, but the error
is bound to be quite small compared to all the other uncertainties about the depreciation process.


                                                    11
PHARMA. For one thing, it implies that all of the value of an investment from any year

is gone after 10 years, and this is not consistent with the data on project survival. As a

robustness check, we computed an alternative R&D stock using the same general

procedures but with a 20-year write-off period rather than the 10-year life as above.

This alternative assumption of amortization results in an estimated stock of R&D capital

of $55.2 billion, some $16 billion greater than the previous estimate. Changes of this

magnitude indicate that the estimates of Table 1 and 2 clearly depend on the magnitude

of this uncertain parameter.



                            D. Organizational and Human Assets



       R&D is not the only type of intangible expenditure in the innovation process.

Pharmaceutical companies typically have large marketing budgets designed, in part, to

launch new products and PHARMA is no exception. It spent $1.6 billion on advertising

in 2006 and this is only part of the total marketing expenses.12 Some fraction of these

expenditures are used to establish new drugs in the market place, and, once

established, the resulting brand equity is an asset to the firm. By analogy with R&D

expenditures, this asset also belongs on the balance sheet of the company.

       This view of marketing expenditures contrasts with the popular view that the

marketing efforts of pharmaceutical companies are unproductive and merely serve to

drive up the cost of drugs to the consumer. This view implicitly assumes that a good

drug will sell itself, implying a rapid and costless dissemination of information. In fact,

12
  This estimate uses advertising spending in 2006 of four companies: Bristol-Myers Squibb, Johnson
and Johnson, Pfizer, and Wyeth. The other two companies provide no advertising data in 2006.



                                                 12
the up-take of new drugs is often slow even when they turn out to be highly efficacious,

and even when drug companies make considerable marketing efforts. One rationale for

capitalizing some fraction of the marketing expenditures is that a company will not

undertake the substantial cost of bringing a new drug to market (recall the $802 million

estimate of DiMasi, Hansen, and Grabowski (2003)), unless the company expects to

sell enough of it to at least cover its full costs. Seen this way, the marketing of a new

drug is a complementary coinvestment with R&D and therefore part of the innovation

process.

        PHARMA also invests in organizational development (e.g., strategic planning,

new management systems) and worker training.13 Brynjolfsson, Hitt, and Yang (2000,

2002) and Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2005) note that much of the IT spending in the 1990s

was a coinvestment with expenditures for organizational development. These

investments were, in part, intended to increase the effectiveness of corporate

management, and the evidence in Bloom and van Reenan (2006) suggests that they

also increase the value of a company. By implication, a fraction of such expenditures

should be treated as capital for accounting purposes. A number of papers report similar

results for worker training (Bassi et. al. (2002), Black and Lynch (2005)).

        Expenditures for brand equity and organizational development are reported on

most financial statements, so we borrow the CHS procedures and translate their

approximate proportions of brand equity and organizational development investment

into a corresponding fraction of SG&A spending. This leads us to impute about 30



13
     For the nonfarm business sector as a whole, CHS estimate that the value of brand equity was $161
billion in 2003, and $425 billion for the other forms of organizational capital.



                                                  13
percent of PHARMA’s total SG&A outlays in 2006 to investment in organizational

capital. The result is an additional $4.1 billion on the top line of PHARMA’s income

statement, bringing the total revenue inclusive of all intangible to $41.0 billion. These

estimates are shown in the last column of Table 1 (labeled “+ ORG K”).

           Organizational investments depreciate over time for a variety of reasons. Brand

equity loses value when new goods appear in the market place or the marketing

programs of competitors cut into market share, and human capital erodes through

worker attrition and with the adoption of new products, processes, and business

models. Management competencies erode for many of the same reasons. There is a

debate over the appropriate depreciation rates for each intangible asset (CHS (2006)),

and there is little information on how PHARMA’s SG&A is split among different types of

organizational investments. Consequently, we adopt the simple assumption (based on

CHS) that each investment dollar is amortized over a six year period, again using a

pattern that declines slowly in the early years of the period and accelerates at the end.

           Using these procedures, we estimate that the depreciation/amortization of

organizational capital amounted to $3.5 billion in 2006. When applied to the $4.1 billion

increase in revenue, after-tax income rose by $0.6 billion to a grand total of $10.1

billion.

           Moving to the balance sheet, the estimated stock of organizational capital was

found to be $16.3 billion (column 3, line 10 of Table 2). When added to the $38.6 billion

in R&D assets, own-produced intangibles exceed the $50.9 billion in conventional

assets. And, this comparison ignores the fact that $16.7 billion of the latter are actually

purchased intangibles and goodwill, implying that the grand total for all intangible capital




                                               14
is $71.6 billion, or 68 percent of all assets. Most of these intangible assets are related

to technological knowledge, brand equity, and organizational know-how, so it is not

unreasonable to conclude that PHARMA is essentially a knowledge-based operation.

PHARMA has only $10.1 billion in plant and equipment.



            E. A Decomposition of the Sources of PHARMA’s Market Valuation



According to the Compustat data set, the stock market valued PHARMA at $102.9

billion in 2006, a figure that greatly exceeds the conventional shareholder equity of

$26.7 billion (ex intangibles). The size of the gap can be measured by Tobin’s average

“q”, the ratio of the stock market value to the book value of equity, or its inverse, which

indicates the fraction of the stock market values explained by the book value of equity.

These metrics are shown in lines 18 and 19 of Table 2. They reveal that the traditional

“10k” measure of shareholder equity explains only 26 percent of PHARMA’s stock

market value.14

        Conventional accounting practice regards this gap as a combination of goodwill

and identifiable intangibles. Rather than assuming a priori that it is so, we have inserted

our cost-based estimates of intangibles into the gap and let the data determine how

much is due to these intangibles and how much remains unexplained. We find that

shareholder equity (inclusive of our intangibles) jumps to $81.7 billion, a figure far closer


14
   These estimates refer to the year 2006. The average market capitalization of the six companies that
make up PHARMA fell to $75 billion on “Black Friday”, October 10, 2008, at which point the contemporary
book value of equity explained 40 percent on the market value. The market value recovered to $84 billion
on October 20, and the percentage explained fell to 35 percent. While these figures assign a larger role
to book value, there is still a large book-to-market gap left unexplained even during a period of extreme
stock market turbulence.


                                                   15
to the stock market’s appraisal of the company. The corresponding measure of Tobin’s

“q” falls to 1.26 and shareholder equity now explains 79 percent of PHARMA’s stock

market value in 2006.

       This result carries an interesting implication for the average rate of return to

equity (Tobin’s “q” times the inverse of the price/earnings ratio). Our estimates for

PHARMA show that the conventionally measured return on equity is 21 percent when

intangibles are excluded, and this falls to 14 percent when intangibles are included in

both the numerator and denominator of the rate of return ratio. This is a much more

modest rate of return on equity, and it is even smaller, 7 percent, when intangible assets

are added to the denominator, but not the numerator. This version measures the direct

(cash) return on equity when all the capital that generated the income is counted.

       Intangible assets do not explain the entire price-to-book gap. Some part of the

remaining gap may reflect the volatility of the stock market, with its episodes of

exuberance and pessimism. Another part may reflect a “Schumpeterian” gap between

the ex ante cost-based estimates of the paper value and the ex post innovation rents

earned by PHARMA. PHARMA represents the highly successful innovators in the

industry, and one aspect of this success is that PHARMA is able to identify drug

discovery programs that generate ex post super-normal profits. Since the probability of

developing a successful drug is quite low, the drug-discovery industry is populated with

less successful ventures. A more representative sample of the industry would tend to

show more modest ex post returns and thus a smaller gap between market value and

book value.




                                             16
       Some part of the remaining gap may reflect other problems with the way that

some balance sheet items are measured. Three sources of bias have already been

noted. First, the balance sheet values tangible assets at the historical price when the

asset was built or acquired, and ignores the inflation after the original investment. As

previously noted, BEA estimates suggest that the balance sheets of U.S. firms under-

state nonresidential business plant and equipment by around 50 percent, implying that

another $5 billion would be added to the balance sheet if we apply that ratio to

PHARMA’s plant and equipment in 2006.

       Second, the 10-year write-off period we assumed for R&D investments may be

too short. If a 20-year write-off period were used instead, the R&D stock would be

$16.6 billion larger.

       Third, there has been no adjustment for the time-value of money. The DiMasi

estimate suggests that for successful projects the time-value of money almost equals

the direct cost. However, only eight percent of the projects are successful, suggesting a

smaller multiplier for all projects. If we use 20 percent as the appropriate multiplier for

PHARMA, and apply it to the $55.2 billion of the R&D stock, the additional write-up in

value is $11 billion.

       The sum of the last three factors adds $32.6 billion to equity and, together, they

explain more than the remaining price-to-book gap of $21.3 billion. This overshoot

could signal an error in the preceding adjustments, but it also reflects the fact that the

component companies of PHARMA performed poorly in the stock market since 2001.

Investors may be pessimistic about the “fecundity” of R&D programs and may be

concerned about regulatory risk.




                                             17
       Other sources of error may bias the results in the opposite direction. We might

have allocated too much of SG&A costs or operating surplus to R&D and organizational

structure. But, however imprecise these estimates are, and they certainly are imprecise,

it is reasonable to conclude that own-produced intangible investments are important in

explaining the valuation of PHARMA.



                        F. Some Pros and Cons of the New View



       It is important to recognize that neither the “old” nor “new” view of the income

statement is uniquely correct. The annual sales and the corresponding ex post profits

reported on the conventional statements provide important ex post information about

success of the firm in the market place. Adding $11.4 billion of implicit intangible

income to actual sales may reveal something about the future prospects of the

company, but it does not help illuminate how well the company’s product are selling in

the current year, and may actually obscure this issue. Moreover, the “new view”

estimates of intangibles are inaccurate. They are based on imputations rather than on

market transactions, and are inferred from the cost of investment.

       On the other hand, treating R&D as an expense can obscure a company’s true

long-run position. For example, many start-up biotechnology companies spend millions

of dollars developing a new drug and go many years without earning significant

revenues. Some of these start-ups become very profitable because their R&D

programs pay off, but by excluding R&D capital from the financial statements, none of

this success is anticipated.




                                            18
        Moreover, if a more mature company wants to give the appearance of good

economic health during rough times, the company can increase its current profits by

cutting its R&D expenses.15 In the case of Table 1, if the entire $4.9 billion current R&D

cost were eliminated, before-tax income in conventional income statement would

increase by this amount. Assuming an unchanged average tax rate, 2006 EPS would

jump from $2.03 to $3.47. This strategy, however, does not work when R&D is

capitalized, because EPS in column 3 would fall from $3.74 to $2.66 if current R&D

were zeroed out. This occurs because the income statement must deduct the

amortization costs from past R&D (line 11) to get before-tax income. More is lost from

the top line than is offset by a reduction in current cost.



                 III. A Broader Look at Financial Accounting with Intangibles



        Is the case of PHARMA representative? After all, PHARMA is a collection of the

more successful companies in the U.S. economy. Are intangible assets as important for

other companies as they are for PHARMA? To answer this question, we extracted a

sample of U.S. 617 corporations from the Compustat database of 9885 firms and

constructed tables for this sample that parallel the items in Tables 1 and 2.16 Only those



15
   A lack of transparency is needed in order for this strategy to work, otherwise the financial markets
would recognize the loss in future value, if any, associated with a reduction in investment in R&D. Lev
(2001, 2003) and Bassi et. al. (2004) argue that this tends to be the case, with the implication that current
accounting practice creates a disincentive for investment in R&D and other expensed intangibles.
16
   The Compustat data are derived from company financial statements, adjusted to harmonize them
across companies. Thus they do not necessary match the data on the company reports. There are well-
known risks in using financial statements for time-series and cross-sectional comparisons (see Hall
(2007)). Accounting rules change over time, and merger and acquisitions (and spinoffs) occur that can
greatly affect the income statements and balance sheets of a company. Comparisons over time, as well


                                                     19
companies with R&D and SG&A expenditures for most of the sample period (1988-

2006) were included. By restricting our sample to firms with a more-or-less continuous

record of R&D spending, we bias our results in favor of intangibles. Around 60 percent

of the companies in the 617 sample come from just six of the 41 two-digit industries and

include the largest R&D performers.17 It is therefore not surprising that the estimates in

Tables 3 and 4 are comparable to those for PHARMA in Tables 1 and 2. The fraction of

617 firms’ market value explained by conventional equity alone is 31 percent and this

increases to 75 percent when “own” intangibles are included. The comparable figures

for PHARMA are 26 percent and 79 percent.



                            IV. Are Intangibles Really Capital Assets?



        We noted earlier in this paper that the long gestation periods for the R&D

programs of the pharmaceutical industry virtually force the conclusion that they should

be regarded as capital investments, and that this conclusion is reinforced by the body of

evidence linking intangibles to company valuation and productivity.18 This conclusion



as the perpetual inventory estimates of the R&D and organizational capital stocks, must be interpreted
with these caveats in mind.
17
    To check the difference between the 617 R&D-intensive companies and the rest, we constructed the
equivalent to Tables 3 and 4 for the entire sample less those companies. A comparison of these tables
with the estimates of Tables 3 and 4 indicate the 617 firms with a complete record are far more intangible-
intensive relative to plant and equipment. One problem with this comparison is that missing data in the
latter sample were assigned a zero, whereas the few cases of missing data in the 617-firm sample were
interpolated. The problem of missing data is the principal reason that we do not analyze the complete
sample in this paper.
18
   This literature includes studies relating financial market value to R&D (e.g., Hall (1993), Hall and Hall
(1993), Lev (2001)); managerial and organizational capital (see Bloom and Van Reenen (2006),
Bryjolfsson and Hitt (2005)), advertising (Hall (1993), Ayanian (1983)), and worker training (Abowd et. al.
(2005), Bassi et. al. (2004)).



                                                     20
can be checked using the Compustat data underlying our intangible stock estimates,

supplemented by data on stock market prices.

       The difficulties in using stock market data to value intangibles are now well

known (Hall (2005) provides a cogent overview of the problems). The boom-bust stock

market cycle evident in Figure 2 contrasts sharply with the much smoother trends in the

intangible stock variables, which are built up from successive investments over the

years and therefore do not change rapidly, even in periods where investment spending

is volatile. Any attempt to forge a tight link between the two is therefore subject to a

certain amount of econometric peril.

       This being said, we can at least check for correlations between the key variables.

To do this, we further narrowed our sample of R&D-intensive companies to a time-

series, cross-section panel of only the 422 companies that have a complete record of all

data series for the years 1997-2006. This smaller sample excludes those companies in

the 617 data set for which some observations had to be extrapolated or interpolated.

We then use these data to estimate a model in which the value of a company’s shares,

Vi ,t , depends on the book value of the company’s equity, Ei ,t , the estimated value of its

R&D capital, Ri ,t , its organizational capital, Oi ,t , and the average price-earning ratio Z i ,t

of the principal industry to which the company belongs (the latter is included in order to

account for shifts in financial market optimism about future earnings). The linear form

of this model is

       V i ,t = α + β E i ,t + γ R i ,t + θ O i ,t + λ Z i ,t + ε t   (1).

Variants of this model are found in the literature linking intangibles to stock market

valuation (see, for example, the discussion in Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2005)). Some


                                                              21
studies use Tobin’s “q” in place of Vi ,t ; the tangible capital stock replaces Ei ,t in others;

and various types of intangible stocks or flows are used instead of Ri ,t and Oi ,t , along

with different ancillary variables.

        The issue of causality is a potential problem in most of these models (including

ours). This problem arises because, while lower rates of investment in intangibles may

indeed lead to a lower market valuation (the usual interpretation), it may also be the

case that a deterioration in business prospects leads both to a lower market valuation

and a lower propensity to invest. This direction of causality may arise from a common

economy-wide shock to both variables, like a recession. In this regard, it has been

noted in the economic literature that R&D investment tends to be pro-cyclical.19 Or, the

problem could arise from firm-specific events in which the diminished (or enhanced)

prospects for a company jointly affect its market value and its investment programs.

        The narrower objective of this paper is to test current accounting practice versus

the “new view” that intangibles have capital value. Current practice assumes that the

coefficients of the intangible stocks in equation (1) should not be correlated with market

value, whereas the “new view” asserts that these coefficients should be positive and

significantly different from zero. If they are, the case for capitalizing intangibles is

enhanced. Furthermore, in the Hall (2005) zero-rent economy with prefect foresight, no




19
   Economic explanations of this pro-cyclical behavior of R&D are discussed in Barlevy (2007). The
incentive to cut R&D spending during periods of falling profits because R&D is expensed, noted by Lev
(2001) and Bassi et. al. (2004), may contribute to this problem by offering a way to boost EPS in the near
term. However, one problem with these explanations is the inherent nature of research programs. They
often involve multi-year commitments, witness the DiMasi data on gestation lags in pharmaceutical R&D,
and are frequently undertaken in competition with the programs of other firms. Canceling or slowing this
sort of R&D program involves more than simply short-run cost considerations.


                                                    22
omitted variables, and correctly priced equity, α and λ should be zero and β should

equal one.

       To test these hypotheses, we carried out the regression indicated by the

valuation equation, in both its level form, as shown above, and in its natural logarithms

(in which case the valuation equation is assumed to be multiplicative). The first column

of Table 5 gives the results of imposing the restriction that intangibles do not affect

market value. The estimate of β is 3.59 and is statistically significant, indicating that a

$1 increase in the book value of equity increases market value by an expected $3.59.

The average annual industry price/earning ratio also shows a significant positive effect

on valuation. However, the constant term, α , is not statistically significant. Dummy

variables for each year are also included as a separate control for general market

effects. The R-squared statistic is respectably large.

       The next column introduces the two stocks of intangible capital, but omits equity.

The results are, again, statistically significant and indicate a large effect, particularly for

the stock of organizational capital, providing evidence in favor of the capitalization

hypothesis. On the other hand, when equity and intangibles are used together, the

estimated coefficients of all variables fall, and that of the stock of organizational capital

becomes statistically insignificant though still positive. However, there is a very high

correlation between the equity and organizational variables in the data, so it is hard to

sort out the separate contributions of the two variables. It is worth recalling, here, that

the equity and R&D variables are derived from reported data whereas the organizational

capital is imputed as a faction of SG&A.




                                               23
       Much the same pattern is observed in the last three columns of Table 5, which

report results for the multiplicative form of the valuation equation. The key variables are

transformed to the natural log form, with the result that the parameters are now

interpreted as elasticities. Equity by itself is again a strong variable, with the magnitude

of the coefficient now implying that a one percent change in the amount of equity leads

approximately to a one percent change in stock market value. The R&D and

organizational capital variables, by themselves, are both strongly significant and their

combined coefficients are close to one. Again, when all three variables are included in

the regression, all coefficients fall but the sum continues to be close to one. The R-

squared statistics in this specification are higher than in the preceding table.

       A number of other regressions were run for various separate industries and

years, with varying results. Organizational capital is a strong explanatory variable in the

chemical and pharmaceuticals industry but has the wrong sign in Instruments.

However, the general industry patterns are consistent with the more aggregate Table 5.

Combined with evidence from past studies, we interpret our results as lending statistical

support to the case for capitalizing intangibles.



                                 V. Concluding Remarks



       Financial accounting data are neither inherently right nor wrong. They are only

more or less useful for the questions that people want answered. Some questions

involve “agency” issues that shareholders and other interested parties seek to monitor

the actions of managers. This has inclined accounting principles toward a conservatism




                                             24
that stresses accuracy in valuation and relies on data generated by arms-length market

transactions.

       One consequence of this conservatism is that hard-to-value assets like

intangibles are excluded from the accounts. According to our estimates, these

excluded assets explain some 40 to 50 percent of the 2006 market value of R&D-

intensive companies in the U.S., and appear significant in explaining the market-to-

book-value puzzle. The intrinsic value of corporate America is a lot larger than its book

equity suggests. This has an important implication for fair value accounting: if the book

value of equity is used as a more accurate indicator of fair value in preference to mark-

to-market rule during sharp downturns in the stock market, the former will greatly

understate fair value by a potentially large amount. Another implication is that the

exclusion of intangible capital from financial statements gives companies an incentive to

cut back on R&D spending during economic downturns, since these expenditures

currently add nothing to assets or equity and raise earnings in the short run.

       The excluded assets also present a different perspective on corporate debt and

the degree to which a company has leveraged its equity. The bottom lines of Tables 2

and 4 show that debt-equity ratios fall significantly when intangibles are included in both

the numerator and denominator (from 0.91 to 0.30 in the case of PHARMA, and from

1.46 to 0.61 for the larger sample). One implication is that the use of debt to finance the

construction of a company’s “own” intangible assets magnifies the conventionally-

measured debt-equity ratio. In this situation, the liability is added to the balance sheet,

while the intangible assets it finances are omitted.




                                             25
       Our findings have yet another implication for the return on corporate equity. The

pharmaceutical industry appears to have a large return, 21 percent, when investment in

intangibles is excluded, but the rate of return on equity falls to a more modest 14

percent when intangibles are added to the numerator and denominator. The return is

even lower, 7 percent, when conventional after-tax net income is compared to a

measure of equity that reflects the huge investments in R&D and marketing. We find

similar results for the larger sample of R&D intensive companies. Again, it is important

to count all the capital that matters.

       The issue of omitted intangibles goes beyond the mechanical problem of adding

or modifying data on company financial statements. A company’s accounting data are a

reflection of its actual economic performance, and this performance is determined in the

long run by the quality and execution of its business model. How the data are

organized and reported should ideally reveal the nature of this model and the

corresponding organizational structure. Current accounting practice falls short of this

ideal because it implicitly portrays the company primarily as a producer of goods and

services. Mandel (2006) puts his finger on this problem when he observes that, while

the Apple iPod is made in China, “Where the gizmo is made is immaterial to its

popularity. It is great design, technical innovation, and savvy marketing that have

helped Apple Computer sell more than 40 million iPods.” Mandel goes on to observe

that by ignoring the value of Apple’s large investments in R&D and marketing, that is, by

imposing a pure production function view of Apple, the company is implicitly portrayed

as simply a reseller of this phenomenally successful product.




                                            26
       In fact, the modern corporation is most often a complex organization that

develops, produces (or, increasingly, arranges for others to produce), and markets a

range of products. Characterizing this process in all its complexity goes far beyond the

simple production function framework to a more realistic model of the firm of the sort

suggested by Penrose (1959). Developing metrics for this more elaborate description of

the firm requires a parallel development in the way a company’s performance data are

organized and presented. Recognizing that expenditures on product development and

organizational capability are investments in a company’s future rather than current

expenses is an important step in this direction.




                                            27
                                      References

Abowd, John M., John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, Julia Lane, Paul Lengermann, Kristin
     McCue, Kevin McKinney, and Kristen Sandusky, “The Relation among Human
     Capital, Productivity, and Market Value: Building Up from Micro Evidence.” In
     Measuring Capital in the New Economy, C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D.
     Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 65. Chicago: The University of
     Chicago Press, 2005.

Advisory Committee on Measuring Innovation in the 21st Century, Innovation
      Measurement: Tracking the State of Innovation in the American Economy, A
      Report to the Secretary of Commerce, U.S. Department of Commerce, January
      2008.

Ayanian, Robert, “The Advertising Capital Controversy.” Journal of Business 56 (3),
      1983, 349-364.

Barlevy, Gadi, “On the Cyclicality of Research and Development,” American Economic
      Review 97 (4), March, 2007, 1131-1164.

Bassi, Laurie, Paul Harrison, Jens Ludwig, and Daniel McMurrer, “The Imact of U.S.
       Firms’ Investments in Human Capital on Stock Prices,” unpublished, June 2004

Berndt, Ernst R., Adrian H.B. Gottschalk, and Matthew W. Strobeck, "Opportunities for
      Improving the Drug Development Process: Results from a Survey of Industry and
      the FDA", in AB Jaffe, J Lerner and S Stern eds., Innovation Policy and the
      Economy, Vol. 6, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press for the NBER, 2006, pp. 91-121.

Bernstein, Jeffrey, I. and Theofanis P. Mamuneas, “R&D Depreciation, Stocks, User
      Costs and Productivity Growth for U.S. Knowledge Intensive Industries,” mimeo,
      Carleton University, 2004.

Black, Sandra and Lisa M. Lynch, “Measuring Organizational Capital in the New
       Economy,“ in Measuring Capital in the New Economy, C. Corrado, J.
       Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 65.
       Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2005, 205-234.

Black, Sandra and Lisa M. Lynch, “Human Capital Investments and Productivity,”
       American Economic Review, 86 (2), May, 1996, 263-267.

Blair, Margaret M., and Steven M.H. Wallman, Unseen Wealth: Report of the Brookings
        Task Force on Intangibles, Brookings Institution Press, Washington D.C., 2001

Bloom, Nick, and John Van Reenen, “Measuring and Explaining Management
      Practices Across Firms and Countries,” National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper 11948, January 2006.



                                          28
Brynjolfsson, Erik., and Lorin M. Hitt, “Remarks,” In Measuring Capital in the New
       Economy, C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and
       Wealth, Vol. 65. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2005, 567-575.

Brynjolfsson, E., Hitt, L. and Yang, S., "Intangible Assets: Computers and
       Organizational Capital," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,1, 2002,137-181.

Brynjolfsson, Erik., Lorin M. Hitt, and Shinkyu Yang, “Intangible Assets: How the
       Interaction of Information Technology and Organizational Structure Affects Stock
       Market Valuations.” Cambridge, Mass: MIT Working paper, 2000.

Corrado, Carol, John Haltiwanger, and Daniel Sichel, “Introduction,” in Measuring
      Capital in the New Economy, C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel, eds.,
      Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 65. Chicago: The University of Chicago
      Press, 2005, 1-9.

Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, “Measuring Capital and Technology:
      An Expanded Framework.” In Measuring Capital in the New Economy, C.
      Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol.
      65. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2005, 11-41.

Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel, “Intangible Capital and Economic
      Growth,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11948, January
      2006.

DiMasi, Joseph A., “New Drug Development in the United States from 1963 to 1999,”
      Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 69, 5, 2001, 151-85.

DiMasi, Joseph A., Ronald W. Hansen, and Henry G. Grabowski, “The Price of
      Innovation: New Estimates of Drug Development Costs,” Journal of Health
      Economics, 22 (2), 2003, 151-186.

Grabowski, Henry G., and Dennis C. Mueller, “Industrial Research and Development,
     Intangible Capital Stocks, and Firm Profit Rates,” The Bell Journal of Economics,
     9, 2 Autumn, 1978, 328-343.

Hall, Bronwyn H., “Measuring the Returns to R&D, The Depreciation Problem,”
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13473, October 2007

Hall, Bronwyn, “The Stock Market’s Valuation of R&D Investment During the 1980’s,”
       American Economic Review, 82, 2, May 1993, 259-264.

Hall, Bronwyn and Robert E. Hall, “The Value and Performance of U.S. Corporations,”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,1, 1993, 1-50.




                                          29
Hall, Robert E., “Remarks,” In Measuring Capital in the New Economy, C. Corrado, J.
       Haltiwanger, and D. Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 65.
       Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2005, 557-562.

Hall, Robert E. (2001a). “Struggling to Understand the Stock Market.” American
       Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 91 (May): 1-11.

Hall, Robert E. (2000). “e-Capital: The Link between the Stock market and the Labor
       Market in the 1990s.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2 ,2000, 73-118.

Hall, Robert E. (2001b). “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation.” American
       Economic Review 91 (December): 1185-1202.

Lev, Baruch, “Remarks on the Measurement, Valuation, and Reporting on Intangible
      Assets,” FRBNY Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, September,
      2003, 17-21.

Lev, Baruch, Intangibles: Management, Measurement, and Reporting, Brookings
      Institution Press, Washington D.C., 2001.

Lev, Baruch, and Suresh Radhakrishnan, “The Valuation Organizational Capital,” In
      Measuring Capital in the New Economy, C. Corrado, J. Haltiwanger, and D.
      Sichel, eds., Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 65. Chicago: The University of
      Chicago Press, 2005, 73-99.

Mandel, Michael, “Why The Economy Is a Lot Stronger Than You Think,” Business
     Week, February 13, 2006, 62-70.

Mead, Charles Ian, “R&D Depreciation Rates in the 2007 R&D Satellite Account,”
      Bureau of Economic Analysis/National Science Foundation, 2007 R&D Satellite
      Account Background Paper, U.S. Department Of Commerce, November 2007.

Penrose, Edith T., The Theory of the Growth of the Firm, Basil Blackwell Mott, 1959.

Robbins, Carol A., and Carol E. Moylan, “Research and Development Satellite Account
      Update Estimates for 1959–2004 New Estimates for Industry, Regional, and
      International Accounts,” Survey of Current Business, October 2007, 49-92.

System of National Accounts 1993. Commission of the European Communities,
      International Monetary Fund, Organization for Economic Co-operation and
      Development, United Nations, and World Bank.




                                          30
                                   TABLE 1
                       ‘NEW VIEW’ INCOME STATEMENT1
                BASED ON SIX COMPANY AVERAGE (“PHARMA”)
                               2006 ($ BILLIONS)
_____________________________________________________________________

                                                                          10k2        + R&D2         +ORG K2

1.    CONVENTIONAL REVENUE                                               $29.6          $29.6           $29.6
2.    OWN PRODUCTION OF R&D3                                                $0           $7.2             $7.2
3.    OWN PRODUCTION OF ORG. CAPITAL3                                       $0             $0            $4.1
4.    TOTAL ADJUSTED REVENUE (L1+L2+L3)                                  $29.6          $36.9           $41.0

5.    CONVENTIONAL COST OF REVENUE                                         $6.4          $6.4            $6.4
6.    CURRENT COST R&D4                                                    $4.9          $4.9            $4.9
7.    CURRENT COST OF SG&A4                                                $8.8          $8.8            $8.8
8.    TOTAL CURRENT COST (L5+L6+L7)                                       $20.2         $20.2           $20.2

 9.   OPERATING SURPLUS (L4-L8)                                            $9.5         $16.7           $20.8
10.   DEPRECIATION ALREADY ACCOUNTED FOR5                                  $1.9          $1.9            $1.9
11.   AMORTIZATION OF OWN R&D6                                             $0.0          $3.2            $3.2
12.   AMORTIZATION OF OWN ORG. CAPITAL6                                    $0.0          $0.0            $3.5
13.   ADJ. OPERATING SUPLUS (L9-L10-L11-L12)                               $7.6         $11.6           $12.2

14.   NET INTEREST AND OTHER ADJUSTMENTS                                   $0.7           $0.7           $0.7
15.   BEFORE-TAX INCOME (L13-L14)                                          $6.9          $10.9          $11.5
16.   INCOME TAX PAID7                                                     $1.5           $1.5           $1.5
17.   AFTER-TAX INCOME                                                     $5.5           $9.5          $10.1

18. EARNINGS PER SHARE                            $2.03    $3.52     $3.74
_____________________________________________________________________________
Note 1: Based on S&P Compustat data and authors’ calculations. Detail may not add up due to rounding error.
Note 2: Column 1, designated “10k”, contains conventional financial data from Compustat; Column 2, designated
“+R&D”, adds R&D data to the data of column 1; Column 3, designated “Org K”, adds organizational capital data
to column 2.
Note 3: “Own Production of R&D” is shadow value of the investment in R&D made by the company. It is equal to
current cost of R&D on line 6, all of which is considered to be a capital expenditure, plus markup for profit (imputed
fraction of line 9 attributable to production of R&D). “Own Production of Org. Capital” is shadow value of the
investment in organizational capital made by the company. It is equal to approximately 30% of current SG&A costs
on line 7, the portion considered to be a capital expenditure, plus markup for profit (imputed fraction of line 9
attributable to production of organizational capital).
Note 4: Current cost of R&D (line 6) and organizational capital (line 7) is the outlay for labor and materials, plus
applicable depreciation and amortization. This differs from the shadow values on lines 3 and 4 (see note 3).
Note 5: Conventional Depreciation and amortization are allocated to costs on lines 5 to 7. They are subtracted,
here, in order to arrive at net income.
Note 6: The amortization of own R&D and organizational capital arises when these items are capitalized, as in
columns 2 and 3. R&D is amortized over a 10 year useful life with a quasi-hyperbolic write-off pattern.
Organizational capital is amortized over a 5 year useful life with a quasi-hyperbolic write-off pattern.
Note 7: Assumes that the implicit income from R&D and organizational capital is not taxed.



                                                         31
                                    TABLE 2
                        ‘NEW VIEW’ASSET ACCOUNTS1
                BASED ON SIX COMPANY AVERAGE (“PHARMA”)
                               2006 ($ BILLIONS)
___________________________________________________________________________

CONVENTIONAL BALANCE SHEET2                                                10k3        + R&D3        + ORG K 3

1.    CURRENT ASSETS                                                       $19.8           $19.8          $19.8
2.    PLANT AND EQUIPMENT                                                  $10.1           $10.1          $10.1
3.    PURCHASED INTANGIBLES                                                 $8.0            $8.0           $8.0
4.    GOODWILL                                                              $8.7            $8.7           $8.7
5.    OTHER LONG TERM ASSETS                                                $4.3            $4.3           $4.3
6.    TOTAL ASSETS (L1+L2+L3+L4+L5)                                        $50.9           $50.9          $50.9

7. TOTAL LIABILTIES                                                        $24.2           $24.2           $24.2
8. EQUITY                                                                  $26.7           $26.7           $26.7

ADJUSTMENTS FOR OWN INTANGIBLES                                             10k         + R&D           + ORG K
                         4
 9.   R&D CAPITAL                                                           $0.0           $38.6          $38.6
                              4
10.   ORGANIZATIONAL CAPITAL                                                $0.0            $0.0          $16.3
11.   ASSETS ADJ. FOR OWN INTANG. (L6+L9+L10)                              $50.9           $89.5         $105.8
12.   EQUITY ADJ. FOR OWN INTANG. (L8+L9+L10)                              $26.7           $65.3          $81.6

COMPANY VALUATION                                                           10k          + R&D         + ORG K
                                                5
13.   MARKET VALUE OF EQUITIES                                            $102.9          $102.9          $102.9
                                      6
14.   FINANCIAL VALUE OF FIRM (L13+L7)                                    $127.1          $127.1          $127.1
15.   CORE FINAN. VALUE OF FIRM (L14-L1-L5)                               $103.0          $103.0          $103.0
16.   CORE ASSETS (L11-L1-L5)                                              $26.9           $65.4           $81.7
17.   TOTAL INTANGIBLE ASSETS (L3+L4+L9+L10)                               $16.8           $55.3           $71.6

VALUATION RATIOS                                                            10k          + R&D        + ORG K

18.   TOBIN'S EQUITY QE (L13/L12)                                           3.85            1.58           1.26
19.   PERCENT MV VALUE EXPLAINED (1/ QE)                                    0.26            0.63           0.79
20.   DEBT/EQUITY RATIO (L7/L12)                                            0.91            0.37           0.30
21.   RETURN ON EQUITY (T1 L17/L12)                                         0.21            0.15           0.14
________________________________________________________________
Note 1: Based on S&P Compustat data and authors’ calculations. Detail may not add up due to rounding error.
Note 2: Conventional balance sheet items recorded at historical cost.
Note 3: See note 2 of Table 1.
Note 4: See note 2 of Table 1 for amortization assumptions. Note also that valuation of intangibles is at current, not
historical, cost.
Note 5: Average monthly market value of outstanding equities.
Note 6: Average monthly market value of outstanding equities plus balance sheet liabilities.



                                                         32
                                         TABLE 3
                    S&P CORPORATIONS WITH CONTINUOUS R&D
                         ‘NEW VIEW’ INCOME STATEMENT1
                                2006 ($ BILLIONS)

                                                           10 k       + R&D        + ORG K

1. CONVENTIONAL REVENUE                                     $4899       $4899        $4899
2. OWN PRODUCTION OF R&D                                       $0        $220         $220
3. OWN PRODUCTION OF ORG. CAPITAL                              $0          $0         $399
4. TOTAL ADJUSTED REVENUE (L1+L2+L3)                        $4899       $5119        $5518

5. CONVENTIONAL COST OF REVENUE                             $3283       $3283        $3283
6. CURRENT COST R&D                                          $165        $165         $165
7. CURRENT COST OF SG&A                                      $658        $658         $658
8. TOTAL CURRENT COST (L5+L6+L7)                            $4106       $4106        $4106

9. OPERATING SURPLUS (L4-L8)                                 $793       $1013        $1412
10. DEPRECIATION ALREADY ACCOUNTED FOR                       $191        $191         $191
11. AMORTIZATION OF OWN R&D                                    $0        $134         $134
12. AMORTIZATION OF OWN ORG. CAPITAL                           $0          $0         $318
13. ADJ. OPERATING SURPLUS (L9-L10-L11-L12)                  $602        $688         $769

14. NET INTEREST AND OTHER ADJUSTMENTS                        $18         $18          $18
15. BEFORE-TAX INCOME (L13-L14)                              $584        $670         $751
16. INCOME TAX PAID                                          $192        $192         $192
17. AFTER-TAX INCOME                                         $392        $478         $559

18. EARNINGS PER SHARE                                       $2.48       $3.03        $3.54

1. Data from 617 R&D-intensive U.S. corporations. See notes to preceding tables.




                                             33
                                         TABLE 4
                    S&P CORPORATIONS WITH CONTINUOUS R&D
                          ‘NEW VIEW’ BALANCE SHEET1
                               2006 ($ BILLIONS)


CONVENTIONAL BALANCE SHEET                                  10 k      + R&D        + ORG K

1. CURRENT ASSETS                                            $1726      $1726        $1726
2. PLANT AND EQUIPMENT                                       $1389      $1389        $1389
3. PURCHASED INTANGIBLES                                      $210       $210         $210
4. GOODWILL                                                   $604       $604         $604
5. OTHER LONG TERM ASSETS                                     $778       $778         $778
6. TOTAL ASSETS (L1+L2+L3+L4+L5)                             $4707      $4707        $4707

7. TOTAL LIABILITIES                                         $2795     $2795         $2795
8. EQUITY                                                    $1910     $1910         $1910


ADJUSTMENTS FOR OWN INTANGIBLES                             10 k      + R&D        + ORG K

9. R&D CAPITAL                                                  $0      $1239        $1239
10. ORGANIZATIONAL CAPITAL                                      $0         $0        $1448
11. ASSETS ADJ. FOR OWN INTANG. (L6+L9+L10)                  $4707      $5946        $7394
12. EQUITY ADJ. FOR OWN INTANG. (L8+L9+L10)                  $1910      $3149        $4597

COMPANY VALUATION                                           10 k      + R&D        + ORG K

13. MARKET VALUE OF EQUITIES                                 $6146      $6146        $6146
14. FINANCIAL VALUE OF FIRM (L13+L7)                         $8941      $8941        $8941
15. CORE FINAN. VALUE OF FIRM (L14-L1-L5)                    $6437      $6437        $6437
16. CORE ASSETS (L11-L1-L5)                                  $2203      $3442        $4890
17. TOTAL INTANGIBLE ASSETS (L3+L4+L9+L10)                    $814      $2053        $3501

VALUATION RATIOS                                            10 k      + R&D        + ORG K

18. TOBIN’S EQUITY QE (L13/L12)                                3.22      1.95          1.34
19. PERCENT MV VALUE EXPLAINED (1/QE)                          0.31      0.51          0.75
20. DEBT/EQUITY RATIO (L7/L12)                                 1.46      0.89          0.61

21. RETURN ON EQUITY (T3 L17/L12)                             0.21       0.15          0.14
1. Data from 617 R&D-intensive U.S. corporations. See notes to preceding tables.




                                             34
                                              TABLE 5
                              DETERMINANTS OF MARKET VALUE
                             S&P SAMPLE OF 422 COMPANIES WITH
                                 COMPLETE RECORD OF R&D


                                  LEVELS                                        LOGS
                        (1)         (2)           (3)                (4)         (5)           (6)
EQUITY                3.59***                    2.07**            1.09***                   0.87***
                       (6.29)                    (2.13)            (56.13)                   (15.28)

R&D STOCK                          2.32***      1.95***                         0.37***      0.17***
                                    (5.50)       (6.36)                          (7.19)       (6.81)

ORG. STOCK                         3.64***        1.04                          0.67***       0.07
                                   (14.58)       (0.77)                          (9.39)      (1.12)

PE RATIO                -0.48        -1.06       -1.54*            -0.0001      -0.0000      -0.0001
                       (-0.40)      (-1.57)      (-1.78)           (-1.47)      (-0.12)      (-1.51)

YEAR                     Y            Y            Y                  Y            Y           Y
DUMMIES
CONSTANT                1360         8.20        190.14            0.56***      1.40***      0.63***
                       (1.36)       (0.02)       (0.41)             (6.63)       (7.71)      (10.09)

R-SQUARED              0.72         0.76          0.79              0.93         0.89         0.94
#OBS                   4220         4220          4220              4220         4220         4220



Notes: Firm-level panel data drawn from Compustat covering the period 1997 to 2006. The
dependent variable is the average of the monthly market value of a firm. The results in columns
(1), (2), and (3) refer to specification in which the variables are in levels. The results in columns
(4), (5), and (6) refer to specification in which market value, equity, R&D stock, and the stock
organizational capital (“Org” stock) are transformed to natural logarithms. The P/E ratio is the
corresponding industry average for each company. Standard errors are clustered by 2-digit
industries.




                                                 35
                                   PHARMA (Six Co. Composite)
                                  Decomposition of Market Value
                                      S&P Compustat Data

                $140
                $120
                $100                                                        residual value
$ billion




                 $80                                                        organization capital
                 $60                                                        R&D assets
                 $40                                                        equity
                 $20
                  $0
                    97

                    98

                    99

                    00

                    01

                    02

                    03

                    04

                    05

                    06
                 19

                 19

                 19

                 20

                 20

                 20

                 20

                 20

                 20

                 20
                                            year




                                            FIGURE 1

                               Decomposition of Financial Market Value
                             All S&P Industries with Full R&D - Asset Detail

                $8.00
                $7.00
                $6.00                                                       residual value
$ trillio n s




                $5.00
                                                                            organizational capital
                $4.00
                                                                            R&D assets
                $3.00
                $2.00                                                       equity
                $1.00
                $0.00
                        97   98   99   00   01     02   03   04   05   06
                                             year




                                            FIGURE 2



                                                        36
