NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPROVING EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES FOR POOR CHILDREN
Brian Jacob
Jens Ludwig
Working Paper 14550
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14550

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

A version of this paper was presented at the Institute of Research on Poverty conference "Changing
Poverty," which was held at the University of Wisconsin-Madison May 29-30, 2008, with financial
support from the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation of the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services and the Russell Sage Foundation. This paper is forthcoming in fall 2009 in the
Russell Sage volume Changing Poverty coedited by Maria Cancian and Sheldon Danziger. Thanks
to Helen Ladd, Betsey Stevenson, the editors, and conference participants at the University of Wisconsin’s
Institute for Research on Poverty and the Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank and University of Pennsylvania
for helpful comments. All opinions and any errors are of course ours alone. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Brian Jacob and Jens Ludwig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Improving Educational Outcomes for Poor Children
Brian Jacob and Jens Ludwig
NBER Working Paper No. 14550
December 2008
JEL No. I20
ABSTRACT
This review paper, prepared for the forthcoming Russell Sage volume Changing Poverty, considers
the ability of different education policies to improve the learning outcomes of low-income children
in America. Disagreements on this question stem in part from different beliefs about the problems
with our nation's public schools. In our view there is some empirical support for each of the general
concerns that have been raised about public schools serving high-poverty student populations, including:
the need for more funding for those school inputs where additional spending is likely to pass a benefit-cost
test; limited capacity of many schools to substantially improve student learning by improving the quality
of instruction on their own; and the need for improved incentives for both teachers and students, and
for additional operational flexibility. Evidence suggests that the most productive changes to existing
education policies are likely to come from increased investments in early childhood education for
poor children, improving the design of the federal No Child Left Behind accountability system, providing
educators with incentives to adopt practices with a compelling research base while expanding efforts
to develop and identify effective instructional regimes, and continued support and evaluation of a variety
of public school choice options.

Brian Jacob
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
bajacob@umich.edu
Jens Ludwig
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jludwig@uchicago.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
One of the best ways to avoid being poor as an adult in America is to obtain a good
education. As Magnuson and Votruba-Drzal (2009) note, individuals with higher academic
achievement and more years of schooling earn more than those with lower levels of human
capital. This is not surprising given that we believe that schooling makes people more
productive, allowing them to command higher wages in the labor market.
Yet, in modern America disadvantaged children face an elevated risk for a variety of
adverse educational outcomes. According to the 2007 National Assessment of Educational
Progress (NAEP), only 16 percent of fourth grade students eligible for free lunch score at
proficient levels in reading compared with 44 percent of fourth graders whose family incomes
are above the eligibility cutoff for free lunch; the disparity in math scores is even larger, 21
versus 53 percent (NCES 2007). Equally large disparities in achievement test scores are
observed between whites and minority racial or ethnic groups, with gaps that show up as early as
age three or four (Jencks and Phillips, 1998, Neal, 2007).1
Understanding why children’s outcomes vary so dramatically along race and class lines in
America is central to formulating effective education policy interventions. Disagreements about
how to improve schooling outcomes for poor children stem in part from different beliefs about
what problems underlie the unsatisfactory outcomes found in too many of our nation’s public
schools. Broadly speaking, critics tend to invoke, at least implicitly, one of the following
reasons why children in high-poverty schools are not performing as well as we would like:

1

Note that these disparities in schooling outcomes along race and class lines are not simply due to immigration into
the U.S. by those with low initial levels of English or other academic skills, since for example reading and math
disparities in NAEP scores are large among 4th and 8th graders even between non-Hispanic whites versus nonHispanic blacks (www.nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/nde, accessed on August 4, 2008).

2

1. Schools serving poor and minority students have fewer resources (e.g., text books, teachers,
support services) than they need to educate the disadvantaged students they serve. In this
case, a potential solution would be to provide more money to disadvantaged schools.
2. High-poverty schools lack the capacity to substantially improve student learning,
independent of financial resources. Under this perspective the teachers and administrators in
highly disadvantaged school districts are thought to lack the skills or knowledge necessary to
improve the quality of instruction on their own. Potential solutions to this problem would
involve helping schools improve the quality of their standard operating practices, for
example by helping implement specific new instructional or organizational practices (i.e.,
curriculum, instruction, school organization) and/or increasing the instructional capacity of
staff in these schools through professional development or more selective hiring. The
success of this approach depends critically on whether there are particular instructional,
organizational, human resource or other practices that are known to be effective, and how
easily these practices could be implemented across different contexts.
3. High-poverty schools do not have sufficient incentives and/or flexibility. High-poverty
schools are under-performing because teachers and administrators are not working hard
enough, they are not working toward the right goal, or they have good local knowledge about
what would work best but they are not able to implement these ideas because of centralized
authority. Proponents of this perspective often claim that without clarifying the key
objectives of school and holding key actors accountable, additional spending will simply be
squandered. Under this view, the solution would be to enhance incentives and provide local
actors more flexibility through policies such as school choice or accountability.

3

4. Schools matter only so much. The real problem rests with the social context in which
schools operate – namely, the family, neighborhood and peer environments that low-income
children experience. Adopting accountability or market-oriented education reforms without
changing social policy more broadly will simply punish educators for factors beyond their
control, and potentially drive the most able teachers toward schools serving less
disadvantaged students. In this case, a necessary condition for making serious improvements
in poor children’s schooling outcomes would involve fixing the other social ills associated
with poverty that impair children’s learning outcomes, such as poor health care or high
unemployment.
For some reason current policy debates often seem to be argued as if the problems above
are mutually exclusive. In contrast, we believe that there is likely some truth to each of these
major explanations. Moreover, it seems plausible that the underlying problems confronting our
schools might interact in complicated ways. For example, it may be the case that certain
curriculum reforms are effective only if they are accompanied by an increase in resources such
as student support services, or by an increase in teacher quality generated by better professional
development and/or reforms to hiring and tenure policies
Research over the past four decades has unfortunately fostered the impression that when
it comes to interventions for the most disadvantaged public schools in our country “nothing
works.” One of the first studies to do so was the landmark 1966 report by sociologist James
Coleman and his colleagues. By drawing on a large, nationally representative sample, the
Coleman Report found that most of the variation in student achievement occurs within rather
than across schools, that family background is the strongest predictor of academic achievement,
and that most measurable school inputs like student-teacher ratios are only weakly correlated

4

with student outcomes. Subsequent evaluation studies also tended to be disappointing and
helped contribute to a sense of pessimism about the ability of schools to lift poor children’s life
chances (Levin, 1977, Glazer, 1986, Jencks, 1986).
In contrast, our chapter offers a message of tempered optimism. The past few decades
have seen a dramatic improvement in the technology of education policy evaluation, which has
enhanced our ability to uncover moderately-sized program impacts within the complex
environment that determines schooling outcomes. The available evidence reveals a number of
potentially promising ways to improve the learning outcomes of low-income children. This is
not to say that everything works: many current and proposed education policies either enjoy no
empirical support for their effectiveness, or in some cases have strong empirical evidence for
their ineffectiveness. But a careful sifting of the empirical evidence identifies a selected set of
interventions that seem to be promising.
Our optimism is tempered by the recognition that even the most successful educational
interventions will reduce, but not eliminate, racial and social class disparities in educational
outcomes. But the usual standard of public economics for judging policy interventions is that
they generate benefits that exceed their cost. Under this benefit-cost standard, education policies
that are capable of improving poor children’s schooling outcomes by enough to justify the costs
of these new programs are worth doing, even if these programs by themselves are not enough to
equalize learning opportunities for all children in America.
While we recognize that the social context of children’s lives plays a large role in their
schooling outcomes, the focus of this chapter involves school-specific policies. For a
comprehensive discussion of the direct link between a child’s family background and their
learning outcomes, see Magnuson and Votruba-Drzal (2009).

5

The distinction between the role of family background and school-specific policies is
blurred by the fact that the concentration of low-income and minority students within schools can
have important implications for the success of school-specific policies.2 A growing body of
empirical evidence suggests that policies that can effectively reduce the amount of racial (and by
implication socio-economic) segregation within schools may help improve the schooling
outcomes of disadvantaged children (see Vigdor and Ludwig, 2008 for a review). Yet there are
substantial barriers – both logistical and political – to further integrating schools along race or
class lines. There is substantial residential segregation in our country, which limits the amount
of school desegregation that can be accomplished since the U.S. Supreme Court made it very
difficult to enact across-district plans in the Milliken v. Bradley decision (418 US 717, 1974).
More generally, the majority of Supreme Court decisions on school desegregation since the early
1970s have restricted the ability of districts to promote integration (Kahlenberg, 2001), including
two recent decisions striking down desegregation plans in Seattle and Louisville. It may be that
school desegregation efforts are unable dramatically improve the lot of poor children in
American schools. In any case in what follows, we assume that the distribution of poor and
minority children across schools is fixed, and consider the ability of different education policies
to improve their learning outcomes given this reality.
The remainder of the chapter is organized as follows. In Section II, we review three
specific areas in which we believe increased resources may yield important benefits for poor
children: early childhood interventions, class size reductions in the early grades that hold the
quality of teachers constant, and bonuses to attract and retain the highest-quality teachers in
disadvantaged schools. In Section III, we examine reforms that do not require a large investment
2

For example, all else equal the typical teacher seems to prefer working in schools that serve more affluent and less
racially diverse student bodies (Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin, 2004), which may have implications for policy efforts
designed to improve the quality of teachers in high-poverty areas.

6

of resources, but instead seek to make specific changes in the ways schools operate, ranging
from changes in curriculum and instruction to changes in teacher hiring and promotion policy.
The available evidence for effective changes in school practices are limited, but this problem
could be overcome if federal and state governments did more to require schools to use methods
that have been proven effective (Jacob and Ludwig, 2005). In Section IV, we review the
literature on school accountability and school choice policies, which aim to change the goals,
incentives and organizational structure within which schools and families operate. The evidence
on school accountability is moderately encouraging, though recent findings suggest that the
design of accountability policies matters a great deal. There is less evidence that current public or
private school choice plans improve student outcomes, but there are likely to be benefits from
continued experimentation with and evaluation of a variety of choice options by states and
school districts. Finally in Section V, we summarize what we believe the available empirical
evidence suggests are the most promising education policies for improving the life chances of
disadvantaged children.
II. SCHOOL RESOURCES
The question of whether “money matters” has been the subject of contentious debate in
the research literature for the past 40 years. Isolating the causal effects of extra school funding is
complicated by the possibility that compensatory spending may be directed towards those
schools serving the most disadvantaged students, and adequately controlling for all aspects of
student disadvantage is quite difficult in practice. A few recent studies have used policy changes
that generate sharp changes in school funding and find some impact on student outcomes (Figlio,
1997, Card and Payne, 2002, Guryan, 2003). Overall, however, there is fairly weak support for
the idea that increases in unrestricted school funding will improve student outcomes (see for

7

example Hanushek 1997). In contrast, there is stronger evidence that some targeted increases in
specific school inputs can improve student outcomes. In this section, we discuss three specific
areas in which we believe increased resources may yield important benefits for poor children:
increased investments in early childhood education; class size reductions in the early grades; and
targeted salary bonuses to help disadvantaged schools recruit and retain better teachers.
A. Early childhood education
Disparities in academic achievement by race and class are apparent as early as age three
and four, well before children enter kindergarten. Recent research in neuroscience,
developmental psychology, economics, and other fields suggests that the earliest years of life are
a particularly promising time to intervene in the lives of low-income children (Shonkoff and
Phillips, 2000, Carniero and Heckman, 2003, Knudsen et al., 2006). Studies show that early
childhood educational programs can generate learning gains in the short-run and, in some cases,
improve the long-run life chances of poor children. Moreover, the benefits generated by these
programs are large enough to justify their costs.
The Perry Preschool and Abecedarian programs are commonly cited as examples of how
high-quality preschool services can change the lives of low-income children. A small group of
children who participated in the these programs in the 1960s and 1970s have been followed for
many years and on average have better outcomes in a range of domains compared to a randomly
assigned group of control children (Schweinhart et al., 2005; Ramey and Campbell, 1979;
Campbell et al., 2002; Barnett and Masse, 2007). Despite the high cost of these programs, these
studies suggest that the total economic benefit of these programs exceeded their costs (Belfield et
al., 2006; Barnett and Masse, 2007). While these results are encouraging, it is important to keep

8

in mind that these are model programs that were unusually intensive and involved small numbers
of children in just two sites.
Yet evidence on publicly funded early education programs, which illustrate what can be
achieved for large numbers of children in programs of variable quality, is also very encouraging.
A recent random-assignment evaluation of Head Start found positive short-term effects of
program participation on a variety of cognitive skills on the order of .2 to .4 standard deviations,3
with typically positive effects on non-cognitive outcomes as well that are usually not statistically
significant. A rigorous evaluation of Early Head Start, a program serving children under age
three in a mix of home and center-based programs, found positive effects on some aspects of
parent practices and children’s development, but the effects were generally smaller than for Head
Start (Love et al. 2002).
Wong et al. (2008) find that several recent state-initiated universal pre-K programs have
even larger impacts on short-term cognitive test scores than does Head Start (see also Gormley et
al., 2005; Gormley and Gayer, 2005). Why might the new state pre-K programs generate larger
cognitive gains than does Head Start? One explanation is that pre-K programs hire more
qualified teachers, pay them more, and offer a more academically oriented curriculum than do
Head Start programs. Another explanation is that the Head Start comparison group received
more center-based care than did children in the pre-K comparison group.4 A third possible
explanation is that the recent Head Start study relies on a rigorous randomized experimental

3

The official evaluation of the program found impacts on elementary pre-reading and pre-writing skills equal to
about 0.3 and 0.2 of a standard deviation respectively (Puma et al. 2005; Ludwig and Phillips, 2007). If one
calculates Head Start impacts by pooling together the three- and four-year-olds in the experiment, the increased
statistical power leads to significant program impacts on math scores and on almost all of the other main cognitive
skill outcomes in the report (Ludwig and Phillips, 2007).
4
http://www.northwestern.edu/ipr/events/briefingdec06-cook/slide16.html

9

design, while the research design of the new state pre-K studies is more susceptible to bias from
selection problems (see Ludwig and Phillips, 2007). 5
While these short-run achievement gains from both Head Start and newer state pre-K
programs are impressive, the crucial question is whether these effects persist over time. In order
to explore longer-run impacts, one must rely on non-experimental studies of children who
participated in Head Start decades ago and control for potential confounding factors (Currie and
Thomas, 1995; Garces, Thomas and Currie, 2002; Ludwig and Miller, 2007; Deming, 2007).
These studies suggest lasting effects on schooling attainment and perhaps criminal activity,
although test score effects appear to fade out over time. Nonetheless, the positive long-term
effects seem large enough to generate benefits that likely outweigh the program costs.
It is possible that the long-term effects of Head Start on more recent cohorts of children
may be different from those for previous cohorts of program participants because program
quality changes over time, or because the developmental quality of the environments that
children would experience as an alternative to Head Start change. But the short-term test score
impacts that have been estimated for recent cohorts of Head Start participants appear to be
similar to what we see for earlier cohorts of children for whom we also now have evidence of
long-term benefits. So there is room for cautious optimism that Head Start might improve the
long-term outcomes for recent waves of program participants as well, even though this cannot be
directly tested for many years (Ludwig and Phillips, 2007).
Although preschool interventions represent a promising way to improve the life chances
of poor children, their success is not well reflected in federal government budget priorities,
which allocate nearly seven times as much money per capita for K-12 schooling as for pre5

Some prior research has found that while pre-kindergarten programs improve cognitive outcomes, they may have
adverse effects on non-cognitive outcomes like self-control (see, for example, Magnuson, Ruhm and Waldfogel,
2004). The evidence on this issue is not yet available for the new state pre-K programs.

10

kindergarten (pre-K), other forms of early education and child care subsidies for three- to fiveyear-olds. Most social policies attempt to make up for the disadvantages poor children
experience early in life. But given the substantial disparities between poor and non-poor
children that already exist among very young children, it is perhaps not surprising that many
disadvantaged children never catch up. There may be very high returns indeed to increased
investments in improving young children’s school readiness with proven, high-quality programs.
B. Class size reduction
Reducing average class sizes may enable teachers to spend more time working with
individual students, tailor instruction to match children’s needs, and make it easier for teachers to
monitor classroom behavior. Class size reductions are not inexpensive, however. They require
hiring additional teachers and in some cases expanding a school’s physical space. Nonetheless,
the best available evidence suggests that class size reduction, holding teacher quality constant,
can improve student outcomes by enough to justify these additional expenditures, with benefits
that are particularly pronounced for low-income and minority children.
The evidence in favor of class size reduction comes mainly from Tennessee’s Project
STAR, which randomly assigned 11,600 students in grades K-13 and 1,330 teachers to small
classes (13-17 students), regular size classrooms (22-25 students), or regular size classrooms that
also included a teacher’s aide.6 Teachers were also randomly assigned to different classroom
environments in this study, which ensured that the average quality of teachers in small versus
regular size classrooms is the same, a critical point to which we will return within the context of
policy efforts to take class size reduction to scale. Class size reductions of around one-third
during these early grades increased Stanford-9 reading and math scores by around 0.12 standard
deviations for whites and 0.24 standard deviations for blacks. Impacts were larger for students
6

This section is based on the summary of Project STAR research by Schanzenbach (2006/7).

11

attending mostly black schools, although even within such schools, black students benefited
somewhat more than did whites (Krueger and Whitmore, 2002). Similarly, impacts were
somewhat larger for students eligible for the free lunch program.
Follow-up evaluations of STAR find long-term benefits of attending a small elementary
school class – the test score impacts seem to persist through 8th grade, although they decline by
one-half to two-thirds (Achilles et al., 1993, Nye et al., 1995, Krueger and Whitmore, 2001). As
with the short-term effects, the eighth grade test scores reveal larger gains among low-income
and minority students. Moreover, black students in the treatment group were roughly 5
percentage points (or 15 percent) more likely to take a college entrance exam (i.e., the SAT or
ACT) during high school (Krueger and Whitmore, 2001, 2002).7 The test score gains induced by
smaller classes in STAR are probably large enough to justify the costs, even when we focus just
on the benefits that arise from test scores on future earnings alone (Krueger, 2003, Krueger and
Whitmore, 2001, Schanzenbach, 2006/7).
The results from Project STAR are encouraging, but they come from a controlled
experiment that held the quality of teachers constant by randomly assigning teachers as well as
students across classrooms. A sobering example of the challenges of taking class size reduction
to scale comes from the California experience. California introduced a statewide initiative to
reduce primary grade class sizes in 1998-99, which required schools to not only hire a large
number of new teachers, but also find additional physical space for the new classrooms
(Borhnstedt and Stecher 2002; Jepsen and Rivkin 2002). The policy was implemented over a
short time period. Many low-income school districts found it difficult to hire qualified teachers,
and had trouble arranging for adequate classroom space. Jepsen and Rivkin (2002) argue that

7

Effects for outcomes such as criminal involvement or teen births yield point estimates that are in the direction of
beneficial CSR impacts, but are imprecisely estimated (Schanzenbach, 2007).

12

much of the benefit from smaller classes in California was lost due to reductions in average
teacher quality, particularly in lower-income urban school districts.
California’s experience suggests the complexity of taking education policy reforms to a
large scale. It suggests the potential value of focusing class size reductions in low-income
districts or schools, as well as the importance of careful implementation of the program so as to
minimize any adverse effects on teacher quality or physical capital. So long as these
implementation efforts did not raise costs too much relative to STAR, it still seems plausible that
a large scale program to reduce class sizes might pass a benefit-cost test.
C. Bonuses for teaching in high-needs schools or subjects
Research has identified substantial variation across teachers in the ability to raise student
achievement. These studies estimate teacher effectiveness by comparing changes in student
achievement scores across classrooms, controlling for student, classroom and school
characteristics that influence achievement regardless of the teacher. Because these studies
attempt to isolate the value that a teacher adds to student achievement, they are referred to as
“teacher value-added” studies. These studies document substantial variation in teacher
effectiveness, both within and across schools. According to a recent analysis of NYC elementary
school math teachers, for example, students whose teacher falls in the top quarter of
effectiveness learn roughly 0.33 test score standard deviations more in a single year than students
whose teachers are in the bottom quarter (Kane et al. 2006).8 If disadvantaged children were
taught by the most effective teachers, disparities in schooling outcomes might be narrowed.

8

There are three concerns with value-added measures of effectiveness. One involves the statistical precision of the
measures; the other involves the possible biases inherent in such measures. First, given the small number of
students that an individual teacher works with in any given year (i.e., 15 or 20 for many elementary school teachers)
and the imperfect reliability of student achievement tests, teacher “value-added” measures are generally measured
with considerable error (Kane and Staiger, 2002a,b). That is, the “confidence interval” around an estimate of a
teacher’s effectiveness is often quite large. A second problem is that students are not randomly assigned to

13

Value-added measures of teacher effectiveness are not very strongly correlated with the
easiest-to-observe characteristics of teachers. On the one hand, novice teachers are less effective
than more experienced ones, but this experience premium disappears after the first few years of
teaching (Rockoff 2004). Teachers who have higher scores on the SAT or various teaching
exams are generally more effective than others (Harris and Sass 2007, Clotfelter et al. 2007). On
the other hand, there is little if any difference in the achievement gains of students assigned to
traditionally certified, alternatively certified or uncertified teachers (Kane et al. 2006; Boyd et al.
2005). Similarly, researchers have found that teachers who have advanced degrees are not more
effective than other teachers (Hanushek 1997).
Hence, the policy challenge in this domain is to induce more effective teachers to teach in
schools serving the most disadvantaged children, knowing that effectiveness cannot easily be
measured. Given the relationship between wages and teacher labor supply (see, for example,
Hanushek, Kain, & Rivkin, 2004; Stinebrickner 2002; and Scafidi, Stinebrickner, & Sjoquist,
2007), one strategy is to entice teachers to work in hard-to-staff schools and/or subjects through
financial incentives such as targeted salary increases or bonuses since. While many states have
adopted some sort of financial assistance programs (e.g., loan forgiveness, mortgage assistance,
salary supplements), there has been little systematic evaluation (Imazeki 2007, Gaurino et al.
2006, Glazerman et al. 2006).
Evaluation of a targeted teacher bonus in North Carolina suggests the program was
successful in reducing teacher turnover rates in low-income or low-performing schools
(Clotfelter, Glennie, Ladd and Vigdor, 2006). In California from 2000 to 2002 the Governor’s

classrooms, and hard-to-measure student characteristics may influence the rate of growth in children’s test scores
not just their levels. So value-added measures may partly confound the causal contribution of the teacher to student
learning with those of the characteristics of their students (Rothstein 2007). A third concern is that the impact of
having an effective teacher may fade out over time (Jacob et al. 2008).

14

Teaching Fellowship program offered academically talented teaching candidates $20,000
bonuses to work in low-performing schools, which was found to increase the rate at which such
teachers started working in disadvantaged schools but did not seem to influence subsequent
retention rates (Steele et al. 2008). Key questions that remain include whether such programs
will successfully lure new teachers into the profession who would not otherwise have taught,
rather than just re-sort a fixed pool of teachers across schools, and how long any talented new
teachers who are drawn into teaching will remain. Moreover, financial incentives that are not
tied to teacher performance might induce ineffective teachers to locate in hard-to-staff schools.
III. CHANGING SCHOOL PRACTICES
In the previous section, we identified several reforms that seem likely to improve
achievement of poor children. Yet all of these policy changes are expensive, and so must
compete for scarce government resources with a variety of other pressing societal concerns.
Some observers of America’s schooling system remain skeptical that additional spending is
needed to improve the learning outcomes of poor children. They argue that by improving the
ways in which schools are organized, including the way they deliver instruction, one could
improve student achievement with few additional resources. This line of reasoning assumes there
is good evidence on which practices are most effective, but that school personnel do not have the
capacity to identify or implement these programs on their own.
In the section below, we review the evidence on a variety of reforms, and find some lowcost changes in school operating practices that seem to improve student outcomes, including
changes to school organization, classroom instruction and teacher hiring and promotion. What
remains unclear is the degree to which these “best practices” have not been more widely adopted

15

because of a lack of information, political resistance, bureaucratic inertia or some combination of
these (or other) barriers.
A. Curricular and Instructional Interventions
In 2002, the Institute for Education Sciences (IES) within the U.S. Department of
Education created the What Works Clearinghouse (WWC) in order to collect and disseminate
scientific evidence on various educational interventions. A brief review of the WWC website
highlights the lack of convincing evidence on curricular interventions. For example, WWC
found only one program with strong evidence of improving reading achievement among
beginning readers (i.e., Reading Recovery), one program for elementary school math (i.e.,
Everyday Mathematics) and two programs for middle school math (I Can Learn Algebra/PreAlgebra and Saxon Middle School Math). Moreover, WWC excluded many studies that did not
meet a minimal standard of evidence, and even the programs for which there is strong evidence
of success according to WWC show a disappointingly low level of rigorous research. For
example, the Everyday Mathematics curriculum was introduced in 1983 and has been used in
175,000 classrooms by around 2.8 million students (WWC 2007). Yet, WWC only found four
studies of Everyday Mathematics that met their minimal standards of evidence “with
reservations.” This lack of success is not limited to traditional “paper and pencil” curricula.
There is also little evidence that educational software programs have significant impacts on
student learning despite their growing popularity (Dynarski et al. 2007).
A more recent approach to school improvement known as Comprehensive or Whole
School Reform (CSR), attempts to improve many different aspects of the school at the same
time, hopefully in a fashion that makes the changes complementary and reinforcing. For
example, a CSR model may combine curriculum materials, professional development, teacher

16

mentoring, reorganization of the school day (e.g., block scheduling) and school structure (e.g.,
schools-within-a-school). Examples include Success for All (Borman and Hewes 2003), Comer
Schools (Cook et al. 2000), Direct Instruction (CRSQ 2006), Accelerated Schools (Bloom et al.
2001), America’s Choice (CRSQ 2006), Career Academies (Kemple and Scott-Clayton 2004),
Project GRAD (Snipes et al 2006), First Things First (Quint et al 2005) and Talent Development
(Kemple et al 2005). Unfortunately the evaluation evidence about the effectiveness of CSR
programs is, like with curricular reforms, quite limited.
At the elementary school level, a few models have been shown to improve student
outcomes. One of the more promising interventions seems to be Success for All (SFA), a
comprehensive whole-school reform model that operates in more than 1,200 mostly high-poverty
Title I schools.9 SFA focuses on reading, with an emphasis on prevention and early intervention.
Children receive 90 minutes each day of reading instruction in groups that are organized across
grade levels based on each child’s current reading level, which helps teachers to target
instruction. Students engage in cooperative learning exercises in which they discuss stories or
learn from each other, which helps reinforce what teachers do and build social skills. Children
are assessed at eight-week intervals, using both formal measures of reading competency and
teacher observations. Children who fall behind are given extra tutoring or help with other
problems, such as health or behavior problems. The program utilizes regular classroom teachers
who receive brief initial training, ongoing coaching, and other forms of support and professional
development.

9

Several other elementary school models show promise, including Direct Instruction (CRSQ 2006). One of the only
other reform models that has been rigorously evaluated is the Comer Schools program, although one problem
identified by the research is the limited degree of difference between Comer treatment schools and control schools in
the implementation of Comer-style school practices (Cook et al. 1999, 2000).

17

A random assignment evaluation of SFA documented that at the end of three years,
students in the treatment schools scored roughly 0.2 standard deviations higher than students in
the control schools on a standardized reading assessment. These effects were equivalent to about
one-fifth the gap between low and high socioeconomic-status children (Borman et al., 2007).
SFA costs about $950 per student per year (Borman and Hewes 2003), with about two-thirds of
this cost associated with the program’s tutoring component. Current spending under the federal
government’s Title I program is around $880 per eligible student, and that there is little evidence
that Title I funding as typically deployed by public schools translates into much gain in student
learning (Gordon, 2004, van der Klaauw, 2008). One implication is that in schools serving
predominantly poor students, SFA could be implemented mostly by just redeploying existing
Title I funds. If the experimental evaluation of SFA is correct and the program’s impact is
anything like 0.2 standard deviations, this type of funding shift would easily pass a benefit-cost
test, since Krueger (2003) shows that test score increases of this magnitude would increase the
present value of each student’s lifetime earnings profile by thousands of dollars.
At the high school level, CSR models incorporate similar features, often involving a
reorganization of the larger high school into smaller learning communities, referred to as “small
schools,” “schools within a school,” and “learning academies.” Small learning communities aim
to provide a more personalized learning environment that will better engage and motivate
students, and prevent at-risk students from “falling through the cracks.” Other common reform
features include work-based learning opportunities (e.g., internships) and assistance for students
who enter high school with poor academic skills (Herlihy and Quint 2006).
However to date there is little evidence that, as currently implemented, these high school
CSR approaches improve student outcomes. The most rigorous evaluation of a high school CSR

18

is the random assignment study of Career Academies, which are organized as small learning
communities of between 150 and 200 high school students (often housed within larger,
comprehensive high schools) that focus on a specific occupation or industry. Unlike the
vocational education programs that were popular in the 1970s and 1980s, career academies
combine academic and technical curriculum, often using the technical curricula relevant to a
particular industry to motivate students. One hallmark of these programs is to establish a
connection with employers in the given field, which occurs through mentors and internships of
students with local employers.
Early results of the Career Academy evaluation indicated that students in the program
reported that their school provided a more personalized learning environment relative to students
in the control group. The program raised attendance and completion of course credits in the
early years of high school. A later follow-up found no differences in high school completion
rates between program and control groups, but did find a substantial impact on earnings among
high-risk students (Kemple and Willner, 2008). More research is needed to assess this approach,
including evidence about whether the positive effects documented in the prior research would
generalize to students who do not volunteer for the program, and whether the career academies
studied as part of this evaluation are of higher quality than the typical career academy.
The federal government could do more to improve the quality of research and
development of curricular improvements or CRS, by for example holding “design competitions.”
Federal, state and local governments could provide curriculum developers with incentives to do
more rigorous evaluation of their products by requiring that schools devote resources to only
those products that have been proven to be effective in randomized trials (see Jacob and Ludwig
2005). The Institute for Education Sciences is moving in this direction. But the FDA’s

19

requirements that new drugs be subject to at least three phases of clinical trials highlights how far
we are from providing parents the same assurances about the value of their children’s learning
experiences at school.
B. Teacher Labor Markets
A key policy challenge for school districts is to induce more effective teachers to teach in
high-poverty schools. As discussed above, one strategy is to offer targeted financial incentives
to individuals teaching in hard-to-staff schools and/or subjects. But there are also a variety of
potential inefficiencies in the way that schools hire, promote, and dismiss teachers. At least
some of the problems might be addressed without substantial increase in resources.10
One promising approach is to promote alternative pathways into teaching. Traditional
certification requirements impose a high cost (both in terms of money and time) on individuals
interested in teaching, particularly on those with the best outside labor market options. As a
result certification requirements may help dissuade some highly skilled people from entering the
teaching profession. Many studies have explored the relative effectiveness of teachers with
traditional versus alternative (or no) certification. The emerging consensus is that differences
between the groups are relatively small, and that in certain grades and subjects, teachers with
alternative certification may actually outperform those with traditional certification (Boyd et al.
2005; Kane, Rockoff and Staiger 2006, Glazerman et al. 2006). Hence, alternative certification
may improve the supply of teachers without reducing quality.
Given the wide variation in effectiveness, policies that help school officials identify and
hire the best applicants could have an important impact on student outcomes. Unfortunately,
10

There has been little research on teacher “demand” policies. One reason is the perception that disadvantaged
school districts are in a state of perpetual shortage, and thus hire anyone that walks through the door. In reality,
while there are often shortages in certain subjects and grade levels, many disadvantaged districts have an ample
supply of teachers for most positions. For example, the Chicago Public Schools regularly receives 10 applications
for each position.

20

there is little guidance that researchers can provide in this area. For example, staffing rules, late
state budgets and inefficient human resource procedures dissuade many qualified applicants from
teaching in urban schools (Levin and Quinn 2003; Levin et al. 2005). This suggests that changes
to collective bargaining agreements that reform staffing rules and a more efficient, customerfocused approach to HR would improve teacher quality.11
Whatever system is used to hire teachers, it is inevitable that some teachers will not
perform well in the classroom. Recognizing that the hiring process is imperfect, virtually all
school systems place new teachers on probation for several years, subjecting them to an up-orout tenure review. However, in practice, public schools typically do not take advantage of the
probationary period to obtain additional information about teacher effectiveness and weed out
lower-quality teachers.12 In New York City, for example, only about 50 out of roughly 75,000
teachers were dismissed for performance-related reasons in recent years.13 In the Chicago Public
Schools, only 15 out of 11,621 teachers who were evaluated in 2007 received a rating of
unsatisfactory, and only 641 out of 11,621 (roughly 5.5 percent) received a rating of satisfactory.
The remaining teachers were rated excellent or superior.14
One possible solution is to raise the tenure bar for new teachers, and to deny tenure to
those who are not effective at raising student achievement. Some have suggested that this type
of evaluation should be based at least in part on teacher value-added scores (e.g., Gordon et al.
2006). Other criteria could also be used in making high-stakes decisions such as teacher
dismissals, given the concerns about the reliability and validity of value-added measures
11

The discussion draws on Jacob (2007). Professional development, including mentoring for novice teachers, is
another strategy for enhancing teacher ability. Such policies are complements to the policies discussed in this
section. For a review, see Hill (2007).
12
As mentioned earlier, professional development is clearly an important complement to the dismissal of
underperforming probationary teachers.
13
Personal communication with Jonah Rockoff, February 19, 2008.
14
Calculations by Brian Jacob from CPS administrative records.

21

discussed earlier. For example, while commonly measured teacher characteristics have little
correlation with student achievement, principals do recognize which teachers are most effective.
Jacob and Lefgren (2007) compare principal ratings of teacher effectiveness with “objective”
measures of teacher effectiveness calculated using student achievement gains. They find that
principals can identify the best and worst teachers, but have little ability to distinguish between
teachers in the middle of the ability distribution. This suggests that principal evaluations could
also be included as one factor in teacher tenure ratings, both because they may add additional
information beyond student test scores, but also because they reduce potential negative effects of
relying solely on an output-based measure (e.g., teachers cheating, or teaching narrowly to the
test in order to maximize short-run student test scores at the cost of skills that will maximize
long-term learning).
One might still be concerned that principals would be hesitant to deny tenure to many
teachers. Several years ago, the Chicago Public Schools and Chicago Teachers’ Union signed a
collective bargaining agreement which gave principals considerable latitude to dismiss untenured
teachers. Jacob (2008) finds that the teachers who were selected for dismissal did have more
absences and lower value-added scores than other probationary teachers in the same school who
were not selected for dismissal, suggesting that principals did consider productivity in making
their decisions. However, Jacob (2008) reports that 30-40 percent of principals – including many
at very low-performing schools – did not dismiss any teachers, suggesting that some
administrators may be reluctant to remove poorly performing employees. One reason may be
that it is difficult to hire high-quality replacements, and so principals might be reluctant to risk
the chance of getting an even worse replacement. It is also possible that principals are reluctant
to incur the social and political costs associated with dismissal. In either case, any policy to raise

22

the tenure bar will inevitably have to grapple with incorporating some system to ensure that
difficult decisions are made.
IV. INCENTIVES AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Class size reduction is an “input-based” educational intervention, based on the
assumption that schools will perform better with additional resources. Comprehensive school
reform is based on the assumption that schools are not utilizing optimal pedagogical practices,
and therefore seeks to improve schooling outcomes by prescribing a more effective instructional
approach. Both strategies assume that educators are willing to work as hard as they can given
resource constraints. Prescriptive approaches that push schools to adopt specific practices also
assume that it does not make sense for individuals to continually “reinvent the wheel” and thus
relies on centralized decision makers who presumably have better information about “best
practices” for any given school than local principals and teachers. An alternative approach to
school reform focuses on enhancing both the incentives and flexibility enjoyed by school
personnel. While the theories underlying school choice and school accountability differ in
important ways, both strategies rely on the core notions of incentives and flexibility. In this
section, we review the existing empirical work on how accountability and choice reforms impact
student outcomes.
The available evidence to date is probably strongest on behalf of the ability of school
accountability systems to change the behavior of teachers and principals, although one lesson
from that body of research is the great importance of getting the design of such policies right.
A. Teacher merit pay
Teacher compensation often arises in discussions of school reform. Most public school
teachers are paid according to strict formulas that incorporate years of service and credits of

23

continuing education including Master’s and doctorate degrees, despite the fact that research
consistently finds that advanced degrees are not associated with better student performance and
experience only matters in the first few years of teaching. For this reason, reformers have
suggested that a teacher’s compensation should be tied directly to her productivity as measured
by student performance or supervisor evaluation. Proponents of “pay-for-performance,” also
known as “merit” or “incentive” pay, argue that it would not only provide incentives for current
teachers to work “harder” or “smarter,” but also could alter the type of people who enter the
teaching force and then choose to remain.
Critics of merit pay emphasize instead that teaching is a collaborative venture and that
incentive pay for individuals could harm the teamwork necessary for effective schools. They
note that it is difficult to monitor teachers, and that because there are multiple objectives that we
would like teachers to accomplish, a system that focuses on one easily observable outcome such
as student test scores will likely distort teacher behavior in ways that harm other outcomes. For
example, teachers may focus attention more on the subjects that “count” under the performance
system, or they may neglect students who they view as too far behind (or even too far ahead).
Proponents counter that pay-for-performance systems can focus on teams of teachers or schools,
and that one might incorporate principal evaluations as well as test scores to mitigate distortions.
As Murnane and Cohen (1986) note, incentive pay has a long history in American
education, though few systems that directly reward teachers on the basis of student performance
have survived. While many teachers indicate that their compensation incorporates some aspect
of incentive pay, there are few examples of pay that is tied very closely with student
performance. One prominent example is the Teacher Advancement Program (TAP), which
incorporates incentive pay along with pay for additional professional development activities and

24

other service. This program is more popular than many “old style” merit pay programs, and
there is some evidence that they may improve student performance on standardized tests
(Springer et al. 2008). Given this tentative but positive evidence, there could be some benefit
from continued experimentation by schools and districts with pay for performance, particularly if
this experimentation is subject to careful evaluation as well.
B. School accountability systems
Recent studies suggest that accountability reforms can foster positive changes in behavior
by school administrators, teachers, and students. At the same time research provides some
warnings that incentive-based reforms often generate unintended negative consequences, such as
teachers neglecting certain students, cutting corners or even cheating to artificially raise student
test scores. The fact that actors within the school system do respond to changes in incentives
highlights both the promise and pitfalls of accountability reform, and underscores the importance
of the specific design details of accountability policies.
While studies of school-based accountability policies in the eighties and nineties found
mixed results (Jacob 2005), two major accountability reforms from the late 1990s – in Chicago
and Florida – have demonstrated positive results. In 1996, the Chicago Public Schools (CPS)
introduced a comprehensive accountability policy designed to raise academic achievement. The
first component of the policy focused on holding students accountable for learning, by ending a
practice commonly known as “social promotion” whereby students are advanced to the next
grade regardless of ability or achievement level. In addition, the CPS also instituted a policy that
placed low-performing schools on probation, which entailed a modest amount of additional
resources along with enhanced monitoring and the threat of future closure.

25

Jacob (2005) finds that math and reading achievement increased sharply following the
introduction of this accountability policy, in comparison to both prior achievement trends in the
district and to changes experienced by other large, urban districts in the mid-west. However, for
younger students, the policy did not increase performance on a state-administered, low-stakes
exam. His analysis suggests that the observed achievement gains were driven by increases in
test-specific skills and student effort. This finding is consistent with prior work suggesting that
test preparation associated with high-stakes testing may artificially inflate achievement,
producing gains that are not generalizable to other exams (see for example Koretz et al. 1991,
Koretz and Barron 1998). Note that the policy did lead to substantial achievement gains for older
students, and that for older students the test-specific gains did likely represent real learning of the
skills found on the high-stakes tests.
Figlio and Rouse (2006) study Florida’s A+ Plan for Education, a school-based
accountability system that was implemented several years before the introduction of No Child
Left Behing. In 1999, schools received “grades” based on their students’ test scores on the
Florida Comprehensive Achievement Test (FCAT). Under the A+ Plan, schools that received a
failing grade (i.e., “F”) in two consecutive years were required to offer their students vouchers to
enroll in private schools. Schools that faced declining enrollments were subject to staff cuts, and
additional sanctions. It was hoped that the stigma associated with the highly visible failing
grade, coupled with the threat of competition induced by the vouchers, would provide lowperforming schools with an incentive to improve.
Figlio and Rouse (2006) find that the designation of a school as failing led to a significant
increase in student math performance, on the order of 5 scale score points, roughly 0.1 standard
deviations. The impact of receiving an “F” on a low-stakes math test is about half as large.

26

Researchers studying later versions of Florida’s accountability system find similar effects
(Chiang 2007, Rouse et al. 2007). Moreover, they find that much of these learning gains were
sustained in the following few years.
While these studies suggest accountability policies can improve student achievement,
other studies show that educators respond strategically to test-based accountability in many
unintended ways, some of which may have negative consequences for students. Jacob (2005)
finds that educators in Chicago responded to the accountability program by placing a larger
fraction of low-performing students in special education (thus removing them from the testtaking pool15), retaining a larger fraction of students before they reached the grades where they
were subject to accountability mandates (i.e., in kindergarten through second grade), and by
shifting attention away from subjects such as science and social studies that were not used to
determine student or school sanctions under the accountability policy. Each of these responses
increased a school’s measured performance, even though they seem inappropriate and
detrimental to student learning. However, it is also possible that some, and perhaps most,
educators viewed these steps as appropriate responses, which would benefit students.16 A
growing body of research also suggests that accountability systems generate larger
improvements among students who are relatively closer to the passing threshold used to reward
schools (Chakrabarty, 2006; Neal and Schatzenbach, 2007). Finally, Jacob and Levitt (2003)
find that the prevalence of teacher cheating rose sharply in low-achieving classrooms following
the introduction of Chicago’s accountability policy.

15

Unlike more recent accountability reforms, the program in Chicago did not explicitly monitor the fraction of
students who were tested so that placing students in special education would benefit a school rating.
16
A struggling student may benefit from placement in special education services. Similarly, teachers and
administrators often believe that holding children back in an earlier grade provides them additional opportunities to
mature and to master basic skills before moving on to higher grades. Also, the focus on math and reading relative to
science and social studies was one intended goal of the program.

27

Two recent studies utilize data from the National Assessment of Educational Progress
(NAEP) to assess the impact of standards-based accountability across a variety of states, rather
than focusing on case studies of a single jurisdiction’s policy. These studies are important
because the NAEP data was not used by any state as part of its accountability program, which
means educators had no incentive to manipulate test scores in the way that prior studies
document has occurred for high-stakes exams in individual states. Both studies find positive
achievement effects overall, although they do not find evidence that accountability policies have
consistently reduced the racial achievement gap (Carnoy and Loeb 2003; Hanushek and
Raymond 2005).
A review of simple national time trends in the recent NAEP data suggests that NCLB
may have improved student achievement, particularly the math performance of younger children.
However, to our knowledge, there has not been any systematic investigation of the impact of
NCLB at a national level which attempts to account for prior achievement trends or the presence
of other policies.
Even without evaluation evidence of NCLB directly, the available accountability research
suggests a number of modifications to NCLB that could potentially increase the effectiveness of
the legislation. The first of these is the adoption of a single achievement standard for all districts
in the country. The provision that allowed states to choose the tests they use for measuring
student performance has resulted in vast disparities in the academic rigor of accountability
requirements across states. Given the political difficulty in imposing a uniform national
standard, some national associations of state officials and educators have worked to voluntarily
adopt common standards. A second feature of NCLB that has come under scrutiny is the use of
a single proficiency level --that is, holding schools accountable for the share of students with

28

scores above some single cutoff value – since this provides students an incentive to neglect
students who are far above or below this threshold. An alternative approach is for schools to be
held accountable for the gains that all students make each year. A third change to NCLB that
has been discussed is to provide states and districts with flexibility to focus on the schools most
in need of improvement, particularly if the current level of federal funding for NCLB is not
increased substantially.
C. School Choice
Another way to clarify goals or change incentives is to provide parents greater choice of
schools for their children through public magnet schools, charter schools, or vouchers for
students to attend private schools. Choice proponents suggest that by creating a marketplace
where parents can select schools, a choice-based system might generate competition among
schools that would improve the quality of schools throughout the marketplace. This theory rests
on several assumptions, including that the degree of choice will be large enough to generate
meaningful competition. For example, a handful of charter schools with limited enrollment
capacity are unlikely to generate meaningful competition in a large district. This suggests that a
choice system must permit relatively easy entry into the market by potential suppliers, which
includes individuals and organizations wishing to open schools. There must also be easy “exit”
from the market that allows (and, indeed, forces) unsuccessful schools to close.17
The second set of assumptions involves the information available to parents and the
preferences they have for their children’s education. Parents must have sufficient information to
make an informed choice. Data on school performance must be transparent, accessible and
easily understood by parents with varying degrees of sophistication. The effects of choice will
17

If the administrators and teachers in a public school that loses half of its students to a nearby charter school
continue teaching the smaller group of students, or are merely reassigned to other schools in the district, they may
not change their practices despite the pressure exerted by the nearby charter.

29

also depend in large part on the nature of the preferences themselves. Expanded choice is only
likely to increase student academic outcomes if achievement is a central concern for parents.
The most rigorous studies to assess parental preferences typically find that parents place a
high value on proximity and student racial composition (Glazerman 2000, Calvo 2006, Hastings
et al. 2006). On average, parents place limited value on the “academic quality” of the school as
measured by things like student test scores, though parents with higher income tend to place a
higher priority on test scores (Hastings et al. 2006). While these results suggest that choice plans
may not lead to higher performance among poor children, there is some evidence that providing
poor families with more transparent information about school quality does lead parents to select
“better” schools in terms of academic performance (Hastings et al. 2007).
Even if school choice does not foster competition that increases the productivity of
schooling overall, the opportunity to choose may still have a positive effect on students. Choice
might allow a student to attend a school with better teachers, more resources, or more studious
peers. Whether this re-sorting of children across schools improves average outcomes for all
children, or simply changes the distribution of academic achievement across children, depends
on whether some children gain more from “better” peer settings than others. Of course, if the
goal is to reduce inequity in schooling opportunities and outcomes, and school choice provides
choices to disadvantaged students who would not have them otherwise, then choice may still
have served a worthwhile purpose. Some argue that choice provides poor parents the
opportunities that wealthier parents have always had.
The availability of choice may also improve student outcomes if it allows parents to find
schools that are a better “match” for their individual child’s needs, which in principle could

30

allow most students to benefit from choice.18 Some would argue that if choice allows parents to
select the type of schools they want, the system should be considered a success. While this may
be true from the parents’ perspective, if society values certain outcomes more than others, then
free choice on the part of parents may not maximize social welfare.
There are hundreds of studies on school choice, ranging from studies of charter schools to
private voucher plans. However, the vast majority of research in this area suffers from a critical
limitation, which researchers refer to as selection bias. Students who utilize school choice
(whether it is a public magnet school, a charter school or a private school) differ from students
who do not, both in terms of easily observable ways such as race, income and achievement level,
but also likely in more subtle ways such as personal motivation or family support. If researchers
do not account for such differences when comparing, for example, charter schools with
neighborhood public schools, then the results can be misleading.
The best studies of the impact of attending a public school of choice on student
achievement overcome the problem of selection bias mentioned above by focusing on choice
schools that are oversubscribed and use random lotteries to determine admission. By comparing
the outcomes of students who win and lose lotteries, the researchers can estimate the causal
impact of attending a public school of choice. Looking at elementary and high schools in
Chicago, Cullen et al. (2006, forthcoming) find that winning a choice lottery has no effect on a
wide range of academic outcomes.19 In a study of school choice lotteries in the CharlotteMecklenberg school district, Hastings et al. (2006a) find that, on average, students do not benefit
from winning one of the lotteries and attending their preferred school. However, when they
18

For example, the back-to-basics, discipline-oriented “academy” may be a good fit for some students, while other
children may thrive more in an environment that provides more flexibility and autonomy. The match may reflect
more mundane needs, including proximity to the parents’ work or the availability of a particular elective.
19
For high school students, the authors find some evidence that winning a choice lottery improves certain nonacademic outcomes such as the likelihood of getting into trouble with the police.

31

examine children whose parents seemed to place a greater value on academics (based on the type
of schools they chose), the authors find that these students do experience higher test scores from
winning the public school choice lottery. Finally, as noted above, there is some evidence that
career academies, one prominent type of public choice school, have positive effects on student
outcomes (Cullen et al. 2005, Kemple and Willner, 2008).
A parallel literature analyzes the effect of attending a charter school on academic
outcomes, and yields similarly mixed outcomes. Several studies find small negative or zero
effects (Hanushek et al. 2005, Bifulco and Ladd 2006, Sass 2006). A recent random evaluation
of New York City charters uses a lottery-based research design, comparing students who win and
lose lotteries to oversubscribed charter schools, and finds robust positive effects (Hoxby and
Murarka 2007). This approach removes concerns about selection bias, but has the drawback of
focusing on a small number of particularly successful (or at least popular) charter schools.
Perhaps the most contentious form of school choice involves vouchers that allow students
to attend private schools. Voucher experiments in Milwaukee, New York, Dayton and
Washington, DC have been evaluated. These studies typically focus on comparing outcomes
between students who are versus are not offered the chance to attend private schools. While the
results in most cities were discouraging, the evaluation in NYC pointed to some modest test
score gains for African-American children, although the magnitude of these results has been
debated (Howell et al. 2002, Krueger and Zei 2004).
The most difficult area of school choice to analyze empirically is the claim that choice will foster
competition that will, in turn, improve the productivity of all schools. Hoxby (2000) compared
geographic areas, and found that those areas with more school choice for largely historical
reasons (e.g. the presence of streams and rivers which made transportation difficult in earlier

32

times, and thus encouraged areas to divide themselves along the boundary of such waterways),
had more productive schools, suggesting that greater choice is associated with greater efficiency
in schooling. However, others have argued that these results are not particularly robust
(Rothstein 2006, Hoxby 2006). Urquiola (2005) finds evidence of sorting: the “best” public
school students left for the private sector. Areas with greater district choice tend to have a
smaller fraction of students attending private schools, but these districts also have schools that
are more racially homogenous.
In summary, there is mixed evidence on whether the opportunity to attend a choice
school – public magnet, charter or private – has substantial academic benefits for poor children
as well as on the question of whether large scale choice programs might improve the productivity
of schools in a general. It is premature to make strong claims about whether such policies can
have substantial benefits for disadvantaged children. Perhaps the main risk associated with
expanded choice opportunities is the possibility of exacerbating the segregation of poor, minority
or low-performing students within a subset of schools. This seems to have happened to some
degree in New Zealand and Chile under the large-scale choice plans adopted there (Fiske and
Ladd, 2000, Ladd and Fiske, 2001, Hsieh and Urquiola, 2006). However as both Neal (2002)
and Ladd (2002) point out, the effects of any choice plan is likely to depend crucially on the
details of key design questions, such as whether schools are allowed to select the best students
from their applicant pools. Many of the current public school choice plans require oversubscribed schools to admit students on the basis of lotteries, providing some guard against this
type of sorting. Additional experimentation by states and districts with different forms of public
school choice (e.g., magnet or charter schools) would provide additional opportunities to learn
more about their potential impacts.

33

V. CONCLUSIONS
The release of the landmark Coleman Report in 1966 fostered pessimism about the ability
of schools to improve the life chances of poor children. The report found that a variety of school
“inputs” such as teacher educational attainment and per pupil spending were only weakly
correlated with student test scores, and raised questions about what schools could accomplish
without broader changes in social policy. The Coleman Report and subsequent research pushed
policymakers to consider outcome-based measures of success and spurred interest in reform
strategies that focus on changing the incentives within the public school system.
A careful review of the empirical evidence, however, suggests a variety of policies that
are likely to substantially improve the academic performance of poor children. Importantly, we
found examples of successful programs or policies within each of the three broad categories
outlined in the introduction. Targeted investment of additional resources in early childhood
education, smaller class sizes and bonuses for teachers in hard-to-staff schools and subjects seem
likely to pass a cost-benefit test, even without a fundamental re-organization of the existing
public school system. At the same time, researchers have identified some ways of changing
standard operating procedures within schools that can improve the outcomes of poor children
even without large amounts of additional spending. Examples include the adoption of
comprehensive school reform models like Success for All and Career Academies and the
expansion of alternative certification opportunities. Finally, policies that seek to change
incentives within schools, such as the accountability policies adopted by districts and states since
the mid-1990s, offer some promise of improving schooling for poor children.
Given limited financial resources and perhaps even more limited political attention, it is
unlikely that policymakers could adopt all of the “successful” practices discussed in this chapter.

34

Based on our read of the empirical literature, the following education policies seem likely to
generate the largest gains in academic achievement among poor children:
1. Increased investments in early childhood education for poor children. Even though
short-term gains in IQ or achievement test scores diminish over time, there is
evidence of long-term improvement in a variety of outcomes such as educational
attainment that will help children escape from poverty as adults. Increased
investment in early childhood education may be particularly productive and important
given the limited investment our society currently makes in the cognitive
development of very young children.
2. Taking advantage of the opportunity provided by No Child Left Behind (NCLB) to
better utilize accountability reforms to improve outcomes for poor children. NCLB
was enacted in 2001 with bipartisan support, although it has received considerable
criticism in recent years. But the debate over the existence of NCLB seems to miss a
fundamental lesson we have learned about accountability in the past decade: the
specific design of the program matters enormously. Potentially productive changes to
NCLB (as well as to co-existing state or district accountability systems) include:
adopting common achievement standards across states, focusing accountability on
student growth rather than proficiency levels, providing states and districts with the
flexibility to focus limited resources on the most needy schools, and reconciling
federal and state accountability systems.
3. Provide educators incentives to adopt practices with a compelling research base while
expanding efforts (including resources) to develop and identify effective instructional
regimes. One of the lessons from the accountability movement is that highly

35

disadvantaged schools (and districts) often lack the capacity to change themselves.
There is good evidence that certain comprehensive school reforms such as Success
for All can raise achievement levels among poor children with little additional
expenditures. Similarly, there is compelling evidence that alternative certification
routes into teaching can expand the supply of teachers willing to work in hard-to-staff
schools and subjects while maintaining, or perhaps even increasing, teacher quality.
State and district officials could ensure that disadvantaged schools, particularly those
that have continued to fail under recent accountability system, adopt instructional
practices and related policies with a strong research base. This would help avoid the
constant reinvention of the wheel. At the same time, the Federal government could
help spur such advantages through more focused R&D spending (e.g., perhaps
through “design competitions” as suggested by Slavin 1997), and governments at all
levels could help increase the supply of high-quality practices by requiring schools to
use programs that have been rigorously evaluated (Jacob and Ludwig, 2005).
4. Continue to support and evaluate a variety of public school choice options. The other
noteworthy trend in output-based reform aside from NCLB is the spread of public
school choice at the local level. While we believe that the current evidence on the
benefits of public school choice is limited, the risk associated with these policies
seems small so long as they are implemented in ways that do not substantially
exacerbate school segregation along race or class lines. Hence, there could be
considerable benefit to expanding magnet and charter schools, and to carefully
evaluating the impact of these schools on the students they serve as well as the
surrounding schools.

36

Most anti-poverty policies focus on lifting adults out of poverty. These policies are often
controversial because of an unavoidable tension between the desire to help people who have
been unlucky and the motivation to encourage hard work and punish socially unproductive
behavior. In contrast, successful education policies can not only help reduce poverty over the
long term by making poor children more productive during adulthood, but also foster economic
growth that expands the “pie” for everyone. Educational interventions arguably also benefit
from a compelling moral justification as well. Many people believe that disadvantaged children
should not be punished for the circumstances into which they are born, and improved education
policy is one of the best ways to prevent this from happening.

37

References
Aronson, Daniel, Barrow, Lisa and William Sander (2007). “Teachers and Student Achievement
in the Chicago Public High Schools.” Journal of Labor Economics 25(1): 95-136.
Achilles, CM, Barbara A. Nye, Jayne B. Zaharias, and B. Dewayne Fulton (1993) “The lasting
benefits study (LBS) in grades 4 and 5 (1990-91): A legacy from Tennessee’s four-year (K-3)
class size study (1985-1989), Project STAR.” HEROS, Inc.
Ballou, Dale (1996) “Do Public Schools Hire the Best Applicants?” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 111(1): 97-133.
Ballou, Dale and Michael Podgursky (1995) “Recruiting Smarter Teachers.” The Journal of
Human Resources 30(2): 326-338.
Balter, D & Duncombe, W. (2005b). Teacher hiring practices in New York State school
districts.” Report prepared for the Education Finance Research Consortium, January.
Barnett, W. Steven, Cynthia Lamy and Kwanghee Jung (2005) “The effects of state prekindergarten programs on young children’s school readiness in five states.” Rutgers University,
National Institute for Early Education Research.
Barnett, W. Steven and Leonard Masse (2007) “Comparative Benefit-Cost Analysis of the
Abecedarian Program and Its Policy Implications.” Economics of Education Review. 26: 113125.
Belfield, Clieve R., Milagros Nores, Steve Barnett, and Lawrence Schweinhart (2006) “The
High/Scope Perry Preschool Program: Cost-benefit analysis using data from the Age-40
Followup.” Journal of Human Resources. 41(1): 162-190.
Besharov, Douglas J. (2002, February 27). Testimony before the Subcommittee on 21st Century
Competitiveness of the Committee on Education and the Workforce.
(www.welfareacademy.org/pubs/testimony-022702.pdf ).
Bifulco, R. and Ladd, H. (2006). “The Impacts of Charter Schools on Student Achievement:
Evidence from North Carolina,” American Education Finance Association.
Bishop, John H. (1998) “Do Curriculum-Based External Exit Exam Systems Enhance Student
Achievement?” Consortium for Policy Research in Education, University of
Pennsylvania Graduate School of Education, Philadelphia
Bloom, Howard S. (1984) “Accounting for no-shows in experimental evaluation designs.”
Evaluation Review 8(2): 225-46.
Bloom, Howard S., Sandra Ham, Laura Melton and Julieanne O’Brien (2001) “Evaluating the
Accelerated Schools Approach: A Look at Early Implementation and Impacts on Student

38

Achievement in Eight Elementary Schools.” New York: MDRC.
Borhnstedt, George W. and Stecher, Brian M. (2002). What Have We Learned about Class Size
Reduction in California. Capstone Report by CSR Research Consortium
Borman, Geoffrey D., & Hewes, Gina M. (2003) “The long-term effects and cost-effectiveness
of Success for All.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 24: 243-266
Borman, Geoffrey D., Robert E. Slavin, Alan C.K. Cheun, Anne M. Chamberlain, Nancy A.
Madden, and Bette Chambers (2007) “Final reading outcomes of the National Randomized Field
Trial of Success for All.” American Educational Research Journal. 44(3): 701-731.
Boyd,Donald Pamela Grossman, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, James Wyckoff (2005a).
“How Changes in Entry Requirements Alter the Teacher Workforce and Affect Student
Achievement.” NBER Working Paper No. 11844
Boyd, Donald, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff (2005b) “Explaining the
Short Careers of High-Achieving Teachers in Schools with Low-Performing Students.”
American Economic Review 95(2): 166-172.
Campbell, Frances A. et al (2002) “Early Childhood Education: Young Adult Outcomes from the
Abecedarian Project.” Applied Developmental Science 6(1): 42-57.
Card, David and Krueger, Alan (1998) “School Resources and Student Outcomes,” The ANNALS
of the American Acadamy of Political and Social Science 559(39): 39-53.
Card, David and A. Abigail Payne (2002) “School finance reform, the distribution of school
spending, and the distribution of student test scores.” Journal of Public Economics 83: 49-82.
Card, David and Jesse Rothstein (forthcoming) “Racial Segregation and the Black-White Test
Score Gap.” Journal of Public Economics.
Carniero, Pedro and James J. Heckman (2003) “Human Capital Policy,” In Inequality in
America: What Role for Human Capital Policies? James J. Heckman and Alan B. Krueger.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carnoy, Martin and Susanna Loeb (2003) “Does External Accountability Affect Student
Outcomes? A Cross-State Analysis.” Education Evaluation and Policy Analysis 24(4). 305-331
Chiang, Hanley (2007) “How Accountability Pressure on Failing Schools Affects Student
Achievement.” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard University.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Elizabeth Glennie, Helen Ladd, and Jacob Vigdor (2006) “Would higher
salaries keep teachers in high-poverty schools? Evidence from a policy intervention in North
Carolina.” Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12285.

39

Clotfelter, Charles T., Ladd, Helen F. (1996) “Recognizing and Rewarding Success in Public
Schools.” In Ladd, H., (Ed.), Holding Schools Accountable: Performance-Based Reform in
Education. The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, Jacob L. Vigdor (2006) "Teacher-Student Matching and
the Assessment of Teacher Effectiveness." Journal of Human Resources 41: 778-820.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor (2007) “Who Teaches Whom? Race
and the Distribution of Novice Teachers,” Economics of Education Review 24(4): 377-392.
CRSQ (2006). “Comprehensive School Reform Quality (CRSQ) Center Report on Elementary
School Comprehensive School Reform Models.” American Institutes for Research.
Cook, Michael D. and Evans, William N. (2000) “Families or Schools? Explaining the
Convergence in White and Black Academic Performance.” Journal of Labor Economics 18(4):
729-754.
Cook, Thomas D., Farah-Naaz Habib, Meredith Phillips, Richard A. Settersten, Shobha C.
Shagle and Serdar M. Degirmencioglu (1999) “Comer's School Development Program in Prince
George's County: A theory-based evaluation.” American Educational Research Journal 36(3):
543-597.
Cook, Thomas D., H. David Hunt, and Robert F. Murphy (2000) “Comer's School Development
Program in Chicago: A theory-based evaluation.” American Educational Research Journal
37(2): 535-597.
Cooley, Jane (2007). “Desegregation and the Achievement Gap: Do Diverse Peers Help?”
(under review).
Cullen, Julie and Randall Reback (2002) “Tinkering Toward Accolades: School Gaming under a
Performance Accountability System.” Working paper, University of Michigan.
Cullen, Julie, Brian A. Jacob and Steven D. Levitt (2006) “The effect of school choice on student
outcomes: Evidence from randomized lotteries.” Econometrica. 74(5): 1191-1230.
Currie, Janet (2001) “Early Childhood Education Programs.” Journal of Economic Perspectives.
15(2): 213-238.
Currie, Janet and Duncan Thomas (1995) “Does Head Start Make a Difference?” American
Economic Review. 85(3): 341-364.
Deere, Donald and Wayne Strayer (2001) “Putting Schools to the Test: School Accountability,
Incentives and Behavior.” Working paper, Department of Economics, Texas A&M University.
Deming, David (2007) “Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development.”
Working Paper, Harvard University.

40

Dolton, Peter and Wilbert van der Klaauw (1999) “The Turnover of Teachers: A Competing
Risks Explanation.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 81(3): 543-550.
Downes, Thomas A. and David N. Figlio (1998) “School Finance Reforms, Tax Limits and
Student Performance: Do Reforms Level-Up or Dumb Down?” Discussion Paper 98-05,
Department of Economics, Tufts University.
Dynarski, Mark, Roberto Agodini, Sheila Heaviside, Timothy Novak, Nancy Care, Larissa
Campuzano, Barbara Means, Robert Murphy, William Penuel, Hal Javitz, Deborah Emery,
Willow Sussex (2007). “Effectiveness of Reading and Mathematics Software Products: Findings
from the First Student Cohort.” Mathematica Policy Research. For U.S. Department of
Education, NCEE 2007-4005. http://www.mathematicampr.com/publications/PDFs/effectread.pdf
Figlio, David N. (2006) “Testing, crime and punishment.” Journal of Public Economics 90(4-5):
837-851.
Figlio, David, Getzler, Lawrence (2002) “Accountability, Ability and Disability: Gaming the
System?” Working paper, University of Florida.
Figlio, David N. and Cecilia Elena Rouse (2006) “Do Accountability and Voucher Threats
Improve Low-Achieving Schools?” Journal of Public Economics 90 239-255.
Figlio, David , Winicki, Joshua, (forthcoming) “Food for Thought? The Effects of School
Accountability on School Nutrition.” Journal of Public Economics.
Fiske, Edward B. and Helen F.Ladd (2000) When Schools Compete: A Cautionary Tale.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Frederisksen, Norman (1994) “The Influence of Minimum Competency Tests on Teaching and
Learning.” Educational Testing Service, Policy Information Center, Princeton NJ.
Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie (2002) “Longer Term Effects of Head Start.”
American Economic Review. 92(4): 999-1012.
Glazer, Nathan (1986) “Education and training programs and poverty.” In Sheldon Danziger and
Daniel Weinberg, Eds. Fighting Poverty: What Works and What Doesn’t. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. Pp. 152-172.
Glazerman, Steven, Tom Silva, Nii Addy, Sarah Avellar, Jeffrey Max, Allison McKie, Brenda
Natzke, Michael Puma, Patrick Wolf, & Rachel Ungerer Greszler, (2006) “Options for studying
teacher pay reform using natural experiments.” Washington, DC: Mathematica Policy Research,
Inc. No. ED-04-CO-0112/0002.

41

Glazerman, Steven, Daniel Mayer, and Paul Decker (2006) “Alternative Routes to Teaching:
The Impacts of Teach for America on Student Achievement and Other Outcomes.” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management. 25(1): 75-96.
Gordon, Nora E. (2004) “Do Federal funds boost school spending? Evidence from Title I.”
Journal of Public Economics 88(9-10): 1771-1792.
Gordon, Robert, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger (2006) “Identifying effective teachers
using performance on the job.” Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, Hamilton Project
Discussion Paper 2006-01.
Gormley, William T. and Ted Gayer (2005) “Promoting School Readiness in Oklahoma: An
Evaluation of Tulsa’s Pre-K Program.” Journal of Human Resources. 40(3): 533-558.
Gormley, William T., Ted Gayer, Deborah Phillips and Brittany Dawson (2005) “The effects of
universal pre-K on cognitive development.” Working Paper, Georgetown University, Center for
Research on Children in the United States.
Grissmer, David and Ann Flanagan, (1998) “Exploring Rapid Achievement Gains in North
Carolina and Texas.” National Education Goals Panel, Washington, D.C.
Grissmer, David, et al (2000) “Improving Student Achievement: What NAEP Test Scores
Tell Us.” RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA MR-924-EDU.
Guarino, Cassandra M., Lucrecia Santibanez, and Glenn A. Daley, (2006) “Teacher Recruitment
and Retention: A Review of the Recent Empirical Literature.” Review of Educational Research
76(2): 173-208
Guryan, Jonathan (2004) “Desegregation and Black Dropout Rates,” American Economic
Review, 94(4): 919-943.
Haney, Walt (2000) “The Myth of the Texas Miracle in Education.” Education Policy
Analysis Archives 8(41).
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain and Steven G. Rivkin (2004). “Why Public Schools Lose
Teachers” Journal of Human Resources 39(2): 326-354.
Hanushek, Eric, Kain, John F., O’Brien, Daniel M. and Steven G. Rivkin (2005). “The Market
for Teachers.” NBER Working Paper 11154.
Hanushek, Eric, Kain, John, Rivkin, Steven, and Branch, G. (2005). “Charter School Quality
and Parental Decision Making with School Choice,” NBER Working Paper No. 11252.
Hanushek, Eric A. and Margaret E. Raymond (2005) “Does School Accountability Lead to
Improved Student Performance?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24(2): 297-327.

42

Hanushek, Eric, and Rivkin, Steven (2007). “Pay, Working Conditions, and Teacher Quality,”
The Future of Children 17(1): 69-86.
Harris, Douglas N. and Tim R. Sass. (2007). "What Makes for a Good Teacher and Who Can
Tell?" Unpublished manuscript, Florida State University, July
Harris, Douglas N., Rutledge, S., Ingle, W.K., Thompson, C. (2006). “When Supply Meets
Demand: Principal Preferences and Teacher Hiring.” Paper prepared for the 2006 annual
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA.
Hastings, Justine S., Thomas Kane, and Douglas Staiger (2006) “Preferences and heterogeneous
treatment effects in a public school choice lottery.” Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper
12145.
Hastings, Justine S., Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger (2006). "Parental Preferences and
School Competition: Evidence from a Public School Choice Program." NBER Working Paper
No. 11805
Hastings, Justine S., Richard Van Weelden, and Jeffrey Weinstein (2007). "Preferences,
Information, and Parental Choice Behavior in Public School Choice." NBER Working Paper No.
12995.
Herlihy, Corinne and Janet Quint (2006). “Emerging Evidence on Improving High School
Student Achievement and Graduation Rates: The Effects of Four Popular Improvement
Programs.” National High School Center Research Brief.
http://www.betterhighschools.org/docs/NHSC_EmergingEvidenceBrief_111606Final.pdf
Hill, Heather C. (2007). “Learning in the Teaching Workforce.” The Future of Children, 17(1)
(Special Issue: Excellence in the Classroom.): 111-127.
Howell, William, Paul E. Peterson with Patrick J. Wolf (2002). “The Education Gap: Vouchers
and Urban Schools.” Brookings Institution Press.
Hoxby, Caroline (2000). “The Effects of Class Size on Student Achievement: New Evidence
from Population Variation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115(4): 1239-1285.
Hoxby, Caroline M. and Sonali Murarka (2007). “Charter Schools in New York City: Who
Enrolls and How they Affect Their Students’ Achievement.” Working Paper.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Miguel Urquiola (2006) “The effects of generalized school choice on
achievement and stratification: Evidence from Chile’s voucher program.” Journal of Public
Economics. 90: 1477-1503.
Imazeki, Jennifer (2007). “Attracting and Retaining Teachers in High-Needs Schools: Do
Financial Incentives Make Financial Sense?” Working Paper. San Deigo State University,
Department of Economics

43

Jacob, Brian (2001) “Getting Tough? The Impact of Mandatory High School Graduation Exams
on Student Outcomes.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 23(2): 99-122.
Jacob, Brian (2005) “Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: the Impact of High-Stakes
Testing in the Chicago Public Schools.” Journal of Public Economics 89(5-6): 761-796.
Jacob, Brian (2007). “The Challenges of Staffing Urban Schools with Effective Teachers.” The
Future of Children 17(2). (Special Issue: Excellence in the Classroom. Policies to Improve the
Teacher Workforce.)
Jacob, Brian A. (2008). “The Effect of Employment Protection on Productivity: Evidence from a
Change in Teacher Dismissal Policy in the Chicago Public Schools.” Working paper.
Jacob, Brian, Levitt, Steven (2003) “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and
Predictors of Teacher Cheating.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(3): 843-878.
Jacob, Brian and Lars Lefgren (2007) “What Do Parents Value in Education? An Empirical
Investigation of Parents’ Revealed Preferences for Teachers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
122(4):1603-1637.
Jacob, Brian, Thomas Kane, Jonah Rockoff and Douglas Staiger (2008). “What PreEmployment Characteristics Predict Teacher Effectiveness: Evidence from New York City.”
Working Paper.
Jargowsky, Paul A. (1996) “Take the Money and Run: Economic Segregation in U.S.
Metropolitan Areas.” American Sociological Review 61(6): 984-998.
Jargowsky, Paul A. (2003) “Stunning Progress, Hidden Problems: The Dramatic Decline of
Concentrated Poverty in the 1990s.” Report for the Living Cities Census Series. Washington,
DC: The Brookings Institution.
Jencks, Christopher (1986) “Education and training programs and poverty.” In Sheldon
Danziger and Daniel Weinberg, Eds. Fighting Poverty: What Works and What Doesn’t.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Pp. 173-179.
Jepsen, Christopher and Steven G. Rivkin (2002) “What is the Tradeoff Between Smaller
Classes and Teacher Quality?” NBER Working Paper 9205.
Kahlenberg, Richard D. (2001) “Review of Brown v. Board of Education, by James T.
Patterson.” The American Prospect. May 20, 2001.
Kane, Thomas J. and Douglas Staiger (2002a) “The promise and pitfalls of using imprecise
school accountability measures.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 16(4): 91-114.
Kane, Thomas J. and Douglas Staiger (2002b) “Volatility in school test scores: Implications for

44

test based accountability systems.” In Diane Ravitch, Editor. Brookings Papers on Education
Policy. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Kane, Thomas J., Jonah Rockoff and Douglas Staiger (2006) “What Does Certification Tell Us
about Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence from New York City” NBER Working Paper No. 12155,
(Submitted for publication, under review)
Kemple, James J. and Judith Scott-Clayton (2004) Career Academies: Impacts on Labor Market
Outcomes and Educational Attainment. New York: MDRC
Kemple, James J., Corinne M. Herlihy, and Thomas J. Smith. (2005) Making Progress Toward
Graduation: Evidence From the Talent Development High School Model. New York: MDRC
Kemple, James J. and Cynthia J. Willner (2008) Career Academies: Long-Term Impacts on
Labor Market Outcomes, Educational Attainment, and Transitions to Adulthood. New York:
MDRC.
Klein, Stephen, Laura Hamilton, et al (2000) “What Do Test Scores in Texas Tell Us?” RAND
Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig and Lawrence F. Katz (2005) “Neighborhood Effects on Crime
for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1): 87-130.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz (2007) “Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75(1): 83-119.
Knudsen, Eric I., James J. Heckman, Judy L. Cameron, and Jack P. Shonkoff (2006) “Economic,
neurobiological, and behavioral perspectives on building America’s future workforce.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 103: 10155-10162.
Koretz, Daniel, Linn, Robert, et al (1991) “The Effects of High-Stakes Testing: Preliminary
Evidence About Generalization Across Tests.” American Educational Research Association,
Chicago.
Koretz, Daniel., Barron, Sheila (1998) “The Validity of Gains in Scores on the Kentucky
Instructional Results Information System (KIRIS).” RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.
Krueger, Alan (1999). “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 114(2): 497-532
Krueger, Alan B. (2003) “Economic considerations and class size.” Economic Journal 113: 333.
Krueger, Alan B. and Diane M. Whitmore (2001). "The Effect of Attending a Small Class in the
Early Grades on College-Test Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from Project

45

STAR." Economic Journal 111: 1-28.
Krueger, Alan B. and Diane M. Whitmore (2002). "Would Smaller Classes Help Close the
Black-White Achievement Gap?" In Bridging the Achievement Gap, John Chub and Tom
Loveless (eds.), Washington, DC: Brookings Institute Press.
Krueger; Alan B and Pei Zhu (2004). “Another Look at the New York City School Voucher
Experiment.” The American Behavioral Scientist; 47(5): 658
Ladd, Helen F. (1996). Holding Schools Accountable: Performance-Based Reform in Education.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution. (Chapter 1 & 2, pages 1-19, 23-63)
Ladd, Helen F. (2002) “School vouchers: A critical view.” Journal of Economic Perspectives.
16(4): 3-24.
Ladd, Helen F., Rosemary Chalk, and Janet S. Hansen, editors. Equity and Adequacy in
Education Finance: Issues and Perspectives. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1999.
Ladd, Helen F. and Edward B. Fiske (2001) “The uneven playing field of school choice:
Evidence from New Zealand.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. 20(1): 43-63.
Lankford, Hamilton, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff (2002). “Teacher Sorting and the Plight
of Urban Schools,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 24: 37–62.
Lavy, Victor (2007). “Using Performance-Based Pay to Improve the Quality of Teachers”, The
Future of Children, Spring 2007, 87-110.
Lazear, Edward P. (2001) “Educational Production.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
116(3): 777-803.
Levin, Henry (1977) “A decade of policy developments in improving education and training for
low-income populations.” In Robert Haveman, Ed. A Decade of Federal Anti-Poverty Policy:
Achievements, Failures, and Lessons. New York: Academic Press.
Levin, Henry (2002). "Issues in Designing Cost-Effectiveness Comparisons of Whole-School
Reforms," In Levin and McEwan, Cost-Effectiveness and Educational Policy, AEFA Yearbook
2002 (Eye on Education 2002), pp. 89-92.
Levin, Jessica and Meredith Quinn (2003). Missed Opportunities: How We Keep High-Quality
Teachers Out of Urban Classrooms. New York, NY: The New Teacher Project, www.tntp.org
Levin, Jessica, Jennifer Mulhern, and Joan Schunck, (2005) “Unintended Consequences: The
Case for Reforming the Staffing Rules in Urban Teachers Union Contracts.” New York, NY:
The New Teacher Project: www.tntp.org.
Linn, Robert, M. Elizabeth Graue, et al (1990) “Comparing State and District Results to National

46

Norms: The Validity of the Claim that 'Everyone is Above Average.” Educational
Measurement: Issues and Practice 9(3): 5-14.
Levin, Henry (2002) "Issues in Designing Cost-Effectiveness Comparisons of Whole-School
Reforms," in Levin and McEwan, COST-EFFECTIVENESS AND EDUCATIONAL POLICY,
AEFA Yearbook. Eye on Education 89-92.
Lewin, Tamar (2007, June 29). Across U.S., a New Look at School Integration Efforts . The New
York Times.
Loeb, Susanna and Marianne E. Page (2000) “Estimating the link between teacher wages and
student outcomes: The importance of alternative labor market opportunities and non-pecuniary
variation.” The Review of Economics and Statistics. 82(3): 393-408.
Love, John M., Ellen Eliason Kisker, Christine M. Ross, Peter Z. Schochet, Jeanne BrooksGunn, Diane Paulsell, Kimberly Boller, Jill Constantine, Cheri Vogel, Allison Sidle Fuligni, and
Christy Brady-Smith. (2002) “Making a Difference In The Lives of Infants and Toddlers and
Their Families: The Impacts of Early Head Start.” Mathematica Policy Research Report.
Ludwig, Jens and Douglas L. Miller (2007) “Does Head Start Improve Children’s Life Chances?
Evidence from a Regression-Discontinuity Design.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 122(1):
159-208.
Ludwig, Jens and Deborah A. Phillips (2007) “The Benefits and Costs of Head Start.” NBER
Working Paper 12973.
Lutz, Byron F. (2005) “Post Brown vs. the Board of Education: The Effects of the End of CourtOrdered Desegregation.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-64. Washington: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Magnuson, Katherine A., Christopher J. Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel (2004) “Does
prekindergarten improve school preparation and performance?” Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 10452.
Magnuson, Katherine and Elizabeth Votruba-Drzal (2009) “Enduring influences of childhood
poverty.” Changing Poverty, edited by Maria Cancian and Sheldon Danziger. NY: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Murray, Sheila E., William N. Evans, and Robert M. Schwab (1998) “Education-finance reform
and the distribution of education resources.” The American Economic Review 88(4): 789-812.
National Center for Education Statistics (2007). “Trends in the Use of School Choice: 1993 to
2003.” NCES 2007-045.
National Center for Education Statistics (2007) "The Nation's Report Card, Mathematics 2007:
National Assessment of Educational Progress at Grades 4 and 8." NCES 2007-494. U.S.
Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences.
47

National Center for Education Statistics (2007) "The Nation's Report Card, Reading 2007:
National Assessment of Educational Progress at Grades 4 and 8." NCES 2007-496. U.S.
Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences.
Neal, Derek A. (2002) “How vouchers could change the market for education.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives. 16(4): 25-44.
Neal, Derek A. and Diane Schanzenbach (2007). “Left Behind by Design: Proficiency Counts
and Test-Based Accountability.” NBER Working Paper 13293.
Nye, B., Fulton B.D., J. Boyd-Zaharias, and V.A. Cain (1995) “The lasting benefits study, eighth
grade technical report.” Nashville, TN: Center for Excellence for Research in Basic Skills,
Tennessee State University.
Nye, B., Larry V. Hedges, and S. Konstantopoulos (2002) “Do low achieving students benefit
more from small classes? Evidence from the Tennessee class size experiment.” Educational
Evaluation and Policy Analysis. 24: 201-217.
Phillips, Meredith, Crouse, James and John Ralph (1998). “Does the Black-White Test Score
Gap Widen after Children Enter School?” In The Black-White Test Score Gap, eds. Christopher
Jencks and Meredith Phillips. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC.
Podgursky, M. and Springer, M.G. (2007). "Teacher Performance Pay: A Review." Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 26(4).
Puma, Michael, Stephen Bell, Ronna Cook, Camilla Heid, Michael Lopez, et al. (2005) “Head
Start Impact Study: First Year Findings.” Westat: Report Prepared for the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services.
Quint, Janet, Howard Bloom, Alison Rebeck Black, LaFleur Stephens, and Teresa Akey. (2005)
“First Things First: The Challenge of Scaling Up Educational Reform.” New York: MDRC.
Ramey, Craig T. and Frances A. Campbell, (1979) “Compensatory Education for Disadvantaged
Children,” The School Review 87(2): 171-189.
Ramey, Craig T. and Frances A. Campbell (1984) “Preventive Education for High-Risk
Children: Cognitive Consequences of the Carolina Abecedarian Project.” American Journal of
Mental Deficiency 88(5): 515-23.
Richards, Craig E. and Tian Ming Sheu (1992). “The South Carolina School Incentive Reward
Program: A Policy Analysis.” Economics of Education Review 11(1): 71-86.
Rivkin, Steven G. (2000). “School Desegregation, Academic Attainment, and Earnings.” The
Journal of Human Resources, 35(2): 333-346.

48

Rothstein, Jesse (2007) “Do value-added models add value? Tracking, fixed effects and causal
inference.” Working Paper, Princeton University Department of Economics.
Rouse, Cecilia E., Hannaway, Jane, Goldhaber, Dan D. and Figlio, David N. (2007). "Feeling the
Florida Heat? How Low-Performing Schools Respond to Voucher and Accountability Pressure".
NBER Working Paper No. 13681.
Rumberger, Russel W. and Gregory J. Palardy (2005). “Does Segregation Still Matter? The
Impact of Student Composition on Academic Achievement in High School.” The Teachers
College Record 107(9): 1999-2045.
Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, Jeffrey R. Kling, Greg J. Duncan, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (2006)
“Neighborhoods and academic achievement: Results from the MTO Experiment.” Journal of
Human Resources. 41(4): 649-691.
Sass, Tim (2006). Charter Schools and Student Achievement in Florida. Education Finance and
Policy. 1: 91-122
Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore (2006/7) “What have researchers learned from Project STAR?”
Brookings Papers on Education Policy. Edited by Thomas Loveless and Frederick Hess.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. Pp. 205-228.
Schweinhart, Lawrence J., Jeanne Montie, Zongping Xiang, W. Steven Barnett, Clive R. Belfield
and Milagros Nores (2005) Lifetime Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through
Age 40. Ypsilanti, Michigan: High/Scope Press.
Scafidi, Benjamin, David L. Sjoquist, and Todd R. Stinebrickner (2007). “Race, poverty and
teacher mobility.” Economics of Education Review 26(2):145-159.
Shepard, Lorrie (1990) “Inflated Test Score Gains: Is the Problem Old Norms or Teaching the
Test?” Educational Measurement: Issues and Practice 9(3): 15-22.
Shonkoff, Jack, and Deborah Phillips, eds. (2000) “From Neurons to Neighborhoods: The
Science of Early Childhood Development.” Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. Spence,
A. Michael. 1974. Market signaling: informational transfer in hiring and related screening
processes. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Slavin, Robert E. (1997) “Design competitions: A proposal for a new federal role in educational
research and development.” Educational Researcher. 26(1): 22-28.
Smith, Stephen Samuel, Roslyn Arlin Mickelson (2000) “All that Glitters is Not Gold: School
Reform in Charlotte-Mecklenburg.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 22(2): 101-127.
Snipes, Jason C., Glee Ivory Holton, Fred Doolittle, and Laura Sztejnberg (2006) “Striving for
Success: The Effect of Project GRAD on High School Student Outcomes in Three Urban School
Districts.” New York: MDRC.

49

Stecher, Brian M., Barron, Sheila I., (1999) “Quadrennial Milepost Accountability Testing in
Kentucky.” Center for the Study of Evaluation, University of California, Los Angeles.
Steele, Jennifer, Murnane, Richard, and Willet, John (2008). “Do Financial Incentives Help
Low-Performing Schools Attract and Retain Academically Talented Teachers? Evidence from
California.” Working Paper.
Stinebrickner, Todd R. “A Dynamic Model of Teacher Labor Supply,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 19(1) January 2001, 196-230.
Stinebrickner, Todd R. (2002). "An Analysis of Occupational Change and Departure From the
Labor Force - Evidence of the Reasons That Teachers Leave." Journal of Human Resources,
37 (1): 192-216.
Strauss, R. P., Bowes, L. R., Marks, M. S., & Plesko, M. R. (2000). Improving teacher
preparation and selection: Lessons from the Pennsylvania experience. Economics of Education
Review, 19(4), 387-415.
Toenjes, Lawrence A., A. Gary Dworkin, Jon Lorence, and Antwanette N. Hill (2000) “The
Lone Star Gamble: High Stakes Testing, Accountability and Student Achievement in Texas and
Houston.” Mimeo, The Sociology of Education Research Group (SERG), Department of
Sociology, University of Texas.
Urquiola, Miguel (2005). “Does School Choice Lead to Sorting? Evidence from Tiebout
Variation” American Economic Review 95(4): 1310-1326.
Van der Klaauw, Wilbert (2008) “Breaking the link between poverty and low student
achievement: An evaluation of Title I.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2): 731-756.
Vigdor, Jacob and Thomas Nechyba (2006). “Peer Effects in North Carolina Schools” in School
and the Equal Opportunity Problem, (eds. Ludger Woessmann, Paul E. Peterson). MIT Press.
Weiner, David A., Byron F. Lutz, and Jens Ludwig (2007). “The Effects of School
Desegregation on Crime.” Working Paper, University of Chicago.
What Works Clearinghouse (2007) “Intervention Report: Everyday Mathematics.” U.S.
Department of Education.
What Works Clearinghouse (2007) “Topic Report: Middle School Math.” U.S. Department of
Education.
Winfield, Linda F. (1990) “School Competency Testing Reforms and Student Achievement:
Exploring a National Perspective.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 12(2): 157-173.
Yinger, John (2004). Helping Children Left Behind. The MIT Press.

50

