                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 WHAT ARE THE EFFECTS OF FISCAL POLICY SHOCKS?

                                        Andrew Mountford
                                          Harald Uhlig

                                       Working Paper 14551
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14551


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2008




This research has been sponsored by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through the SFB 649 "Economic
Risk" and by the RTN networks NASEF and MAPMU. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Andrew Mountford and Harald Uhlig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
What are the Effects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?
Andrew Mountford and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 14551
December 2008
JEL No. C32,E60,E62,H20,H50,H60

                                               ABSTRACT

We propose and apply a new approach for analyzing the effects of fiscal policy using vector autoregressions.
Specifically, we use sign restrictions to identify a government revenue shock as well as a government
spending shock, while controlling for a generic business cycle shock and a monetary policy shock.
We explicitly allow for the possibility of announcement effects, i.e., that a current fiscal policy shock
changes fiscal policy variables in the future, but not at present. We construct the impulse responses
to three linear combinations of these fiscal shocks, corresponding to the three scenarios of deficit-spending,
deficit-financed tax cuts and a balanced budget spending expansion. We apply the method to US quarterly
data from 1955-2000. We find that deficit-financed tax cuts work best among these three scenarios
to improve GDP, with a maximal present value multiplier of five dollars of total additional GDP per
each dollar of the total cut in government revenue five years after the shock.


Andrew Mountford
University of London
A.Mountford@rhul.ac.uk

Harald Uhlig
5454 S. Hyde Park Blvd.
Chicago, IL 60615
and NBER
huhlig@uchicago.edu
1     Introduction
What are the effects of tax cuts on the economy? How much does it matter whether
they are financed by corresponding cuts of expenditure or by corresponding increases
in government debt, compared to the no-tax-cut scenario? These questions are of key
importance to the science of economics and the practice of policy alike. This paper aims
to answer these questions by proposing and applying a new method of identifying fiscal
policy surprises in vector autoregressions.
       The identification method used in this paper is an extension of Uhlig (2005)’s ag-
nostic identification method of imposing sign restrictions on impulse response functions.
We extend this method to the identification of multiple fundamental shocks. More pre-
cisely, we identify a government revenue shock as well as a government spending shock
by imposing sign restrictions on the fiscal variables themselves as well as imposing or-
thogonality to a generic business cycle shock and a monetary policy shock, which are
also identified with sign restrictions. No sign restrictions are imposed on the responses
of GDP, private consumption, private non-residential investment and real wages to fiscal
policy shocks,and so the method remains agnostic with respect to the responses of the
key variables of interest.
       The identification method is thereby able to address three main difficulties which
typically arise in the identification of fiscal policy shocks in vector autoregressions. Firstly
there is the difficulty of distinguishing movements in fiscal variables caused by fiscal
policy shocks from those which are simply the automatic movements of fiscal variables
in response to other shocks such as business cycle or monetary policy shocks. Secondly
there is the issue of what one means by a fiscal policy shock. While there is agreement
that a monetary policy shock entails a surprise rise in interest rates, several competing
definitions come to mind for fiscal policy shocks. Finally one also needs to take account
of the fact that there is often a lag between the announcement and the implementation
of fiscal policy and that the announcement may cause movements in macroeconomic
variables before there are movements in the fiscal variables.
       For the first problem we identify a business cycle shock and a monetary policy
shock and require that a fiscal shock be orthogonal to both of them. This filters out the
automatic responses of fiscal variables to business cycle and monetary policy shocks.
       To address the second problem, we argue that macroeconomic fiscal policy shocks
exist in a two dimensional space spanned by two basic shocks, a government revenue
shock and a government spending shock. Different fiscal policies such as balanced budget
expansions can then be described as different linear combinations of these two basic
shocks. For example a basic government spending shock is defined as a shock where
government spending rises for a defined period after the shock, and which is orthogonal to

                                              1
the business cycle shock and the monetary policy shock. We choose to restrict responses
for a year following the shock in order to rule out shocks where government spending
rises on impact but then subsequently falls after one or two quarters. This provides
additional identifying power.
      For the third problem, we also identify fiscal policy shocks with the the identi-
fying restriction that the fiscal variable in question does not respond for four quarters,
and then rises for a defined period afterwards. Restricting the responses of impulse re-
sponses as a means of identification is therefore particularly suitable for dealing with the
announcement effect.
      This paper therefore contributes to the recent and growing literature of employing
vector autoregressions to analyze the impact of fiscal policy shocks, complementing the
existing large literature analyzing monetary policy shocks, see e.g. Leeper, Sims and
Zha (1996), Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1997) and Favero (2001) for excellent
surveys. Most of the previous literature has identified fiscal shocks either by making
assumptions about the sluggish reaction of some variables to fiscal policy shocks, see
for example Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Fatas and Mihov (2001a,b), Favero (2002),
and Galı́, López-Salido, and Vallés (2007) or by using additional information such as
the timing of wars, detailed institutional information about the tax system and detailed
historical study of policy decisions or elections, see for example Ramey and Shapiro
(1998), Edelberg, Eichenbaum and Fisher (1998), Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Burn-
side, Eichenbaum and Fisher (2003), and Eichenbaum and Fisher (2004).1
      By contrast this paper relies on macroeconomic time series data alone for shock
identification and does not rely on assumptions about the sluggish reaction of some
variables to macroeconomic shocks. Indeed it imposes no restrictions on the signs of
the responses of the key variables of interest - GDP, private consumption, private non-
residential investment and real wages - to fiscal policy shocks. The approach of this
paper thus sharply differentiates it from previous studies and provides an important
complementary method of analysis which, being a purely vector autoregressive approach,
is automatically systematic and can be universally applied.
      The method of identifying policy shocks using sign restrictions on impulse re-
sponses has been introduced and applied to monetary policy in Uhlig (2005). Uhlig’s
method is extended here by imposing orthogonality restrictions to the business cycle and
monetary policy shocks as well as sign restrictions. Faust (1998) uses sign restrictions
   1
    There are a wide variety of other empirical studies investigating the effects of fiscal policy. The
focus of this paper is on the analysis of the effects of fiscal policy using vector autoregressions and so
we do not attempt to summarize this literature here. For an excellent survey see Hemming, Kell and
Mahfouz (2000).



                                                   2
to identify monetary policy shocks, imposing them only at the time of impact however
and Canova and De Nicolo (2002, 2003) and Canova and Pina (1998) identify mone-
tary shocks using sign restrictions on impulse response correlations. Canova and Pappa
(2006) also identify fiscal shocks using sign restrictions on impulse response correlations
but control for monetary policy shocks by using data from economies (states and coun-
tries) belonging to monetary unions. More recently Dedola and Neri (2007) have used
sign restrictions to identify technology shocks and Mountford (2005), Peersman (2005),
Benati and Mumtaz (2007), Dungey and Fry (2007) and Fry and Pagan (2007) have
addressed the identification of multiple shocks using sign restrictions.
       We apply our new approach to US quarterly data, from 1955 to 2000. We use
the same definitions of government expenditure and revenue as Blanchard and Perotti
(2002) in order not to obscure the implications of our new methodological approach by
using different data definitions. We show that controlling for the business cycle shock is
important when analyzing the consequences of fiscal policy. By linearly combining our
two base fiscal policy shocks - i.e. the government revenue shock and the government
spending shock - , we analyze three policy scenarios: deficit-spending, deficit-financed
tax cuts and a balanced budget spending expansion. Comparing these three scenarios,
we find that a surprise deficit-financed tax cut is the best fiscal policy to stimulate
the economy, giving rise to a maximal present value multiplier of five dollars of total
additional GDP per each dollar of the total cut in government revenue five years after
the shock. Furthermore, we find that deficit spending weakly stimulates the economy,
that it crowds out private investment without causing interest rates to rise, and that it
does not cause a rise in real wages.
       Despite the novel methodology developed in this paper, the results are reasonably
similar to those of the existing literature. As with Blanchard and Perotti (2002) we
find that investment falls in response to both tax increases and government spending
increases and that the multipliers associated with a change in taxes to be much higher
than those associated with changes in spending. This latter results also accords with the
analysis of Romer and Romer (2007) who find large effects from exogenous tax changes.
With regard to private consumption we find, in common with Blanchard and Perotti
(2002) and Galı́, López-Salido, and Vallés (2004), that consumption does not fall in
response to an unexpected increase in government spending. However, in contrast to
these studies we do not find that consumption rises strongly. Our results show that the
response of consumption is small and only significantly different from zero on impact
and are thus more in line with those of Burnside, Eichenbaum and Fisher (2003) who
find that private consumption does not change significantly in response to a positive



                                            3
spending shock.2 Finally we find that real wages do not rise in response to an increase
in government spending and have a negative response on impact and at longer horizons.
Thus the responses of investment, consumption and real wages to a government spending
shock are difficult to reconcile with the standard Keynesian approach although they are
also not the responses predicted by the benchmark real business cycle model either.
       As an open issue for future research, we leave the question as to how far the
responses calculated here are consistent with general equilibrium modelling, or whether
additional restrictions from general equilibrium modelling ought to be imposed during
estimation. Chung and Leeper (2007) have recently pointed out that long-run budget
balance needs to hold and that this implies restrictions on the VAR coefficients. Put
differently, it ought to be obvious that one cannot forever stimulate the economy with
deficit-financed tax cuts: they eventually need to be repaid. We agree with Chung and
Leeper that this issue is important and merits further attention.
       The paper is comprised of three main sections. Section 2 describes the identification
procedure and the VAR. The empirically identified basic shocks are presented in section 3,
while section 4 conducts policy analysis and compares the results with those of the
existing literature in section 4.6. The appendix contains additional detail, in particular
on the VAR framework and the sign restriction methodology as well as describing the
data sources.


2       Identifying Fiscal Policy Shocks
A fiscal policy shock is a surprise change in fiscal policy. However, there is no such
thing as a fiscal policy shock per se. Fiscal policy encompasses a wide variety of policies:
there is an endless list of types of incomes, for which the tax rules could be changed, or
categories of government spending, where changes could occur. In this paper we address
the much broader and traditional ‘macro’-economic issue of the effects on the aggregate
economy of aggregate fiscal variables. Even so there still remain a large set of possible
policies since changes in fiscal policy could, for example, be about changing the tax-debt
mix for financing a given stream of government spending, or about changing the level of
spending for a given level of debt.
      In this paper we view fiscal policy shocks as existing in a two dimensional space
spanned by two basic impulse vectors, a government revenue shock and a government
    2
    Theoretical explanations for why consumption does not fall in response to a government spending
shock in an infinite horizon framework are given by Devereux, Head and Lapham (1996), in a model
with increasing returns to scale and Galı́, López-Salido, and Vallés (2007) in a model with both sticky
prices and ”Non-Ricardian” agents.


                                                   4
spending shock. We identify each of these basic fiscal policy shocks by imposing a positive
reaction of the impulse response of the appropriate fiscal variable - i.e. government
revenue or government spending - for quarters k = 0, . . . , 3 following the shock and by
requiring it to be orthogonal to a business cycle shock and a monetary policy shock,
which in turn are also identified using sign restrictions. If we would not control for
the state of the business cycle, it would be easy to end up confusing, for example, an
increase in government receipts due to a business cycle upturn with an upturn ”caused”
by a tax increase. Note that we do not require the two fiscal policy shocks to be mutually
orthogonal.
       Rather than simultaneously identifying all three (or all four) shocks, subject to the
orthogonality restrictions, we first identify the business cycle shock and monetary policy
shock via a criterion function based on the sign restrictions, thus ascribing as much
movements as possible to these shocks. The fiscal shocks are then identified via sign
restrictions as well as the orthogonality restrictions. This procedure may be reminiscent
of a causal ordering. If the criterion function was linear, one could linearly recombine
the variables such that the first variable now corresponds to that linear combination
of the criterion function: a Cholesky decomposition would then make the first shock
explain as much as possible of the one-step ahead prediction error in that first variable,
thus maximizing the criterion function. Since our criterion function is nonlinear and
involves the impulse responses for several periods, one could not rewrite the problem in
this manner, but the analogy may still be helpful to understand the procedure and the
results.
       A further thorny and well-understood challenge when identifying fiscal policy
shocks is the problem of the possible lag between the announcement and implemen-
tation of changes in fiscal policy. Considering the potentially lengthy debates in legis-
latures about, say, a reduction in tax rates, the change in government revenue is fairly
predictable by the time the tax reduction actually takes effect. Forward-looking individ-
uals and firms can adjust their economic choices before that date. While the tax change
will happen eventually, the surprise of a change in fiscal policy occurs earlier. Our iden-
tification procedure is easily adapted to deal with this problem by directly identifying a
shock for which there is a lag between the announcement and the implementation of the
change in fiscal policy. In particular, we shall identify announced fiscal policy shocks,
where government spending only rises in the fourth quarter following the shock but shows
no reaction beforehand.3
       Given the two basic fiscal shocks, different fiscal policy scenarios can be described
   3
    In this respect the identified shocks resemble a type of ‘news shock’ about fiscal policy and so are
related to the shocks identified by Beaudry and Portier (2003).


                                                  5
as sequences of different linear combinations of these two basic shocks. For example,
we will define a balanced budget expansionary fiscal scenario as a sequence of a linear
combination of the two basic shocks such that the increase in government spending is
matched by the increase in tax revenue for a sequence of five quarters, k = 0, . . . , 5,
following the initial shock.


2.1    The VAR and Identifying Restrictions
We use a VAR in GDP, private consumption, total government expenditure, total gov-
ernment revenue, real wages, private non-residential investment, interest rate, adjusted
reserves, the producer price index for crude materials and the GDP deflator. The VAR
system consists of these 10 variables at a quarterly frequency from 1955 to 2000, has
6 lags, no constant or a time trend, and uses the logarithm for all variables except the
interest rate where we have used the level. The chosen approach largely dictates the
choice of these variables. GDP, private consumption, private investment and real wages
are included as the focus of interest. Private consumption is also included because the
consumption-GDP ratio has predictive value for GDP, as Cochrane (1994) has shown.
Real wages are also included as Neoclassical and New Keynesian models tend to predict
different signs for the responses of real wages to deficit spending shocks, with the former
predicting negative and the latter positive responses, see Ramey and Shapiro (1998).
The monetary and price variables are there to identify monetary policy shocks. All the
components of national income are in real per capita terms. A more detailed description
can be found in Appendix B.
       The two fiscal variables in the VAR are defined in the same way as in Blanchard
and Perotti (2002). Thus total government expenditure is total government consumption
plus total government investment and total government revenues is total government tax
revenues minus transfers. Netting out transfer payments from the government revenue
variable is a non-trivial decision, but we have chosen to use Blanchard and Perotti’s
(2002) data definitions in order to emphasize the implications of the new identification
technique rather than have the results obscured by using different data definitions.


2.2    The identifying assumptions in detail.
An overview of our identifying sign restrictions on the impulse responses is provided
in Table 1. A business cycle shock is defined as a shock which jointly moves output,
consumption, non-residential investment and government revenue in the same direction
for four quarters following the shock. Since we associate business cycles with the more
substantial movements in these variables, we identify the business cycle shock by a

                                            6
                                            TABLE 1
                                 IDENTIFYING SIGN RESTRICTIONS
                                       Gov.          Gov        GDP, Cons,      Interest    Adjusted        Prices
                                      Revenue      Spending     Non-Res Inv       Rate      Reserves


 Non-Fiscal Shocks
 Business Cycle                          +                           +
 Monetary Policy                                                                   +            -             -

 Basic Fiscal Policy Shocks
 Government Revenue                      +
 Government Spending                                   +

This table shows the sign restrictions on the impulse responses for each identified shock. ‘Cons’ stands
for Private Consumption and ‘Non-Res Inv’ stands for Non-Residential Investment. A ”+” means that
the impulse response of the variable in question is restricted to be positive for four quarters following
the shock, including the quarter of impact. Likewise, a ”-” indicates a negative response. A blank entry
indicates, that no restrictions have been imposed.


criterion function, which rewards large impulse responses in the right directions more
than small responses and penalizes responses of the wrong sign.
       Such a co-movement is consistent with both demand and supply side shocks and
hence the approach remains ‘agnostic’ on the issue of the determinants of business cycle
fluctuations. The restriction that government revenues increase with output in the busi-
ness cycle shock should be emphasized. This is our crucial identifying assumption for
fiscal policy shocks: when output and government revenues move in the same direction,
we essentially assume that this must be due to some improvement in the business cycle
generating the increase in government revenue, not the other way around. We regard this
is a reasonable assumption and consistent with a number of theoretical views. Further-
more, our identifying assumptions are close to minimal: some assumptions are needed
to say anything at all. The orthogonality assumption a priori excludes the view that
positive co-movements of government revenues and output are caused by some form of
short term ‘Laffer Curve’ or ’fiscal consolidation’ effect from a surprise rise in taxes.4
       A monetary policy shock moves interest rates up and reserves and prices down for
   4
    The ‘Laffer Curve’ is a phenomenon which, if it exists, may be expected to operate over the medium
term and so would not be ruled out by the short run sign restrictions imposed. Indeed Figure 11 shows
that the responses of government revenue in response to a tax cut can be positive in the medium term.

                                                   7
four quarters after the shock. These identifying restrictions are close to those used in
Uhlig (2005). We also require the monetary policy shock to be orthogonal to the busi-
ness cycle shock. The main purpose of characterizing the business cycle and monetary
shocks is to filter out the effects of these shocks on the fiscal variables. The additional
orthogonalization among these two shocks has no effect on that.
       Fiscal policy shocks are identified only through restricting the impulse responses
of the fiscal variables and through the requirement that they are orthogonal to both
business cycle shocks as well as monetary policy shocks. As stated above we identify
two basic fiscal shocks, a ”government spending shock” and a ”government revenue
shock”, employing tight identifying restrictions where the responses of the fiscal variables
are restricted for a year after shock. For example a basic government spending shock
is defined as a shock where government spending rises for a defined period after the
shock. These tight restrictions are designed to rule out very transitory shocks to fiscal
variables where for example, government spending rises on impact but falls after one
or two quarters. Nonetheless we have checked that our results are robust to weaker
identifying restrictions where responses are only restricted on impact. Finally it should
be noted that we do not restrict the behavior of government revenue when identifying
the government spending shock or vice versa. This is not necessary since all that is
required to describe the two dimensional space of fiscal policy shocks are two linearly
independent vectors. However it is possible to place restrictions on these shocks so that
for example government revenue’s response to a government spending shock is initially
zero. An example of such restrictions are the year delayed fiscal shocks in Figures 5 and
8 where fiscal responses are restricted to be zero for a year following the announcement
of the shock.
       Details on the estimation as well as on the implementation of the identification
strategies, including these zero restrictions, are described in Appendix A and in Mount-
ford and Uhlig (2002).


3     Results
The identified fundamental shocks for each time period are displayed in Figure 1. The
shocks are identified for each draw from the posterior and the 16th, 50th and 84th
quantiles plotted. The impulse responses for these fundamental shocks are shown in
Figures 2 through 9, where we have plotted the impulse responses of all our 10 variables
to the shocks. The Figures plot the 16th, 50th and 84th quantiles of these impulse
See Trabandt and Uhlig (2007) and Giavazzi, Jappelli and Pagano (1990, 2000) and Perotti (1999) for
analysis on this issue.


                                                8
responses, calculated at each horizon between 0 and 24 quarters after the shocks. The
impulses restricted by the identifying sign restrictions are identified by the shaded area
in the figures.


3.1    The Business Cycle Shock
The identified business cycle shocks are plotted in the first panel of Figure 1 where the
NBER recession dates are shaded. The identified shocks correspond well with the NBER
dates, with the only anomalies being the 1981-82 recession, which is not picked up, and
the short 1990-91 recession which doesn’t appear to be very different in scale from other
clusters of negative shocks.
       The impulse responses of the business cycle shock are plotted in Figure 2. In
response to the business cycle shock, output, consumption, non-residential investment
and government revenue increase in the first four quarters by construction. Given that
no restriction is placed on these responses after four periods, it is notable that all of these
responses are persistent. Government revenues increase approximately twice as much in
percentage terms as GDP. There is no contradiction here, provided marginal tax rates are
approximately twice average tax rates. The persistence in the non-residential investment
variable indicates that a business cycle shock may increase the steady state capital to
labor ratio and so generate a higher level of steady state income, consumption and
government revenue. It must be stressed that these responses are consistent with both
demand and supply side explanations of the business cycle and this paper is agnostic on
the issue of the relative importance and persistence of demand and supply shocks.
       The responses of the monetary variables and the government spending variable
to the business cycle shock were not restricted at all by the identification method and
their responses are quite interesting. The interest rate rises and the adjusted reserves
fall in response to a positive business cycle shock. This could be caused by a systematic
counter-cyclical response of monetary policy over the sample period, which fits with the
description of monetary policy given by Romer and Romer (1994). The fall in adjusted
reserves (compared to the no-business-cycle-shock scenario) would indicate that this
counter-cyclical response is rather strong.
       Government expenditures in contrast do not behave in a counter-cyclical fashion.
Rather they increase, slowly, with a positive business cycle shock. Thus if a business
cycle boom fills the government’s coffers with cash, it will spend more eventually. Note
again that, following Blanchard and Perotti (2002), we chose the government expendi-
ture variable to be government consumption and investment in order to isolate changes
in government expenditure from automatic changes over the business cycle. Thus the


                                              9
government expenditure variable does not include transfer payments which almost surely
would automatically vary counter-cyclically.


3.2    The Monetary Policy Shock
The identified monetary policy shocks are plotted in the second panel of Figure 1. Again
these identified shocks correspond well with the existing literature, such as Bernanke and
Mihov’s (1998) plot of monetary policy stance, and are on average negative (indicating
a loose policy stance) in the late 1970’s, positive (indicating a tight policy stance) in the
early 1980’s, as well as being more volatile in the Volcker experiment period 1979-82.
       The response to a monetary policy shock is shown in Figure 3. Note that we have
constructed the monetary policy shock to be orthogonal to the business cycle shock shown
in Figure 2. Thus this shock represents that part of the unanticipated quarterly change
in monetary policy that is not accounted for by systematic responses over the quarter to
unanticipated business cycle shocks. A consequence of our identification strategy is that
if, rather counter-intuitively, monetary policy shocks should be such that surprise rises
in the interest rate cause short term increases in output, consumption and investment,
then these effects would be captured by the business cycle shock shown in Figure 2,
not by the monetary shock shown here. Thus, output, consumption and investment in
Figure 3, have a propensity to fall in the short term almost by construction and they do,
although interestingly by very little. Over the medium term monetary policy shocks are
associated with a marginally lower interest rate and increases in income, consumption,
and wages. These results are thus not inconsistent with the findings in Uhlig (2005):
there, without orthogonality to the business cycle shock, sign restriction methods do not
deliver a clear direction for real GDP in response to a surprise rise in interest rates.
       What is a little surprising is the rise in government revenue in response to the
rise in interest rates. One plausible, although not the only, explanation for this is that
over the sample period, monetary and fiscal policy was coordinated so that a monetary
tightening was accompanied by a fiscal tightening via an increase in taxes. If this were
the case then there would be a danger that requiring fiscal shocks to be orthogonal to
monetary policy shocks will cause biases in the results. For this reason we have checked
the robustness of our identified fiscal shocks by identifying them both second (orthogonal
to only the business cycle shock) and third (orthogonal to both the business cycle and
monetary policy shocks). We find that the responses of the real variables are very similar
in both these specifications and hence any bias is small. This may be because monetary
policy shocks do not appear have a large effect on real macroeconomic variables. We
conclude from this, that controlling for the monetary policy shock is not important when


                                            10
analyzing the consequences of fiscal policy, see Mountford and Uhlig (2002) for a greater
discussion of this issue.


3.3       The Basic Government Revenue Shock
A basic government revenue shock is identified as a shock that is orthogonal to the
business cycle and monetary policy shock and where government revenue rises for a
year after the shock. The identified government revenue shocks are plotted in the third
panel of Figure 1 where the change from shaded to non-shaded areas denote changes in
presidential terms. These identified shocks correspond, in part at least, with Romer and
Romer’s (2007) measure of exogenous tax changes, in that the shocks are on average
negative in the mid-1960’s and mid 1980’s and positive in the early 1990’s. They also
clearly pick up the large effects of the 1975 Tax Reduction Act.
      The impulse responses for this shock are displayed in Figure 4. Figure 4 shows
that the responses of the real variables of interest to a standard government revenue
shock are intuitive. GDP, consumption and investment fall in response to an increase
in revenue and real wages also fall although with a lag. The responses of interest rates
and prices are less intuitive as interest rates rise and reserves fall in response to a rise
in revenue. Although no restriction is placed on the behavior of government spending
for this shock, government spending follows the shape of the GDP and consumption
responses and falls before recovering.


3.4       The Anticipated Government Revenue Shock
We also identify a year delayed shock where government revenue is restricted to rise only
after a year. The responses of this shock are displayed in Figure 5. They show an intuitive
‘announcement effect’ as the anticipated rise in revenues immediately depresses output
and consumption. This accords with our intuition regarding the optimal smoothing
behavior of individuals and firms. Interest rates also fall with this drop in output which
is also intuitive.
       The median responses of the unanticipated and anticipated shocks are compared
in Figure 6 where the responses of the unanticipated shocks are shifted forward so that
the implementation of the revenue shock is in the same time period. Figure 6 shows
that the responses to an anticipated government revenue shock, while similar to those of
the unanticipated shocks in terms of their sign, are somewhat smaller, perhaps because
announced policies move fiscal variables by less than unanticipated changes.5
  5
      Changes in fiscal policy may be the result of the systematic component of fiscal policy - unrelated



                                                   11
3.5     The Basic Government Spending Shock
A basic government revenue shock is identified as a shock that is orthogonal to the
business cycle and monetary policy shock and where government spending rises for a
year after the shock. The identified government spending shocks are plotted in the fourth
panel of Figure 1 where the change from shaded to non-shaded areas denote changes in
presidential terms. These identified shocks show that government spending shocks were
predominantly positive in the mid 1960’s and early 1990’s and predominantly negative
around 1960 and in the early 1970’s. In the the 1990’s government spending appears to
be more stable than average with relatively few shocks reaching the 2.5 percent level in
absolute terms.
      The impulse responses for this shock are displayed in Figure 7. Figure 7 shows
that the basic government spending shock stimulates output during the first four quarters
although only weakly and has only a very weak effect on private consumption. It also
reduces investment, although interestingly not via higher interest rates. Real wages do
not respond positively to the government spending shock and indeed are negative on
impact and in the medium term which is more in accordance with neoclassical than New
keynesian models of government spending, see Ramey and Shapiro (1998). Although
no restriction is placed on the behavior of government revenue this does not change
very significantly and so the basic government spending shock will resemble a fiscal
policy shock of deficit spending, whose responses are displayed in Figure 10 in section 4
below. The response of prices to the increase in government spending is a little puzzling
since both the GDP deflator and the producer price index for crude materials show a
decline. Although this is a counter-intuitive result, it should also be noted that this
negative relationship between prices and government spending has also been found in
other studies, see for example Canova and Pappa (2003), Edelberg, Eichenbaum and
Fisher (1999) and Fatás, and Mihov (2001a).


3.6     The Anticipated Government Spending Shock
We also identify a year delayed shock where government spending is restricted to rise
only after a year. The responses of this shock are displayed in Figure 8. They again
show an intuitive ‘announcement’ effect on impact as the anticipated rise in spending
immediately has a positive effect on output and interest rates. Again this is consistent
with smoothing behavior by individuals and firms. The median responses of the unan-
to the business cycle - rather fiscal policy shocks, as Liu, Waggoner and Zha (2007) have argued is the
case for monetary policy shocks. However we leave the joint identification of fiscal policy regime shifts
and fiscal policy shock for future work.


                                                  12
ticipated and anticipated shocks are compared in Figure 9 where the responses of the
unanticipated shocks are shifted forward so that the implementation of the spending
shock is in the same time period. Figure 9 shows that the responses to an anticipated
government spending shock appear more persistent and stronger than for the unantici-
pated shocks and investment is no longer crowded out by the increased in government
spending. This is an interesting and slightly puzzling result, however it should be noted
that the interpretation of these responses in the medium term is clouded by the marginal
cut in taxes after a year. From Figure 5 this would have a significant expansionary effect
and this may be the cause of the persistent positive effects on income and consumption.
In section 4.1 below we demonstrate a straightforward method for accounting for such
changes when performing policy analysis.


4     Policy Analysis
We can use the basic shocks identified in the previous section to analyze the effects of
different fiscal policies. We view different fiscal policy shocks as different linear combina-
tions of the basic fiscal policy shocks. There are clearly a huge number of possible fiscal
policies we could analyze so here we restrict ourselves to comparing three popularly an-
alyzed fiscal policies. A deficit spending shock, a deficit financed tax cut and a balanced
budget spending shock. We first detail how the impulse responses for these policies are
generated


4.1    Calculating the Impulse Responses for Different Fiscal Pol-
       icy Scenarios
Our methodology regards different fiscal policy scenarios as being different combinations
of the two basic shocks over a sequence of several quarters. For example, a government
spending scenario where government spending is raised by 1% for four quarters while
government revenue remains unchanged is the linear combination of the sequence of the
two basic shocks that generates these responses in the fiscal variables as the combined
impulse response. More formally denoting rj,a (k) as the response at horizon k of variable
j to the impulse vector a then the above policy requires that

                k
                X
      0.01 =      (rGS,BGS (k − j)BGSj + rGS,BGR (k − j)BGRj )         for k = 0, . . . K
                j=0




                                             13
            k
            X
        0 =   (rGR,BGS (k − j)BGSj + rGR,BGR (k − j)BGRj )            for k = 0, . . . K
               j=0


where K = 4, GS and GR stand for Government Expenditure and Government Revenue
and BGSj ,and BGRj are respectively the scale of the standard basic government spending
and revenue shocks in period j.
      We analyze three key policy scenarios below: deficit spending, a deficit-financed
tax cut and a balanced budget spending expansion. It should be clear, however, that
other scenarios of interest can be analyzed in this manner as well.


4.2    A Deficit Spending Fiscal Policy Scenario
The impulse responses for a deficit spending fiscal policy scenario are shown in Figure 10.
The policy scenario is designed as a sequence of basic fiscal shocks such that government
spending rises by 1% and tax revenues remain unchanged for four quarters following the
initial shock. As noted above the standard basic government spending shock does not
change tax revenues significantly so the impulses in Figure 10 and are similar to those in
Figure 7. Thus the deficit spending scenario stimulates output and consumption during
the first four quarters although only weakly, it reduces non-residential investment and it
produces a counterintuitive response for prices.


4.3    A Deficit Financed Tax Cut Fiscal Policy Scenario
The impulse responses for a deficit financed tax cut fiscal policy scenario are shown in
Figure 11. The policy scenario is designed as a sequence of basic fiscal shocks such that
tax revenues fall by 1% and government spending remains unchanged for four quarters
(including the initial quarter) following the initial shock. The responses look very similar
to a mirror image of the responses to the basic government revenue shock in Figure 4.
Thus the tax cut stimulates output, consumption and investment significantly with the
effect peaking after about three years. The effect on prices is initially negative but
subsequently positive following the rise in output.


4.4     The Balanced Budget Spending Policy Scenario
The balanced budget spending policy scenario is identified by requiring both government
revenues and expenditures to increase in such a way that the increase in revenues and ex-
penditure are equal for each period in the four-quarter window following the initial shock.
For ease of comparison we choose a sequence of basic fiscal shocks such that government

                                            14
                                 TABLE 2
             PRESENT VALUE MULTIPLIERS OF THE POLICY SCENARIOS
                                          1 qrt   4qrts   8 qrts   12 qrts    20 qrts     Maximum


 DEFICIT FINANCED TAX CUT                  0.29    0.51     1.43       3.99     -4.98   5.33 (qrt 14)
 DEFICIT SPENDING                          0.65    0.46     0.12      -0.22     -0.97   0.65 (qrt 1)

This table shows the present value multipliers for a deficit financed tax cut policy scenario and for a
deficit spending fiscal policy scenario. The multipliers given are the median multipliers in both cases.


spending rises by 1% and government revenues rises by 1.28%. Government revenue rises
by more than government spending since over the sample government revenue’s share of
GDP is 0.162 while that of government spending is 0.208 thus we require government
revenues to rise by (0.208/0.162)%. The results are shown in Figure 12. These show
that on impact there is a small expansionary effect on GDP but thereafter the depressing
effects of the tax increases dominate the spending effects and GDP, consumption and
investment fall.


4.5     Measures of the Effects of Policy Scenarios
To compare the effects of one fiscal scenario with another it is useful to define summary
measures of the effects of each fiscal scenario. One measure used in the literature is
the ratio of the response of GDP at a given period to the initial movement of the fiscal
variable, see for example Blanchard and Perotti (2002) and Canova and Pappa (2003).
We refer to this as the impact multiplier. We report the impact multipliers of the deficit
financed tax cut and deficit spending policy scenarios below in Tables 3 and 4.
      However we also think a measure of the impact of a scenario along the entire path
of the responses up to a given period is also useful. In Figure 13 we have therefore plotted
the present value of the impulse responses of GDP and the fiscal variables for the deficit
financed tax cut and the deficit spending policy scenarios. We have also calculated a
present value multiplier for these scenarios which we display in Table 2. To calculate the
present value multiplier we use the following formula.
                                                        Pk           −j
                                                          j=0 (1 + i) yj 1
                 Present Value Multiplier at lag k = Pk
                                                                     −j
                                                          j=0 (1 + i) fj
                                                                         f /y

where yj is the response of GDP at period j, fj is the response of the fiscal variable at


                                                  15
period j, i is the average interest rate over the sample, and f /y is the average share of
the fiscal variable in GDP over the sample. We use the median multiplier in all cases.
       Table 2 and Figure 13 and tell the same story. They show that in present value
terms tax cuts have a much greater effect on GDP than government spending. The
present value of the GDP response to a deficit spending scenario becomes insignificant
after two years whereas that for the deficit financed tax cut is significantly positive
throughout. Figure 13 also shows that the standard error of the present value multiplier
becomes very large for the deficit financed tax cut at later time periods.6


4.6     Comparison of Results With The Existing Literature
Despite the novel methodology used in this paper, there are many similarities to results
obtained elsewhere in the existing literature. There are however also important differ-
ences which we shall discuss below. As we have used Blanchard and Perotti’s (2002)
data definitions for the fiscal variables and use a very similar sample period it is nat-
ural to compare our results most closely with their paper. We do this in the following
subsection. We compare our results to other studies in a further subsection.

4.6.1    Comparison With Blanchard and Perotti (2002)
The impact multipliers, defined above, are compared with those of Blanchard and Perotti
(2002) in Tables 3 and 4.
      For the deficit financed tax cut, Table 3 shows that our results are very comparable
with Blanchard and Perotti’s. In both studies the effect on output of a change in tax
revenues is persistent and large. The size of the impact multiplier is greater in our results
than in Blanchard and Perotti’s although in both studies the impact multipliers of the
tax cut scenario are greater than those of the spending scenario.
      For the spending scenario, Table 4 shows that size of the impact multipliers as-
sociated with increased government spending are smaller than Blanchard and Perotti’s,
but that the timing has a similar pattern in the sense that the largest impact multipliers
are in the periods close to the impact of the initial shock and with the responses after a
year being insignificant.
      With respect to the responses of investment again the two studies are similar. In
both Blanchard and Perotti’s and in our study investment falls in response to both tax
increases and government spending increases. With regard to consumption the results
have some similarities to Blanchard and Perotti’s in that consumption does not fall in
  6
     The median multiplier becomes negative at later time periods for both the deficit spending and
deficit financed tax cut shocks but in both cases these negative multipliers are not significant.


                                               16
                                TABLE 3
   IMPACT MULTIPLIERS OF DEFICIT FINANCED TAX CUT POLICY SCENARIOS
                                           1 qrt   4qrts    8 qrts   12 qrts    20 qrts     Maximum


  Mountford and Uhlig
 GDP                                        0.28     0.93     2.05      3.41       2.59   3.57 (qrt 13)
 TAX REVENUES                              -1.00    -1.00     0.06      1.05       1.03
 GOV SPENDING                               0.00     0.00     0.27      0.43       0.48

  Blanchard and Perotti (2002)
 GDP                                        0.70     1.07     1.32       1.30      1.29    1.33 (qrt 7)
 TAX REVENUES                              -0.74    -0.31    -0.17      -0.16     -0.16
 GOV SPENDING                               0.06     0.10     0.17       0.20      0.20

This table shows the impact multipliers for a deficit financed tax cut fiscal scenario for various quar-
ters after the initial shock and compares them to similar measures from Blanchard and Perotti (2002)
Table III. The multiplier represents the effect in dollars of a one dollar cut in taxes at the first quar-
ter. For the Mountford and Uhlig results this is calculated with the formula: multiplier for GDP
      GDP response
=                        /(Average Fiscal variable share of GDP), where the median responses are used
    Initial Fiscal shock
in all cases. On the calculation of the Blanchard and Perotti (2002) multipliers see Blanchard and
Perotti (2002) section V.


response to a spending shock. However in Blanchard and Perotti (2002) consumption
rises significantly in response to a spending shock whereas in our analysis consumption
does not move by very much.7 As Figure 10 shows consumption’s response is only
significantly positive on impact and then by only a small amount. Thereafter its response
is insignificant. Finally we find that real wages do not rise in response to an increase
in government spending and have a negative response on impact and at longer horizons.
Thus taken together these findings are difficult to reconcile with the standard Keynesian
approach although they also not the responses predcited by the benchmark real business
cycle model.
   7
    See also Galı́, López-Salido, and Vallés (2007) who also find a significantly positive consumption
response.




                                                   17
                                 TABLE 4
        IMPACT MULTIPLIERS OF A DEFICIT SPENDING POLICY SCENARIO
                                           1 qrt   4qrts    8 qrts   12 qrts   20 qrts     Maximum


  Mountford and Uhlig
 GDP                                        0.65    0.27     -0.74     -1.19      -2.24   0.65 (qrt 1)
 GOV SPENDING                               1.00    1.00      0.90      0.37      -0.32
 TAX REVENUES                               0.00    0.00     -0.33     -0.87      -2.04

  Blanchard and Perotti (2002)
 GDP                                        0.90    0.55     0.65       0.66       0.66   0.90 (qrt 1)
 GOV. SPENDING                              1.00    1.30     1.56       1.61       1.62
 TAX REVENUES                               0.10    0.18     0.33       0.36       0.37

This table shows the impact multipliers for a deficit spending fiscal scenario for various quarters after
the initial shock and compares them to similar measures from Blanchard and Perotti (2002) Table
IV. The multiplier represents the effect in dollars of a one dollar increase in spending at the first
quarter. For the Mountford and Uhlig results this is calculated with the formula: multiplier for GDP
      GDP response
=                        /(Average Fiscal variable share of GDP), where the median responses are used
    Initial Fiscal shock
in all cases. On the calculation of the Blanchard and Perotti (2002) multipliers see Blanchard and
Perotti (2002) section V.


4.6.2    Comparison With Other Studies
With regard to other studies in the literature not only are there differences in method-
ology but also in the definitions of the fiscal variables. There is thus no shortage of
potential sources for differences in results. Nevertheless there is still some common
ground in the results of this paper and previous work. For example consider the recent
work by Burnside,Eichenbaum and Fisher (2003) which builds on the work of Ramey
and Shapiro (1998), and Edelberg, Eichenbaum and Fisher (1998) in using changes in
military purchases associated with various wars to identify government spending shock.
They find that private consumption does not change significantly in response to a gov-
ernment spending shock. However in contrast to our results they find that investment
has an initial, transitory positive response to the spending shock.




                                                   18
                             TABLE 5
 MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM IMPACT MULTIPLIERS OF FISCAL POLICY SCENARIOS
  Fiscal Scenario          Maximum Multiplier                          Minimum Multiplier
                      Median       Confidence Interval     Median               Confidence Interval
                     Multiplier    16th,84th Quantiles    Multiplier            16th,84th Quantiles


 Deficit Spending        0.91           0.68, 1.37           -2.88                      -4.99, -0.80
                        lag 4          lag 2, lag 6        at lag 20                  lag 24, lag 8
 Balanced Budget         0.47           0.19, 0.84           -5.84                      -9.46, -3.63
                        lag 1          lag 1, lag 1        at lag 19                 lag 15, lag 11
      Tax Cut            3.81           2.58, 5.49           0.19                        -0.11, 0.36
                        lag 12        lag 15, lag 13       at lag 24                  lag 24, lag 1


 Deficit Spending        0.79           0.59, 1.05           0.09                         -0.21, 0.31
   In first year        lag 4          lag 4, lag 1        at lag 4                     lag 4, lag 2
 Balanced Budget         0.45           0.16, 0.79          -0.71                       -1.11, -0.40
   In first year       at lag 3        lag 1, lag 1        at lag 4                     lag 1, lag 2

These statistics relate to the distribution of the maximum and minimum impact multiplier ef-
fects of each fiscal scenario. For each draw the maximum and minimum fiscal multiplier is cal-
culated and the 16th, 50th and 84th percentiles of these results are displayed. The multiplier
statistic is calculated in terms of the initial, lag 0, fiscal shock as follows: multiplier for GDP
       GDP response
=                        /(Average Fiscal variable share of GDP).
   Fiscal shock at Lag 0


4.7     Variance of the Policy Analysis
Clearly there is a considerable degree of uncertainty in the numbers displayed in Tables 3
and 4, as they are based on the maximum multipliers from the median impulse responses.
An advantage of the Bayesian approach used in our analysis is that it naturally provides
a measure of the standard errors for this policy analysis. Standard errors can easily be
calculated for each policy scenario by taking the maximum and minimum multipliers of
GDP and their corresponding lag for each of the draws from the posterior. These maxima
and minima can then be ordered and the 16th, 50th and 84th percentiles reported. This
is done in Table 5.
      Table 5 supports the conclusions above. The maximum expansionary effect of
a deficit spending scenario is much below that of the tax revenue scenario. Indeed the

                                               19
upper confidence limit of the deficit spending scenario is below the lower confidence limit
of the tax cut scenario. For the tax cut the maximum effects are significantly positive
and the minimum effects are insignificantly different from zero.
       The results in Table 5 are usefully related to the impulse responses in Figures 10
through 12. For the tax cut the maximum multipliers occur after two or more years,
whereas for the balanced budget and deficit spending scenarios the maximum effects
occur at short lags and the minimum effects at longer lags. Since the variance of the
impulse responses for these scenarios appears to increase at longer lag lengths, we also
look at the maximum and minimum multipliers of the two spending scenarios in the
first year after the initial shock. In this case we now get the result that the deficit
spending scenario’s minimum multiplier is insignificantly different from zero but that for
the balanced budget spending scenario is still significantly negative.


4.8     Policy Conclusions
An important lesson one can draw from the results is that while a deficit-financed ex-
penditure stimulus is possible, the eventual costs are likely to be much higher than the
immediate benefits. For suppose that government spending is increased by two percent,
financed by increasing the deficit: this results, using the median values from Table 5, at
maximum, in less than a two percent increase in GDP. But the increased deficit needs
to be repaid eventually with a hike in taxes. Even ignoring compounded interest rates,
this would require a tax hike of over two percent.8 This tax hike results in a greater than
seven percent drop in GDP. Thus unless the policy maker’s discount rate is very high
the costs of the expansion will be much higher than the initial benefit.
      This general line of reasoning is consistent with the balanced budget spending
scenario whose impulses are shown in Figure 12. This shows that when government
spending is financed contemporaneously that the contractionary effects of the tax in-
creases outweigh the expansionary effects of the increased expenditure after a very short
time.


5       Conclusion
In this paper we have presented a new approach for distinguishing the effects of fiscal
policy shocks by adapting the method of Uhlig (2005). This method uses only the in-
formation in the macroeconomic time series of the vector autoregression together with
    8
    For simplicity we are assuming the tax hike to be a surprise, when it occurs, which allows us to use
the results above.


                                                  20
minimal assumptions to identify fiscal policy shocks. In particular it imposes no restric-
tions on the responses of the key variables of interest - GDP, private consumption, real
wages and private non-residential investment - to fiscal policy shocks. The paper applied
this approach using post war data on the US economy.
      We have analyzed three types of policy scenarios: a deficit financed spending in-
crease, a balanced budget spending increase (financed with higher taxes) and a deficit
financed tax cut, in which revenues increase but government spending stays unchanged.
We found that a deficit spending scenario stimulates the economy for the first 4 quarters
but only weakly compared to that for a deficit financed tax cut. We also found that both
types of spending scenario had the effect of crowding out investment.
      Although the best fiscal policy for stimulating the economy appears to be deficit-
financed tax cuts, we wish to point out that this should not be read as endorsing them.
This paper only points out that unanticipated deficit-financed tax cuts work as a (short-
lived) stimulus to the economy, not that they are sensible. The resulting higher debt
burdens may have long-term consequences which are far worse than the short-term in-
crease in GDP, and surprising the economy may not be good policy in any case. These
normative judgements require theoretical models for which the empirical positive results
in this paper can provide a useful starting point.




                                           21
 APPENDIX

A      VARs and impulse matrices
A VAR in reduced form is given by
                             L
                             X
                      Yt =         Bi Yt−i + ut , t = 1, ....T,   E[ut u0t ] = Σ
                             i=1

where Yt are m × 1 vectors, L is the lag length of the VAR, Bi are m × m coefficient
matrices and ut is the one step ahead prediction error.
        The problem of identification is to translate the one step ahead prediction errors,
ut , into economically meaningful, or ‘fundamental’, shocks, vt . We adopt the common
assumptions in the VAR literature that there are m fundamental shocks, which are mu-
tually orthogonal and normalized to be of variance 1. Thus E[vt vt0 ] = Im . Identification
of these shocks amounts to identifying a matrix A, such that ut = Avt and AA0 = Σ. The
jth column of A represents the immediate impact, or impulse vector, of a one standard
error innovation to the jth fundamental innovation, which is the jth element of v. The
following definition is useful, and new.

Definition 1 An impulse matrix of rank n is a n × m sub-matrix of some m × m
matrix A, such that AA0 = Σ. An impulse vector a is an impulse matrix of rank 1,
i.e. is a vector a ∈ Rm such that there exists some matrix A, where a is a column of A,
such that AA0 = Σ.

      One can show that the identification does not depend on the particular matrix A
chosen beyond a given impulse matrix, i.e. a given impulse matrix uniquely identifies
the fundamental shocks corresponding to it:

Theorem 1 Suppose that Σ is regular. Let a given impulse matrix [a(1) , . . . , a(n) ] of size
n be a submatrix of two m × m matrices A, Ã with AA0 = ÃÃ0 = Σ. Let vt = A−1 ut , ṽt =
                        (1)        (n)        (1)      (n)
Ã−1 ut and let vt , . . . , vt resp. ṽt , . . . , ṽt be the entries in vt resp. ṽt corresponding
                                                                            (1)
to a(1) , . . . , a(n) , i.e., if e.g. a(1) is the third column of A, then vt is the third entry of
                  (i)      (i)
vt . Then, vt = ṽt for all i = 1, . . . , n.

      Proof: W.l.o.g., let [a(1) , . . . , a(n) ] be the first n columns of A and Ã. If this is e.g.
not the case for A and if e.g. a(1) is the third column of A, one can find a permutation
matrix P so that the given impulse matrix will be the first n columns of Â = AP with


                                                  22
a(1) the first column of Â. Since P P 0 = I, ÂÂ0 = Σ. Furthermore, the first column of P
is the vector e3 , which is zero except for a 1 in its third entry: hence the first entry of
                                                                 (1)
Â−1 ut = P 0 vt must be the third entry of vt and thus be vt corresponding to a(1) .
       With [a(1) , . . . , a(n) ] as the first n columns of A and Ã, let En = [In , 0n,m ]. Note
        (1)         (n)
that [vt , . . . , vt ]0 = En A−1 ut . We need to show that En A−1 ut = En Ã−1 ut for all ut .
It suffices to show that En A−1 Σ = En Ã−1 Σ, since Σ is regular. But this follows from

                                 En A−1 Σ = En A−1 AA0
                                            = En A0
                                            = [a(1) , . . . , a(n) ]0
                                            = En Ã−1 ÃÃ0
                                            = En Ã−1 Σ

•


       In the VAR literature identification usually proceeds by identifying all m fundamen-
tal shocks and so characterizing the entire A matrix. This requires imposing m(m − 1)/2
restrictions on the A matrix. This is done either by assuming a recursive ordering of
variables in the VAR, so that a Cholesky decomposition of A can be used, see Sims
(1986), or by imposing the m(m − 1)/2 restrictions via assumed short run structural
relationships as in Bernanke (1986) and Blanchard and Watson(1986), via assumed long
run structural relationships, as in Blanchard and Quah (1989) or via both assumed short
run and long run structural relationships as in Gali (1992).
       This paper instead extends the method of Uhlig (2005) and identifies at most three
fundamental shocks and so needs to characterize an impulse matrix [a(1) , a(2) , a(3) ] of rank
3 rather than all of A. This is accomplished by imposing sign restrictions on the impulse
responses. Note that by construction, the covariance between the fundamental shocks
  (1) (2)        (3)
vt , vt and vt corresponding to a(1) , a(2) and a(3) is zero, i.e. that these fundamental
shocks are orthogonal.
       To that end, note that any impulse matrix [a(1) , . . . , a(n) ] can be written as the
                                 e of the lower triangular Cholesky factor A
product [a(1) , . . . , a(n) ] = AQ                                              e of Σ with an
n × m matrix Q = [q (1) , . . . , q (n) ] of orthonormal rows q (i) , i.e. QQ0 = In : this follows
from noting that A      e−1 A must be an orthonormal matrix for any decomposition AA0 = Σ
of Σ. Likewise, Let a = a(s) , s ∈ {1, . . . , n} be one of the columns of the impulse matrix
and q = q (s) = A  e−1 a(s) be the corresponding column of Q: note that q (s) does not depend
on the other a(p) , p 6= s. As in Uhlig (2005), it follows easily that the impulse responses
for the impulse vector a can be written as a linear combination of the impulse responses

                                               23
to the Cholesky decomposition of Σ as follows. Define rji (k) as the impulse response
of the jth variable at horizon k to the ith column of A, e and the m dimensional column
vector ri (k) as [r1i (k), ..., rmi (k)]. Then the m dimensional impulse response ra (k) at
horizon k to the impulse vector a(s) is given by
                                                   m
                                                   X
                                        ra (k) =         qi ri (k)                      (1)
                                                   i=1

(where qi is the i-th entry of q = q (s) ), delivering equation (??).
       Define the function f on the real line per f (x) = 100x if x ≥ 0 and f (x) = x
if x ≤ 0. Let sj be the the standard error of variable j. Let JS,+ be the index set of
variables, for which identification of a given shock restricts the impulse response to be
positive and let JS,− be the index set of variables, for which identification restricts the
impulse response to be negative. To impose the additional identifying inequality sign
restrictions beyond the zero restrictions of equation (3), we solve

                                       a = argmina=Aq
                                                   e Ψ(a)                               (2)

where the criterion function Ψ(a) is given by
                               3
                             X X                           X X 3
                                               rja (k)               rja (k)
                    Ψ(a) =                f (−         )+         f(         )
                             j²JS,+   k=0
                                                 sj       j²J k=0
                                                                       sj
                                                                 S,−


Computationally, we implement this minimization, using a simplex algorithm: it is avail-
able on many statistical packages as e.g. MATLAB and RATS; for this paper we use
the version of the algorithm written in GAUSS by Bo Honore and Ekaterini Kyriazidou,
available from http://www.princeton.edu/ honore/.
      Note that ‘zero’ restrictions, where the impulse responses of the j-th variable to an
impulse vector a for, say, the first four periods are set to zero, can be incorporated into
the analysis fairly easily. These restrictions can be written as a restriction on the vector
q that
                                           0 = Rq                                        (3)
where R is a 4 × m matrix of the form
                                                         
                                    rj1 (0) · · · rjm (0)
                                  .        ..       ..   
                            R =  ..            .     .                                (4)
                                    rj1 (3) · · · rjm (3)

     To identify an impulse matrix [a(1) , a(2) ], where the first shock is a business cycle
shock and the second shock is a fiscal policy shock, first identify the business cycle shock

                                                   24
        e (1) in the manner described above and then identify the second shock a(2) by
a(1) = Aq
replacing the minimization problem 2 with
                              a = argmina=Aq,Rq=0,q
                                          e         0 q (1) =0 Ψ(a)                        (5)
i.e. by additionally imposing orthogonality to the first shock. The two restrictions
Rq = 0, q 0 q (1) = 0 can jointly be written as
                                                  e
                                              0 = Rq                                       (6)
where Re0 = [q (1) , R0 ]. Likewise, if orthogonality to two shocks - the business cycle shock
and the monetary policy shock - is required, identify the business cycle shock a(1) = Aq  e (1)
and identify the monetary policy shock a(2) = Aq     e (2) and solve

                           a = argmina=Aq,Rq=0,q
                                       e         0 q (1) ,q 0 q (2) =0 Ψ(a)                (7)
      Given the above we can now state our identification restrictions more formally. We
only provide two: the others follow the same pattern.
Definition 2 A business cycle shock impulse vector is an impulse vector a, that
minimizes a criterion function Ψ(a), which penalizes negative impulse responses of GDP,
private consumption, nonresidential investment and government revenue at horizons k =
0, 1, 2, and 3.
Definition 3 A basic government revenue shock impulse vector is an impulse
vector a minimizing a criterion function Ψ(a), which penalizes negative impulse responses
to the vector a of government revenue at horizons k = 0, 1, 2, and 3.
      The computations are performed, using a Bayesian approach as in Uhlig (2005),
see also Sims and Zha (1998). We take a number of draws from the posterior. For each
draw from the posterior of the VAR coefficients and the variance-covariance matrix Σ,
the shocks are identified using the criteria described above. Given the sample of draws
for the impulse responses, confidence bands can be plotted.


B      The Data
All the data we use is freely available from the World Wide Web. The data on components
of US national income is taken from the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA)
which are made publically available by the Bureau of Economic Analysis on their website
http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/uguide.htm. The monetary data - the interest rate, producer
commodity price index and adjusted reserves - and the real wage data, is taken from the
Federal Reserve Board of St Louis’ website http://www.stls.frb.org/fred/.

                                                25
B.1      Definitions of Variables in the VAR
All the components of national income are in real per capita terms and are transformed
from their nominal values by dividing them by the gdp deflator (NIPA table 7.1 Row
4) and the population measure (NIPA table 2.1 Row 35). The table and row numbers
refers to the organization of the data by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

 GDP: This is NIPA table 1.1 Row 1.

 Private Consumption: This is NIPA table 1.1 Row 1.

 Total Government Expenditure: This is ‘Federal Defense Consumption Expendi-
    tures’, NIPA table 3.7 Row 4, plus ‘Federal Non Defense Consumption Expendi-
    tures’, NIPA table 3.7 Row 15, plus ‘State and Local Consumption Expenditures’,
    NIPA table 3.7 Row 28. plus ‘Federal Defense Gross Investment’, NIPA table 3.7
    Row 11, plus ‘Federal Non Defense Gross Investment ’, NIPA table 3.7 Row 24,
    plus ‘State and Local Gross Investment’, NIPA table 3.7 Row 35.

 Total Government Revenue9 : This is ‘Total Government Receipts’, NIPA table 3.1
    Row 1, minus ‘Net Transfers Payments’, NIPA table 3.1 Row 8, and ‘Net Interest
    Paid’, NIPA table 3.1 Row 11.

 Real Wages: This is ‘Nonfarm Business Sector: Real Compensation Per Hour’ Series
    COMPRNFB from the U.S. Department of Labor: Bureau of Labor Statistics.

 Private Non-Residential Investment: This is ‘Nominal Gross Private Domestic
     Investment’, NIPA table 1.1 Row 6,.minus private residential investment, NIPA
     table 1.1 Row 11.

 Interest Rate: This is the Federal Funds rate which is the series fedfunds at the
     Federal Reserve Board of St Louis’ website http://www.stls.frb.org/fred/. We take
     the arithmetic average of the monthly figures for the Federal Funds Rate.

 Adjusted Reserves: This is the Adjusted Monetary Base given by the series adjressl
    series at the Federal Reserve Board of St Louis’ website http://www.stls.frb.org/fred/.
    We take the arithmetic average of the monthly figures to get a quarterly figure.
   9
     This definition follows Blanchard and Perotti (1999) in regarding transfer payments as negative
taxes. We use this definition in order not to obscure the implications of the new identification technique
used in this paper, by using different data.




                                                   26
 PPIC: This the Producer Price Index of Crude Materials given by the series ppicrm
    at the Federal Reserve Board of St Louis’ website http://www.stls.frb.org/fred/.
    We take the arithmetic average of the monthly figures to get a quarterly figure.

 The GDP Deflator: This is NIPA table 7.1 Row 4.

      The VAR system consists of these 10 variables at quarterly frequency from 1955(Q1)
to 2000(Q4), has 6 lags, no constant or time trend, and uses the logarithm for all variables
except the interest rate where we have used the level.
      The fiscal variable are chosen so that they will have different responses to business
cycle movements and fiscal policy shocks. The government expenditure variable is chosen
so as to exclude expenditures which will vary over the business cycle such as transfer
payments, see for example Blanchard (1997) p 600 on this. The government receipts
variable should clearly respond positively to a business cycle shock, an increase in output
should increase tax receipts and reduce transfer payments.




                                            27
 REFERENCES


Alesina, Alberto and Roberto Perotti (1995): “Fiscal Expansions and Fiscal
Adjustments in OECD Countries” Economic Policy, 21, pp. 205-48.

Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier (2003): “Stock Prices, News and Economic
Fluctuations,” Mimeo, Université de Toulouse.

Benati, Luca and Haroon Mumtaz, (2007):. ”U.S. evolving macroeconomic
dynamics - a structural investigation,” Working Paper Series, European Central Bank,
No. 746.

Bernanke, Ben S. (1986): “Alternative Explanations of the Money-Income
Correlation,” in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds., Real Business Cycles, Real Exchange
Rates, and Actual Policies, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, no.
25, Amsterdam, North-Holland.

Bernanke, Ben S. and Ilian Mihov (1998): “Measuring Monetary Policy,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. 113(3), pp 869-890.

Blanchard, Olivier (1997): “Macroeconomics” Prentice Hall .

Blanchard, Olivier and R. Perotti (2002): “An Empirical Characterization of the
Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 1329-1368

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Danny Quah (1989): “The Dynamic Effects of
Aggregate Demand and Supply Disturbances,” American Economic Review, vol. 79,
September, 655-673.

Blanchard, Olivier and Mark Watson (1986): “Are All Business Cycles Alike?”
in R.J. Gordon, ed., The American Business Cycle, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 123-160.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Jonas D.M. Fisher (2003): “Fiscal
Shocks And Their Consequences,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
Paper 9772).

Canova, Fabio and Gianni De Nicoló (2002): “Monetary Disturbances Matter for
business fluctuations in the G7” Journal of Monetary Economics 49: 1131-1159.

Canova, Fabio and Gianni De Nicoló (2003): “On the Sources of Business Cycles
in the G7” Journal of International Economics 59: 77-100.



                                         28
Canova, Fabio and Evi Pappa (2007): “Price Differentials in Monetary Unions:
The Role of Fiscal Shocks” Economic Journal, vol. 117, pp 713-737.

Canova, Fabio and Joaquim Pina (1998): “Monetary Policy Misspecification in
VAR models,” CEPR working paper.

Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum (1992): “Current
Real-Business Cycles Theories and Aggregate Labor-Market Fluctuations”, American
Economic Review,82, pp. 430-50.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Charles Evans (1997):
“Monetary Policy Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End?”, draft,
Northwestern University, forthcoming, Handbook of Monetary Economics, Michael
Woodford and John Taylor, eds.

Chung, Hess and Eric M. Leeper (2007): “What has Financed Government
Debt?”, NBER Working Paper No. W13425.

Cochrane, John H. (1994) ”Permanent and Transitory Components of GNP and
Stock Prices,” Quarterly Journal of Economics; 109(1), 241-65.

Dedola, Luca and Stefano Neri (2007) ”What does a technology shock do? A
VAR analysis with model-based sign restrictions,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol
54(2), pp512-549.

Devereux, M.B., Head, A.C., and M. Lapham (1996): ”Monopolistic
Competition, Increasing Returns and the Effects of Government Spending,” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 28, pp. 233-254.

Dungey, Mardi and Renée Fry, (2007):. ”The identification of Fiscal and
Monetary Policy in a Structural VAR,” CAMA Working Paper , No. 29-2007.

Edelberg, Wendy, Martin Eichenbaum and Jonas D.M. Fisher (1999):
“Understanding the Effects of a Shock to Government Purchases,” Review of Economic
Dynamics, 2:166:206.

Eichenbaum, Martin and Jonas D.M. Fisher (2004): “Fiscal Policy in the
Aftermath of 9/11,” Northwestern University, Working Paper 32704.

Fatás, Antonio and Ilian Mihov (2001a): “Fiscal Policy and Business Cycles: An
Empirical Investigation,” (”Polı́tica fiscal y ciclos económicos: una investigacı́on
empı́rica”), Moneda y Credito, vol. 212, 167-210

Fatás, Antonio and Ilian Mihov (2001b): “The Effects of Fiscal Policy on
Consumption and Employment: Theory and Evidence,” draft, INSEAD.




                                         29
Faust, Jon (1998): “On the Robustness of the Identified VAR conclusions about
money,” Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 49, 207-244.

Favero, Carlo (2001): Applied Macroeconometrics, Oxford University Press.

Favero, Carlo (2002): ”How do European monetary and fiscal authorities behave?”,
draft, IGIER, Bocconi University.

Fry, Renée and Adrian Pagan, (2007):. ”Some Issues in Using Sign Restrictions
for Identifying Structural VARs,” NCER Working Paper, No. 14.

Galı́, Jordi (1992): “How well does the IS-LM model fit postwar U.S. data?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 709-738.

Galı́, Jordi, López-Salido, J. David, and Javier Vallés (2007): “Understanding
the Effects of Government Spending on Consumption” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 5(1):227-270

Giavazzi, Francesco, Tullio Jappelli and Marco Pagano (1990): ”Can Severe
Fiscal Contractions be Expansionary? Tales of Two Small European Countries,” in
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by Olivier J. Blanchard and Stanley Fisher,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press.

Giavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano (1996): ”Non-Keynesian Effects of Fiscal
Policy Changes: International Evidence and the Swedish Experience”, Swedish
Economic Policy Review, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 67-103.

Giavazzi, Francesco and Marco Pagano (2000): ”Searching for non-linear effects
of fiscal policy: evidence from industrial and developing countries”, European
Economic Review 44, pp. 1259-1289.

Hemming, Richard, Michael Kell and Selma Mahfouz (2000): ”The
Effectiveness of Fiscal Policy in Stimulating Economic Activity - A Review of the
Literature”, Mimeo, International Monetary Fund.

Leeper, Eric, Sims, Christopher and Tao Zha (1996): “What Does Monetary
Policy Do ?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 1-63.

Liu, Zheng, Waggoner, Daniel F. and Tao Zha, (2007): ”Expectation Effects of
Regimes Shifts in Monetary Policy,” Kiel Working Papers 1357 , Kiel Institute for the
World Economy, revised.

Mountford, Andrew and Harald Uhlig, (2002): “What are the Effects of Fiscal
Policy Shocks?,” CEPR Discussion Papers, No.3338, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Mountford, Andrew, (2005): “Leaning into the Wind: A Structural VAR
Investigation of UK Monetary Policy,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics,

                                         30
vol 67(5) pp597-621.

Peersman, Gert (2005): ”What caused the early millennium slowdown? Evidence
based on vector autoregressions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, vol. 20(2), pp
185-207.

Perotti, Roberto (1999): “Fiscal Policy in Good Times and Bad” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, forthcoming.

Ramey, V. and M. Shapiro (1998): “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Effects
of Government Spending” Carnegie Rochester Conference on Public Policy.

Romer David, H. and Christina Romer (1994): “What Ends Recessions ?”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 9:13-57.

Romer David, H. and Christina Romer (2007): “The Macroeconomic Effects of
Tax Changes: Estimates Based On a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks” NBER Working
Pape, No. 13264.

Scholl, Almuth and Harald Uhlig, (2005): “New Evidence on the Puzzles.
Results from Agnostic Identification on Monetary Policy and Exchange Rates.,” SFB
649 Discussion Paper, No. 2005-037.

Sims, Christopher A. (1986): “Are Forecasting Models Usable for Policy Analysis,”
Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank Quarterly Review, Winter, 2-16.

Sims, Christopher A.(1994): “ A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of
the Price Level and the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Economic-Theory
4(3), pp. 381-99.

Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha (1998): “Bayesian Methods for Dynamic
Multivariate Models,” International Economic Review 39(4), November, 949-68.

Trabandt, Mathias and Harald Uhlig, (2006): “How Far Are We From the
Slippery Slope? The Laffer Curve Revisited.,” SFB 649 Discussion Paper, No.
2006-023.

Uhlig, Harald (2005): “What are the Effects of Monetary Policy? Results from an
Agnostic Identification Procedure” Journal of Monetary Economics.
                                             Business Cycle Shocks

                 5
       Percent
                 2.5
                 −5 −2.5 0




                                   1960   1970          1980           1990    2000
                                                                              Date

                                             Monetary Policy Shocks
                 −5 −2.5 0 2.5 5
       Percent




                                   1960   1970          1980           1990    2000
                                                                              Date

                                          Government Revenue Shocks
                 5
       Percent
                 2.5
                 −5 −2.5 0




                                   1960   1970          1980           1990    2000
                                                                              Date

                                          Government Spending Shocks
                 5
       Percent
                 2.5
                 −5 −2.5 0




                                   1960   1970          1980           1990    2000
                                                                              Date



Figure 1: The shocks identified by the VAR: The business cycle shocks is identified first
first, the monetary policy shocks is identified second and the government revenue and
government spending shocks are identified third. The shaded areas represent NBER
recessions in the business cycle plot and a change of president in the fiscal plots

                                                   32
                                                    GDP                                                                   CONSUMPTION
                1 1.5




                                                                                            1 1.5
      Percent




                                                                                  Percent
                .5




                                                                                            .5
                −.5 0




                                                                                            −.5 0
                                  0   5        10          15      20        25                               0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                      Quarters After the Shock                                                  Quarters After the Shock




                                          GOVERNMENT SPENDING                                                          GOVERNMENT REVENUE
                −3 −1.5 0 1.5 3




                                                                                            −3 −1.5 0 1.5 3
      Percent




                                  0   5        10          15      20        25   Percent                     0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                      Quarters After the Shock                                                  Quarters After the Shock




                                              REAL WAGES                                                          NON−RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT
                1




                                                                                            6
      Percent




                                                                                  Percent
                .5




                                                                                            3
                −1 −.5 0




                                                                                            −6 −3 0




                                  0   5        10          15      20        25                               0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                      Quarters After the Shock                                                  Quarters After the Shock




                                             INTEREST RATE                                                             ADJUSTED RESERVES
                1




                                                                                            2
      Percent




                                                                                  Percent
                                                                                            1
                .5




                                                                                            −2 −1 0
                0
                −.5




                                  0   5        10          15      20        25                               0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                      Quarters After the Shock                                                  Quarters After the Shock




                                                    PPIC                                                                  GDP DEFLATOR
                4
      Percent




                                                                                  Percent
                                                                                            −1 −.5 0 .5 1
                2
                −4 −2 0




                                  0   5        10          15      20        25                               0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                      Quarters After the Shock                                                  Quarters After the Shock




Figure 2: The business cycle shock ordered first. The shaded areas indicate the impulses
directly restricted by the identification procedure.



                                                                             33
                                            GDP                                                               CONSUMPTION
               1




                                                                                    1
     Percent




                                                                          Percent
               .5




                                                                                    .5
               0




                                                                                    0
               −.5




                                                                                    −.5
                          0   5        10          15      20        25                           0    5       10       15       20        25
                                              Quarters After the Shock                                              Quarters After the Shock




                                  GOVERNMENT SPENDING                                                      GOVERNMENT REVENUE
               2
     Percent




                                                                          Percent
                                                                                    −2 −1 0 1 2
               1
               −2 −1 0




                          0   5        10          15      20        25                           0    5       10       15       20        25
                                              Quarters After the Shock                                              Quarters After the Shock




                                      REAL WAGES                                                      NON−RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT
               1




                                                                                    4
     Percent




                                                                          Percent
               .5




                                                                                    2
               −1 −.5 0




                                                                                    −4 −2 0




                          0   5        10          15      20        25                           0    5       10       15       20        25
                                              Quarters After the Shock                                              Quarters After the Shock




                                     INTEREST RATE                                                         ADJUSTED RESERVES
               1




                                                                                    −1 0 1 2
     Percent




                                                                          Percent
               .5
               0
               −.5




                                                                                    −3




                          0   5        10          15      20        25                           0    5       10       15       20        25
                                              Quarters After the Shock                                              Quarters After the Shock




                                            PPIC                                                              GDP DEFLATOR
               4




                                                                                    1
     Percent




                                                                          Percent
               2




                                                                                    0
               −4 −2 0




                                                                                    −1
                                                                                    −2




                          0   5        10          15      20        25                           0    5       10       15       20        25
                                              Quarters After the Shock                                              Quarters After the Shock




Figure 3: The monetary policy shock ordered second. The shaded areas indicate the
impulses directly restricted by the identification procedure.



                                                                     34
                                                   GDP                                                                  CONSUMPTION
                .5




                                                                                           .5
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                0




                                                                                           0
                −.5




                                                                                           −.5
                −1




                                                                                           −1
                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                         GOVERNMENT SPENDING                                                         GOVERNMENT REVENUE
                −3 −2 −1 0 1 2




                                                                                           −3 −2 −1 0 1 2
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                             REAL WAGES                                                         NON−RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT
                1




                                                                                           4
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                .5




                                                                                           2
                −1 −.5 0




                                                                                           −4 −2 0




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                            INTEREST RATE                                                            ADJUSTED RESERVES
                .5




                                                                                           2
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                           1
                0




                                                                                           −2 −1 0
                −.5




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                                   PPIC                                                                 GDP DEFLATOR
                4




                                                                                           1
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                           .5
                2
                −4 −2 0




                                                                                           −1 −.5 0




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




Figure 4: The basic government revenue shock, identified by orthogonality to the business
cycle shock and monetary policy shock as well as a positive impulse response function
of government revenues for four quarters after the shock. The restriction is indicated by
the shaded area on the graph.

                                                                            35
                                                   GDP                                                                  CONSUMPTION
                1




                                                                                           1
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                .5




                                                                                           .5
                −1 −.5 0




                                                                                           −1 −.5 0
                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                         GOVERNMENT SPENDING                                                         GOVERNMENT REVENUE
                −3 −2 −1 0 1 2




                                                                                           −3 −2 −1 0 1 2
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                             REAL WAGES                                                         NON−RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT
                1




                                                                                           4
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                .5




                                                                                           2
                −1 −.5 0




                                                                                           −4 −2 0




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                            INTEREST RATE                                                            ADJUSTED RESERVES
                .5




                                                                                           2
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                           1
                                                                                           −2 −1 0
                0
                −.5




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                                   PPIC                                                                 GDP DEFLATOR
                4




                                                                                           1
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                           .5
                2
                −4 −2 0




                                                                                           −1 −.5 0




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




Figure 5: The announced or anticipated basic government revenue shock, identified by
orthogonality to the business cycle shock and monetary policy shock as well as a zero
impulse response for the first four quarters and a positive impulse response function for
the next four quarters of government revenues. The restriction is indicated by the shaded
area on the graph.
                                            36
               1                                  GDP                                                                  CONSUMPTION




                                                                                          1
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
               .5




                                                                                          .5
               −1 −.5 0




                                                                                          −1 −.5 0
                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                        GOVERNMENT SPENDING                                                         GOVERNMENT REVENUE
               −3 −2 −1 0 1 2




                                                                                          −3 −2 −1 0 1 2
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                            REAL WAGES                                                         NON−RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT
               1




                                                                                          4
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
               .5




                                                                                          2
               −1 −.5 0




                                                                                          −4 −2 0




                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                           INTEREST RATE                                                            ADJUSTED RESERVES
               .5




                                                                                          2
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                                                                          1
               0




                                                                                          −2 −1 0
               −.5




                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                                  PPIC                                                                 GDP DEFLATOR
               4




                                                                                          1
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                                                                          .5
               2
               −4 −2 0




                                                                                          −1 −.5 0




                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




Figure 6: A comparison of the median responses of an anticipated - solid line - and
unanticipated - dashed line - government revenue shock, where the impulses are plotted
so that the time period of the implementation of the tax rise is the same.


                                                                           37
                                                   GDP                                                                  CONSUMPTION
                .5




                                                                                           .5
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                0




                                                                                           0
                −.5




                                                                                           −.5
                −1




                                                                                           −1
                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                         GOVERNMENT SPENDING                                                         GOVERNMENT REVENUE
                −3 −2 −1 0 1 2




                                                                                           −3 −2 −1 0 1 2
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                             REAL WAGES                                                         NON−RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT
                1




                                                                                           4
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                .5




                                                                                           2
                −1 −.5 0




                                                                                           −4 −2 0




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                            INTEREST RATE                                                            ADJUSTED RESERVES
                .5
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                           −2 −1 0 1 2
                0
                −.5




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                                   PPIC                                                                 GDP DEFLATOR
                4




                                                                                           1
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                           .5
                2




                                                                                           −1 −.5 0
                −4 −2 0




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




Figure 7: The basic government expenditure shock, identified by orthogonality to the
business cycle shock and monetary policy shock as well as a positive impulse response
function of government expenditures for four quarters after the shock. The restriction is
indicated by the shaded area on the graph.

                                                                            38
                                                   GDP                                                                  CONSUMPTION
                1




                                                                                           1
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                .5




                                                                                           .5
                −1 −.5 0




                                                                                           −1 −.5 0
                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                         GOVERNMENT SPENDING                                                         GOVERNMENT REVENUE
                −3 −2 −1 0 1 2




                                                                                           −3 −2 −1 0 1 2
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                             REAL WAGES                                                         NON−RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT
                1




                                                                                           4
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                .5




                                                                                           2
                −1 −.5 0




                                                                                           −4 −2 0




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                            INTEREST RATE                                                            ADJUSTED RESERVES
                .5




                                                                                           2
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                           1
                0




                                                                                           −2 −1 0
                −.5




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                                   PPIC                                                                 GDP DEFLATOR
                4




                                                                                           1
      Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                           .5
                2
                −4 −2 0




                                                                                           −1 −.5 0




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




Figure 8: The announced or anticipated basic government expenditure shock, identified
by orthogonality to the business cycle shock and monetary policy shock as well as a zero
impulse response for the first four quarters and a positive impulse response function for
the next four quarters of government expenditures. The restriction is indicated by the
shaded area on the graph.
                                            39
                                                  GDP                                                                  CONSUMPTION
               1




                                                                                          1
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
               .5




                                                                                          .5
               −1 −.5 0




                                                                                          −1 −.5 0
                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                        GOVERNMENT SPENDING                                                         GOVERNMENT REVENUE
               −3 −2 −1 0 1 2




                                                                                          −3 −2 −1 0 1 2
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                            REAL WAGES                                                         NON−RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT
               1




                                                                                          4
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
               .5




                                                                                          2
               −1 −.5 0




                                                                                          −4 −2 0




                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                           INTEREST RATE                                                            ADJUSTED RESERVES
               .5




                                                                                          2
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                                                                          1
               0




                                                                                          −2 −1 0
               −.5




                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                                  PPIC                                                                 GDP DEFLATOR
               4




                                                                                          1
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                                                                          .5
               2
               −4 −2 0




                                                                                          −1 −.5 0




                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




Figure 9: A comparison of the median responses of an anticipated - solid line - and
unanticipated - dashed line - government spending shock, where the impulses are plotted
so that the time period of the implementation of the increase in government spending is
the same.

                                                                           40
               .5                                 GDP                                                                 CONSUMPTION




                                                                                          .5
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
               0




                                                                                          0
               −.5




                                                                                          −.5
               −1




                                                                                          −1
                                0   5        10          15      20        25                             0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                Quarters After the Shock




                                        GOVERNMENT SPENDING                                                        GOVERNMENT REVENUE
               −3 −2 −1 0 1 2




                                                                                          −3−2−1 0 1 2
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                0   5        10          15      20        25                             0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                Quarters After the Shock




                                            REAL WAGES                                                        NON−RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT
               1




                                                                                          4
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
               .5




                                                                                          2
               −1 −.5 0




                                                                                          −4 −2 0




                                0   5        10          15      20        25                             0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                Quarters After the Shock




                                           INTEREST RATE                                                           ADJUSTED RESERVES
               .5
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                                                                          −2 −1 0 1 2
               0
               −.5




                                0   5        10          15      20        25                             0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                Quarters After the Shock




                                                  PPIC                                                                GDP DEFLATOR
               4




                                                                                          −1 −.5 0 .5 1
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
               2
               −4 −2 0




                                0   5        10          15      20        25                             0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                Quarters After the Shock




Figure 10: The deficit spending policy scenario where government spending is raised by
1% for four quarters with government revenues remaining unchanged. These impulses
are linear combinations of a sequence of the basic shocks displayed in Figures 4 and 7.


                                                                           41
                                                  GDP                                                                  CONSUMPTION
               1




                                                                                          1
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
               .5




                                                                                          .5
               0




                                                                                          0
               −.5




                                                                                          −.5
                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                        GOVERNMENT SPENDING                                                         GOVERNMENT REVENUE
               −3 −2 −1 0 1 2
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                                                                          −3 −2 −1 0 1 2
                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                            REAL WAGES                                                         NON−RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT
               1




                                                                                          4
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
               .5




                                                                                          2
               −1 −.5 0




                                                                                          −4 −2 0




                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                           INTEREST RATE                                                            ADJUSTED RESERVES
               .5




                                                                                          2
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                                                                          1
               0




                                                                                          −2 −1 0
               −.5




                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                                  PPIC                                                                 GDP DEFLATOR
               4




                                                                                          1
     Percent




                                                                                Percent
                                                                                          .5
               2
               −4 −2 0




                                                                                          −1 −.5 0




                                0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                    Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




Figure 11: The deficit-financed tax cut policy scenario where government spending re-
mains unchanged and government revenue is reduced by 1% for four quarters. These
impulses are linear combinations of a sequence of the basic shocks displayed in Figures
4 and 7.

                                                                           42
                                                   GDP                                                                  CONSUMPTION
               −1.5−1 −.5 0 .5




                                                                                           .5
     Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                           −1.5 −1 −.5 0
                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                         GOVERNMENT SPENDING                                                         GOVERNMENT REVENUE
               −3 −2 −1 0 1 2




                                                                                           −3−2−10 1 2
     Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                             REAL WAGES                                                         NON−RESIDENTIAL INVESTMENT
               −1 −.5 0 .5 1




                                                                                           −6 −4 −2 0 2 4
     Percent




                                                                                 Percent




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                            INTEREST RATE                                                            ADJUSTED RESERVES
               .5
     Percent




                                                                                 Percent
                                                                                           −2 −1 0 1 2
               0
               −.5




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




                                                   PPIC                                                                 GDP DEFLATOR
               4




                                                                                           −1−.5 0 .5 1
     Percent




                                                                                 Percent
               2
               −4 −2 0




                                 0   5        10          15      20        25                              0    5       10       15       20        25
                                                     Quarters After the Shock                                                 Quarters After the Shock




Figure 12: The balanced budget policy scenario where government spending is raised
by 1% for four quarters and government revenues raised so that the increased revenue
matches the increased spending. These impulses are linear combinations of a sequence
of the basic shocks displayed in Figures 4 and 7.

                                                                            43
                         DISCOUNTED CUMULATIVE RESPONSES TO POLICY SHOCKS


                                                    DEFICIT SPENDING



                     DISCOUNTED CUMULATIVE GOVT SPENDING                        DISCOUNTED CUMULATIVE GDP RESPONSES
                12




                                                                         3
      Percent




                                                                   Percent
                10




                                                                         1.5
                8




                                                                         0
                6
                4




                                                                         −1.5
                2




                                                                         −3
                0
                −2




                     0      5     10         15      20       25                0     5      10         15      20       25
                                       Quarters After the Shock                                   Quarters After the Shock




                                              DEFICIT FINANCED TAX CUT



                     DISCOUNTED CUMULATIVE GOVT REVENUE                         DISCOUNTED CUMULATIVE GDP RESPONSES
                                                                         6
      Percent




                                                                   Percent
                                                                         4
                3
                0




                                                                         2
                −3




                                                                         0
                −6




                                                                         −1




                     0      5     10         15       20      25                0     5      10         15      20       25
                                       Quarters After the Shock                                   Quarters After the Shock




Figure 13: The present value of the impulses for GDP and the changing fiscal variable
for the deficit spending policy scenario and the deficit financed tax cut policy scenario
which are displayed in Figures 10 and 11.


                                                              44
