                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                A RESOURCE BELIEF-CURSE? OIL AND INDIVIDUALISM

                                        Rafael Di Tella
                                          Juan Dubra
                                       Robert MacCulloch

                                       Working Paper 14556
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14556


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2008




We thank our commentator, George Marios Angeletos, as well as the editors (Federico Sturzenegger
and Bill Hogan) for very helpful suggetsions. For helpful conversations or comments we thank Rawi
Abdelal, Sebastian Galiani, Ernesto Schargrodsky and seminar participants at the Kennedy School
Conference on "Contractual Renegotiations in Natural Resources" on October 30, 2007. We thank
Javier Donna and Jorge Albanesi for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Rafael Di Tella, Juan Dubra, and Robert MacCulloch. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Resource Belief-Curse? Oil and Individualism
Rafael Di Tella, Juan Dubra, and Robert MacCulloch
NBER Working Paper No. 14556
December 2008
JEL No. E62,P16

                                               ABSTRACT

We study the correlation between a belief concerning individualism and a measure of luck in the US
during the period 1983-2004. The measure of beliefs is the answer to a question related to whether
the poor should be helped by the government or if they should help themselves, while the measure
of luck is the share of the oil industry in the state's economy multiplied by the price of oil. The correlation
is negative, suggesting that more reliance on luck is correlated with less individualism. We provide
three short models that help interpret this correlation. One implication of this finding is that societies
that depend heavily on oil, and perhaps natural resources more generally, will experience a heavier
demand for government intervention. We argue that if a government cares about the impact of its natural
resource policies on the demand of government intervention more generally, it should take this effect
into account.


Rafael Di Tella                                        Robert MacCulloch
Harvard Business School                                The Business School
Soldiers Field Rd                                      Imperial College London
Boston, MA 02163                                       South Kensington Campus
and NBER                                               London SW7 2AZ
rditella@hbs.edu                                       United Kingdom
                                                       r.macculloch@imperial.ac.uk
Juan Dubra
Universidad de Montevideo
Prudencio de Pena 2440
Montevideo, 11.600 URUGUAY
dubraj@um.edu.uy
1       Introduction
        Like all the men of Babylon, I have been proconsul; like all, I have been a slave.
        I have known omnipotence, ignominy, imprisonment. (. . . ).
        I owe that almost monstrous variety to an institution–the Lottery– which is
        unknown in other nations, (. . . ).
        A slave stole a crimson ticket; the drawing determined that that ticket entitled
        the bearer to have his tongue burned out. The code of law provided the same
        sentence for stealing a lottery ticket. Some Babylonians argued that the slave
        deserved the burning iron for being a thief, others, more magnanimous, that the
        executioner should employ the iron because thus fate had decreed. There were
        disturbances, there were regrettable instances of bloodshed, but the masses of
        Babylon at last, over the opposition of the well-to-do, imposed their will; they
        saw their generous objectives fully achieved.
        Excerpts from “The Lottery in Babylon”, by Jorge Luis Borges, 1941.

    Markets, privatizations and other capitalist ideas do not seem to be appreciated by the
public at large. Outside the US, and a few countries where communism made people’s life re-
ally miserable, capitalism, at least without strong regulations, is not in high demand around
the world. Several survey measures attest to this. For example, a 2005 survey in 20 countries
showed that 65% of respondents endorsed the view that “The free enterprise system and free
market economy work best in society’s interests when accompanied by strong government reg-
ulations.” Beyond opinions, data on the platforms and names of political parties reveal that
left wing parties are more common in poor countries than in rich countries. Figure 1 illus-
trates the typical pattern.1 This is unfortunate for economists because our own enthusiasm
for markets relies on the assumption that people are rational. Thus, explaining the public’s
antipathy towards our preferred solution to the world’s material problems appears to be of
importance to Economics.

                                           Figure 1 about here
   Beyond this general point, antipathy towards markets has become particularly acute in
Latin America, where a series of “surprise right wing reformists” had emerged during the
1990’s.2 Of course, the left wing wave eventually coincided with particularly high prices
    1
     This is shown in Di Tella and MacCulloch (2002), using data on political parties from Beck et al (2000).
Survey data comes the 2005 GlobeScan Report on Issues and Reputation accessed on October 27, 2007
through http://www.globescan.com/news_archives/pipa_market.html
   2
     Interestingly, these surprise reforms where all cases of left or center politicians turned free marketers
(including Menem in Argentina, Fujimori in Peru and Lula in Brazil). In contrast, in rich countries, there
are more cases of surprises in the other direction (i.e., left wing actions by politicians elected on right wing
platforms), including the case of “Nixon going to China”. See Lora and Olivera (2006) and Queirolo (2006)
for the electoral fate of the reformers.

                                                       2
for oil and primary commodities after the year 2000. In Bolivia, Venezuela, Ecuador and
Argentina, policymakers have focused their anti market energies and attention on natural re-
source companies, renegotiating their contracts in several cases. Accordingly, a more speci…c
question for economists concerns the possible connection between natural resource depen-
dence and ideological inclination. Believers in the advantages of free markets for economic
development might be inclined to ask the question di¤erently, namely “Is the curse of the
“resource curse” a tendency for people to become left wing when natural resources are im-
portant in the economy?”
    A basic explanation for the general phenomenon is provided in a seminal paper by Piketty
(1995). He showed that beliefs concerning the income generating process could be central in
determining the form of economic organization. In particular, he emphasized how rational
agents would increase taxes when luck is important. In contrast, when e¤ort plays a large
role, rational agents fearing adverse incentive e¤ects would moderate taxes. Interestingly, he
argued that, even if there was one unique reality (given by the technology), a shock could
make one belief particularly important at a point in time. If taxes had to be set at that
moment, agents with di¤erent beliefs might not converge as long as it was di¢ cult/costly
to …nd credible information to generalize from their own experience. In fact, he argued
that information on how much e¤ort really pays is not easy to observe (given that e¤ort
input is not observable), and that eventually agents would settle on some belief about the
likely value of these parameters and stop experimenting (a form of bandit problem). He
emphasized that there are mechanisms that would reinforce these beliefs: where e¤ort doesn’t
pay and luck dominates, agents would tend to vote on high taxes and luck would then really
dominate. Other papers that give a central role to beliefs include Benabou and Ok (2001)
on upward mobility, Alesina and Angeletos (2005) on fairness, Di Tella and Dubra (2008) on
punitiveness, Benabou and Tirole (2006) on belief in a just world, and Alesina and Angeletos
(2005) and Di Tella and MacCulloch (2002) on corruption. Denzau and North (1993) also
give a central role to beliefs in their discussion of institutions as “shared mental models”
(see also Greif, 1994).
    In this paper we develop adaptations of these models predicting that oil dependence
leads to beliefs and attitudes that lean towards the left end of the spectrum. We then
present evidence of a negative correlation between individualist beliefs and oil dependence,
using survey evidence from the US General Social Survey and the share of oil in a state’s
GDP for the period 1983-2004. The …rst theoretical mechanism delivering the correlation
is quite simple: when the price of oil increases, people feel richer and want to increase the
amount of money that they give to the poor people. We call this ‘the charity model’and is
related to (the spirit of) Meltzer and Richard (1981). In principle, a similar process might
be a¤ected by other primary commodities, so that one could “test” whether it is charity
that drives the push to the left (or some other factor which is speci…c to oil) by looking at
the e¤ect of other commodity prices and establishing whether they have the same e¤ect as




                                              3
oil.3 However, it is perhaps signi…cant that oil is visible in political debates and occupies
a place of some importance in popular imagination (a¤ecting for example, the perception
of whether individuals are living in a rich country), so the dynamics a¤ecting oil might be
di¤erent than those a¤ecting other commodities.
    The second model introduces an important cost of these redistributions, namely that
higher taxes reduce the amount of e¤ort that agents put forth, as argued in Piketty (1995).
The basic assumption is that the e¤ort elasticity of income in the oil sector is smaller (or
is perceived to be smaller) than in the non-oil sector. We model this by assuming that the
elasticity in the oil industry is actually zero, which leads to the extreme result that full
nationalization of the oil industry is good for the economy because it leads to lower taxes
in the rest of the economy, and to lower distortions overall. Trivially, in more sophisticated
settings, where oil companies have to invest heavily to maintain production, this result
changes. But the model raises an important issue, namely that as long as the voters have
the perception of oil industries e¤ortlessly extracting a natural resource, the demand for taxes
and state intervention in the sector will be high.4 This reasoning also applies to exogenous
increases in the price of oil. Presumably, exogenous movements in the price of oil redistribute
income and reduce people’s faith in their estimate of the e¤ort elasticity of income (these
movements will increase the standard error of their estimates of how income responds to
e¤ort). Note that, to the extent that the oil industry is owned by (and a¤ects) actors
outside the state, changes in employment in the oil industry observable within the state are
particularly relevant. A related point is that in an economy where oil is an important export,
changes in the price of oil lead to changes in capital in‡ows and macroeconomic volatility
more generally. Again, if income in the economy behaves like earnings in a casino, it will be
hard for voters to be convinced of the idea that one has to be careful about raising taxes
because it might a¤ect e¤ort (and income).
    The third model we present is built around the idea that oil dependence may a¤ect the
perception of fairness in the economy. This matters in the model of Alesina and Angeletos
(2005) which gives a central role to an individual’s perception of fairness in the economy,
although the version we use here is heavily modi…ed. This perception is increased when
people are seen to “get what they deserve and deserve what they get”. Accordingly, they
focus on how talent and e¤ort a¤ect income relative to random shocks. We adopt a similar
assumption concerning how unfairness reduces utility, and assume income in the oil sector
is particularly noisy, leading to an increased perception of unfairness in the economy. By
increasing taxes when oil prices are high, voters are able to reduce the amount of undeserved
(as talent and e¤ort play a small role) income amongst the rich. Again, directing the taxes
   3
     If the “pro…ts” generated by other commodities depend more on e¤ort than do the pro…ts of oil, a rise
in the price of these commoditied might lead to less e¤ort, however.
   4
     There is evidence that expropriation rhetoric pays attention to this aspect. For example, Venezuelan
president Hugo Chavez announced in 2005 a plan to expropriate approximately 1,800 enterprises that were
deemed unproductive. See, for example, “Otro Controvertido Plan del Gobierno de Chavez”, La Nacion,
Martes 19 de Julio de 2005.


                                                    4
to the oil sector would improve the e¢ ciency (and fairness) in the economy, although in
circumstances that high oil prices bring about capital in‡ows, such ability to target taxes to
particular sectors might be of limited use.
    Finally, it is worth mentioning that oil dependence is positively correlated with percep-
tions of corruption within countries. Corruption is correlated with a desire for higher taxes,
both generally, in the fairness models of Alesina and Angeletos (2005), and speci…cally as it
relates to how the income of capitalists is derived, in the model of commercial legitimacy of
Di Tella and MacCulloch (2002). More broadly, the idea that beliefs, in particular beliefs
about the income generating process, play an important role in the determination of the
economic system goes back at least to de Tocqueville’s work emphasizing economic opportu-
nities and status as derived from material position and Frederick Jackson Turner’s work on
the ‘The Frontier’in American History and its signi…cance for the determination of Ameri-
can culture in cities far away form the frontier itself. Later work, particularly by Seymour
Martin Lipset, emphasized the role of beliefs about mobility independent of the amount of
mobility itself. Evidence on the patterns of beliefs has been gathered by Hochschild (1981),
Inglehart (1990), Ladd and Bowman (1998), Hall and Soskice (2001), Corneo and Gruner
(2002), Fong (2004), Di Tella, et al (2007), inter alia. Closer to the question we ask, concern-
ing the statistical correlation between beliefs and oil, is the more recent work by Alesina and
Glaeser (2004) who …nd left wing views to prevail in countries small in size or with electoral
systems based on proportional representation, and the papers by Di Tella et al (2006) (on
the correlation between beliefs and oil dependence, macroeconomic volatility and crime) and
Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2007) (on the e¤ects of growing up in a recession on your beliefs).
As a reference, we present in Figure 2 the results from Di Tella et al (2006).

                                     Figure 2 about here

The …gure shows that average right(left) self placement in the country is negatively correlated
with Fuel Exports (‘Fuel exports as % of merchandise exports’) and Ores (‘Ores and metals
exports as % of merchandise exports’), controlling for country and year …xed e¤ects in a
sample of 49 countries included in the World Values Survey. For illustration purposes, we
re-run the the base regression with Fuel Exports as the independent variable using a probit,
and set the other variables at their average level, forcing the data so that there is an even
split of beliefs when Fuel Exports are equal to zero. When Fuel Exports increase to 10%,
self-placement on the left exceeds that on the right by 6 percentage points (i.e., 53% to 47%).
We also show increases in Fuel Exports of up to 90% as, in our sample, the Fuel Exports in
Nigeria in 1997 are 96%.
    In the next section we discuss the three short models that help us interpret the relation-
ship between oil dependence and beliefs. In the third section we present evidence on this
correlation using panel data for the US for the period 1983-2004. Section IV concludes.




                                               5
2       Three Models Connecting Oil and Beliefs
2.1     Charity
We start exploring a simple mechanism directly connecting income and beliefs (or more
generally, ideology). The literature starting with Meltzer and Richard (1981) has emphasized
the role of material gains from redistribution in more unequal societies (in terms of income).
In particular, income inequality has a big role to play because the median voter has more
to gain from taxing citizens that are farther away in terms of income. A problem with
this approach is that it is well known that this mechanism fails to explain even the basic
properties of cross country data. For example, the US is more unequal than France and
it seeks to redistribute less (instead of more). Still, the natural reaction when faced with
governments that re-contract when the price of oil goes up is related to material incentives:
these governments are taking advantage of the good times to get a bigger piece of the pie
for themselves. The “charity model” presented here also gives a central role to increases in
income as it makes people more willing to help others.5 The connection with “helping others”
follows the empirical evidence that we have available on why and how people give to charity,
or help in the charitable provision of public goods (see Morgan, 2000, and the references
therein). In brief, the section seeks to illustrate why might a higher oil price increase the
desire to help the poor, through an income e¤ect. The intuition is simple enough: concavity
of the utility function implies that a given transfer costs less in utils for a richer person.
    There are two people in the state, the representative worker and the “poor guy”. Output
in the manufacturing industry is …xed at m; and nominal output in the oil industry is p:q:
All the output (which equals pro…ts) is owned by the worker, who is taxed an amount t,
and the receipts of the tax are transferred to the poor guy. The utility of the poor guy is
v (t) and that of the representative worker is u (pq + m t) + v (t) (he cares about the poor
guy).6

Proposition 1 If u00          0; the optimal tax is increasing in the price of oil.

   Proof. We use monotone comparative statics (see Milgrom and Shannon, 1994). It is
easy to see that since the choice variable t is one dimensional, the utility function of the
worker is quasisupermodular in t: It will therefore su¢ ce to show that it satis…es the single
crossing property: for p0 > p and t0 > t;

         u (pq + m      t0 ) + v (t0 )      u (pq + m      t) + v (t)
                                         ) u (p0 q + m     t0 ) + v (t0 )   u (p0 q + m    t) + v (t)
    5
      We assume altruistic preferences, whereas Meltzer and Richard (1981) assume agents that care only
about their own material payo¤s. Strangely enough, altruism is relatively uncommon in the political economy
literature as a motivation. But see Rotemberg (2003).
    6
      It is possible to write this model with standard sel…sh preferences by assuming that one decides on taxes
before the revelation of income.


                                                      6
(and similarly with strict inequalities). The idea is that if the worker prefers raising taxes
for a low price, he also prefers so for a high price. Rearranging terms, the above condition
is equivalent to

  u (pq + m      t0 )   u (pq + m          t)         v (t)       v (t0 )
                                                ) u (p0 q + m               t0 )   u (p0 q + m     t)     v (t)   v (t0 ) :

So it is enough that

            u (p0 q + m         t0 )    u (p0 q + m      t)       u (pq + m          t0 )     u (pq + m    t)

which is ensured if u is concave (note that in this case, u being concave is not a “cardinal”
property, because the worker’s utility is u + v; so one can’t transform u “at will” as would
be the case if v wasn’t there). To see so, note that u00       0 implies that for all s 2 [t; t0 ] ;
u0 (p0 q + m s) u0 (pq + m s) which implies
                      Z t0                         Z t0
                            0  0
                           u (p q + m s) ds             u0 (pq + m s) ds ,
                          t                                           t
           u (p0 q + m        t0 )     u (p0 q + m     t)           u (pq + m          t0 )    u (pq + m     t)

as was to be shown.
      Notice that the intuition for the result corresponds exactly with the statement of the
proposition: if u is concave, a given transfer costs less in utils for a richer person. If we
used more “traditional”methods, however, we would also have to assume that v 00 0: With
traditional methods, the …rst order condition for the optimal tax is u0 (pq + m t (p)) =
v 0 (t (p)) ; so that
                                                                                         u00 (pq + m t (p)) q
   u00 (pq + m      t (p)) (qdp        t0 dp) = v 00 (t (p)) t0 dp , t0 =                                            :
                                                                                   u00 (pq + m t (p)) + v 00 (t (p))
If v 00     0 and u00 0; we obtain t0    0 (but note that we need more conditions, not just
  00
u       0).
     Finally, we note that the roles of p and q are symmetric in the utility function of the
worker. Therefore, optimal taxes would also increase after an increase in q: We don’t push
this point further, because in this simpli…ed model we have assumed that there is no cost
to extracting output in the oil industry. In a richer model that incorporates the realistic
assumption that extracting oil has a cost, the roles of p and q wouldn’t be symmetric any
more, and an increase in output wouldn’t lead necessarily to an increase in taxes. In addition,
here p and q are taken as given, but in a richer model, p would be exogenous, while q would
be a choice variable.


2.2    E¢ ciency
The features discussed in this model follow Piketty’s discussion in the context of alternative
economic systems, but it is a general approach that goes back to Ramsey (1927) and his

                                                              7
insights about the relationship between elasticities and taxes.7 The basic idea that drives
our results in this section, is that output in the oil industry, being driven primarily by luck
and not e¤ort, is less sensitive to taxes than output in the manufacturing industry. Hence,
e¢ ciency dictates that taxes in the oil industry should be larger. This translates into two
di¤erent e¤ects. First, if taxes are uniform across industries, the tax rate in a society will
be higher the higher the share of oil in GDP. Second, if tax rates are allowed to vary across
industries, a nationalization (expropriation) of the oil industry may be optimal.
    There are two sectors in the economy, the Oil industry and the M anufacturing industry,
and time is discrete t = 0; 1; 2:::.

   1. At the start of each period the tax rate for the period and the proportion of people
      earning income from the oil industry are …xed.

   2. Then, people in the manufacturing industry choose e¤ort, and incomes are realized:
      pre-tax incomes can be either y0 or y1 > y0 > 0; in the oil industry, the probability of
      y1 is a …xed exogenous ; whereas in the manufacturing industry the probability of y1
      is e; the worker’s e¤ort.

   3. After the choices of e¤ort, and the realization of the income shocks, nature chooses for
      the next period (through its choice of the price of oil) whether the proportion of people
      in the economy earning income from the oil industry is ql or qh > ql (higher price leads
      to more investment and more hiring by the oil …rms).

   4. A tax rate that maximizes the income of (next period’s) poor workers is set8

       The worker’s utility when income is y and e¤ort e is

                                                           e2
                                                U =y
                                                           2a
(where a > 0 is a parameter such that a (y1 y0 ) 2 [0; 1]). We also add the restriction that
the oil sector is not too large in the economy to ensure that the optimal tax rate is not full
expropriation: a (y1 y0 )        q= (1 q) for all q (we have assumed that there are only two
levels of q; but the model can be immediately generalized to an arbitrary set of qs in R).
    Income is taxed at a rate and tax revenue is redistributed in a lump-sum way to all
workers, so that if total income is Y; after tax income is either (1 ) y0 + Y or (1     ) y1 +
   7
     In the …rst version of this paper we incorrectly claimed that the approach originated in Piketty (1995).
We thank George Marios Angeletos for pointing this out and other useful comments.
   8
     Why focus on income and not utility? There are at least two reasons for this choice. First, utility is
unobservable, while income may be observed (possibly imperfectly). Second, in this model utility is di¤erent
depending on the sector (workers in one sector exert e¤ort, while in the other they do not). Therefore, while
the simpli…cation of oil’s production being just luck and manufacturing’s probability of high output just
e¤ort is good for highlighting our point, it would be incorrect to make it play an additional role (as it would
do if we considered the cost of e¤ort in the maximization).


                                                      8
 Y: When choosing his e¤ort level, the worker takes Y as given (there are a continuum many
workers), so that his e¤ort is

                                                                                                      e2
             e ( ) = arg max e [(1          ) y1 + Y ] + (1               e) [(1        ) y0 + Y ]
                             e                                                                        2a
                                                                 e2
                  = arg max e (1            ) (y1       y0 )        = a (y1         y0 ) (1      )                      (1)
                             e                                   2a
By our assumption that a (y1 y0 ) 2 [0; 1] ; the optimal e¤ort also does, and hence the
probability of the high income in the manufacturing industry (which is exactly e) is also
between 0 and 1:
    Then, the income of the poor workers in the next period (if today a tax rate of is chosen
for tomorrow and a proportion q of the population will be in the oil industry) is

             (1   ) y0 + fq [ y1 + (1             ) y0 ] + (1         q) [e ( ) y1 + (1       e ( )) y0 ]g

which, after simpli…cation becomes

                                 y0 + (y1       y0 ) fq + (1              q) e ( )g :                                   (2)

    Note …rst that the poor worker’s income is his production, y0 ; plus a proportion of
the incremental income of the rich, y1 y0 ; multiplied by the proportion of rich people
fq + (1 q) e ( )g : Of course, if the e¤ort were …xed at e , the optimal would be 1;
since q + (1 q) e > 0 (it would be optimal to completely equalize incomes). But since
taxing reduces e¤ort, such a high tax rate is not optimal because eventually it becomes
counterproductive.

Proposition 2 The optimal tax rate is
                                                                          q
                                                a (y1        y0 ) +      1 q
                                            =                                                                           (3)
                                                    2a (y1        y0 )
which is increasing in q:

    Proof. Substituting the expression of the optimal e¤ort rate e ( ) = a (y1                               y0 ) (1        )
into equation (2) we obtain the objective function to be maximized

  y0 + (y1    y0 ) fq + (1        q) e ( )g = y0 + (y1            y0 ) fq + (1             q) a (y1   y0 ) (1          )g

that is maximized for the tax rate in equation (3). Also, we note that the expression for the
optimal tax rate is increasing in q; and that the tax rate is between 0 and 1; because of our
assumption that a (y1 y0 )       q= (1 q) :
    The previous Proposition can be interpreted more generally in the context of “the curse
of natural resources”: if a country’s income relies heavily on activities in which taxes are
not “very”distortionary, taxes will tend to be higher. Note that the problem arises because

                                                         9
the same tax is applied to all sectors. If the tax to the two sectors could be di¤erent, the oil
sector would be taxed at 100% rate (as there is no e¤ort cost, and no ine¢ ciency associated
with the tax), providing a rationale for nationalizations. Thus, it is best for the rest of the
capitalists (and the economy) to nationalize the oil industry. This result is presented in the
next Proposition, but before we continue, a word about what it means to nationalize an
industry is in order. Our “operational”de…nition of a nationalization, is that all oil-workers’
income is equated to the income of the poor workers in the manufacturing industries; all
income in excess of that of poor workers in other sectors is expropriated. Formally, after a
nationalization, the poor workers’income (irrespective of the sector) is the sum of their post
tax income, plus the government transfers arising from the oil industry, plus the transfers
arising from the manufacturing sector:

       (1     ) y0 + q ( (y1   (1    ) y0 ) + (1      ) y0 ) + (1        q) (ey1 + (1   e) y0 ) :   (4)

    With other (reasonable) de…nitions of a nationalization, the result that taxes are lower
after a nationalization continues to hold. The reason is simple: after the nationalization,
the tax rate is applied only to sectors where the taxes are distortionary, while before the
nationalization it applied also to the oil sector where no distortions would arise; taxes are
relatively more distortionary after the nationalization.

Proposition 3 The optimal tax rate falls after a nationalization of the oil industry.

    Proof. After a nationalization, the income of the poor workers is as in equation (4), that
simpli…es to y0 + ( q + e (1 q)) (y1 y0 ). Substituting the optimal e¤ort from equation
(1), we obtain the expression to be maximized:

                       y0 + ( q + a (y1     y0 ) (1     ) (1   q)) (y1     y0 )

This expression is maximized for = 1=2; which is smaller than the tax rate (3) before the
nationalization, as was to be shown.
    As argued above, since Proposition 3 shows that taxes would fall in the rest of the
economy after a nationalization of the oil industry, it provides a political economy argument
in favor of nationalizations. Also, it is easy to show that the distortions introduced by
taxation are smaller after the nationalization. Therefore, there is also an e¢ ciency rationale
for nationalizing the oil industry (assuming that output in the industry wouldn’t fall if the
sector is managed by the government).


2.3    Fairness: Adapting Alesina-Angeletos
An alternative channel through which oil might in‡uence the desire to distribute income is
by its e¤ect on the perception of the degree to which people live in a fair society. A natural



                                               10
question is how is fairness going to be de…ned?9 We follow the idea that people can feel
disutility when they …nd out that they live in a society where people consume more than
what they “deserve”, where this is the amount that their e¤ort and talent would command.
This is broadly the approach followed in Alesina and Angeletos (2005) (henceforth AA),
although our speci…cation has several di¤erences (see below for a detailed discussion).10
    Finally, it is worth pointing out that in the present de…nition of fairness, oil dependency
increases the perception that unfairness prevails because it generates income that is not tied
to e¤ort or talent. As explained above, we do not have evidence concerning this assumption
(i.e., we do not have evidence that there is such a widespread perception that e¤ort plays
such a small role in the extraction of oil, or, more precisely, that the e¤ort elasticity of
production in the oil sector is smaller than in manufacturing). Again, we view this as a
broad issue, where the discovery of oil (or an increase in its price) may lead to an increase in
capital in‡ows and changes in relative prices (in particular in the exchange rate), that can
be seen as unexpected and tied to luck.
    There are two sectors in the economy, the Oil industry and the M anufacturing industry,
and time is discrete t = 0; 1; 2:::.
   1. At the start of each period the proportion of people earning income from the oil industry
      is …xed (by nature) and known. Nature then chooses two shocks for each individual:
      an ability shock, and a luck shock. The latter is identically 0 for the manufacturing
      industry.

   2. Taxes are set by majority voting.

   3. Then, people choose e¤ort.

   4. After the choices of e¤ort, nature chooses for the next period whether the proportion
      of people in the economy earning income from the oil industry is ql or qh > ql . This is
      a reduced form formulation for a broader model in which nature chooses demands or
      tastes in the economy that induce variations in the price of oil; then if, for example,
      nature chose a high price, that would lead to more investment and more hiring by the
      oil …rms.
   The economy is populated by a measure 1 continuum of individuals i 2 [0; 1]. For each
individual i; and industry j = O; M; total pre-tax income yi is
                                                              j
                                              yi = Ai ei +    i
   9
     Another question is why would oil dependence make society more unfair? We continue to maintain our
assumption of the previous model, that output in the oil industry is more connected to luck than output
in the rest of the economy. Hence, in a broad sense, the models in this section and in the previous section
can be seen as having the same underlying structure on the …rms’side; but higher taxes arise for e¢ ciency
reasons in the previous model, and for fairness reasons in this model.
  10
     We note that reasonable alternatives to the de…nition of what is fair and what is not include Levine
(2001) and Rotemberg (2003), who focus on reciprocal altruism; Di Tella and MacCulloch (2002) use these
preferences to analyze why capitalism does not ‡ow to countries where capitalists are perceived to be corrupt.

                                                     11
where A is talent, e is e¤ort and ji is “noise” or “luck” for individual i in industry j. We
assume that O has 0 mean, and a symmetric distribution, that M is always 0; and that
the distribution of A2 is symmetric (we also assume that 2A2 is greater than the maximum
element in the support of A2i ). The shocks A and are independent among them, and across
agents.
   The government imposes a ‡at tax rate on income and redistributes the proceeds in a
lump sum fashion, so that the individual’s consumption is

                                        ci = (1             ) yi + G
                                R
for government transfer G = i yi :
    Let ui be the private utility from own consumption and e¤ort;         the “distaste for
unfair outcomes”; and       a measure of the social injustice in the economy. Then, with
                        2
ui = V (ci ; ei ) = ci ei =2 being the private utility of consumption and e¤ort, individual
preferences are
                                                              e2i
                       Ui u i          V (ci ; ei )       ci         :
                                                              2
Social injustice is                        Z
                                           =          (ui      bi )2
                                                               u
                                                  i

where ui is the actual level of private utility, and u  bi is a measure of the “fair”level of utility
the individual should have (deserves) on the basis of his talent and e¤ort. This follows
Alesina and Angeletos (2005), who in turn follow a considerable literature in philosophy and
morality on “just deserts”. We note, however, that there are two di¤erences between A and
 : The …rst is that although one tends to view ability as a fairly permanent shock and luck
as a transitory shock, in the model both are transitory shocks. Still, in our de…nition of
unfairness (that follows Alesina and Angeletos’), we have assumed that people see a shock to
talent as fair, and a luck shock as unfair; this assumption that a permanent shock is “fair”
and a transitory one not, seems at odds with our perception of what people see as fair.
    The second di¤erence between A and is that the ability shock A a¤ects the agent’s
optimal choice of e¤ort, while the luck shock doesn’t. This second feature of our assumption
of the interaction between shocks and e¤ort is simply a re‡ection of how one usually thinks
about talent and luck. Given the unobservable nature of “talent” and “luck”, it would be
impossible to gather evidence suggesting whether e¤ort applied to the permanent shock has
more impact on income than if applied to the temporary shock (in favor of our assumption,
however, one can think of situations in which an individual with high talent could acquire
education that a¤ects the quality of the e¤ort). We now de…ne the fair level of utility u      bi as
the level of utility an individual would have, if he consumed all his income, minus whatever
income he gained from a luck shock: u   bi = Vi (e            ci e2i =2 for
                                                  ci ; ei ) = e

                                   e
                                   ci = yei = (1            ) Ai ei + G:


                                                      12
                                                                                                                                         j
For the purposes of comparison, recall that individual consumption is ci = (1                                                ) Ai ei +   i   +
G:
   The individual maximizes
                                                                                   j           e2i
                           ui = (1             ) Ai ei + (1                )       i   +G                                                (5)
                                                                                               2
with respect to e; to obtain ei = (1    ) Ai . Let be the mean and median of , and let
      2
                   R 2
ai = Ai and am = Ai . Substituting into the utility, and using
                Z         Z                       Z
                                     j
          G=        yi =     Ai ei + i = (1      ) A2i +       (1  ) am + ;

we get
                       ai             2
                 ui =     1                   +   i   + (              i)      + (am               ai ) (1        )
                       2
                       ai             2
                     =    1                   + (1         )    i   + (am                 ai ) (1        )
                       2
   Using our de…nition of fair consumption, e
                                            ci = (1                                    ) Ai ei + G; we get

                       = V ar (ci             e
                                              ci ) = V ar ((1                  ) yi       (1         ) Ai ei )
                       = V ar ((1              ) (yi       Ai ei )) = V ar ((1                       ) i)

But since only people in the oil industry have non-zero i shocks, and they are a proportion
q of the population, letting 2 stand for the variance of ; social injustice is

                                                  = (1              )2 q   2
                                                                               :

Then, Ui = ui        implies
                  ai           2
           Ui =      1              + (1          )   i   + (am                ai ) (1         )
                  2
                  ai
                =    1         2
                                    + (1          )   i   + (am                ai ) (1         )         (1           )2 q   2
                                                                                                                                         (6)
                  2
    The next theorem identi…es who is the median voter, in terms of the underlying shocks:
given our symmetry assumptions, the individual whose preferred tax rate is the median of
the distribution of preferred tax rates, is the individual with the median values of the shocks
a and :

Theorem 1 The Median Voter is the individual with the median values of the shocks. That
is, the tax rate preferred by the individual with the median values of the shocks, (ai ; i ) =
(am ; 0) ; is a Condorcet winner: it beats every other tax rate by simple majority voting.

   Proof. From the equation (6) we obtain
                   dUi                                                                                        2
                       =       ai         i   + (am        ai ) (1             2 ) + 2 (1               )q
                   d
                                                           13
and then
                                      d2 Ui                                   2
                                            = ai            2am      2 q          :
                                      d 2
                                                                                                       dUi (   )
The optimal tax rate for an individual with shocks (ai ; i ) is determined by                            d
                                                                                                                   = 0 if
  2 (0; 1):
              dUi                                                                            2
                  =        ai     i   + (am         ai ) (1       2 ) + 2 (1            )q       =0,
              d
                                                            2
                            i+ am ai + 2 q
                       =
                            2am ai + 2 q 2
If the numerator is negative, the optimal tax rate for the individual is 0; and if      thus
calculated is greater than 1; the optimal tax rate is 1:
    To …nish solving the model notice that we have assumed that ai 2am 0 for all ai in
the support, so that d2 Ui =d 2 < 0 and preferences are single peaked; then the median voter
theorem applies. We now show that the median voter (the individual whose preferred tax
rate accumulates 1=2 of the peaks to each side) is the individual who receives the median
shocks ai = am and i = 0: Note that an individual’s preferred tax rate is larger than the
preferred tax rate of the voter with the median shocks i¤
                                             2
                   i+ am ai + 2 q                     2 q 2                           am (am ai )
                                                                          ,       i               :
                   2am ai + 2 q 2                   am + 2 q          2               am + 2q 2
   Let f denote the density of ai and g that of : Recalling that am is the mean of ai ;
we assume that for all x; f (am x) = f (am + x) ; and that g ( x) = g (x) : With this
assumption, am is not only the mean of ai but also its median. Let
                                                                am (am ai )
                                S=        (ai ; i ) :   i
                                                                am + 2q 2

so that the proof will be complete if we show that Pr (S) 1=2:
    We have that for c am = am + 2q 2
                    R 1 hR (am ai )c         i
        Pr fSg =       1     1
                                     g ( ) d   f (a) da                                                               (7)
                          h
                    R a R (am ai )c          i          R 1 hR (am ai )c        i
                =      1     1
                                     g ( ) d f (a) da + a       1
                                                                         g ( ) d f (a) da

De…ne z (a) = a am ; the density h of z is such that h (z) = f (z + am ) ; so that by the
symmetry assumption on f; we have h (z) = f (z + am ) = f (am z) = h ( z) : Then,
equation (7) and the change of variable z (a) = a am imply that
                       R 0 hR zc         i         R 1 hR zc        i
             Pr fSg = 1        1
                                 g ( ) d h (z) dz + 0     1
                                                             g ( ) d h (z) dz         (8)

but symmetry of g implies that
                                      R   zc                    R1
                                          1
                                             g   ( )d =         zc
                                                                     g( )d

                                                        14
so that equation (8) becomes
                        R 0 hR            zc
                                                        i                   R1 R1
              Pr fSg = 1                  1
                                             g   ( )d       h (z) dz +          0   zc
                                                                                         g( )d     h (z) dz

   Since g is symmetric, the pdf of g, G, is such that for all x; G ( x) = 1 G (x) : Therefore
                                 R0                                   R1
               Pr fSg =               1
                                        G ( zc) h (z) dz +         [1 G (zc)] h (z) dz
                                                                       0
                                 R0                                R1
                           =          1
                                          [1     G (zc)] h (z) dz + 0 [1 G (zc)] h (z) dz

so for w =   z, using h ( w) = h (w) and 1                     G ( wc) = G (wc) we obtain
                     R0                                        R1
        Pr fSg =          1
                            [1    G (zc)] h (z) dz +              0
                                                                       [1       G (zc)] h (z) dz
                     R1                                               R1
                 =    0
                         G ( wc)] h (w) dw + 0 [1 G (zc)] h (z) dz
                           [1
                   R1                 R1                      R1           1
                 = 0 G (wc) h (w) dw + 0 [1 G (zc)] h (z) dz = 0 h (z) dz = :
                                                                           2
This completes the proof.
    The previous Theorem establishes whose preferences will prevail. The next result is the
main result of this section: it characterizes the tax rate preferred by the median voter; it
establishes the equilibrium tax rate, and indicates the comparative statics of the equilibrium
tax rate with respect to how important is oil in the economy. The Theorem shows that as
the oil industry becomes more important in a society, its tax rate will increase.

Theorem 2 The Condorcet winner, the equilibrium tax rate, is

                                                              2 q 2
                                                    =                       2
                                                                                                              (9)
                                                            am + 2 q

so that an increase in q leads to an increase in the tax rate desired by society.

    Proof. Substituting the median shocks in equation (6) and optimizing with respect to
 ; we obtain the tax rate preferred by the individual with median shocks given in equation
(9). Theorem 1 then ensures that this is the tax rate adopted by society.
    Our model is loosely based on Alesina and Angeletos’. Given the importance of that pa-
per, in the next section we detail the di¤erences between our model and theirs. In particular,
the model of AA has a few mistakes some of which are important both for their paper and
ours.

2.3.1   Di¤erences with Alesina and Angeletos
A …rst small di¤erence here is that we corrected some small algebraic mistakes that lead AA
to conclude that preferences are single peaked. Our assumption that ai 2am 0 for all ai
in the support is necessary for single peakedness (see the proof of Theorem 1).


                                                             15
    A second di¤erence with AA is that even if one assumes that ai 2am 0 for all ai in
the support, so that preferences are single peaked and the median voter theorem applies,
their analysis of the equilibrium is problematic. In particular, they claim that the individual
with the median values of the shocks is the median voter, which is not always true. As
a consequence, they predict (for example) a 0 tax rate when the tax rate that arises in
equilibrium (the Condorcet winner) is positive. In order to …x this problem in our model, we
have made some symmetry assumptions on the distributions, that ensure that the individual
with the median shocks is indeed the median voter.11
    Finally, and most important, their de…nition of what constitutes a “fair level of con-
sumption” is unattractive. Individual consumption is ci = (1          ) Ai ei + ji + G; the AA
de…nition of fair consumption (adapted to this model without capital) is b     ci = Ai ei ; and our
de…nition of fair consumption is e  ci = (1   ) Ai ei + G: The “current” situation of the econ-
                                j
omy is ci = (1      ) Ai ei + i + G; so when asking ourselves “how would a fair society look
like –what would life look like without luck shocks”, it seems that the natural comparison
is with eci = (1      ) Ai ei + G (the current situation, with luck shocks set to 0, but with
taxes and government still in place). AA, however, de…ne fair consumption to be one with
0 luck shocks, but also without government: = G = 0: An important point to note is that
while de…ning fair consumption as we do, or as AA do, has no relevant consequences for
our model, it has critical consequences for AA: the multiplicity of equilibria disappears.12
Also, this problem with the de…nition of fair consumption has the unnatural consequence
that even if there is no unfairness in society ( i = 0 for all i); changes in the preference for
fairness (changes in ) that should have no e¤ect on the equilibrium tax rate (because there
is no unfairness), do change the amount of redistribution that society wants. That is, the
wedge between the “verbal”de…nition of fairness, and the technical one, a¤ects the optimal
tax for reasons unrelated to fairness.


3       Empirical Illustration Using US data
3.1     Data and Empirical Strategy
3.1.1    Data
We use two primary sources of data and discuss each one in turn. First, as we are trying
to explain the determinants of a subjective preference (i.e., left versus right-wing) we need
to acquire survey data on this attribute of an individual. The data we use for this purpose
are repeated cross-sections of randomly sampled Americans from the United States General
  11
     We note that the symmetry assumptions that ensure that the median voter is the voter with the median
values of the shocks is not necessary to apply the median voter theorem, or the methods of Theorem 1. The
model can be easily generalized to situations with asymmetric distributions of shocks.
  12
     To obtain multiplicity again, one needs to make a very complicated de…nition ; the aggregate level of
un-fairness in society.



                                                   16
Social Survey (GSS) from 1983 to 2004. The sample is reasonably continuous over time
(although there are some holes -there are no GSS data for 1992, 1995, 1997, 1999 and 2001).
There are however data for 1973 but they were discarded given that it is 10 years apart from
the rest of our sample. Each survey is an independently drawn sample of English-speaking
persons 18 years of age or over, living in the United States. One of the basic purposes of the
GSS is to gather data on contemporary American society in order to monitor and explain
trends and constants in attitudes, behaviors, and attributes.
    The particular variable that we use from the GSS is called Help P oor Rist , which is a
categorical variable that is the answer (by individual i, living in state s and year t) to the
question:

            “Some people think that the government in Washington should do everything
        possible to improve the standard of living of all poor Americans; they are at Point
        1 on this card. Other people think it is not the government’s responsibility, and
        that each person should take care of himself; they are at Point 5. Where would
        you place yourself on this scale, or haven’t you have made up your mind on
        this?”. The possible answers are “1 (Gov’t actions), 2, 3 (Agree with both), 4, 5
        (People help selves)”.

    We assign the ‘R’ extension to the variable name since higher values of this variable
are usually associated with the individualist response, which is sometimes associated with
parties that are on the right of the political spectrum, related to how the poor themselves
should be responsible for their own well-being (without government intervention).
    Second, as a proxy for the relative role of luck versus e¤ort in the determination of income
we use Luckst , which is de…ned as the price of oil (in US dollars) multiplied by the share
of the oil industry in the total GDP of the State. States that are heavily dependent on oil
revenues, and consequently the price of oil, are assumed to experience economic outcomes
that are more determined by luck

3.1.2     Empirical Strategy
We estimate an ordered logit regression of the following form:


HelpP oor Rist =       Luckst + P ersonalcontrolsist +States +Y eart +StateT imeT rendsst +"ist

where the dependent variable, HelpP oor Rist , and our primary explanatory variable of
interest, Luckst , are both de…ned above. Note that exogeneity concerns should be mitigated
due to the oil price (and relative size of the oil industry) being primarily determined by factors
outside the control of individual preferences. P ersonalcontrolsist include the respondent’s
marital status, gender, income and age. Income is the response to the GSS question “In
which of these groups did your total family income, from all sources, fall last year before

                                                17
taxes, that is? Just tell me the letter”. There are twelve possible categorical responses
corresponding to di¤erent ranges of income, so we use dummy variables that correspond to
each one of them.
    All the regressions include state …xed e¤ects, and we also report results that control for
year …xed e¤ects, Y eart , as well as state speci…c time trends, StateT imeT rendsst . The error
term, "ist , is assumed to be logistic (and identically, independently distributed). For more
information, see the appendix.


3.2    Results
Our main results are reported in Table 1. Column (1) reports the base speci…cation in which
the determinants of HelpP oor R are estimated. State dummies are included though there
are no other controls. The negative sign is suggestive of a relationship whereby higher oil
prices in States that are relatively dependent on oil drive people away from the right-wing
and more towards the left-wing preference that the government should help the poor. As we
argued above, this may be expected when people start believing that luck (not e¤ort) plays
an important role in the economy. In column (2) we add year dummy variables and obtain
a similar result.
                                      Table 1 about here
    The third column also adds state speci…c time trends (in addition to state and year
dummies). The negative e¤ect of Luck on an individual’s survey response of whether the
poor should help themselves becomes signi…cant at the 5 per cent level. In the base scenario,
the cut points leave 16.0 % of the population in the bottom HelpP oor R category (i.e.,
Gov’t actions), 13.4 % in the second to last, 45.7 % in the third, 14.6 % in the fourth and
10.3 % in the top category (i.e., People help selves). When Luck increases by an amount
equivalent to a shift from a State that has no dependence on oil (e.g., Vermont) to the State
with the highest dependence on oil in the sample (Wyoming) the median person has the
same response to HelpP oor R as the person at the 36th percentile of the distribution in
the base scenario. Figure 3 illustrates the alternative scenarios. That is, they become more
supportive of government intervention to help the poor. This calculation assumes that the
other explanatory variables are at their average levels in the sample. This does not seem like
a very large e¤ect. The exercise assumes a large change in oil dependence, which corresponds
to an increase in Luck of $1; 248 (in constant 2000 dollars), when the standard deviation of
Luck is $ 117 (see Table A in Appendix A).

                                     Figure 3 about here
   In an attempt to provide another metric for these changes, we can focus on the top two
categories of HelpP oor R (where people favor self-help for the poor). When Luck increases
by an amount equivalent to a shift from (no-oil) Vermont to (oil-dependent) Wyoming, 8.9
percentage points of people no longer report themselves in one of the top two categories of


                                              18
HelpP oor R. That is, the proportion preferring the poor to bear responsibility for helping
themselves drops from 24.9 % to 16.0 % as people lean more toward the view that the
government should help. Alternatively, a one standard deviation increase in Luck leads 1.0
% of people to no longer report themselves in one of the top two categories of HelpP oor R.
    Similar results are obtained in column (4) once we add personal controls for each indi-
vidual’s marital status, gender, age and income level. As may be expected, whereas those
on low incomes are strongly in favor of more government help for the poor, those on higher
incomes are more disposed toward the view that the poor should look after themselves. The
coe¢ cients range from signi…cantly negative in the low income categories to signi…cantly
positive in the top couple of categories. Older people are also in favor of the poor having to
help themselves. The size of the e¤ect of Luck on HelpP oor R becomes somewhat more
negative with this full set of controls. Figure 4 provides an illustration of the results in this
column, using an approach that can be compared with the country panel results in Di Tella
et al (2006) presented in Figure 2. The size of the e¤ects within the US are clearly smaller:
In the present paper the exercise uses a much larger scale to display similar-sized e¤ects,
with a value of Luck of 1248 (as that is the value adopted in Wyoming in 1983).
                                     Figure 4 about here
    Robust regressions using the same speci…cations as above are done in Table 2. In the base
speci…cation in column (1), more Luck drives signi…cantly less people to report that the poor
should help themselves. The sign of the coe¢ cient on Luck remains negative throughout
all of the other speci…cations, though in contrast to Table 1, the e¤ect loses signi…cance in
columns (2-3). In the most general speci…cation reported in column (4), more Luck has a
negative e¤ect on HelpP oor R at the 5% level of signi…cance, and its’size is not signi…cantly
di¤erent from the corresponding (non robust) coe¢ cient reported in column (4) in Table 1.
                                      Table 2 about here
    One simple attempt to discriminate the charity channel versus the luck channel (for both
the Piketty-based model of section 2.2 and the Alesina and Angeletos-based model of section
2.3) is to include income in the regression. Since the charity channel depends only on income,
and not on luck speci…cally, if the luck coe¢ cient continues to be signi…cant, it suggests that
there is a role for the belief based arguments in the models of Sections 2.2 and 2.3. The
regression in column (4) does that by controlling for individual income. If oil a¤ects beliefs
through the charity mechanism, then any increase in income a¤ects the desire to give to the
poor because the concavity of the utility function implies that a given transfer costs less in
utility for a richer person. An alternative to the same test is to include GDP per capita in
the state at the same time as Luck. We do this in Tables 3 and 4.
                                 Tables 3 and 4 around here
We …nd that GDP per capita does not have a robust correlation with HelpP oor R; whereas
Luck is still negative and, in the most complete speci…cation which controls for personal
characteristics and state speci…c time trends, also signi…cant.

                                               19
4    Conclusions
We start from the observation that capitalism is not as widespread as economists might hope.
Data from surveys of public opinion, as well as on the distribution of political parties, con…rm
the idea that capitalism doesn’t ‡ow to poor countries. In some countries, anti market
sentiment has increased in recent years, a period where the price of oil and other primary
commodities have soared. The combination (of anti market sentiment and high oil prices)
have led, not surprisingly, to renegotiations of oil contracts and even nationalizations in some
countries such as Bolivia and Venezuela. Of course it is tempting for economists trained in the
theory of political capture to argue that this is just another instance where special interests
exploit the circumstances to make an extra dollar. Given that these nationalizations are
often popular with the majority of voters, we resist this temptation and ask if there are
explanations where a positive correlation emerges between voter’s desired tax rates and
dependence on oil.
    We present three models where this association is natural. For example, in our adaptation
of Alesina and Angeletos (2005), oil dependence increases the perception that luck rather
than e¤ort matters and high taxes are called in to increase “fairness”. One implication
is that non-oil sectors bene…t from a nationalization of the oil industry because people’s
desired taxes go down. The link is based on the idea that the nationalization “removes”
the sector where luck prevails from the determination of income in the country. Of course
several assumptions are needed for this result. For example, the oil sector in the hands
of the government will generate rents to some groups and this might undermine again the
notion that e¤ort pays, this time because connections and corruption drive income instead of
e¤ort. Thus, the results require that perceptions of corruption do not immediately become
widespread (Di Tella and MacCulloch, 2002, present evidence that corruption perception
leads to a desire to regulate).
    We then present suggestive evidence for the period 1983-2004 from the US where answers
to a question about whether the poor should be helped by the government (versus they
should help themselves) tend less towards the individualist end of the spectrum when the
share of the oil industry in a State increases. This holds in some speci…cations that control
for income shocks. Thus, there seems to be at least some connection between dependence
on oil and receptivity to populist rhetoric that is both natural in economic models and has
some support in the data. Critics of left wing ideas might see this connection as another
version of the “resource curse”.


5    Appendix A
Survey Descriptions GSS 1972-2006 Cumulative Data File
    The General Social Surveys (GSS) are designed as part of a program of social indicator
research, replicating questionnaire items and wording in order to facilitate time-trend studies.


                                              20
This collection is a cumulative dataset that merges all data collected as part of the General
Social Surveys from 1972 to the present. Among the new items added for the 2002 surveys
are topical modules on prejudice, doctors and patients, quality of working life, employee
compensation, altruism, adult transitions, and mental health. Also included are crossnational
modules, conducted under the aegis of the international Social Survey Program (ISSP), on
the role of government, social support and equality, family and gender, national identity,
religion, the environment, and work.
    This cumulative data …le merges all 25 General Social Surveys (1972-1978, 1980, 1982-91,
1993, 1994, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004) into a single …le with each year or survey acting
as a sub…le. This arrangement of the data facilitates trend analysis on repeated questions
over the 32-year period. Each survey is an independently drawn sample of English-speaking
persons 18 years of age or over, living in non-institutional arrangements within the United
States. Block quota sampling was used in 1972, 1973, and 1974 surveys and for half of the
1975 and 1976 surveys. Full probability sampling was employed in half of the 1975 and
1976 surveys and the 1977, 1978, 1980, 1982-1991, 1993-1998, 2000, 2002, and 2004 surveys.
The basic purposes of the GSS are to gather data on contemporary American society in
order to monitor and explain trends and constants in attitudes, behaviors, and attributes;
to examine the structure and functioning of society in general as well as the role played
by relevant subgroups; to compare the United States to other societies in order to place
American society in comparative perspective and develop cross-national models of human
society. See http://www.disc.wisc.edu/newcatalog/study.asp?tid=13995&id=8093)
    Individual Level Variables
    Help Poor-R: is a categorical variable that is the answer to the question: “Some people
think that the government in Washington should do everything possible to improve the
standard of living of all poor Americans; they are at Point 1 on this card. Other people
think it is not the government’s responsibility, and that each person should take care of
himself; they are at Point 5. Where would you place yourself on this scale, or haven’t you
have up your mind on this?”. The possible answers are 1 (Govt actions), 2, 3 (Agree with
both), 4, 5 (People help selves).
    Luck(s,t): is computed as Oil Price(t)*Oil Share(s,t) where Oil price(t) denotes oil price
at time t, Oil Share(s,t) refers to oil share in state, s, at time t and Luck(s,t) denotes luck
in state, s, at time, t.
    Age: Respondent’s age in years.
    Gender: Respondent’s gender.
    Marital Status: Respondent’s marital status: Married, Widowed, Divorced, Separated,
Never Married.
    Income: is the answer to the question “In which of these groups did your total family
income, from all sources, fall last year before taxes, that is? Just tell me the letter”. The
possible answers are: 1 if “LT $1000”, 2 if “$1000 to 2999”, 3 if “$3000 to 3999”, 4 if
“$4000 to 4999”, 5 if “$5000 to 5999”, 6 if “$6000 to 6999”, 7 if “$7000 to 7999”, 8 if
“$8000 to 9999”, 9 if “$10000 to 14999”, 10 if “$15000 to 19999”, 11 if “$20000 to 24999”,

                                              21
12 if “$25000 or more”, 13 if “Refused”. Refused values are treated as missing values in the
regressions.
    State Level Variables
    Oil price(t): refers to Annual Average Crude Oil Price per Barrel (Real US$) and is
obtained from U.S. Energy Administration.
    Oil Share(s,t): refers to Oil Industry share as a % of GDP (US$ current) and is obtained
from U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, www.bea.gov.

                                     Table A about here


6    Appendix B
Notes to Tables 1 and 3
    [1] All regressions are ordered logistic regressions. See also Notes to all tables. Cut
points (standard errors) In Table 1: for col. (1) are: c1=-1.73 (0.10), c2=-0.95 (0.11),
c3=1.02 (0.11), c4=2.07 (0.11). Cut points for col. (2): c1=-1.51 (0.12), c2=-0.73 (0.13),
c3=1.24 (0.13), c4=2.29 (0.14). Cut points for col. (3): c1=-6.50 (0.39), c2=-5.72 (0.39),
c3=-3.74 (0.39), c4=-2.68 (0.39). Cut points for col. (4): c1=-5.90 (0.47), c2=-5.09 (0.47),
c3=-3.04 (0.46), c4=-1.97 (0.46).
    Notes to Tables 2 and 4
    [1] In all regressions we use the robust regression method using iteratively re-weighted
least squares (Huber and Tukey biweights) with rreg routine in Stata. See Notes to all tables.
    Notes to all Tables
    [1] All regressions include states dummies. [2] Name of dependent variable has R (L)
extension if higher numbers mean more Right (Left). [3] Help Poor-R: is a categorical variable
that is the answer to the question: “Some people think that the government in Washington
should do everything possible to improve the standard of living of all poor Americans; they
are at Point 1 on this card. Other people think it is not the government’s responsibility, and
that each person should take care of himself; they are at Point 5. Where would you place
yourself on this scale, or haven’t you have up your mind on this?”. The possible answers are
“1 (Govt actions), 2, 3 (Agree with both), 4, 5 (People help selves)”. Help Poor-R is obtained
from the GSS. [4] Luck(s,t)=Oil Price(t)*Oil Share(s,t). Oil price refers to Annual Average
Crude Oil Price per Barrel (Real US$) and is obtained from U.S. Energy Administration.
Oil Share refers to Oil Industry share as a % of GDP (US$ current) and is obtained from
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, www.bea.gov. [5] Personal Controls reported in column
4: marital status, gender, income and age. [6] Income is the answer to the GSS question
“In which of these groups did your total family income, from all sources, fall last year before
taxes, that is? Just tell me the letter”. The possible answers are: 1 if “LT $1000”, 2 if “$1000
to 2999”, 3 if “$3000 to 3999”, 4 if “$4000 to 4999”, 5 if “$5000 to 5999”, 6 if “$6000 to
6999”, 7 if “$7000 to 7999”, 8 if “$8000 to 9999”, 9 if “$10000 to 14999”, 10 if “$15000 to


                                              22
19999”, 11 if “$20000 to 24999”, 12 if “$25000 or more”, 13 if “Refused”. Refused values
are treated as missing values in the regressions. [7] Standard errors (adjusted for clustering)
in parentheses. [8] * signi…cant at 10%; ** signi…cant at 5%; *** signi…cant at 1%.


References
 [1] Alesina, Alberto and Edward L. Glaeser (2004), Fighting Poverty in the U.S. and Eu-
     rope: A World of Di¤erence, New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

 [2] Alesina, Alberto, Ed Glaeser and Bruce Sacerdote (2001) “Why Doesn’t the US have a
     European Style Welfare State?”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 187-277.

 [3] Alesina, Alberto and George-Marios Angeletos (2005): “Corruption, Inequality and
     Fairness,”Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 52(7), pp. 1227-44.

 [4] Alesina, Alberto and George-Marios Angeletos (2005): “Fairness and Redistribution,”
     American Economic Review, 95(4), 960-80.

 [5] Bénabou, Roland and Efe A. Ok (2001) “Social Mobility And The Demand For Re-
     distribution: The Poum Hypothesis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2),
     447-87,

 [6] Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2006) “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive
     Politics, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 699-746.

 [7] Borges, Jorge Luis (1944), La Loteria de Babilonia, in Ficciones, Buenos Aires: Editorial
     Sur.

 [8] Corneo, Giacomo and Hans Gruner (2002) “Individual preferences for political redistri-
     bution”, Journal of Public Economics, Volume 83, Issue 1, pp 83-107

 [9] Denzau, A. and Douglass North (1993) “Shared Mental Models: Ideologies and Institu-
     tions”, Economic History Working Paper #9039003.

[10] Davis, James A., Tom W. Smith, and Peter V. Marsden. (2005) “General Social Surveys,
     1972-2004: [Cumulative …le] [Computer …le]. 2nd ICPSR version”. Chicago, IL: National
     Opinion Research Center [producer], 2005. Storrs, CT: Roper Center for Public Opinion
     Research, University of Connecticut / Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium
     for Political and Social Research / Berkeley, CA: Computer-assisted Survey Methods
     Program (http://sda.berkeley.edu), University of California [distributors].

[11] Di Tella, Rafael and Robert MacCulloch (2002) “Why Doesn’t Capitalism Flow to Poor
     Countries?”, Harvard Business School, mimeo.



                                              23
[12] Di Tella, Rafael, Schargrodsky, Ernesto and Sebastian Galiani (2007) “The Formation
     of Beliefs: Evidence from the Allocation of Land Titles to Squatters”, Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, vol. 122, no. 1 (February), pp. 209-41.

[13] Di Tella, Rafael, Donna, Javier and Robert MacCulloch (2006) “Oil, Macro Volatility
     and Crime in the Determination of Beliefs in Venezuela”, forthcoming in Hausmann,
     Ricardo and Francisco Rodríguez, (eds) Venezuela: Anatomy of a Collapse, Harvard.

[14] Di Tella, Rafael and Juan Dubra (2008), “Crime and Punishment in the ‘American
     Dream’,”Journal of Public Economics, 92(7).

[15] Fong, Christina (2001) “Social Preferences, Self Interest and the Demand for Redistri-
     bution”, Journal of Public Economics 82, 2001; 225-246.

[16] Fong, Christina (2004) “Which Beliefs Matter for Redistributive Politics? Target-
     speci…c versus general beliefs about the causes of income”, Carnegie Mellon University,
     mimeo.

[17] Giuliano, Paola and Antonio Spilimbergo (2007) “Growing up in a Recession: Beliefs
     and Macroeconomic Shocks”, mimeo Harvard University and the IMF.

[18] Greif, Avner (1994) “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and
     Theoretical Re‡ection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies”, Journal of Political
     Economy, 102(5): 912-50.

[19] Hall, Peter and David Soskice (2001), Varieties of Capitalism, Oxford, UK: Oxford
     University Press.

[20] Hochschild, Jennifer (1981) What’s Fair? American Beliefs about Distributive Justice,
     Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.

[21] Inglehart, Ronald, (1990) Culture Shift in Advanced Societies, Chicago, IL: Chicago
     University Press.

[22] Ladd, Everett Carll and Karlyn Bowman (1998) Attitudes Towards Economic Inequal-
     ity, AEI Press: Washington.

[23] Levine, D.K., (1998) "Modelling Altruism and Spitefulness in Experiments", Review of
     Economic Dynamics 1, 593-622.

[24] Lora, Eduardo and Mauricio Olivera (2005) “The Electoral Consequences of the Wash-
     ington Consensus”, forthcoming Economia.

[25] Meltzer, A. and S. Richard (1981) “A rational theory of the size of government”, Journal
     of Political Economy, 89(5): 914-927.


                                             24
[26] Milgrom, P. and C. Shannon (1994), “Monotone Comparative Statics,” Econometrica
     62(1), 157-80.

[27] Morgan, J. (2000), “Financing Public Goods by means of Lotteries,” Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies 67(4), 761-84.

[28] North, Douglass (2005) Understanding the Process of Economic Change, Princeton
     University Press: Princeton, New Jersey.

[29] Piketty, Thomas (1995) “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics”, Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 110(3): 551–84.

[30] Queirolo, Rosario (2006) “The Impact of Neoliberal Economic Reforms on Latin Amer-
     icans’Voting Behavior (1980-2004),”University of Pittsburgh, PhD in Political Science
     Dissertation.

[31] Ramsey, F.P. (1927) “A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation,” Economic Journal,
     37, 47-61.

[32] Rotemberg, Julio (2003) “Commercial Policy with Altruistic Voters”, Journal of Polit-
     ical Economy, volume 111, pages 174–201

[33] Rotemberg, Julio (2003) “Minimally Acceptable Altruism and the Ultimatum Game”,
     mimeo, forthcoming Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization.




                                            25
                       Does Capitalism Flow to Poor Countries?


        Rich, 1975-97                    Middle Income                     Poor, 1975-97

 70%                             70%                              70%
 60%                             60%                              60%
 50%                             50%                              50%
 40%                             40%                              40%
 30%                             30%                              30%
 20%                             20%                              20%
 10%                             10%                              10%
  0%                              0%                               0%
       Left   Center    Right          Left   Center   Right            Left    Center   Right




Figure 1: The distribution of party ideology around the world, 1975-97, by income.


   Note: Source, Di Tella and MacCulloch (2002). Data on parties comes from Beck et al
   (2001) and refers to the color of the Chief Political Officer (prime minister of president).
   A similar picture emerges using largest government party. Right: Parties on the right are
   those with the terms “conservative” or “Christian democratic” in their names, or are
   labeled right-wing in their sources. Left: Similarly, parties classified as left if their names
   reveal them to be communist, socialist, or social democratic or if the sources label them
   as left-wing. Center: Similarly, centrist parties are those called centrist by their sources or
   if their proposed policies can best be described as centrist (e.g., because the party
   advocates strengthening private enterprise but also supports a redistributive role for
   government).
        Left-Right Self Placement in the Country for different levels of Fuel Exports
  90%
                                                                             77%
  80%
                                                         72%
  70%
  60%                                53%
            50%   50%                                                                   R
                               47%
  50%
                                                                                        L
  40%
                                                   28%
  30%                                                                  23%
  20%
  10%
   0%
              fuel=0%         fuel=0%-->10%      fuel=0%-->70%       fuel=0%-->90%



Figure 2: Average Left-Right Self Placement predicted in the Country for different
levels of dependence on oil exports. Based on Di Tella et al (2006).
.4




.3



.2



.1                                                     50th percentile
                                                       (median)

                        36th percentile
 0


              All Explanatory Variables at their average level

              Luck increases equivalent to a shift from a State with no oil dependence
              (Vermont) to the State with the highest dependence (Wyoming)




     Figure 3: The Probability Density Function of Help Poor - R ist
                    Belief (Help Poor) in the State for different Oil Shares

  90%
                                                                               77%
  80%                                                            73%
  70%                                               63%
  60%                                  56%
                          53%
          50%50%
                       47%                                                            Right
  50%                              44%
                                                                                      Left
  40%                                           37%

  30%                                                         27%
                                                                           23%
  20%

  10%

   0%
             0         0-->100      0-->250      0-->500     0-->1000      0-->1248



Figure 4: Average Belief (Help-Poor) predicted in the State for different shares of
the oil industry in State GDP (times the price of oil), using the coefficient in
column (4) in Table 1.
                                       Table 1
                 How Beliefs about Helping the Poor vary with Luck
       Ordered Logit Regressions; United States General Social Surveys: 1983-2004
          Dependent variable:
                                          (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)
                   Help Poor-R


 Luck                                        -4.25e-04    -1.70e-04    -4.48e-04**   -6.48e-04***
                                             (3.13e-04)   (2.82e-04)    (2.09e-04)    (1.99e-04)

 Marital Status          - Widowed                                                       0.0837
                                                                                       (0.0751)
                         - Divorced                                                    -0.0845*
                                                                                       (0.0496)
                         - Separated                                                 -0.2764***
                                                                                       (0.0907)
                         - Never Married                                                -0.0512
                                                                                       (0.0346)
 Female                                                                              -0.2550***
                                                                                       (0.0293)
 Personal Income         - Income 2                                                   -0.4826**
                                                                                       (0.1902)
                         - Income 3                                                  -0.5495***
                                                                                       (0.1802)
                         - Income 4                                                  -0.7108***
                                                                                       (0.2069)
                         - Income 5                                                  -0.6494***
                                                                                       (0.2066)
                         - Income 6                                                  -0.5890***
                                                                                       (0.2027)
                         - Income 7                                                    -0.4243*
                                                                                       (0.2189)
                         - Income 8                                                     -0.2874
                                                                                       (0.1935)
                         - Income 9                                                     -0.1644
                                                                                       (0.1944)
                         - Income 10                                                    -0.0680
                                                                                       (0.1893)
                         - Income 11                                                     0.1712
                                                                                       (0.1934)
                         - Income 12 (top)                                            0.4121**
                                                                                       (0.1909)
 Age                                                                                 0.0093***
                                                                                       (0.0011)

 Year Dummies                                   No           Yes          Yes            Yes
 State Specific time trends                     No           No           Yes            Yes

 Pseudo R-sq                                  0.0042       0.0062        0.0077        0.0240
 No. of States                                  44           44            44            44
 No. of Years                                   15           15            15            15
 No Obs.                                      17,401       17,401        17,401        17,401
Notes: See appendix B.
                                    Table 2
                How Beliefs about Helping the Poor vary with Luck
    Robust OLS Regressions; United States General Social Surveys: 1983-2004
 Dependent variable: Help Poor-R       (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)


 Luck                                        -2.94e-04**   -1.22e-04    -2.92e-04    -4.08e-04**
                                              (1.23e-04)   (1.35e-04)   (1.79e-04)    (1.77e-04)

 Marital Status          - Widowed                                                       0.0534
                                                                                       (0.0375)
                         - Divorced                                                    -0.0527*
                                                                                       (0.0283)
                         - Separated                                                 -0.1824***
                                                                                       (0.0506)
                         - Never Married                                                -0.0317
                                                                                       (0.0266)
 Female                                                                              -0.1596***
                                                                                       (0.0187)
 Personal Income         - Income 2                                                  -0.3159***
                                                                                       (0.1111)
                         - Income 3                                                  -0.3589***
                                                                                       (0.1100)
                         - Income 4                                                  -0.4589***
                                                                                       (0.1080)
                         - Income 5                                                  -0.4187***
                                                                                       (0.1061)
                         - Income 6                                                  -0.3761***
                                                                                       (0.1081)
                         - Income 7                                                   -0.2731**
                                                                                       (0.1065)
                         - Income 8                                                    -0.1822*
                                                                                       (0.0999)
                         - Income 9                                                     -0.1003
                                                                                       (0.0913)
                         - Income 10                                                    -0.0342
                                                                                       (0.0921)
                         - Income 11                                                     0.1229
                                                                                       (0.0917)
                         - Income 12 (top)                                           0.2748***
                                                                                       (0.0884)
 Age                                                                                 0.0059***
                                                                                       (0.0007)

 Year Dummies                                   No            Yes          Yes          Yes
 State Specific time trends                     No            No           Yes          Yes

 R-sq                                          0.0119       0.0176       0.0219        0.0672
 No. of States                                   44           44           44            44
 No. of Years                                    15           15           15            15
 No Obs.                                       17401        17401        17401         17401
Notes: See appendix B.
                                    Table 3
How Beliefs about Helping the Poor vary with Luck; controlling for GDP per capita
  Ordered Logit Regressions; United States General Social Surveys: 1983-2004
      Dependent variable:
                                      (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)
                   Help Poor-R


 Luck                                         -3.14e-04     -3.1e-04    -3.91e-04    -5.74e-04**
                                              (2.69e-04)   (2.92e-04)   (2.89e-04)    (2.79e-04)
 GDP per capita (US$ 2000)                   2.21e-05***    1.37e-05    -6.19e-06     -7.98e-06
                                              (5.07e-06)   (1.26e-05)   (2.46e-05)    (2.44e-05)
 Marital Status          - Widowed                                                       0.0838
                                                                                       (0.0751)
                         - Divorced                                                    -0.0845*
                                                                                       (0.0495)
                         - Separated                                                  -0.276***
                                                                                       (0.0907)
                         - Never Married                                                -0.0512
                                                                                       (0.0346)
 Female                                                                               -0.255***
                                                                                       (0.0292)
 Personal Income         - Income 2                                                    -0.483**
                                                                                       (0.1903)
                         - Income 3                                                  -0.5493***
                                                                                         (0.18)
                         - Income 4                                                  -0.7106***
                                                                                       (0.2069)
                         - Income 5                                                  -0.6493***
                                                                                       (0.2066)
                         - Income 6                                                   -0.589***
                                                                                       (0.2027)
                         - Income 7                                                   -0.4244**
                                                                                        (0.219)
                         - Income 8                                                     -0.2876
                                                                                       (0.1937)
                         - Income 9                                                     -0.1644
                                                                                       (0.1944)
                         - Income 10                                                    -0.0683
                                                                                       (0.1894)
                         - Income 11                                                     0.1712
                                                                                       (0.1934)
                         - Income 12 (top)                                               0.4121
                                                                                       (0.1909)
 Age                                                                                   0.0093**
                                                                                       (0.0011)
 Year Dummies                                   No            Yes          Yes            Yes
 State Specific time trends                     No            No           Yes            Yes
 Pseudo R-sq                                   0.0049       0.0062       0.0077        0.0240
 No. of States                                   44           44           44            44
 No. of Years                                    15           15           15            15
 No Obs.                                       17,401       17,401       17,401        17,401
Notes: See appendix B.
                                    Table 4
How Beliefs about Helping the Poor vary with Luck; controlling for GDP per capita
   Robust OLS Regressions; United States General Social Surveys: 1983-2004
Dependent variable: Help Poor-R       (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)


 Luck                                       -2.2e-04*   -2.11e-04    -2.46e-04    -3.58e-04*
                                           (1.23e-04)   (1.58e-04)   (2.19e-04)   (2.16e-04)
 GDP per capita (US$ 2000)                1.43e-05***    8.79e-06    -4.95e-06     -5.46e-06
                                           (2.31e-06)   (8.10e-06)   (1.36e-05)   (1.34e-05)
 Marital Status       - Widowed                                                       0.0534
                                                                                    (0.0375)
                      - Divorced                                                    -0.0527*
                                                                                    (0.0283)
                      - Separated                                                 -0.1824***
                                                                                    (0.0506)
                      - Never Married                                                -0.0317
                                                                                    (0.0266)
 Female                                                                           -0.1596***
                                                                                    (0.0187)
 Personal Income      - Income 2                                                   -0.316***
                                                                                    (0.1111)
                      - Income 3                                                  -0.3589***
                                                                                    (0.1100)
                      - Income 4                                                  -0.4589***
                                                                                    (0.1080)
                      - Income 5                                                  -0.4187***
                                                                                    (0.1061)
                      - Income 6                                                  -0.3761***
                                                                                    (0.1081)
                      - Income 7                                                   -0.2731**
                                                                                    (0.1065)
                      - Income 8                                                    -0.1822*
                                                                                    (0.0999)
                      - Income 9                                                     -0.1003
                                                                                    (0.0913)
                      - Income 10                                                    -0.0342
                                                                                    (0.0921)
                      - Income 11                                                     0.1229
                                                                                    (0.0917)
                      - Income 12 (top)                                           0.2748***
                                                                                    (0.0884)
 Age                                                                              0.0059***
                                                                                    (0.0007)
 Year Dummies                                No            Yes          Yes            Yes
 State Specific time trends                  No            No           Yes            Yes
 R-sq                                       0.0119       0.0176       0.0219       0.0672
 No. of States                                44           44           44           44
 No. of Years                                 15           15           15           15
 No Obs.                                    17401        17401        17401         17401
Notes: See appendix B.
                                          Table A
                       Summary Statistics for the Aggregate Variables
                                                                 Std.
              Variable                      Obs.         Mean             Min.       Max.
                                                                 Dev.

Help Poor-R                              Total= 17,401   2.90     1.16       1         5
                         - between               n=95             0.28       2       3.82
                         - within       T-bar= 183.168            1.16     0.55      5.90


Oil Price                                Total= 17,401   22.47    8.54    11.27      40.16
                         - between               n=95             6.87    14.61      38.25
                         - within       T-bar= 183.168            7.91     9.30      39.83


Oil Share                                Total= 17,401   1.33     3.75      0        31.21
                         - between               n=95             5.43      0        26.67
                         - within       T-bar= 183.168            2.94    -5.26      31.19


Luck(s,t)=Oil Price(t)*Oil Share(s,t)    Total= 17,401   34.62   116.93     0       1248.16
                       - between                 n=95            151.21     0        837.34
                       - within         T-bar= 183.168            96.76   -425.55   1250.46
