NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DID ECONOMICS CAUSE WORLD WAR II?
Robert J. Gordon
Working Paper 14560
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14560

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

This paper is a review article of Tooze (2006) and related literature on the same topic and will appear
in the Journal of Economic History in March, 2009. I am grateful to Joel Mokyr for helpful suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Robert J. Gordon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Did Economics Cause World War II?
Robert J. Gordon
NBER Working Paper No. 14560
December 2008
JEL No. H56,N14,N24,N54,N64,N70,N74,N80,N84
ABSTRACT
Historians have long recognized the role of economic resources and organization in determining the
outcome of World War II: the Nazi economy lacked the economic resources and organization to oppose
the combined might of the U.S., U.K., and U.S.S.R. A minority view is that the Germans were defeated
not by economics, but by Hitler's many strategic and tactical mistakes, of which the most important
was the invasion of the Soviet Union. Compared to this debate about the outcome of the war, there
has been less attention to economics as the cause of World War II.
This is a review article of a new economic history of the Nazi economy by Adam Tooze which cuts
through the debate between economics and Hitler's mistakes as fundamental causes of the outcome.
Instead, Tooze argues that the invasion of the Soviet Union was the inevitable result of Hitler's paranoia
about the land-starved backwardness of German agriculture as contrasted with the raw material and
land resources of America's continent and Britain's empire. The American frontier expansion that
obliterated the native Indians provided Hitler with a explicit precedent, which he often cited, for pushing
aside the native populations in the east to provide land for German Aryan farmers.
Germany's agricultural weakness is summarized by its low land-labor ratio, but Poland and the Ukraine
had even less land per person. Thus simply acquiring the land to the east could not solve Germany's
problem of low agricultural productivity without removing the native farming populations. Far better
than other histories of the Third Reich, Tooze reveals the shocking details of General Plan Ost, the
uber-holocaust which would have removed, largely through murder, as many as 45 million people
from eastern agricultural land. Tooze, like the Nazis before him, fails to emphasize that the solution
to Germany's agricultural problem was not acquiring more land for the existing German farm population,
but rather by raising the land-labor ratio by making the existing German land more efficient, mechanizing
agriculture and encouraging rural-to-urban migration within Germany.

Robert J. Gordon
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
rjg@northwestern.edu

Introduction
Historians have long recognized the role of economic resources and
organization in determining the outcome of World War II. There was never any
doubt that the economic resources of the U. S. overwhelmed those of Japan, and
regarding the war against Germany a powerful case assembled by Harrison
(1998), Overy (1994), and many others has argued that the Nazi economy lacked
the economic resources and organization to oppose the combined might of the
U. S., U. K., and U. S. S. R.
A minority view disputes the primacy of economics in defeating the
Germans by pointing to Hitler’s many strategic and tactical mistakes, of which
the most important was invading the U. S. S. R. Among the more persuasive
counterfactual scenarios about the German war as a whole are those developed
by Alexander (2000) and Tsouras (2006), while many other books examine
alternative outcomes of particular phases of the war, e.g., a hypothetical German
invasion of the U. K. or defeat of the Allies at D‐Day. A strong case for the
legitimacy of counterfactual history is made by Ferguson (1999).
While the role of economics and of Hitler’s mistakes in determining the
war’s outcome has been examined extensively, less attention has been paid to
economics as a cause of German aggression. This review article of Adam Tooze’s
(2006) ambitious economic history of the Nazi regime finds the author’s most
significant contribution to lie in his intricate account of the prewar weakness of
the German agricultural sector as a motivation for Hitler’s determination to
expand to the east. Hitler was paranoid about the land‐starved backwardness of
German agriculture as contrasted with the raw material and land resources of
America’s continent and Britain’s empire. ”Land hunger was one, if not the
most important impulse” (p. 166). The American frontier expansion that

1

obliterated the native Indians provided Hitler with a explicit precedent, which he
often cited, for pushing aside the native populations in the east to provide land
for German Aryan farmers. “It was the last great land‐grab in the long and
bloody history of European colonialism” (p. 462). Tooze devotes far more
attention than other recent histories of the Third Reich to the ultimate logical
conclusion of Hitler’s eastern land hunger, the so‐called General Plan Ost that
would have displaced and perhaps ultimately killed as many as 40 million
eastern Europeans to provide the Germans with the land that Hitler coveted.
Tooze’s preface proclaims a grand ambition for the book, to bring to the
understanding of Nazi economics the same major leap forward that he claims
has been achieved in political history over the last two decades. But the book’s
achievements accomplish only part of this ambition. Most of what we learn
about the prewar years (1933‐39) repeats what we already knew but now in more
detail. Tooze’s treatment of the war itself, 1939‐45, is more successful and
contains a fascinating set of analyses that enrich our previous ideas about the
conduct and outcome of the war. However, Tooze is not the first to focus on
Germany’s land shortage as a basic cause of war. Barkai makes exactly the same
point: “Hitler projected into the utopic distance a vast agrarian Grossraum that
was to be conquered by the sword, a vision that could not be realized within
German’s frontiers until 1939” (1990, p. 157).

The Pre‐war Years, 1933‐39
What we already knew about the prewar 1930s comes from Barkai (1990)
and Abelshauser (1998), among others, and on the big questions, Tooze reaches
the same conclusions. The German recovery from 25 percent unemployment in
1932 to less than 5 percent by 1936/7 was achieved by a money‐financed fiscal

2

expansion. These authors ask how and when the Nazis “became Keynesians
before Keynes,” when during the same period the Roosevelt New Deal was
failing to bring the US unemployment rate down to single digits. All three
authors trace the idea for credit‐financed expansion back to the previous Weimar
government and to the Nazi Sofortprogramm contained in a 1932 political
manifesto that was “widely circulated in pamphlet form . . . during the campaign
for the July 1932 Reichstag election” (Abelshauser, p. 129).
Tooze confirms previous findings that relatively little of the expansion in
public expenditures took the form of public works like the autobahns, while over
80 percent consisted of spending for rearmament. Abelshauser (1998, p. 169)
calls this “military Keynesianism on a large scale.” The central resource
constraint in the 1930s was foreign exchange, and this shortage led to a byzantine
system of export subsidies and import controls. Why did the regime refuse to
devalue the Reichsmark, particularly in 1936 when most of its neighbors
devalued? The answers suggested by Tooze and his predecessors make little
sense. According to Tooze, the Nazi regime feared the consequences of
devaluation for servicing its large foreign debt, but why could the Nazis not have
devalued in 1933‐34 and repudiated that foreign debt (after all, they imposed a
moratorium on foreign debt repayment as early as June, 1934)? Did the refusal
to devalue represent a fear of inflation? While this explanation might seem
plausible after the trauma of 1922‐23, it becomes less convincing with the passage
of time as the German economy expanded toward full employment during 1933‐
36 without any significant inflation.
Did private consumption rise in the 1930s or was it squeezed by the
shortage of foreign exchange and the demands of the rearmament program? The
reader searches in vain among Tooze’s many figures and tables for an answer.
There are only scattered comments about particular short time intervals, e.g.
3

there was no growth in consumer goods production between 1934 and 1936 and
a flat level of textiles production between early 1934 and late 1935. But what
about the post‐1933 period as a whole? We must turn to Barkai (Appendix Table
1, text p. 232) to learn that per‐capita real consumption expressed as an index
number was 88 in 1933, 100 in 1936, 108 in 1939, and fell back to 100 in 1942.
Abelshauser’s (1998, Table 4.2) time series of industrial production of consumer
goods is quite similar (100 in 1936, 110 in 1939, and 95 in 1942). Both these
authors contradict the impression provided by Tooze that consumption
stagnated in the 1930s and highlight by their example the frustrating tendency of
Tooze to present data over only a fraction of the relevant number of years.
Evidently the Nazi economy succeeded at least until 1939 in expanding the
production of both guns and butter, or in Abelshauser’s pithy phrase (1998, p.
148) “as much butter as necessary, as many guns as possible.” This residual
increase in consumption is hardly surprising in view of the enormous amount of
initial economic slack in 1933.
The previous literature has emphasized the Nazi policy of holding down
real wages as a contribution to the rapid expansion of employment, the opposite
of the perverse wage‐increasing policies of Roosevelt’s NRA. Indeed, Barkai
shows that the share of German wage income in national product declined from
64 to 59 percent between 1932 and 1936, while the increase in profits was “quite
spectacular” (p. 196). Likewise, Abelshauser (p. 148) reports that the income
share of the bottom half of the income distribution fell from 25 to 18 percent
between 1928 and 1936. But Tooze has nothing to say about the change in the real
wage, only about the low level of the German standard of living as measured by
how many minutes of labor were necessary to purchase everyday items like
cigarettes or coffee (pp. 141‐3). These indicators of relative German poverty are
used by Tooze to suggest that German workers had a standard of living only
4

one‐fourth the level of Americans. He makes no attempt to achieve a
reconciliation with Maddison’s estimates that the ratio of German to US real
GNP per capita, after declining from 72 percent in 1913 to 65 percent in 1928,
jumped to 84 percent in 1938 (see Harrison, 1998, Tables 1.1 and 1.2). Granted
that GNP includes more than consumption, particularly in view of rearmament
expenditure, but the gulf between Tooze’s one‐fourth estimate and Maddison’s
much higher implicit estimate seems too large to bridge.
A major share of Tooze’s prewar analysis is devoted to German
agriculture, in order to support his central point that economics created the
motivation for war. The Nazis’ only perceived solution to inadequate food
production was an eastward expansion to obtain lebensraum by force. The 1933
census revealed that fully 29 percent of German employment was in the
agricultural sector, and that there was great inequality in land holdings. In an
attempt to squeeze more production out of these resources, a set of draconian
price and production controls was put in place in 1933 that ended the free market
in agriculture and extended bureaucratic control “into every field, barnyard, and
milking shed in the country” (p. 187).
The Nazis’ focus on lebensraum was driven by a perceived land shortage.
Germany had only 2.1 hectares per farm worker, compared to 12.8 in the US, 3.8
in the UK, and 2.8 in France (p. 176). Yet both the Nazis and Tooze look at these
facts upside down. The problem was not too little land but rather too many farm
workers. Germany had four times as much agricultural land as Britain that was
cultivated by seven times as many farm workers. A key aspect of economic
development is the movement of farm workers to industrial and service jobs in
the cities. The Nazis failed to see the obvious solution, programs to encourage
the movement of peasants with small land holdings to industrial jobs, which
were plentiful in the full‐employment economy achieved after 1936. And
5

Tooze’s facts on land‐labor ratios previewed the required brutality of lebensraum;
prewar Polish farmers had only 1.8 hectares per farm worker, less than Germany
(p. 176). Simply merging Poland into Germany would not help. Only by
expelling or exterminating every one of the 10 million Polish farmers and then
replacing them with landless German peasants would the combined
German/Polish land‐labor ratio be brought up to the British level. The low
land/labor ratio and the overall level of poverty in the Ukraine compounds the
Polish example.

The 1939‐45 War, the Occupied Countries, and General Plan Ost
The story of the 1939‐45 war is familiar, but Tooze makes significant
contributions by probing deeply into the sources of Germany’s resource
constraints and their strategic consequences. By early 1941 the Germans had
become dependent on raw materials imported from the USSR, and Tooze poses
their central strategic dilemma. Should Germany continue to rely on those
imports or rather invade the USSR, in effect grabbing the resources rather than
paying for them? Once the USSR was conquered, Germany would be ready for a
“battle of the continents,” starting with the oil supplies of the Middle East. One
must ask, as Tooze does not, why the drive to the Middle East for oil supplies
did not take precedence over the invasion of the USSR? Rommel was starved
for supplies in North Africa in 1941‐42, and a diversion to him of only a few of
the panzer divisions allocated to the Russian front would have allowed the
Germans to push past Suez into the oil‐rich Middle East by mid‐1942.
The standard interpretation by Overy (1995) and others is that the
Germans lacked sufficient resources to win the war, and that they bungled the
management of the resources that they possessed. Why did the Americans and

6

Russians produce so much and the Germans produce so little? In Overy’s
version, the Germans failed to appreciate the American technique of mass
production and produced too many variants of weapons at an unnecessarily
high level of quality. Production stagnated until Albert Speer came to the rescue
in his temporary 1942‐44 economic miracle that achieved quantum leaps in
armaments production until that miracle was cut short by Allied bombing.
Indeed, Tooze confirms the conventional wisdom that the Russian production
miracle was largely achieved at a safe distance behind the Urals (p. 588).
Tooze alters the emphasis from mismanagement to the many dimensions
of resource shortages, and his indictment of German mismanagement shifts from
domestic armaments production to the bungled treatment of the resources
available in the western nations conquered in the 1940 Blitz. The Germans had
great hopes that their own resource shortages would be relieved from the
conquered nations, particularly France. But they forgot that incentives matter.
French farmers were demoralized by German confiscation of food and by the
near‐disappearance of energy, both petrol and coal. The French harvest declined
by half between 1938 and 1941. Without food, French coal miners reduced their
work effort and at one point were in “open rebellion”, and Tooze argues that in
no other occupation is production so related to the food intake of workers as in
the coal industry. And without coal Germany’s ongoing shortage of steel was
exacerbated. Stripping the conquered nations of railroad wagons made matters
worse, as did the cruel and abysmal conditions in which slave laborers from
France, Poland, and elsewhere were forced to work in Germany’s armaments
factories. In fact Tooze comes up with the stunning figure of 7 million slave
workers, including USSR prisoners of war, who died from barbaric conditions
who would otherwise have been available to supplement the acute labor
shortages of the Reich.
7

Tooze’s search for the sources of underproduction in the conquered
territories extends to the lack of imported grains and of fertilizer due to the
British blockade. Since the conventional wisdom is that Britain came close to
losing the war as a result of the U‐boat attacks, Tooze deserves credit for
pointing out the converse, that continental agriculture suffered irreparably as the
result of the British blockade, a partial repeat of the food deprivation that
Germany experienced during World War I (Offer, 1989).
Tooze reinforces these points by showing how much more Britain gained
from its alliance with America than Germany gained from its conquered
millions. The initial Congressional Lend‐Lease appropriation in March, 1941 (at
a plausible exchange rate) equaled two full years of domestic German
armaments production. By the end of 1941 the UK had received no less than
5000 aircraft from the US, while Germany had obtained a mere 78 aircraft from
France and the Netherlands. In addition to steel, oil was the binding constraint
on German military advances, and one of the most striking of Tooze’s many
novel comparisons is that in 1942 Britain (despite the u‐boat sinkings) imported
more than five times as much oil from the US as Germany imported from
Romania. British planners displayed “incredulity” that Hitler would have
invaded the USSR with less than a third of the petrol stocks that the British
considered the minimum tolerable limit.
Tooze returns to this theme with even more startling comparisons about
the year 1943, when total US armaments production was 30 times higher than the
contribution of the conquered territories to the Reich, and US shipments to the
UK were four times higher. A critical Lend‐Lease contribution was the fleet of
400,000 Dodge trucks, which carried the Red Army to victory while the Germans
were retreating with their archaic horse‐drawn transport. Resource constraints
also undermined the entire rationale of lebensraum. Yes, the Ukraine had a grain
8

surplus, but it could have been harvested after the Soviets scorched the earth
only by a massive movement of farm machinery from Germany to the Ukraine,
which was beyond the realm of feasibility due to shortages of petrol, not to
mention of the machines themselves.
Tooze’s most original contribution to the economics of World War II is his
detailed account of Germany’s planned über‐holocaust, “General Plan Ost” (GPO),
which continues Tooze’s central theme that Germany was driven to war by a
shortage of agricultural land. Barely mentioned in previous large‐scale histories
of the Third Reich, e.g. Burleigh (2000), GPO was the plan to displace most of the
non‐Germanic residents of Poland, Belorussia, and the Ukraine by German
ethnics who would be invited (or forced) to occupy hundreds of thousands of
square miles of fertile land from which the previous occupants had been
removed. And how would they be removed? The plan implicitly assumed
forced marches to nowhere along which most of the displaced people would die
through “natural wastage” (p. 476). Tooze estimates that the total number of
people forced out would have amounted to an unbelievable 45 million, more
than seven times the number of recorded victims of the holocaust.
Fortunately for the future of Europe, GPO proved to be both strategically
and tactically impossible. The German failure to capture Moscow in December,
1941, and the subsequent Soviet counterattack converted the German invasion
from a triumphant march into a desperate struggle for survival. The tactical
failure was demonstrated in an experimental project in July, 1942, to deport the
entire Polish population of the Zamość region. The number of German troops
per displaced inhabitant turned out to be an infeasibly large number, and tens of
thousands of the inhabitants learned what was happening and fled in advance to
the woods, escaping the round‐up squads of “German police, troops, and
auxiliaries.”
9

The traditional debate about World War II is between economic resources
and Hitler’s mistakes as the ultimate source of Allied victory. For a book on
economic history, Tooze admirably devotes substantial attention to military
strategy and tactics and their interplay with economic resources. Perhaps his
most important insight is that the German logistical system was not equipped to
penetrate beyond 500 km into the USSR, and that Hitler counted on the collapse
of the Red Army before that point was reached. But the Red Army, despite
losing more than 3 million men to prisoner camps and ultimate death in the first
two months, did not collapse.
Tooze attributes the German failure to capture Moscow not to Hitler’s
mistake of diverting Guderian’s panzer divisions south to Kiev in August, 1941,
but rather to fundamental limitations of supply. German fuel trucks consumed
as much fuel in traversing a mere 500 kilometers as the amount of fuel they could
deliver (similarly, for the same reason, Patton’s army ran out of fuel in eastern
France in the fall of 1944). Tooze rightly dismisses planning for Barbarossa as
wishful thinking, and when the Germans failed to take Moscow in 1941, the
entire German economic planning apparatus was thrown into a state of crisis.
Part of the outcome was predetermined on the invasion date of June, 1941;
Germany had mobilized all of its young men for the invasion, with virtually no
one in reserve. The USSR, with double the population, had vast hordes beyond
the Urals who could, and ultimately did, come to the rescue of Mother Russia,
initially in the Moscow counterattack of late 1941 and in the encirclement of the
German Sixth Army at Stalingrad in late 1942.
When Tooze reviews the peacetime years of the 1930s, he tells us mostly
what we already know. But his book deserves high praise for what he teaches us
about the wartime years 1939‐45 themselves. The shortages were endemic; the
harsh treatment of the occupied territories starved them while depriving the
10

Reich of the expected resources; the British blockade had teeth; and the logistical
planning of the 1941 invasion of the USSR was based on absurdly unrealistic
assumptions. Further, lebensraum was no solution to Germany’s inefficient
agricultural economy without a tactically infeasible über‐holocaust. Germany
marched into Russia with 3 million men, 2000 tanks, and 700,000 horses. All
those horses remain a symbol of the economic backwardness that motivated
Germany to go to war and ultimately caused its defeat.

11

REFERENCES
Abelshauser, Werner (1998). “Germany: guns, butter, and economic miracles,”
in Harrison (1998), pp. 122‐76.
Alexander, Bevin (2000). How Hitler Could Have Won World War II: The Fatal
Errors that Led to Nazi Defeat. New York: Three Rivers Press.
Barkai, Avraham (1990). Nazi Economics:
Haven: Yale University Press.

Ideology, Theory, and Policy.

New

Burleigh, Michael (2000). The Third Reich: A New History. New York: Hill and
Wang.
Ferguson, Niall (1999). “Virtual History: Towards a Chaotic Theory of the Past,”
in Niall Ferguson, ed., Virtual History. New York: Basic Books, pp. 1‐90.
Harrison, Mark (1998). The Economics of World War II. Cambridge and New
York: Cambridge University Press,
Offer, Avner (1989). The First World War: An Agrarian Interpretation, Clarendon
Press/Oxford.
Overy, Richard (1995). Why the Allies Won. New York: Norton.
Tooze, Adam (2006). The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of the
Nazi Economy. London and New York, Allen Lane for Penguin.
Tsouras, Peter G., ed. (2006). Hitler Triumphant: Alternate Decisions of World War
II. London: Greenhill Books.

12

