                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INTERNATIONAL TRADE IN USED DURABLE GOODS:
                   THE ENVIRONMENTAL CONSEQUENCES OF NAFTA

                                         Lucas W. Davis
                                         Matthew E. Kahn

                                       Working Paper 14565
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14565


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2008




We are grateful to David Autor, Brian Kovak, Arik Levinson, William Nordhaus, Joe Shapiro, Eric
Verhoogen and seminar participants at the University of Michigan, Boston University, Columbia,
Georgetown, Yale and Harvard for helpful comments. Italo Gutierrez provided excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Lucas W. Davis and Matthew E. Kahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
International Trade in Used Durable Goods: The Environmental Consequences of NAFTA
Lucas W. Davis and Matthew E. Kahn
NBER Working Paper No. 14565
December 2008
JEL No. F18

                                             ABSTRACT

Previous studies of trade and the environment overwhelmingly focus on how trade affects where goods
are produced. However, trade also affects where goods are consumed. In this paper we describe a model
of trade with durable goods and non-homothetic preferences. In autarky, low-quality (used) goods
are relatively inexpensive in high-income countries and free trade causes these goods to be exported
to low-income countries. We then evaluate the environmental consequences of this pattern of trade
using evidence from the North American Free Trade Agreement. Since trade restrictions were eliminated
for used cars in 2005, over 2.5 million used cars have been exported from the United States to Mexico.
Using a unique, vehicle-level dataset, we find that traded vehicles are dirtier than the stock of vehicles
in the United States and cleaner than the stock in Mexico, so trade leads average vehicle emissions
to decrease in both countries. Total greenhouse gas emissions increase, primarily because trade gives
new life to vehicles that otherwise would have been scrapped.


Lucas W. Davis
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
308 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
lwdavis@umich.edu

Matthew E. Kahn
UCLA Institute of the Environment
Department of Economics
Department of Public Policy
Box 951496
La Kretz Hall, Suite 300
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1496
and NBER
mkahn@ioe.ucla.edu
1.     Introduction

       Policy makers and environmentalists have been concerned that free trade

between rich and poor nations encourages dirty factories to locate in the poorer

“pollution haven”. The public health issue is that industrial migration will create local

pollution hot spots in the poor country and that this will exacerbate environmental

justice and equity challenges as ambient air quality improves in the rich importing

country and is degraded in the poor exporting country.

       Today, as climate change has become the pre‐eminent environmental policy

issue, there is now a new set of policy concerns revolving around the issue of trade and

“carbon leakage”. If a rich nation signs a carbon reduction treaty (i.e some version of the

Kyoto Protocol) while its poorer trading partner does not, then shifts in production of

carbon intensive goods from the rich country to the poor country would allow the rich

country to meet its carbon obligations but the globe’s aggregate emissions would not

decline and might rise. Anticipating this issue, policy makers are proposing complex

“border adjustments” to reflect the expected carbon content of imports and exports

(Orzag 2008).

       In both of these trade and the environment policy discussions, the focus has been

on how trade affects where goods are produced and the environmental consequences of

this trade. But, trade also affects where goods are consumed. Trade affects prices and

consumer choice sets and thus changes the type and quality of goods that are consumed,

potentially with serious implications both for local ambient pollution levels and for

aggregate greenhouse gas emissions.

       In this paper we use theory and empirical evidence to evaluate the

environmental implications of free trade in used durable goods between a rich nation

and a poorer trading partner. In our model preferences are non‐homothetic such that

demand for good quality is increasing in income. In autarky, low‐quality (used) goods

are relatively inexpensive in high‐income countries and free trade causes these goods to

be exported to low‐income countries. This result is consistent with a widely‐recognized


                                            2
but seldom studied pattern that high‐income countries export large quantities of used

durable goods to low‐income countries.

       Both countries enjoy large gains from trade. However, our model also highlights

several mechanisms by which trade impacts the environment. These external costs are

potentially very important because of the central role of energy‐using durable goods in

producing local and global emissions. The model implies that the direct effect of trade is

to increase the number of used goods in low‐income countries and decrease the number

of used goods in high‐income countries. Trade also affects the composition, or mix of

goods that is consumed in each country. How average emissions change in both

countries depends on how the environmental characteristics of traded goods compare to

the existing stock.

       We apply this framework to the deregulation of the North American market for

used cars and trucks following the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). In

2005, Mexico eliminated trade restrictions on all 10‐15 year‐old vehicles. This

represented a dramatic break from the previous policy that prohibited entry for all used

vehicles except for certain vehicles used in agriculture. Consistent with the predictions

of our model, we document that between 2005 and 2008 over 2.5 million used cars and

trucks were exported from the United States to Mexico.

       To evaluate the environmental consequences of this trade pattern, we assemble

the most comprehensive dataset ever compiled on North American trade in used

vehicles and vehicle emissions. Our dataset allows us to identify, at the vehicle level

(using VIN numbers), which vehicles were traded as a result of trade liberalization. The

results show that traded vehicles are higher‐emitting than the stock of vehicles in the

United States, but lower‐emitting than the stock of vehicles in Mexico. As a result, trade

has led to a decrease in average emissions in both countries.1

       Total greenhouse gas emissions increase, primarily because trade gives new life

to vehicles that otherwise would have been scrapped. Although trade led to no

1This is similar to a result from Feenstra and Hanson (1997) that capital flows from North to
South can increase the average capital intensity in both countries.

                                             3
discernible decrease in the number of vehicles in circulation in the United States, it led to

a large increase in the number of vehicles in Mexico. Over the long‐run this scale effect is

exacerbated by differences in vehicle retirement rates between the two countries. As

predicted by our model, we document that vehicle retirement rates are substantially

lower in Mexico and we show that this can have a large impact on lifetime carbon

emissions from vehicles.

       Previous studies of trade and the environment have not emphasized the role of

durable goods. Grossman and Krueger (1993), Antweiler, Copeland and Taylor (2001),

Copeland and Taylor (2003), and Levinson and Taylor (2008) focus on the effect of trade

on the location of production. For example, Copeland and Taylor (2003) find that trade

concentrates the production of dirty capital‐intensive goods in high‐income countries

where goods are produced more cleanly, potentially leading to lower overall emissions

levels. With durable goods, how and where goods are consumed is potentially even

more important than how and where they are produced. For example, only 7% of the

total lifetime carbon emissions for vehicles come from vehicle materials production and

assembly. The remaining 93% of carbon emissions come from fuel usage.2

       Another important feature of our analysis which distinguishes it from much

previous work is our focus on both local and global pollutants. The leading empirical

studies in the trade and environment literature have emphasized effects on local

pollutants such as sulfur dioxide in judging the consequences of trade (see, e.g.,

Antweiler, Copeland and Taylor 2001 and Copeland and Taylor 2003). We agree that

local pollutants are important, but given the paramount importance of the issue of

climate change it is also important to investigate how free trade affects this global

environmental criterion. With global pollutants the location of consumption is

irrelevant, but the magnitude of lifetime consumption is not. As a result, policies aimed

at reducing greenhouse gas emissions may not achieve aggregate gains when fuel

inefficient durable goods can be traded.


2These estimates are from Massachusetts Institute of Technology Energy Laboratory (2000) based
on a total lifetime driving distance of 300,000 kilometers.

                                              4
2         The Environmental Consequences of Trade in Used Durable Goods

          This section describes a model of trade in used durable goods. In section 2.1, we

demonstrate that if demand for good quality is increasing in income then free trade will

lead old durable goods to be exported from high‐income countries to low‐income

countries. Section 2.2 shows how trade affects the choice set in each country, and argues

that the effect of trade on average quality in each county is ambiguous. Finally in section

2.3, we examine the environmental consequences of this trade pattern. Older goods tend

to emit higher levels of local and global pollutants. As a result, trade in used durables

may have a large impact on environmental quality in both importing and exporting

countries.

2.1       Non‐Homothetic Preferences and Gains to Trade

          Suppose preferences are non‐homothetic such that demand for good quality is

increasing in income.3 For constant prices, countries consume an increasing fraction of

high‐quality (new) goods as income increases. Figure 1b shows that in the relevant case,

the income expansion path bends toward new goods and away from old goods.

      Figure 1a: Homothetic Preferences           Figure 1b: Non‐Homothetic Preferences




3Previous studies of trade with non‐homothetic preferences have not focused on durable goods.
Flam and Helpman (1987), Stokey (1991), and Matsuyama (2000) adopt non‐homothetic
preferences in the context of the Ricardian trade model, with low‐income countries having a
comparative advantage in producing low‐quality goods. It is difficult to incorporate durable
goods into this framework because used goods are not produced directly so a country cannot,
e.g., have a comparative advantage in producing used durable goods.

                                              5
       This framework implicitly assumes a vertical model of quality. Durable goods

are differentiated products described by a vector of different utility‐bearing attributes

(Rosen, 1974). We are assuming, however, that these attributes can be mapped into a

single measure of quality that is consistent across countries. The vertical model provides

an important starting point for describing the trade pattern between rich and poor

countries.

       Consider the case in which durable goods have a lifespan of two periods. Goods

are new in the first period and then old in the second period. If new goods are

purchased at a constant rate, there will be a fixed proportion of new and old goods. In

autarky old goods will be relatively inexpensive in the high‐income country and

relatively expensive in the low‐income country. This can be seen graphically in figure 2,

with the fixed proportion of new and old goods represented by a 45‐degree line.

                         Figure 2: Equilibrium Prices in Autarky




       With non‐homothetic preferences a country would like to consume relatively

more new goods as income increases. 4 When the proportion of new and old goods is

fixed, however, relative prices must change to clear the market. In particular, as income

4Urban economists have noted a “filtering” pattern with respect to long‐lived houses. New
houses tend to be owned by high‐income households but over time neighborhoods with an older
housing stock tend to attract lower‐income households. See Brueckner and Rosenthal (2008) for
details.


                                             6
increases, old goods must become relatively less expensive in order to maintain equal

demand for both quality levels.

       When the market is opened to trade in new goods, prices of new goods equalize

but the prices of old goods continue to adjust to maintain equal demand for both quality

levels in both countries. As durable goods age, they decrease in price more quickly in

the high‐income country. When, in addition, the market is opened to trade in old goods,

old goods are exported from the high‐income country to the low‐income country. Trade

expands until the price of old goods equalizes as in the original figure 1b.

       Both countries gain from trade. The high‐income country, with its high

willingness‐to‐pay for quality, is able to consume a high proportion of new goods. As

these goods depreciate in quality, trade provides an outlet for the high‐income country

to sell their old goods. The low‐income country uses a high proportion of old goods,

purchasing them from the high‐income country where they are relatively less desirable.

Trade continues indefinitely, as goods depreciate in both countries and need to be

replaced.

       Results are similar allowing for endogenous retirement of old goods. In the

baseline model described above, durable goods have a two period lifespan and then are

retired exogenously. However, in autarky the low‐income country has more incentive

than the high‐income country to delay retirement. Old goods are relatively expensive in

the low‐income country, and so when faced with repair costs, agents in the low‐income

country are less likely to retire the good. In the high‐income country, old goods are

relatively cheap, and so when faced with repair costs, the agents are more likely to retire

the good. This differential retirement mitigates the compositional mismatch across

countries, increasing the relative share of old goods in the low‐income country and the

relative share of new goods in the high‐income country.




                                             7
2.2    Extending the Model to Allow for a Continuum of Quality Levels

       With two quality levels (new and old) the effect of trade on quality in each

country is unambiguous – raising average quality in the rich country and lowering

average quality in the low‐income country. However, when one extends the model to

allow for a continuum of quality levels, the effect of trade on quality is ambiguous.

Consider first what happens in the low‐income country. As in Rosen (1974), the

relationship between price (p) and quality (z) is determined by equilibrium interactions

between buyers and sellers. Figure 3 demonstrates how this hedonic price schedule

might shift in response to international trade in used durable goods.

             Figure 3: An Illustration of How Trade in Old Goods Shifts the
                  Hedonic Price Schedule in the Low‐Income Country




       International trade shifts the hedonic price schedule downward, decreasing the

equilibrium prices of older, lower‐quality goods, with the largest price decreases for

very old, very low‐quality goods. Buyers locate at different points along the price

schedule depending on their willingness‐to‐pay for quality. Different buyers within the

low‐income country have different willingness‐to‐pay for quality because of differences




                                            8
in income or other factors. Preferences for quality are described by the buyer’s bid

function, denoted θ, an indifference curve in (p,z) space.

       The figure demonstrates how two different types of buyers respond to the shift

in the hedonic price schedule. Type 1 buyers substitute to higher‐quality goods, walking

up the “quality ladder” in response to the lower price of quality. Type 2 buyers, in

contrast, substitute to lower‐quality goods, responding to the considerably lower prices

for somewhat lower‐quality goods than they were consuming in autarky.

       In the high‐income country the hedonic price schedule shifts in the opposite

direction. Owners of durable goods in the high‐income country recognize that they have

a tradeoff between using their current good, trading it to the low‐income country, or

scrapping it. Trade increases the price of low‐quality goods, leading some buyers to

substitute toward higher quality and others to substitute toward lower‐quality.

       Trade may also change the number of buyers in the market. In the Rosen

framework there are a fixed number of buyers who are assumed to demand a single

good inelastically. However, by shifting the hedonic price schedule, trade may cause

changes along the extensive margin. In the low‐income country, trade decreases the

price of low‐quality goods, potentially making them accessible to buyers who had been

previously priced out of the market. In the high‐income country, trade increases the

price of low‐quality goods, potentially forcing some buyers out of the market. We revisit

these possibilities in the following subsection because they have particular relevance in

the empirical application which follows.

       Overall, the impact of international trade on average quality is ambiguous. In the

low‐income country if there are large changes in the extensive margin, or widespread

substitution away from new durables, then average quality will fall. In contrast, if

enough buyers respond to the decrease in the price of quality by upgrading to higher‐

quality goods, then average quality will rise. Similarly, in the high‐income country, if

there are large changes along the extensive margin or widespread substitution toward

new durables then average quality will rise. However, if enough buyers respond to the

increase in quality by downgrading to lower quality, then average quality will fall.

                                             9
        Implicitly in this section we are assuming that there is limited scope for

producers of new durable goods to respond to competition from old goods.5 We

recognize, however, that changes in the prices of old durable goods will affect pricing

for new durable goods that are close substitutes. This is reflected in the smooth price

gradient after trade in figure 3. We assume, however, that as one moves toward the

high‐end of the quality gradient, this effect attenuates to zero. This is likely to be a

reasonable approximation in the short‐run, where only prices can change. In the long‐

run, however, producers of new durable goods will want to, for example, increase the

quality of new goods in order to differentiate them from old goods available through

trade. Our analysis does not capture these long‐run responses.



2.3    The Environmental Consequences of this Pattern of Trade

       This pattern of trade has important environmental implications because energy‐

using durable goods are a major source of local and global pollutants. This section

discusses the different mechanisms by which trade affects the overall level of emissions.

Following the existing literature on trade and the environment (e.g., Grossman and

Krueger 1993, Copeland and Taylor 2003) we distinguish between scale and

composition, recasting these mechanisms to our framework which emphasizes

consumption rather than production.6




5 For example, trade in used durable goods changes the incentives for forward‐looking firms. As
first articulated by Coase (1972) and more recently analyzed by Esteban and Shum (2007), the
market for used durable goods limits market power for producers. A trade pattern in which used
durable goods are traded from high‐income to low‐income countries will increase the ability of
producers in the high‐income country to exercise market power, and decrease the ability of
producers in the low‐income country to exercise market power. These dynamic effects are
mitigated, however, when there are a relatively large number of firms because each producer
does not internalize the effect current production will have on future profits for other firms.
Trade will also affect the market for new durable goods by changing resale prices, increasing
resale prices in high‐income countries and decreasing resale prices in low‐income countries.
6 A similar distinction between consumption and production is made by McAusland (2008) which

examines theoretically how opposition to environmental regulations varies with whether
pollution is generated by producers or consumers.

                                              10
       The model implies that the direct effect of trade is to increase the number of old

goods in the low‐income country and decrease the number of old goods in the high‐

income country. Changes in relative prices also engender changes in purchases of new

goods, decreasing consumption of new goods in the low‐income country, and increasing

consumption of new goods in the high‐income country. The scale effect is the total

change in the overall number of durable goods in each country.

        In addition, trade affects the composition, or mix of durables in each country.

The model implies that old durable goods will be exported from the high‐income

country to the low‐income country. Because older, low‐quality durable goods also tend

to be high‐emitting, this pattern of trade potentially has important implications for the

environment. How average emissions change in both countries depends on how the

environmental characteristics of traded goods compare to the existing stock.

       Scale and composition effects also depend on changes in the number of agents in

the market. As discussed earlier, trade equalizes the price of quality across countries,

increasing the number of buyers in the low‐income country and decreasing the number

of buyers in the high‐income country. These changes along the extensive margin will

affect composition if these buyers demand a different level of quality than the average

buyer in the market. For example, new entrants in the low‐income country will tend to

demand very low‐quality durable goods. If these goods are also very high‐emitting this

can have large environmental effects.

       Another important factor is intensity of use. Emissions are a function of the

number of durable goods, their emissions levels, and the intensity with which they are

used. If intensity of use varies across countries, trade will affect the total level of

emissions even if the total number of durable goods in use does not change. Income

effects imply that intensity of use will tend to be higher in high‐income countries. If this

is the case, then total intensity of use will decline as durable goods are traded from high‐

income countries to low‐income countries.




                                            11
        For local pollutants, the magnitude of social costs depends not only on the level

of emissions, but also on the location of emissions. One of the important themes in a

recent literature in the atmospheric sciences is that marginal damages from emissions

can vary dramatically across locations. See, e.g., Mauzerall, et al., 2005. One of the most

important factors is the number of people nearby who are exposed to the increase in

ambient pollution levels. Thus, a comprehensive analysis of the social costs from local

pollution would need to measure not only the change in total emissions, but also model

the relationship between emissions and ambient pollution levels, and examine changes

in levels across particular locations.

        We have highlighted the key mechanisms by which trade in used durable goods

will affect the environment. We now turn to a specific empirical application to quantify

the size of these separate effects.



3       Background: The North American Free Trade Agreement

        NAFTA is a good candidate for an empirical study of the environmental

consequences of trade in durable goods for several reasons. First, the volume of trade

within North America is large. Total merchandise trade between the United States and

Mexico in 2006 was $335 billion (WTO, 2007, p.17). This represents a large proportion of

total trade, particularly for Mexico where 84.8% of all exports in 2006 went to the United

States (WTO, 2007, p. 23). Second, the stark difference in income levels between Mexico

and the U.S. make this is a particularly good case for testing the implications of a model

based on non‐homothetic preferences. Third, NAFTA marked a sharp change from

previous policies, allowing us to observe market behavior both with and without trade

restrictions. Fourth, a substantial literature already exists about the environmental

consequences of NAFTA, providing a point of comparison for our analysis.7



7 Previous empirical studies of the effect of NAFTA on the environment have found mixed
results. Working prior to NAFTA, Grossman and Krueger (1993) use a cross‐country regression
to show that ambient levels of sulfur dioxide and particulates increase with per capita GDP at
low levels of GDP, suggesting that NAFTA would improve environmental quality via an overall

                                             12
        We restrict the analysis to cars and trucks. Vehicles are the single largest category

of internationally traded used durable goods, and the most important in terms of

environmental considerations. In the United States, for example, 33.8% of carbon dioxide

emissions are derived from the transportation sector.8 Using a midpoint estimate of the

marginal damage per ton of carbon dioxide ($15, Metcalf 2008), this implies external

costs of approximately $30 billion annually. In addition, in many cities, vehicles are

responsible for a substantial proportion of emissions of local pollutants.9 Moreover,

restricting our analysis to a single class of durable goods allows us to assess

environmental quality using a consistent set of measures.

        NAFTA came into effect January 1, 1994, immediately eliminating tariffs on

many goods and establishing a timetable for tariff reductions on many other goods.

Restrictions for used vehicles imports were immediately eliminated in Canada and the

United States. Mexico did not initially eliminate restrictions but agreed to a timetable

under which restrictions would be eliminated in five phases beginning January 1, 2009

and ending, with complete liberalization, January 1, 2019.10 Gearing up to meet these

changes, Mexican President Vicente Fox surprised many industry insiders by

accelerating the deregulation process, eliminating trade restrictions for a large class of

increase in income. Harbaugh, Levinson, and Wilson (2002) argue that these results are fragile.
Grossman and Krueger use cross‐industry evidence to examine the impact of U.S. tariff rates and
pollution abatement costs on U.S. imports from Mexico, finding no significant effect. Levinson
and Taylor (2008) examine the effect of U.S. environmental regulations on trade with Canada and
Mexico, finding a robust relationship between abatement costs and import levels. For the average
industry, a 1% increase in abatement costs is associated with a .2% increase in net imports from
Mexico.
8 United States Department of Energy, ʺEnergy Outlook 2008ʺ, DOE/EIA‐0383(2008), Table A18,

Carbon Dioxide Emissions by Sector and Source, 2006 and 2030.
9 A large literature documents the social cost of local air pollution (see, e.g., Dockery, et al. 1993,

Pope 1995, Chay and Greenstone 2003, Currie and Neidell 2005, and Chay and Greenstone 2005).
Airborne pollutants have been linked to respiratory infections, chronic respiratory illness and
aggravation of existing cardiovascular disease.
10 Our study is germane to a small literature that examines the determinants of trade restrictions

for used vehicles. Pelletiere and Reinert (2004) find that among 132 countries for which data are
available, 74 have some kind of restrictions on used vehicle imports. Using cross‐country
regressions, Pelletiere and Reinert (2002) and Pelletiere and Reinert (2004) find that the most
significant factor determining used automobile protection is the presence of domestic automobile
production.

                                                  13
used vehicles beginning August 22, 2005. Under the new rules, 10‐15 year old vehicles

could be imported to Mexico virtually tax free. Trade restrictions remained in place for

vehicles less than 10 years old and more than 15 years old. In continuing to restrict the

importation of relatively new vehicles the Mexican government hoped to appease the

powerful Mexican Association of Automobile Distributors (MAAD) and other political

factions within Mexico with a vested interest in new vehicle sales.11

        This removal of restrictions marked a substantial change from previous Mexican

policies which allowed used vehicles to be imported only for agricultural use. During

the following three years over 2.5 million vehicles were imported by Mexico from the

United States. This represents a small fraction of the vehicle stock in the United States

(232 million in 2005 according to R.L. Polk), but represents a substantial fraction of the

vehicle stock in Mexico (22 million in 2005 according to INEGI). The used car import

market that has evolved in response to this policy change is highly decentralized, with

thousands of car dealers and hundreds of thousands of citizens bringing vehicles into

Mexico. An account in the Los Angeles Times describes how Ciudad Juarez, a border

city just south of El Paso, Texas, has become a major point of trade for used vehicles

entering Mexico.12

        This pattern of trade was foreshadowed by Berry, Grilli and López‐de‐Silanes

(1993), “If free trade in used cars is permitted, the relatively poor Mexican consumers

would become a major source of demand for used cars from the US and Canada. This

would substantially drive up the price of used cars and lead wealthier consumers (in all

countries) to trade in their old cars more frequently. In this case a more complicated

trading pattern might emerge, with the increase in North American demand for new

cars coming largely from US and Canadian consumers, while a large portion of Mexican

demand is satisfied by used cars.”



11 Only vehicles produced in the United States and Canada are eligible to be imported. Vehicles
exceeding 4,500 kilograms (e.g. buses and semi trucks) are not eligible. Diesel vehicles are
eligible, but less than 1/5th of 1 percent of all imports during this period were diesel vehicles.
12 Los Angeles Times, “In Mexico, old U.S. Cars Find New Homes” (February 16, 2008).



                                               14
       While these changes were occurring in the North American used car market,

trade policy for new vehicles did not change. Since 1994, NAFTA has allowed duty‐free

trade of new vehicles and new vehicle parts as long as content restrictions are met. In

2005, the most recent year for which data are available, Mexico exported 506,000 new

vehicles to the United States.13 Since 1994, all new vehicles sold in Mexico must meet

U.S. emissions standards so emissions characteristics of new vehicles are similar in both

countries.

       President Fox’s policy remained in place until March 18, 2008, when restrictions

were reinstated for all 11‐15 year old vehicles. Thus, after the change only 10 year old

vehicles could be imported. In addition, the government increased the excise tax on used

vehicles entering Mexico from 3% to 15%. This return to trade restrictions was a political

response to pressure from MAAD, who pointed to alleged decreased sales of new

vehicles, and argued vigorously for trade restrictions, claiming that the change in policy

was needed to, “stop the accelerated conversion of our country into the world’s biggest

automotive garbage dump.”14

       Although this pattern of trade between the United States and Mexico is unusual

because of the high volume of trade, there is much precedent for high‐income countries

exporting used vehicles to lower‐income trading partners. Japan exports vehicles to over

100 different countries, South Korea exports vehicles to Vietnam and Russia, and the

United Kingdom exports vehicles to Ireland.15 Another prominent example of a vehicle

importing country is Peru, where over 80% of the vehicles in circulation were imported




13 See INEGI, Industria Automotriz en México, 2007, Table 3.3.2, Volumen de Las Exportaciones de
Automóviles y Camiones por Continente y País de Destino.
14 Associated Press, “Mexico Bans Imports of Most Used Cars” (March 2, 2008) reports that this

policy change has caused a surge in prices for vehicles that are exactly 10 years old. In 2008
dealers in South Texas reported $500‐$800 premiums for 1998 model vehicles.
15 According to the New Zealand Herald, “Import Age Limit Plan: Car Prices To Soar” (October 16,

2006), over 100 countries “compete” with New Zealand to purchase used cars from Japan.
According to The Korea Herald, “Exports of Used Cars Hit Record in 2007” (April 17, 2008), South
Korea exported over 220,000 used cars and trucks in 2007. See also The Irish Times, “Used Car
Imports from UK hit 50,000 a Year” (July 4, 2007).

                                              15
as used vehicles from the United States and Japan.16 Although these accounts suggest

that the total volume of international trade in used vehicles is large, we are not aware of

any comprehensive measures of global trade. For example, WTO (2007) tracks

“automobile products” but does not distinguish between new and used goods.



4    Empirical Analysis: Scale and Composition

        In section 4.1, we describe the vehicles that were exported from the United States

to Mexico during the first two years after trade deregulation. This provides our measure

of scale, the total number of vehicles on the road. In section 4.2, we compare the traded

vehicles to the stock of vehicles in both countries, characterizing composition. We

compare the vehicle emissions of traded vehicles to the stock of vehicles in both

countries. In section 4.3 we look within vehicle model‐vintage groups. Our dataset

allows us to identify, at the vehicle level (using VIN numbers), which vehicles were

traded as a result of trade liberalization. This degree of detail is crucial because there is

rich heterogeneity across vehicles in emissions levels even among vehicles of the same

model and vintage.

        Our approach emphasizes documenting changes in quantities rather than

changes in prices. Our model implies that free trade will cause prices for used cars to

increase in the United States and decrease in Mexico. Examining prices would be a

valuable test of the model, and would provide indirect evidence about trade flows.

Nonetheless, for several reasons we chose not to pursue this approach. First, the U.S.

used car market is very large, so we did not expect to find large price effects. Moreover,

identification of price changes would be based primarily on changes in prices over time

for vehicles of different vintages, and thus could be difficult to separate from other time‐

varying factors that affect prices. Second, no publicly‐available data exist for used car

prices in Mexico. In a different context, Davis (2008) examines used car prices in


16See (in Spanish) Centro de Investigación y de Asesoría del Transporte Terrestre del Perú, “Cuarto
Informe de Observación Pública: Externalidades Negativas Generadas por la Importación de
Vehículos Usados Sobre la Salud y la Vida de la Población en Perú”, April 2005, for details.

                                                16
newspaper advertisements. However, this analysis is only for Mexico City and relies on

advertised prices which may be a poor proxy for transaction prices. Third, our objective

is to document changes in the quantity of local and global pollutants brought about by

international trade. Given our focus, it is crucial to track the scale and composition of

trade flows.



4.1     The Effect of Trade Deregulation on Scale

        Tables 1 and 2 describe the vehicles exported from the United States to Mexico

between November 2005 and July 2008. These data were collected by the Mexican

Customs Agency a branch of the Mexican Ministry of Finance and represent the

universe of vehicles that were exported during this period. Table 1 describes vehicles by

year traded, vintage and vehicle manufacturer. Table 2 describes the top 10 most traded

models.17 The customs records describe in detail the substantial flow of used vehicles

from the United States to Mexico during this period. Overnight the flow of used vehicles

from the United States to Mexico changed from virtually zero to over 75,000 vehicles per

month. Overall, 2.45 million vehicles were traded during the almost three year period.18

        Newer vehicles are heavily represented among traded vehicles. Vehicles 10‐15

years old were eligible to be traded but 10‐11 year old vehicles were much more often

traded than 14‐15 year old vehicles. Our model predicts the largest price differentials for

very old, very low‐quality vehicles. Trade may be limited, however, by transaction costs.

Even a huge relative price differential on a very old car may not be enough to cover the

travel and administrative costs associated with importing a vehicle.19


17 The most commonly traded vehicle model is the Ford Explorer, a vehicle that fell largely out of
favor with U.S. consumers after a highly‐publicized recall of Firestone tires in August 2000 and
claims that the large number of tread separations observed with these tires might be related to
vehicle design. See Krueger and Mas (2004) for details.
18 Although Central America is a large market for used vehicles from the United States, very few

of these vehicles were likely re‐exported to Central America. Vehicles headed from the United
States to Central America can bypass the expense of legalizing the vehicle in Mexico by shipping
the vehicle by boat, or by driving through Mexico with a temporary permit.
19 The Alchian‐Allen, or “Shipping the Good Apples Out” theorem points out that fixed



                                               17
        The fact that relatively newer vehicles are heavily represented provides

suggestive evidence about what trade in vehicles would look like under different trade

policies. According to NAFTA, the North American market for used vehicles will be

completely deregulated in 2019. Without a household‐level model, it is impossible to

predict what vehicles would tend to be traded under such a policy change. However, the

observed pattern suggests that the policy might lead to substantial trade in vehicles less

than 10 years old.

        Another striking feature of these data is the prevalence of trucks and other large

vehicles. There are several explanations for this pattern. First, this reflects the fact that

only U.S. and Canadian‐produced vehicles were eligible to be imported. In addition, oil

prices in the United States were high during the period 2005‐2008, making these fuel‐

inefficient vehicles relatively desirable in Mexico where gasoline prices are set by

PEMEX, the national petroleum company at less than $2.50 per gallon.20



4.2     The Effect of Trade Deregulation on Composition

        Although scale is clearly important, the environmental impact of trade also

depends critically on the type of vehicles that are traded. The model implies that trade

will cause the price of used goods to equalize, with an ambiguous effect on average

vehicle quality in both countries. In order to examine the emissions characteristics of

traded vehicles we contacted the California and the Illinois Environmental Protection

Agencies to collect vehicle level data on emissions and vehicle attributes. These large

states provided us with data from their used vehicle emissions programs in 2005. For

California, we were provided with emissions records for 7.2 million vehicles that were

tested in 2005 under California’s Smog Check program using an ASM emissions test. For

transportation costs decrease the relative price of high‐quality goods in importing countries,
causing consumption to shift toward these goods. See Alchian and Allen (1964) and Borcherding
and Silberberg (1978) for details.
20 According to the Mexican Energy Information System, the average price per gallon of regular

unleaded gasoline in Mexico was $2.11 in 2005, $2.39 in 2006, $2.40 in 2007, and $2.20 in 2008. As
a point of comparison the average price in the United States in July 2008, according to the
Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, was $3.95.

                                               18
Illinois we were provided with a sample of 835,000 vehicles that were tested in 2005

using an IM240 test. We use these records to estimate average emissions levels for

vehicles of different manufacturers and vintages. For vehicles which were tested

multiple times, we use data on the first vehicle emissions test for each vehicle. In Section

4.3 we return to these multiple tests and are able to test directly if traded vehicles are

more likely to have failed emissions testing.

           Let   denote the average emissions level among all vehicles from manufacturer

j and vintage t. Vehicles produced in 1976 or before are grouped together, and vehicles

produced after 2005 are grouped together, so the set of all vintages, T, includes 1976‐

2005. We focus on all manufacturers for which there were more than 1,000,000 total

registered vehicles in the United States as of 2005. Other vehicle manufacturers are

included in an “other” category.21 Let J denote this set of 30 manufacturers. For the

results reported below, we calculated the             vector using the emissions data from

California, the largest and arguably the most reliable set of emissions measures. We

have also examined results based on emissions factors calculated using data from the

Mexico City Emissions Testing Program and results are qualitatively similar, providing

evidence that our results are not driven by selection of a particular set of emission

factors.

           Composition is measured by comparing the emissions characteristics of traded

vehicles with the emissions characteristics of the stock of vehicles in the United States

and Mexico,

                 Average Emissions of Traded Vehicles
                                                            ,


                 Average Vehicle Emissions in U. S.
                                                        ,




 Our manufacturers include Acura, BMW, Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet, Chrysler, Dodge, Ford,
21

GMC, Honda, Hyundai, Infiniti, Isuzu, Jeep, Kia, Lexus, Lincoln, Mazda, Mercedes‐Benz,
Mercury, Mitsubishi, Nissan/Datsun, Oldsmobile, Plymouth, Pontiac, Saturn, Toyota,
Volkswagen, and Volvo.

                                               19
               Average Vehicle Emissions in Mexico                       .
                                                              ,

        Here       denotes the proportion of traded vehicles of each manufacturer and

vintage, and       and      denote the proportion of the vehicle fleet of each manufacturer

and vintage in the United States and Mexico. We measure the empirical distribution of

vehicles in the United States and Mexico using ancillary datasets. For the United States,

we obtained data from R.L. Polk that describe the distribution of registered vehicles in

the United States as of 2005 by manufacturer and vintage. For Mexico, describing the

distribution of vehicles was more challenging.22 We filed the equivalent of a Freedom of

Information Act request with the Mexican Ministry of Public Safety via the Mexican

Federal Institute for Access to Public Information. In response to our request, we were

provided with a document describing the distribution of vehicles in Mexico by state,

vintage, and manufacturer as of 2008. Similar data for 2005 are not available.

        Table 3 presents the composition results. The table reports mean emission levels

for hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxide, as well as vehicle vintage. The

results imply that NAFTA led to a decrease in average emissions of local pollutants in

both the United States and Mexico. Compared to the stock of vehicles in the United

States, traded vehicles emit higher levels of all three local pollutants. The differences are

substantial, ranging from 6% for carbon monoxide to 20% for nitrogen oxide. Compared

to the stock of vehicles in Mexico, traded vehicles emit lower levels of all three local

pollutants. Again the differences are substantial, ranging from approximately 3% for

nitrogen oxide to 38% for carbon monoxide.23


22 Although vehicle registration is required in all parts of Mexico, registries are maintained at the
state level and the Mexican National Statistics Institute compiles total vehicle counts by state and
year, but not by vintage or manufacturer. Another possibility would be to use commercially‐
available data. R. L. Polk maintains data about registered vehicles in Mexico by vehicle
manufacturer, but not by vintage.
23 The table indicates a clear ordering of vehicles by age. The stock in the United States is

considerably newer than the stock of vehicles in Mexico, with traded vehicles in between. Older
vehicles tend to emit higher levels of emissions because of both vintage effects and age effects,
though engineering studies (e.g. Bishop and Stedman, 2008) have tended to find that vintage
effects are more important. This suggests that these differences in local emission levels are likely

                                                 20
           The table also reports results for miles‐per‐gallon, vehicle weight, number of

cylinders, and engine size.24 Carbon dioxide emissions are proportional to total gasoline

consumption and these measures directly or indirectly measure vehicle fuel‐efficiency.

Traded vehicles are marginally less fuel efficient on average than the stock of vehicles in

both countries. As a result, trade increases fuel efficiency in the United States, and

decreases fuel efficiency in Mexico City. The differences are small. Whereas local

emissions vary across columns by as much as 30‐40%, the differences in miles‐per‐gallon

vary by less than 3%, indicating that composition effects are likely to play a much

smaller role for global pollutants.



4.3        Vehicle‐Level Heterogeneity in Emission Levels

           The previous subsection illustrated that the vehicles exported from the United

States to Mexico were higher‐emitting on average than the stock of vehicles in the

United States and lower‐emitting than the stock in Mexico. Our data, however, allow us

to refine the analysis further. For each vehicle that was emissions tested in California

and Illinois in the year 2005, we know the vehicle identification number (VIN). By

merging these records with the customs records of traded vehicles, we were able to

identify the subset of vehicles that were subsequently exported to Mexico. This

information is crucial for examining changes in composition because even within

vehicles of the same model and vintage there is large heterogeneity in emissions levels.

           In this section we test hypotheses concerning differential emission levels between

U.S. vehicles and vehicles that were not exported to Mexico at the vehicle level. In

particular, we run regressions controlling for manufacturer, model, and vintage fixed

effects,



to be persistent over time.
24 We imputed miles‐per‐gallon for each vehicle using vintage, vehicle weight, cylinders, and

engine size. Using data from the Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, for each vintage 1978‐2005 we estimated a separate regression of miles‐per‐
gallon on weight, cylinders and engine size and then used the estimated coefficients to predict
miles‐per‐gallon for each vehicle in the emissions testing data.

                                               21
                  y            1                              δ   ω    σ     ε.

         We estimate a variety of specifications using as the dependent variable the same

measures of emissions and vehicle characteristics used in the previous subsection. In all

specifications, the coefficient of interest            corresponds to an indicator variable for

whether the vehicle was subsequently exported to Mexico. A positive coefficient

indicates that vehicles exported to Mexico have higher levels of y. We report results

from specifications that control for vintage indicators, δ , as well as specifications that

control for manufacturer/vintage interactions, ω , and even model/vintage interactions,

σ    .25 In this fully interacted specification        describes how y varies compared to other

vehicles of the same model and vintage.

         Table 4 reports coefficients and standard errors corresponding to 36 separate

OLS regressions. Across pollutants and specifications we find evidence that the vehicles

exported to Mexico have higher local emission levels. Columns (3) and (7) report results

with the full set of model/vintage interactions. Compared to other vehicles of the same

model and vintage, traded vehicles have emissions levels that are significantly higher

than vehicles not sent to Mexico. The effect remains in column (4) after controlling for a

quadratic in mileage, indicating higher emissions for exported vehicles even within

vehicles of the same make, vintage, and mileage. We also examine odometer readings as

a separate dependent variable. Controlling for model/vintage interactions, vehicles

exported to Mexico have on average almost 10,000 more miles. Consistent with our

model, these results provide evidence that low‐quality vehicles are disproportionately

desirable in Mexico.

         The table also reports coefficients corresponding to miles‐per‐gallon and other

vehicle characteristics predictive of carbon dioxide emissions. Controlling for vintage,

traded vehicles are less fuel efficient, heavier, with more cylinders, and larger engines

than the stock of vehicles in California. This is consistent with the pattern observed in

25 Model is measured using the 5th digit of the VIN number as assigned by each individual
manufacturer. This classification of model distinguishes between, for example, the Ford Windstar
(a minivan) and the Ford F‐Series (a truck), but does not distinguish, for example, between the
Ford F‐150 and the Ford F‐250.

                                                  22
table 2 that minivans, SUVs, and trucks are heavily represented among traded vehicles.

After controlling for manufacturer/vintage or model/vintage interactions the coefficients

become much smaller.

        Table 5 presents coefficient estimates from additional regressions using as the

dependent variable whether or not the vehicle has failed emissions testing. Vehicles that

emit extremely high levels of pollutants are particularly important for the environment

because it has been shown that these vehicles contribute a large proportion of overall

emissions. In these regressions the dependent variable is an indicator variable for

whether the vehicle failed emissions once, twice, and three or more times, as well as

whether the vehicle was a “gross polluter” once, twice, and three or more times.

According to California law, a “gross polluter” is a vehicle that exceeds twice the

allowable emissions for at least one pollutant. The results indicate that exported vehicles

are more likely to be super‐emitters. The magnitude of the differences is large. For

example, after controlling for model/vintage fixed effects, exported vehicles are over

four times more likely to have failed emissions testing three times, and over five times

more likely to have been declared a gross polluter three or more times. This pattern is

consistent with vehicles being exported to Mexico after they become too expensive to

maintain according to emissions standards. This could also be evidence of differential

asymmetric information, with Mexican buyers less able to identify high‐emitting

“lemons”.

        Overall the results imply that exports are “browner” than the average stock in

the United States. We conclude based on the California and Illinois samples that

exported vehicles tend to be significantly higher‐emitting than other vehicles. This effect

remains after controlling for vintage, manufacturer, and model. Our model implies that

low‐quality vehicles are disproportionately desirable in Mexico, and the trade pattern

reflects this.




                                            23
5      The Behavioral Response: New Vehicle Sales and Vehicle Retirement

       According to our model, trade liberalization causes prices of low‐quality (used)

goods to increase in the high‐income country and decrease in the low‐income country.

In the high‐income country, high‐quality goods (new) goods become relatively less

expensive, and consumption of these goods increases. In addition, because low‐quality

goods have become relatively more expensive, households hold on to them longer, and

one would expect vehicle retirement rates to decrease. See, e.g. Gruenspecht (1982). In

the low‐income country, the results are exactly the opposite. High‐quality (new) goods

become relatively more expensive, and consumption of these goods decreases. Low‐

quality (used) goods become less expensive, and vehicle retirement rates increase. These

changes in behavior are potentially important because they may mitigate the

environmental impact of trade.

       In this section we examine vehicle purchase and retirement behavior using

detailed data from both countries. The section has three main results. First, NAFTA did

not meaningfully affect the number of registered vehicles in the United States. Second,

vehicle retirement rates are substantially lower in Mexico than the United States. Third,

there is little evidence that trade decreased sales of new vehicles in Mexico.



5.1    Vehicle Retirement in the United States

       In this subsection we examine changes in the stock of registered vehicles in the

United States during the period 2003 to 2007. We observe increased exit rates among 10‐

15 year old vehicles during the post‐NAFTA period, but the increase is much smaller

than the flow of vehicles to Mexico. We conclude that most of the vehicles exported to

Mexico during this period were either vehicles that would have been retired otherwise

or vehicles that were already retired (i.e. not registered). This is consistent with our

evidence from Section 4.3 that very low‐quality vehicles are more likely than other

vehicles to be traded.




                                            24
        As a result, the elimination of trade restrictions in Mexico led to little or no

impact on the number of registered vehicles in the United States. This “zero effect” for

scale in the United States is not surprising. The stock of used vehicles in the United

States is large, so increased demand for used vehicles is unlikely to have raised used

vehicle prices more than a few hundred dollars per vehicle. Moreover, the capital cost of

used vehicles is only one part of the costs of operating a vehicle (e.g. maintenance,

insurance, gasoline, etc) and in the United States the elasticity of vehicle ownership with

respect to these costs is likely very low. In short, it is hard to imagine trade leading a

large number of households in the United States to reduce the number of vehicles they

own.

                     Figure 4: Exit Rates by Vehicle Age in the United States
           .15
           .1
           .05
           0




                    2    3   4    5    6   7    8     9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                                    Before NAFTA (10/03 - 10/05)
                                                    After NAFTA (10/05 - 10/07)
                 Source: R.L. Polk & Company.




        Figure 4 plots exit rates by vehicle age in the United States before and after

NAFTA.26 The overall pattern is consistent with previous studies of vehicle retirement


26These data were obtained from R.L. Polk & Company in April 2008. Exit rates were calculated
by calendar year and vehicle age as follows. Let v denote vehicle vintage (e.g. 1991) and let t
denote calendar year. We calculated the exit rate for vehicles age t‐v for year t, as the percentage
change in the number of vehicles of vintage v between year t‐1 and t.

                                                          25
patterns. Annual exit rates increase with vehicle age from less than 2% for vehicles that

are 4‐5 years old to more than 10% for vehicles over 15 years old. The figure reveals

higher exit rates after NAFTA for vehicles 10‐15 years old. Five out of the six differences

are statistically significant at the 1% level. Across vehicle ages, retirement rates tend to

be higher during the post‐NAFTA period, perhaps due to the gasoline price increases

during this period. However, we take the disproportionately large increases among 10‐

15 year old vehicles as evidence of trade with Mexico.

        However, the increase in exit rates for vehicles 10‐15 years old implies only a

small overall decrease in the number of vehicles in the United States. Even without

controlling for the apparent overall increase in exit rates during the post‐NAFTA period,

these results imply only approximately 180,000 additional exits annually among 10‐15

year old vehicles relative to the earlier period. The number of exits is considerably

smaller than the 1,000,000 vehicles per year that were exported annually to Mexico

during this period, suggesting that most of the vehicles that were exported to Mexico

would have been retired otherwise or were drawn from the stock of already retired

vehicles.

        These data underestimate the total number of exits because there is a lag between

when a vehicle exits and when it is removed from the R.L. Polk database.27 Results are

similar, however, when we instead define the post‐NAFTA period as October 2006 to

October 2007, a later period which includes exits both from the October 2006 to October

2007 period and delayed exits from October 2005 to October 2006. Using this

specification the results imply 315,000 additional exits annually among 10‐15 year old

vehicles relative to the earlier period.

27The R. L. Polk data are based on vehicle registrations, and vehicles are registered only once a
year. Thus, for example, if a vehicle is registered in January and then exported in February it will
not disappear from the vehicle registry until the following January. In addition, R.L. Polk allows
for another 6 months past the due date of registration before dropping a vehicle from its
database. As a result, in some cases a vehicle that is exported will not be reflected as “missing”
until 18 months later. Assuming that exports are uniformly distributed across years and months
and assuming that vehicle registrations are uniformly distributed throughout the year (consistent
with our conversations with R. L. Polk), exits October 2005 to October 2006 will include only 25%
of actual exports, whereas exits October 2006 to October 2007 will include 96%.

                                                26
        These results highlight the immense size of the used vehicle market in the United

States. During the period 2003‐2007, 5.9 million vehicles were retired annually in the

United States, 2.1 million vehicles 10‐15 years old. This provides a large potential stock

of vehicles for export, even without dipping into the stock of registered vehicles. A

relatively small fraction of these castoffs can represent a large number of vehicles for a

smaller country like Mexico.



5.2 Differential Vehicle Retirement Rates in the United States and Mexico


        The model implies that retirement rates will be higher in the United States than

Mexico. In autarky, old durable goods are relatively inexpensive in the high‐income

country, so when faced with repair costs, agents are more likely to retire the good. In the

low‐income country, old durable goods are relative expensive, so when faced with

repair costs, agents are less likely to retire the good.

        Figure 5 describes the age distribution of vehicles in both countries. Consistent

with the predictions of the model, vehicles in Mexico tend to be much older. The average

age of vehicles in the United States is 9.4 years compared to 13.5 years in Mexico. The

distribution implies dramatically different vehicle retirement behavior in the two

countries. The implied mean annual exit rate for 10‐30 year old vehicles is 12.2% in the

United States and only 3.8% in Mexico.




                                              27
                         Figure 5: The Age Distribution of Vehicles




               1
               .8
               .6
               .4
               .2
               0




                    0                  10                      20               30
                                                  Age

                                     Registered Vehicles in the United States
                                     Registered Vehicles in Mexico




5.3     Vehicle Sales in Mexico

        Our model implies that the influx of relatively high‐quality used vehicles will

cause households in Mexico to substitute away from new vehicles. Indeed, MAAD has

been a vocal opponent to liberalization, and claims that NAFTA has reduced sales

considerably.28 In this subsection we examine the evidence from new vehicle sales,

finding no evidence of decreased sales. The one possible exception is subcompact car

sales, which indeed drop during the post‐NAFTA period, though sales appeared to be in

decline even prior to trade deregulation. Overall, the evidence from new vehicle sales

suggests that the 10‐15 year old used vehicles were not an attractive alternative for most

buyers of new vehicles.




28Recent publications from the Mexican Association of Automobile Distributors describe in detail
the environmental and commercial threats from free trade in used vehicles. See, e.g., “Trade in
Very Old Used Cars: A Challenge for Air Quality” (“El Comercio de Autos Usados de Gran
Antigüedad: Un Reto a la Calidad del Aire en las Cuencas Atmosféricas de la Frontera de EUA y
México”), August 2007. Our study is the first full‐scale attempt to measure empirically the impact
of NAFTA on new vehicle sales.

                                                28
                                              Figure 6. Monthly Sales of New Vehicles in Mexico




                             140
              Monthly Sales (in thousands)
              80          10060       120




                                             2001        2002          2003          2004         2005       2006   2007   2008
                                              Source: INEGI, La Industria Automotriz en México, 2002-2008.




       Figure 6 plots monthly sales of new vehicles in Mexico during the period January

2001 to December 2007, as well as a fitted cubic polynomial in time with intercept at

August 2005 when the market for used vehicles was liberalized. Based on the plot it is

difficult to make strong statements about the impact of trade deregulation on sales.

Overall, vehicle sales post‐NAFTA are similar to sales pre‐NAFTA. There is a

pronounced season pattern to sales, which will be taken into account in the regression

analysis which follows.

       Figure 7 plots monthly sales of new vehicles in Mexico by vehicle category.

Whereas sales of subcompacts decrease steadily after August 2005, sales for

subcompacts, luxury cars, and light trucks and SUVs increase. With their relatively low

quality design and few features, subcompacts are likely the closest substitute to the used

vehicles from the United States, and thus it is not surprising that this category would

have been most affected. Still, we are hesitant to make definitive statements about

causality particularly because the decline in subcompact sales appears to begin even

prior to trade deregulation.




                                                                                      29
                                   Figure 7. Monthly Sales of New Vehicles in Mexico by Vehicle Category


                                                        Subcompact Cars                                                                            Compact Cars
    Monthly Sales (in thousands)




                                                                                               Monthly Sales (in thousands)
                             60




                                                                                                                      30
                        50




                                                                                                                 25
                40




                                                                                                          20
          30




                                                                                                    15
    20




                                                                                               10
                                   2001   2002   2003     2004   2005     2006   2007   2008                                  2001   2002   2003   2004   2005    2006   2007   2008



                                                  Luxury and Sports Cars                                                                      Light Trucks and SUVs
    Monthly Sales (in thousands)




                                                                                               Monthly Sales (in thousands)
                                                                                                                       50
                         6   7




                                                                                                                  40
                    5




                                                                                                           30
              4




                                                                                                     20
         3




                                                                                               10
     2




                                   2001   2002   2003     2004   2005     2006   2007   2008                                  2001   2002   2003   2004   2005    2006   2007   2008


  Source: INEGI, La Industria Automotriz en México, 2002-2008.



                                   Table 6 reports coefficients and standard errors from an analogous regression

analysis. Monthly sales of new vehicles in Mexico (in logs) are regressed on month

indicator variables, a polynomial time trend, and an indicator for after NAFTA. To

control for aggregate changes in demand, we also include the growth rate of GDP

(available quarterly) from the Mexican National Statistics Institute, National System of

Accounts. For second, third, and fourth order polynomials, the coefficient on NAFTA for

total sales is near zero and not statistically significant. The null hypothesis of a 10% drop

in total vehicle sales can be rejected at the 2% level across specifications. For

subcompacts the coefficient is negative and near 5%, but not statistically significant.

Compact and luxury car sales increase in all specifications.

                                   In future work it would be valuable to examine trade’s general equilibrium

model based on structural estimates of household‐level vehicle demand. See, e.g. Berry,

Levinsohn, Pakes (1995), Goldberg (1999), and Bento, Goulder, Jacobsen, and von

Haefen (2008). One potential challenge of estimating such a model in this context is the


                                                                                               30
difficulty of acquiring necessary Mexican data. Structural models of vehicle demand in

the United States have been successful, in part, because researchers have access to

detailed micro‐level datasets like the National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) and the

Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES). There is no dataset in Mexico comparable to the

NHTS. The Mexico equivalent to the CES, the National Survey of Household Income

and Expenditures includes basic household demographics and information about

expenditures on vehicles, vehicle maintenance, vehicle insurance, and vehicle licensing

and fees, but does not include the manufacturer, model, or vintage of household

vehicles.



5.4     An Illustration of How Trade Can Increase Lifetime Carbon Emissions

        In Section 5.1, we presented evidence that indicates that NAFTA had little effect

on the total number of vehicles in circulation in the United States. Section 5.2 examined

the distribution of vehicle age in both countries, finding evidence of dramatically lower

retirement rates in Mexico. Finally, Section 5.3 showed that changes in new vehicle

purchases in Mexico are too small to considerably offset the large influx of vehicles from

the United States. These results together indicate that overall NAFTA is associated with

a substantial net increase in the number of vehicles in circulation. In this section we

evaluate the implications of this increase for lifetime greenhouse gas emissions.

Although our analysis provides much of the information required for these calculations,

these results do require us to make a number of additional assumptions, particularly

about vehicle utilization.29 As a result, we refer to these results as an “illustration” and

these results should be interpreted with caution.

        We consider both short‐run and long‐run thought experiments. For the short‐

run, we examine the change in annual global carbon emissions that results from

increasing the number of vehicles in Mexico by 1,000,000. This corresponds closely with

the annual level of imports during the period 2005‐2008. For the long‐run illustration,

29If the micro data existed, Goldberg’s (1999) structural model of the vehicle ownership decision
and the utilization (miles driven) decision could be used to estimate the social cost of trade.

                                               31
we calculate the lifetime increase in carbon emissions from these vehicles. The long‐run

cumulative impact of trade is particularly important in this context because vehicle

retirement rates in Mexico are low, so these 1,000,000 vehicles continue to be used in

Mexico for many years.

        Short‐run carbon emissions are the product of number of vehicles, number of

miles driven annually, and emissions per mile:

                                                                                            (1)

Scale enters through the number of vehicles, and composition enters emissions per mile.

Long‐run carbon emissions are total lifetime emissions,
                        ∞
                                                                                            (2)


        where λ is the vehicle retirement rate. For λ we use .038, the average annual

retirement rate for vehicles 10‐30 years from section 5.2. For miles driven, we use the

average number of miles driven annually per vehicle in each country. Vehicles in the

United States travel an average of 12,408 miles annually compared to 6,100 miles

annually in Mexico.30 We would have preferred instead to use measures of miles driven

that vary by vehicle model and vintage, but with no vehicle‐level information available

on miles driven in Mexico, this was not possible.

        Table 7 reports the short‐run and long‐run increases in carbon. The impact of one

year of trade is substantial, increasing carbon dioxide emissions by 2.6 million tons

annually. To put these results in some context, using these same methods total annual

emissions of carbon dioxide from vehicles in the United States and Mexico is 1.2 billion

tons and 56 million tons, respectively. Using $15 per ton for the social cost of carbon



30 U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, ʺHighway Statistics
2006ʺ, Section V: Roadway Extent, Characteristics, and Performance, Table VM‐1. No analogous
survey‐based statistic is available for Mexico. However, annual gasoline consumption indicates
that vehicles tend to be used less intensively. Gasoline consumption in Mexico in 2007 totaled 8.6
billion gallons (SIE, 2008). Using average miles per gallon from Table 3, this implies that the
average vehicle in Mexico travels 6,100 miles annually. Vehicles are used less intensively in
Mexico for many reasons including lower income levels, lower quality roads and highways, and
differences in commuting patterns.

                                               32
dioxide following Metcalf (2008), this implies social costs of $39 million. Using $85 per

ton for the social cost of carbon dioxide following Stern (2007), social costs are $219

million. The long‐run results are considerably larger. The total lifetime increase in

carbon dioxide emissions from these vehicles is 67.7 million tons. Total social cost ranges

from $1.02 billion to $5.76 billion depending on the value used for the social cost of

carbon.

          It is important to emphasize that these thought experiments describe trade in

vehicles during only a single 1‐year period. To calculate the total lifetime impact of a

permanent policy change it would be necessary to calculate and take the sum of lifetime

emissions for each successive wave of imports. Moreover, because of the large stock of

vehicles in the United States, it is not unrealistic to believe that trade flows of this

magnitude from the United States to Mexico could continue at this rate over a long

period of time. The stock of vehicles in the United States is approximately 10 times the

stock in Mexico, and a flow of 1,000,000 annually can be maintained simply by

siphoning off a fraction of the vehicles that otherwise would have been scrapped.

          These results provide a valuable preliminary assessment of the total impact of

U.S.‐Mexico trade on carbon dioxide emissions. However, it is important to emphasize

that these numbers are based on several assumptions, many of which can be only

partially verified empirically. First, we are assuming implicitly that prior to driving an

imported used car, Mexicans were generating no carbon dioxide from transportation.

For households substituting from high‐occupancy public transportation, this is a

reasonably accurate approximation. However, for households substituting away from

low‐occupancy public transportation or from shared private vehicles, there will be an

offsetting decrease in vehicle emissions.

          Second, these results describe the social cost from carbon dioxide emissions, but

not the social cost from emissions of local pollutants. There is reason to believe that the

social cost from increased ambient pollution levels could be large relative to the costs

associated with climate change. For example, World Bank (2002) finds that the annual

benefits of a 10 percent reduction in ozone and particulates in Mexico City would be

                                             33
approximately $882 million (in 2006 U.S. dollars). A more comprehensive analysis of the

social costs of trade in used vehicles would track vehicles after they enter Mexico, model

the relationship between emissions and ambient pollution levels, and incorporate the

social costs of the resulting increases.



6      Conclusion

       Wealthy nations demand a range of high‐quality transportation equipment

(trucks, trains, buses, boats, and planes), as well as residential durable goods (air

conditioners, clothes washers, etc), commercial durables (computers, lighting, heating

and cooling equipment, etc) and industrial durables (power generating equipment,

metalworking equipment, construction machinery, etc). These durable goods depreciate

in quality over time. Poorer nations want to purchase similar durable goods but due to

income effects desire lower quality. From a societal perspective, there are gains to trade

from shipping used durable goods from rich countries to poorer countries.

       In this paper we argued that this pattern has large implications for the

environment. As we discuss in the paper, the effect of trade on average and total

emissions depends on the relative magnitude of scale and composition effects. Trade

provides rich countries with an outlet for low‐quality durable goods. Because low‐

quality durables are typically also high‐emitting, this tends to decrease average and total

emissions in rich countries. In poor countries, trade increases the number of durable

goods, but may also improve the quality of the stock. Whether or not this change in

composition is large enough to offset the scale effect depends on the characteristics of

the initial stock of durable goods and other factors.

       In the empirical analysis we focused on the deregulation of the market for used

cars and trucks following NAFTA. Scale effects are immediate and large and magnitude,

with millions of vehicles exported from the United States to Mexico during the first

years of trade. Composition effects are also large. For local pollutants, traded vehicles

have significantly higher emissions than the stock in the United States, and significantly


                                            34
lower emissions than the stock in Mexico. As a result, trade decreased average emissions

of local pollutants in both countries. For carbon dioxide emissions, composition effects

are much smaller, with traded vehicles marginally less fuel‐efficient than the stock in

either country.

       Total emission levels decrease in the United States and increase in Mexico, with

global carbon dioxide emissions increasing. Whereas trade has led to no discernible

decrease in the number of vehicles in circulation in the United States, it has led to a large

increase in the number of vehicles in Mexico. Furthermore, because vehicle retirement

rates are low in Mexico, these vehicles will continue to be used for many years. This

pattern is likely to be the case not just for NAFTA, but for North‐South trade more

generally. Although the magnitude of scale and composition will differ across contexts,

this tendency of durable good lifespans to be increased by trade is likely to be repeated

elsewhere as barriers to trade continue to fall.

       The broader conclusion of our paper is that policymakers in conducting

economic analysis of environmental policies ought to take careful account of the

implications of their policies for trade in used durables. This is particularly important for

global pollutants such as carbon dioxide where domestic policies designed to reduce

emissions can be easily undermined by emissions increases abroad. As a result,

unilateral policies aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions may not achieve

aggregate gains when fuel inefficient vehicles can be traded.

       Our results also have implications for predicting likely unintended consequences

induced by pending United States climate change mitigation legislation. Today,

California is leading an effort to unilaterally reduce its greenhouse gas emissions

through AB32 legislation. Economists have pointed out that “leakage” can undermine

the aggregate benefits of this initiative. Leakage takes place when regulation in one

spatial sector, such as California, leads to migration of polluting activity away from the

regulated area to an unregulated area.




                                             35
       Given that the transportation sector is a major producer of carbon dioxide

emissions, the Congress continues to wrestle with raising fuel economy (CAFE)

standards or raising gasoline taxes. Our results speak directly to the differential

implications of these two policies. If CAFE standards increase sharply, exports of used

vehicles to Mexico will decline. As articulated by Gruenspecht (1982), new vehicle

regulations increase the cost of new vehicles, causing households to delay new car

purchases. This would increase demand for used cars in the United States, bidding up

the price, and leading fewer used cars to be shipped to Mexico.

       In contrast, increasing the gasoline tax would increase exports of used vehicles to

Mexico. A gasoline tax in the United States would make large, fuel inefficient vehicles

relatively more desirable in Mexico. We have shown that it was already the case that

many of the vehicles exported to Mexico between 2005 and 2008 were trucks, minivans,

and SUVs. This pattern would almost certainly be exacerbated by an increase in the

gasoline tax, causing further decreases in emissions in the United States and further

increases in emissions in Mexico. Thus, the broader conclusion of our analysis is that the

composition of trade can change sharply as U.S incentives change.




                                           36
References

Alchian, Armen A. and Allen William R., University Economics. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth,
     1964.
Antweiler, W., Copeland, B. and Taylor, S. “Is Free Trade Good for the Environment?”American
     Economic Review, 2001, 91 (4), 877‐908.
Bento, Antonio M., Larry Goulder, Mark R. Jacobsen, and Roger H. von Haefen, “Distributional
     and Efficiency Impacts of Increased U.S. Gasoline Taxes” American Economic Review,
     forthcoming.
Berry, Steven, Vittorio Grilli and Florencio López‐de‐Silanes, “The Automobile Industry and the
     Mexico‐U.S. Free Trade Agreement” in P. M. Garber, ed., The Mexico‐U.S. Free Trade
     Agreement, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn and Ariel Pakes. “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium”
     Econometrica, 1995, 63(4), 841‐890.
Bishop, Gary A. and Donald H. Stedman, “A Decade of On‐Road Emissions Measurements”
     Environmental Science and Technology, 2008, 42(5), 1651‐1656.
Borcherding, Thomas E. and Eugene Silberberg, “Shipping the Good Apples Out: the Alchian
     and Allen Theorem Reconsidered” Journal of Political Economy, 1978, 86(1), 131‐138.
Brueckner, Jan and Stuart Rosenthal. Gentrification and Neighborhood Housing Cycles: Will
     Americaʹs Future Downtowns Be Rich? Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone. “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality:
     Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession.” Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 2003, 118(3): 1121‐1167.
Chay, Kenneth Y. and Michael Greenstone. “Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the
     Housing Market.” Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113(2): 376‐424.
Coase, Ronald. “Durability and Monopoly” Journal of Law and Economics, 1972, 15(1): 143‐149.
Copeland, Brian R. and M. Scott Taylor, Trade and the Environment: Theory and Evidence. Princeton:
     Princeton University Press, 2003.
Currie, Janet and Matthew Neidell. “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn from
     California’s Recent Experience?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2005, 120(3): 1003‐1030.
Davis, Lucas W. “The Effect of Driving Restrictions on Air Quality in Mexico City” Journal of
     Political Economy, 2008, 116(1), 38‐81.
Dockery, Douglas W., et al. “An Association between Air Pollution and Mortality in six U.S.
     Cities.” The New England Journal of Medicine, 1993, 329: 1753‐1759.
Esteban, Susanna and Matthew Shum. “Durable‐goods Oligopoly with Secondary Markets: The
     Case of Automobiles” RAND Journal of Economics, 2007, 38(2), 332‐354.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, “Foreign Direct Investment and Relative Wages:
     Evidence from Mexico’s Maquiladoras” Journal of International Economics, 1997, 42, 371‐393.
Flam, Harry and Elhanan Helpman, “Vertical Product Differentiation and North‐South Trade”
     American Economic Review, 1987, 77(5), 810‐822.
Gamper‐Rabindran, Shanti, “NAFTA and Environment: What Can the Data Tell Us?” Economic
     Development and Cultural Change, 2006, 605‐633.
Goldberg, P. K. , ‘The Effects of the Corporate Average Fuel Efficiency Standards in the U.S.’,
     Journal of Industrial Economics, 1998, 46, 1–3.
Grossman, G. M., and Alan B. Krueger, “Environmental Impacts of a North American Free Trade
     Agreement” in P. M. Garber, ed., The Mexico‐U. S. Free Trade Agreement, Cambridge, MA:
     MIT Press, 1993.

                                               37
Gruenspecht, Howard, Differentiated Regulation: The Case of Auto Emissions Standards,
     American Economic Review, 1982 72(2), 328‐331.
Harbaugh, William, Arik Levinson, and David Wilson, Re‐examining the Empirical Evidence for
     an Environmental Kuznets Curve.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2002 84(3) 541–51.
Krueger, Alan B. and Alexandre Mas, “Strikes, Scabs, and Tread Separations: Labor Strife and the
     Production of Defective Bridgestone/Firestone Tires.” Journal of Political Economy, 2004,
     112(2), 253‐287.
Levinson, Arik and M. Scott Taylor, “Unmasking The Pollution Haven Effect” International
     Economic Review, 2008, 49(1), 223‐254.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Energy Laboratory “On the Road in 2020: A Lifecycle
     Analysis of New Automobile Technologies” October 2000, MIT EL 00‐003.
Matsuyama, Kiminori, “A Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods under Nonhomothetic
     Preferences: Demand Complementarities, Income Distribution, and North‐South Trade”
     Journal of Political Economy, 2000, 108(6), 1093‐1120.
Mauzerall, Denise L., Babar Sultan, Namsoug Kim and David F. Bradford. ``NOx Emissions from
     Large Point Sources: Variability in Ozone Production, Resulting Health Damages and
     Economic Costs.ʹʹ Atmospheric Environment, 2005, 39: 2851‐2866.
McAusland, Carol. “Trade, Politics, and the Environment: Tailpipe vs. Smokestack.” Journal of
     Environmental Economics and Management, 2008, 55(1), 52‐71.
Metcalf, Gilbert. “A Proposal for a U.S Carbon Tax Swap.” Brookings Institution. Hamilton
     Project Working paper, 2007.
Newey, W. K., and K. D. West. “A Simple, Positive Semi‐definite Heteroskedasticity and
     Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix.” Econometrica, 1987, 55 (3): 703–8.
Orszag, Peter, “Issues in Designing a Cap‐and‐Trade Program for Carbon Dioxide Emissions”
     before the Committee on Ways and Means U.S. House of Representatives, September 18,
     2008.
Pelletiere, Danilo and Kenneth A. Reinart. “The Political Economy of Used Automobile
     Protection in Latin America” World Economy, 2002, 25(7), 1019‐1023.
Pelletiere, Danilo and Kenneth A. Reinart. “Used Automobile Protection and Trade: Gravity and
     Ordered Probit Analysis” Empirical Economics, 2004, 29(4), 737‐751.
Pope, C. Arden, III, et al. “Particulate Air Pollution as a Predictor of Mortality in a Prospective
     Study of U.S. Adults.” American Journal of Respiratory Critical Care Medicine, 1995, 151(3): 669‐
     674.
Rosen, Sherwin. “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
     Competition,” Journal of Political Economy, 1974, 82(1), 34‐55.
Stern, Nicholas. ʺThe Economics of Climate Changeʺ, American Economic Review, 2008, 98(2),. 1‐
     37.
Stokey, Nancy L, “The Volume and Composition of Trade between Rich and Poor Countries”
     Review of Economic Studies, 1991, 58, 63‐80.
World Bank Mexico Air Quality Management Team. 2002. “Improving Air Quality in
     Metropolitan Mexico City: An Economic Valuation.” Policy Research Working Paper no.
     WPS 2785, World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Trade Organization. International Trade Statistics 2007 World Trade Publications: Geneva,
     2007.




                                                 38
                              TABLE 1
                        Descriptive Statistics
   Vehicles Exported from the United States to Mexico 2005‐2008

Total Number of Vehicles                                                 2,454,639

Year Traded (proportion)
     2005                                                                         .16
     2006                                                                         .37
     2007                                                                         .32
     2008                                                                         .15

Vintage
     1991                                                                         .04
     1992                                                                         .06
     1993                                                                         .11
     1994                                                                         .14
     1995                                                                         .19
     1996                                                                         .20
     1997                                                                         .16
     1998                                                                         .10

Vehicle Manufacturer
     Ford                                                                         .33
     Chevrolet                                                                    .17
     Dodge                                                                        .10
     Nissan                                                                       .07
     Jeep                                                                         .06
     Plymouth                                                                     .05
     Mercury                                                                      .04
     GMC                                                                          .03
     Chrysler                                                                     .03
     Pontiac                                                                      .02
     Other                                                                        .10

Note: As described in detail in the text, this table describes cars and trucks exported
from the United States to Mexico between August 2005 and July 2008. These data
were collected by the Mexican Customs Agency, a branch of the Mexican Ministry of
Finance.
                                TABLE 2
                         Top 10 Traded Models
     Vehicles Exported from the United States to Mexico 2005‐2008

Rank           Manufacturer        Model                             Proportion

1              Ford                Explorer (SUV)                              .08
2              Chevrolet           S‐10 (Truck)                                .06
3              Dodge               Caravan (Minivan)                           .05
4              Ford                Ranger (Truck)                              .05
5              Ford                Windstar (Minivan)                          .05
6              Chevrolet           Silverado (Truck)                           .04
7              Ford                F‐150 (Truck)                               .04
8              Plymouth            Voyager (Minivan)                           .03
9              Jeep                Cherokee (SUV)                              .03
10             Ford                Tauras (Car)                                .03

Notes: These data were collected by the Mexican Customs Agency, a branch of the
Ministry of Finance and describe cars and trucks exported from the United States to
Mexico between August 2005 and July 2008.
                                              TABLE 3
   The Effect of Trade Deregulation on the Composition of Vehicles in the United States and Mexico


                                                                                            Traded
                                                                United States               Vehicles                 Mexico
                                                                     (1)                      (2)                     (3)


Local Pollutants:

       Hydrocarbons (parts per million)                               38.9                    43.6                     49.3

       Carbon Monoxide (percent)                                      .137                    .146                     .201

       Nitrogen Oxide (parts per million)                            239.2                    300.4                   310.8

       Vehicle Vintage                                              1996.2                   1995.1                  1994.5


Global Pollutants:

       Miles Per Gallon                                              25.41                    24.75                   25.34

       Vehicle Weight (pounds)                                        3515                    3708                    3462

       Cylinders                                                      5.84                    6.01                     5.75

       Engine Size (liters)                                           3.46                    3.68                     3.44

Note: This table reports means of the variables listed in the row headings for the group listed at the top of the columns. Column
(1) is the stock of vehicles in the United States as of October 2005. Column (2) is the vehicles exported from the United States to
Mexico between August 2005 and July 2008. Column (3) is the stock of vehicles in Mexico as of 2008.
                                                                      TABLE 4
                                             Comparing Exported Vehicles to the Stock in the United States

                                                                         California                                                       Illinois

                                                                                    With Model
                                                                                       Vintage
                                               With       With Make With Model Interactions                              With       With Make With Model
                                              Vintage      Vintage      Vintage    and Quadratic                        Vintage      Vintage      Vintage
                                           Fixed Effects Interactions Interactions   in Mileage                      Fixed Effects Interactions Interactions
                                                (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)                              (5)           (6)          (7)

Local Pollutants:

     Hydrocarbons (in logs)                     .086             .096             .089               .049                 .291             .203              .092
                                               (.004)           (.004)           (.004)             (.004)               (.014)           (.017)            (.022)

     Carbon Monoxide (in logs)                  .104             .084             .062               .023                 .150             .085              .004
                                               (.004)           (.004)           (.004)             (.004)               (.013)           (.017)            (.022)

     Nitrogen Oxide (in logs)                   .135             .075             .067               .014                 .067             .015              .016
                                               (.005)           (.005)           (.005)             (.005)               (.013)           (.016)            (.021)

     Miles on Odometer (1000s)                  9.88            11.20             9.68                                      ‐                ‐                 ‐
                                               (.192)           (.183)           (.179)

Global Pollutants:

     Predicted Miles Per Gallon                 ‐1.53            ‐0.24            0.05                                      ‐                ‐                 ‐
                                               (.020)           (.017)           (.013)

     Vehicle Weight (pounds)                   231.6             53.7             ‐0.7                                      ‐                ‐                 ‐
                                               (3.16)           (2.82)           (2.33)

     Cylinders                                  0.29             ‐0.11           ‐0.06                                      ‐                ‐                 ‐
                                               (.005)           (.004)           (.003)

     Engine Size (liters)                       0.43             ‐0.03           ‐0.04                                      ‐                ‐                 ‐
                                               (.005)           (.003)           (.002)

Note: This table reports coefficients and standard errors corresponding to 1(Exported to Mexico) from 36 separate OLS regressions. The row headings list the dependent
variable used in each regression. The sample includes vehicles with model years 1990‐1998. Local pollutants are measured in logs. All other vehicle characteristics are
measured in levels. Out of 7.2 million vehicles in the California data, 83,095 vehicles were exported. Of the 835,000 vehicles in the Illinois data, 9,731 vehicles were
exported.
                              TABLE 5
       Are Exported Vehicles More Likely to be Super‐Emitters?


                                                                     California
                                                                   Sample With
                                                                   Model Vintage
                                                                    Interactions

1(Failed Emissions Test Once)                                             1.20
                                                                         (.013)

1(Failed Emissions Test Twice)                                            3.04
                                                                         (.053)

1(Failed Emissions Test Three or More Times)                              4.55
                                                                         (.217)

1(Gross Polluter Once)                                                    1.22
                                                                         (.025)

1(Gross Polluter Twice)                                                   3.18
                                                                         (.109)

1(Gross Polluter Three or More Times)                                     5.45
                                                                         (.514)

Note: This table reports results from 6 separate OLS regressions. The row headings
list the dependent variable used in each regression. In each row we report how
many times more likely it is for an exported vehicle to be in each category. For
example, controlling for model vintage interactions, exported vehicles are 3.04 times
more likely to have failed emissions testing twice. The sample includes all vehicles in
the California dataset with model years 1990‐1998.
                                                                    TABLE 6
                                                           New Vehicle Sales in Mexico




                                                                 Total           Subcompact             Compact          Luxury and        Trucks and
                                                                Vehicles            Cars                  Cars           Sports Cars          SUVs



Second‐Order Polynomial Time Trend                                .018                 ‐.047               .088              .180               .031
                                                                 (.032)               (.052)              (.068)            (.085)             (.067)
Third‐Order Polynomial Time Trend                                 ‐.015                ‐.045               .053              .197               ‐.054
                                                                 (.033)               (.055)              (.064)            (.082)             (.054)

Fourth‐Order Polynomial Time Trend                                ‐.019                ‐.044               .048              .196               ‐.061
                                                                 (.033)               (.056)              (.064)            (.082)             (.054)


Note: This table reports estimates that correspond to 15 separate OLS regressions. The dependent variable is monthly sales of new vehicles in Mexico (in
logs) from INEGI, La Industria Automotriz en México, 2002‐2008 for total vehicles or for different vehicle segments as indicated in the column headings.
The table reports coefficients and standard errors for 1(NAFTA) , an indicator variable for the period after the liberalization of the used car market in
August 2005. Specifications include flexible polynomial time trends as indicated in the row headings as well as the growth rate of GDP. In accordance with
findings from standard diagnostic tests of serial correlation, reported standard errors are estimated following Newey and West (1987) with a 1‐month lag.
                                               TABLE 7
                     An Illustration of How Trade Can Increase Lifetime Emissions

                                                                           Short‐Run                 Long‐Run



Carbon Dioxide (Millions of Tons)                                                2.6                    67.7

Social Cost (Millions of Dollars)
              $15 per ton of C02 (Metcalf, 2008)                                $39                   $1,016
              $85 per ton of C02 (Stern, 2007)                                  $219                  $5,758

Note: This table describes the short‐run (1 year) and long‐run (lifetime) increase in carbon emissions associated with
Mexico importing 1,000,000 vehicles from the United States. For details see section 5.4.
