                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        SOVEREIGN WEALTH FUNDS:
        STYLIZED FACTS ABOUT THEIR DETERMINANTS AND GOVERNANCE

                                          Joshua Aizenman
                                            Reuven Glick

                                        Working Paper 14562
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14562


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008




A previous draft of this paper was presented at the conference on “Sovereign Wealth Funds in an Evolving
Global Financial System” sponsored by the Australia National University Centre for Applied Macroeconomic
Analysis, together with the Lowy Institute for International Policy, in Sydney, September 25-26, 2008.
We thank Prasanna Gai for comments and Andrew Cohn for research assistance. The views expressed
below do not represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, or the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Joshua Aizenman and Reuven Glick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Sovereign Wealth Funds: Stylized Facts about their Determinants and Governance
Joshua Aizenman and Reuven Glick
NBER Working Paper No. 14562
December 2008
JEL No. E52,E58,F15,F3

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper presents statistical analysis supporting stylized facts about sovereign wealth funds (SWFs).
It discusses the forces leading to the growth of SWFs, including the role of fuel exports and ongoing
current account surpluses, and large hoarding of international reserves. It analyzes the degree to which
measures of SWF governance and transparency compare with national norms of behavior. We provide
evidence that many countries with SWFs are characterized by effective governance, but weak democratic
institutions, as compared to other nonindustrial countries. We also present a model with which we
compare the optimal degree of diversification abroad by a central bank versus that of a sovereign wealth
fund. We show that if the central bank manages its foreign assets with the objective of reducing the
probability of sudden stops, it will place a high weight on the downside risk of holding risky assets
abroad and will tend to hold primarily safe foreign assets. In contrast, if the sovereign wealth fund,
acting on behalf of the Treasury, maximizes the expected utility of a representative domestic agent,
it will opt for relatively greater holding of more risky foreign assets. We discuss how the degree of
a country's transparency may affect the size of the foreign asset base entrusted to a wealth fund's management,
and show that, for relatively low levels of public foreign assets, assigning portfolio management independence
to the central bank may be advantageous. However, for a large enough foreign asset base, the opportunity
cost associated with the limited portfolio diversification of the central bank induces authorities to establish
a wealth fund in pursuit of higher returns.


Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics; E2
1156 High St.
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@ucsc.edu

Reuven Glick
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
reuven.Glick@sf.frb.org
1. Introduction

        Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) are saving funds controlled by sovereign governments

that hold and manage foreign assets. Private analysts put current sovereign wealth fund assets in

the range of $2 to 3 trillion or even higher.1 This amount is projected to grow to as much as $13

trillion in the next ten years, an amount larger than the current global stock of foreign reserves of

about $6 trillion.2 While not a new phenomenon, the recent activities and projected growth of

SWFs have stirred debate about the extent to which their size may allow them to affect financial

markets and their policies may be driven by non-economic considerations.

        As an increasing share of the foreign asset holdings of SWFs shift from government debt

obligations to private equities, concerns also have arisen about how institutions in the “investing”

and “receiving” countries may need to adapt. Much discussion has been devoted to the need for

individual SWFs to be more transparent about their investment approach, by providing more

information on the type and amounts of assets they hold, and about their governance structure,

by clarifying how decisions are made and monitored.

        This paper gives an overview of the ongoing debate about the expanding role of SWFs in

international financial markets. It discusses the forces leading to the growth of SWFs and

provides statistical analysis supporting stylized facts about their determinants. It also analyzes

the degree to which measures of the governance and transparency of individual SWFs compare


1
  Ziemba (2008) estimates SWF assets amounted to around $2 trillion at the end of 2007. Lyons (2007) and Jen
(2007) give figures of roughly $2.2 and $2.5 trillion, respecitvely. Truman (2008) estimates that SWFs managed just
under $3 trillion at the end of 2007 (he also identifies another $2.3 billion under management by sovereign pension
funds). Definitional issues tend to account for most of the divergence in estimates. For example, Truman includes
investment funds managed by monetary authorities in Saudi Arabia, Hong Kong, and Russia. Ziemba excludes these
funds as well as SWFs who primarily hold domestic assets (e.g., Singapore’s Temasek and Malaysia’s Khazanah
Fund). Based on public ownership asset data, Balding (2008) suggests that sovereign wealth funds manage much
less than any of the numbers above; however, he ignores assets handled by external fund managers.
2
  Jen (2007) projects global SWF assets will total $12 trillion in 2015; the IMF Survey (March 4, 2008) projects an
increase to $8-13 trillion by 2013. Lyons (2007) projects a total of $13 trillion by 2017.


                                                        1
with national and global norms of behavior. In addition, the paper discusses how expansion of

asset holdings of SWFs may affect the level of official reserve holdings. The paper concludes

with discussion of the implications of growing SWFs for international financial markets.


2. Reasons for the Growth of SWFs

       SWFs have become an important class of investors in terms of the size of assets under

sovereign control. How do they compare to other pools of global investment? As shown in

Figure 1, SWF asset holdings now amount to much less than the funds under management by

mutual funds, pension funds, insurance companies, $20-30 trillion each, and less than the $6

trillion in central bank foreign reserve holdings (including $1.8 trillion by China). But they are

more than the $1.9 trillion under management by hedge funds and almost $1 trillion by private

equity groups.

       SWFS generally fall into two categories according to the source of their foreign exchange

assets. Commodity SWFs are funded by commodity exports, either owned or taxed by

government (e.g. the Gulf States, Norway, Russia). They have been established for various

purposes, including stabilization of fiscal revenues, management of inter-generational savings,

and sterilization of the effects of balance of payments inflows on domestic inflation. Non-

commodity SWFs are funded typically by the transfer of assets from official foreign exchange

reserves (e.g. China, other Asia countries). Current estimates suggest that funds derived from oil

and gas export revenues account for some two thirds of the total assets held by SWFs, with the

rest consisting of funds mainly controlled by Asian surplus exporters.

       The growth of SWFs may be viewed as a consequence of countries running persistent

current account surpluses and accumulating net foreign assets. SWFs arise as a by-product of




                                                 2
these current account surpluses in circumstances where sovereign governments choose to retain

control of the foreign assets acquired.

       There are several reasons for the accumulation of net foreign assets by sovereigns and the

resulting growth of sovereign wealth funds. First, the recent commodity price boom has swelled

the sovereign asset holdings of commodity-exporting countries where the public sector controls

commodity exports or heavily taxes the revenues earned by private commodity exporters. Earlier

commodity price booms vividly illustrate the adverse effect on competitiveness of domestic

inflation and large real appreciations induced by using these windfall gains for domestic

expenditures, particularly when the gains are transitory. For example, the windfall gains

associated with the sharp rise in the price of oil in 1973–1974 induced oil-exporting countries to

increase government spending; this spending fell sharply when oil prices collapsed in the early

1980s. Consequently, some sovereigns have sought to deal with these concerns by saving a share

of the gains in SWFs. In some cases these savings are used as a financial stabilizer if commodity

prices fall and depress tax revenue declines. In other cases, SWFs serve as mechanisms to

transform concentrated exposure of public assets to volatile commodity prices into a more

balanced and diversified global exposure, thereby protecting the income of future generations.

       A second factor behind the growth of SWFs is the effort by many emerging market

countries to accumulate large stockpiles of international reserves by running persistent current

account surpluses (see Aizenman 2007). Many of these countries, particularly in Asia, now hold

more reserves than needed for prudential reasons. Attempts to diversify these reserves into

potentially higher-yielding assets entail transferring them from the control of the central bank to

the Treasury or to quasi-public entities, such as SWFs, with the mandate to pursue financial

strategies aiming at higher long-run returns. For example, China recently set up the China




                                                 3
Investment Corporation with assets worth $200 billion to manage more aggressively a portion of

its over $1.8 trillion in foreign reserves (as of June 2008).

       Of course, by definition, the global sum of all current accounts adds up to zero. Hence,

the growing current account surpluses of commodity exporters and Asian countries are the

mirror image of the growing current account deficits of other countries, primarily the U.S. in

recent years. In this view the excess saving and accumulation of foreign assets by surplus

countries is the counterpart to the excess demand and issuance of foreign liabilities by deficit

countries. The resulting international wealth transfer from debtors in one country to creditors in

others fosters the growth of SWFs when sovereign governments choose to retain control of the

foreign assets accumulated.

       SWFs are fundamentally different from monetary authorities holding official foreign

reserves, where liquidity and security issues necessitate a short investment horizon and low risk

tolerance. Central banks generally invest their foreign exchange reserves conservatively in safe

and marketable instruments that are readily available to monetary authorities to meet balance of

payments needs. In contrast, SWFs typically seek to diversify foreign exchange assets and earn a

higher return by investing in a broader range of asset classes, including longer-term government

bonds, agency and asset-backed securities, corporate bonds, equities, commodities, real estate,

derivatives, and foreign direct investment.

       SWFs typically make little use of leverage, in contrast to hedge funds and private equity

funds which generally engage in highly leveraged transactions. SWFs also differ from large

institutional private investors such as mutual and insurance funds, in that although they hold

assets, they generally have no specific liabilities to be paid to shareholders or policyholders.

SWFs similarly differ from sovereign pension funds (SPFs) in that the latter, while government-




                                                  4
owned, have explicit liabilities, such as worker pensions. For this reason, SWFs typically have

had less incentive to be transparent about their investment and management practices. However,

as SWFs invest more of their assets in private financial markets, greater concern has arisen as to

the extent to which they should follow the practices of private institutional investors.

         In the appendix we present a model with which we compare the optimal degree of

diversification abroad by a central bank versus that of a sovereign wealth fund, depending on the

authorities’ utility function. We show that if the central bank manages its foreign assets with the

objective of reducing the probability of sudden stops, it will place a high weight on the downside

risk of holding risky assets abroad and will tend to hold primarily safe foreign assets. In contrast,

if a sovereign wealth fund, acting on behalf of the Treasury, maximizes the expected utility of a

representative domestic agent, it will opt for greater diversification towards holding more risky

foreign assets. 3

         Our model suggests that, for relatively low levels of public foreign assets, assigning

portfolio management independence to the central bank may advantageous. However, for a large

enough foreign asset base accumulated through commodity exports or foreign exchange

intervention, the opportunity cost associated with the limited portfolio diversification of the

central bank becomes high enough to induce the authorities to establish a wealth fund in pursuit

of greater returns. In these circumstances, the fund would opt for much greater investment in

foreign equities, while the central bank manages its assets with limited diversification, so as to

minimize the downside risk of sudden stop crises.

3
  We also formulate a more elaborate model of joint decision making in which we treat the Treasury as the dominant
player and assume that it sets the total level of foreign assets managed by the central bank, but delegates to the
central bank the responsibility for maintaining financial stability through the composition of its portfolio.
Conditional on the actions of the central bank, the Treasury decides what level of public foreign assets to entrust to
the central bank for management as well as the composition of the residual share of the country’s public foreign
assets managed through the SWF. In these circumstances, we find that the assignment of the objective to financial
stability to the central bank tends to increase the gap between the optimal diversification patterns of the bank and the
fund.


                                                           5
3. Data Analysis and Stylized Facts about SWFs

        In this section we provide graphical and statistical support for stylized facts about SWFs.

Table 1 summarizes data on SWFs by country, taken from Truman (2008), including the country

fund name, date of establishment, and estimated size.4 (When there is a range of size figures we

take the average; when there is more than one fund per country, we take the sum and use the

establishment date of the largest fund.) We exclude sovereign pension funds (SPFs), e.g., the

Australia Future Fund and Canada Pension Fund, since typically they have limited foreign

investment assets5 and, as noted earlier, they differ significantly in their governance structure

because of the nature of the liabilities on their balance sheets. 6 We also exclude non-Federal

sovereign wealth funds, e.g. the Alaska Permanent Fund and the Alberta Heritage Savings Trust,

since we wish to focus on cross-country differences in SWF behavior at the national level.

        Figure 2 depicts the SWFs in our sample by decreasing total asset size. Observe that

SWF asset holdings are fairly concentrated, with the top six funds, accounting for three-fourths

of total SWF assets. The United Arab Emirates, including the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority,

established back in 1976, and other assorted funds, have a combined asset value of over $800

billion. Norway’s Government Pension Fund - Global (previously called the Petroleum Fund of

Norway) was established in 1990 and now holds over $350 billion. In Asia, Singapore’s two

government investment funds—the Government Investment Corporation (GIC) and Temasek—

have combined assets of over $300 billion. Saudi Arabia’s oil surplus funds, mainly managed by

the central bank together with its reserves, amount to almost $300 billion. Kuwait and China

4
  We used 2003 as the establishment date of the Qatar Investment Authority, rather than Truman’s 2005 date, based
on information from the fund’s website.
5
  Some SWFs do not hold foreign assets exclusively. For example, Singapore’s Temask and Malaysia’s Khazanah
Fund hold substantial domestic assets, as indicated in Figure 2.
6
  We will compare the governance behavior of SWFs and SPFs below.


                                                        6
hold roughly $200 billion each in SWFs. As shown in Table 1, almost all of these large funds

have been in existence for fairly long periods, having been established in 1990 or earlier (China

is the exception).


3.A. Determinants of SWFs

           We begin with simple depictions of the characteristics of countries with SWFs relative to

other countries. All data are taken from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators, 2008;

we use the data for 2006, the latest reported in the WDI, or the most recent available. Small

countries with populations in 2006 of less than 250,000 are excluded.

           Figure 3 depicts the distribution of countries according to their specialization in fuel

exports, defined as fuel exports as a share of total merchandise exports. Countries with SWFs in

2007 or 2008 are indicated by dark (blue) bars. Not surprisingly, the figure shows that SWFs

tend to be prevalent among intensive fuel-exporting countries. As fuel prices have risen over

time in recent years, countries that are heavy fuel exporters have earned sizable amounts of

revenue from exports and accumulated foreign assets.7 They also have had more reason than

other countries to diversify their foreign asset holdings through SWFs.

           Figure 4 depicts the distribution of SWFs across countries ranked by average current

account surpluses as a share of GDP over the period 2002-2006. (In cases where current account

data is missing, we use the most recent years or use trade balance data instead.) Observe that

countries with SWFs tend to be countries with high current account surpluses. Although many

SWF countries with large current account surpluses also are intensive fuel exporters (the raw

correlation is 0.48, the rank correlation is .37), many are not. Comparison of Figures 2 and 3




7
    This presumes that imports expand by less than exports.


                                                              7
indicates that economies, such as Hong Kong, China, and Chile, among others, rank low in terms

of fuel exports, but relatively high in terms of current account surpluses.

        Figure 5 depicts the distribution of SWFs across countries ranked by GDP per capita (in

$2000). Observe that countries with SWFs tend to be fairly evenly distributed across income

levels. That is, there are high, medium, and low income countries with SWFs.

        What are the foreign reserve holdings of countries with a SWF? Figure 6 shows the

distribution of countries ordered by their level of foreign reserves (excluding gold) as a share of

GDP. Not surprisingly, the ratio of reserves to GDP is relatively high in many countries with

SWFs, particularly in countries that have recently established such funds. However, reserves

are somewhat lower in some countries, particularly those in the Gulf area (e.g. Saudi Arabia,

Kuwait, Oman, United Arab Emirates) with SWFs of longer duration.

        We now turn to more formal statistical analysis of the determinants of sovereign wealth

funds. We first analyze the effect of individual country characteristics on the existence of a

sovereign wealth fund in 2007 or 2008. Table 2 reports the results of probit regressions of the

incidence of SWFs, defined as a 0-1 dummy, as a function of the (five-year average) current

account/GDP ratio, fuel exports as a share of total exports, and ore and metal exports as a share

of total exports. As reported in column (1), the coefficients on the first two variables are positive

and significant. Countries that run larger current account surpluses or that specialize in fuel

exports are more likely to have established sovereign wealth funds. This confirms the insights

drawn from Figures 3 and 4.

        In terms of economic significance, an increase in a country’s current account surplus as a

percent of GDP by 10% percentage points (as occurred in China between 2001 and 20078) raises


8
 China’s current account balance as a ratio to GDP rose from 1.3% in 2001 to 11.1% in 2007 (IMF World Economic
Outlook, April 2008, Statistical Appendix, Table A12.)


                                                      8
the likelihood of a SWF by 8 percentage points (0.767x100). A 10 percentage point increase in

fuel exports as a share of total merchandise exports by 10% raises the probability by 3

percentage points. In contrast, the coefficient on ore and metals exports, though positive, is not

significant.9

            Other possible determinants are considered in columns (5) and (6) of Table 2. The

coefficient on GDP per capita is positive, but insignificant.10 The association of foreign reserves

and the likelihood of a SWF is positive. We will discuss the issue of the interaction of SWF

assets and reserve holdings below.


3.B. SWFs and National Governance

            What about the role of national governance? Do countries with high or low governance

tend to establish SWFs?

            To answer this question, we use the Worldwide Governance Indicators constructed by

Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (KKM, 2007) which capture key dimensions of governance for

individual countries:11 These include the following six subindices:

     (i)       “Voice and Accountability” (VA), which measures the extent to which a country’s
               residents participate in selecting their government, as well as engage in freedom of
               expression;

     (ii)      “Political Stability and the Absence of Violence” (PS) , which measures perceptions
               of the likelihood that the government will be destabilized or overthrown by
               unconstitutional or violent means, including domestic violence and terrorism;

     (iii)     “Government Effectiveness” (GE), a measure of the quality of public policies and
               services, independence from political pressures, and the credibility of the government
               commitment to these policies;


9
 Among countries with SWFs, ores and metals comprise more than 25% of total exports only for Chile.
10
   Restricting the sample by omitting advanced countries results in a positive coefficient for the GDP per capita
variable. Thus, among developing countries, lower income countries are less likely to establish SWFs.
11
   These indicators are available for the years 1996 through 2006 on the Worldwide Governance Indicators Web site
(http://www.govindicators.org).


                                                        9
     (iv)      “Regulatory Quality” (RQ), a measure of the ability of the government to formulate
               and implement sound policies that promote private sector development;

     (v)       Rule of Law (RL), a measure of the extent to which agents have confidence in and
               abide by the rules of society, including the quality of contract enforcement, the police,
               and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence; and

     (vi)      Control of Corruption (CC), measuring the extent to which the government limits
               corruption and rent seeking by elites and private interests.

These variables are constructed on a standardized scale ranging from -2.5 to 2.5.

(The data are scaled such that a 1 unit change is equivalent to 1 standard deviation of each

variable’s distribution.) Higher values indicate “better” performance. Note that the “Voice and

Accountability” subindex captures the degree of development of democratic institutions. An

aggregate governance score for each country is given by the average of the six subindices,

which we shall refer to as the “KKM governance average.”

            Figure 7 shows the distribution of SWFs across countries ranked by their KKM

governance average level in 2006, the latest date available.12 The chart does not indicate any

obvious association between national average governance and the presence of a sovereign wealth

fund. In contrast, as shown in Figure 8, SWF countries appear to rank lower on the voice and

transparency measure, our indicator of democracy performance. Only 5 of 26 SWFs have

democracy levels in the top quartile; most are in the bottom half of the sample.

            This finding is supported by Figure 9 which compares governance performance for

different country groupings – countries with SWFs, other developing countries, and industrial

countries.13 It is apparent that countries with SWFs score significantly lower than do industrial

countries for all governance measures, including the average as well as the subindices. However,

in comparison with other developing countries, countries with SWFs score somewhat higher,

12
 We still exclude countries with populations of less than 250,000.
13
 All figures are unweighted averages of the countries in each grouping. The industrial countries group excludes
Norway which is included in the SWF group.


                                                        10
with the notable exception of voice and accountability where they score much lower. Thus, while

SWF countries display somewhat better governance on average than other developing countries,

they are characterized by relatively low democracy performance.

         Table 3 reports the results of univariate probits involving our national governance

measures. Column (1) of the table confirms the absence of any statistical association between

national governance and SWF likelihood with our country sample. The other columns of Table 3

report the effects of the individual governance subindices. Observe that none are significant, with

the notable exception of the voice and accountability index which has a negative as well as

significant effect on the incidence of SWFs. This confirms the observation drawn from Figures 7

and 8 that countries with more (less) democratic political institutions are less (more) likely to

have SWFs.14

         Table 4 restricts the sample to developing countries only (with the exception of Norway

which is included in the sample because it has a SWF). Now we find that the governance average

and most of the other subindices have significantly positive effects on SWF likelihood.15

However, the effect of voice and accountability though still negative, is no longer significant.

This supports the fact that developing countries with better governance, particularly in terms of

government effectiveness, regulatory quality, and control of corruption, are more likely to have

SWFs.




14
   If industrial countries are excluded from the sample, then the KKM and its subindices are generally positive and
significant. The coefficient on VA is still negative, but no longer significant.
15
    Multivariate probits, with controls for whether a country has current account surpluses or is a fuel or ore&metal
exporter, yield similar results for both the full and developing country only samples.



                                                         11
3.C. SWFs and Individual Fund Governance

        Thus far we have examined the association of national governance characteristics with

the incidence of SWFs across countries. What about the governance characteristics of individual

SWFs?

        SWFs differ in their strategies for investing abroad and in the information they provide

about their activities. The Norwegian Government Pension Fund, the most transparent large

SWF, invests in a wide set of foreign industrial and emerging market securities, with significant

portions under external management. It generally has not sought out management control of its

investments, tending to have only small ownership shares in companies. Temasek, the Singapore

government’s strategic investment arm, was established in 1974. It takes long-term stakes in

local and foreign companies and tends to take a more activist approach to its investments.

Temasek has released some information about its financial performance since 2004, but the

available information has been confined to consolidated accounts that do not disclose flows

between subsidiary investments and omits historical financial data before 2001. Other sovereign

funds have been more opaque.

        The degree of transparency displayed by a SWF at home and abroad has implications for

the extent and nature of its activities. In more democratic countries, political contestability

implies that the SWF agenda and investment goals should be more aligned with the domestic

electorate, implying greater demand for domestic transparency. In these circumstances, greater

domestic transparency may increase the electorate’s support for the SWF, thereby expanding the

resources delegated to it. In less democratic countries, SWF management may reflect the

preferences of a narrow power group, and the determination of internal transparency is more

involved. Too little transparency may backfire by fueling popular dissent, encouraging political




                                                 12
instability, and possibly reducing the tenure of the government and its management team by its

forceful removal from office. Yet, “high” domestic transparency may entail another cost to the

government in the form of greater discontent, inducing other power groups to challenge the size

and the mandate of the SWF. In these circumstances, greater transparency may lessen the

reported foreign assets allocated to SWF for management. In the appendix model we discuss

how the degree of a country’s transparency may affect the size of the foreign asset base entrusted

to a SWF’s management.

         A SWF also may face a complex trade off regarding the degree of international

transparency it displays, i.e. the degree to which its investment strategy and holdings are

transparent to the global financial system. On the one hand, if the SWF benefits from access to

superior talent and information, greater transparency may reduce the effectiveness of any

proprietary strategy used by the fund. On the other hand, inadequate international transparency

tends to reduce the hospitality shown towards foreign direct and portfolio investment in the host

country and possibly encourage local efforts to reduce a SWF’s access to profitable business

opportunities.16

         To provide empirical content to the role of governance in the activities of SWFs, we next

examine the governance characteristics of the individual SWFs in our sample described in Table

1. We first explore the question as to how the governance of individual SWFs compares with the

KKM national governance measures. To do so we make use of Truman (2008) governance




16
  These considerations suggest that the degree of transparency displayed by a SWF may be determined
endogenously in an effort to maximize foreign investment opportunities. We allude to this possibility in the
appendix, but do not model it.



                                                         13
scores for nonpension sovereign wealth funds.17 He constructs 4 subindices measuring the

behavior of individual SWFs in various dimensions:

     (i)     “Fund Accountability and Transparency,” which measures the clarity of investment
             strategy, investment activities, reporting, and audits;

     (ii)     “Fund Structure,” measuring clarity of the fund’s basic structure, including its
             objectives, fiscal treatment, and independence from management of the country’s
             international reserves;

     (iii)   “Fund Behavior,” measuring the fund’s approach to managing its portfolio and using
             leverage and derivatives.

     (iv)    “Fund Management,” which measures the existence of investment guidelines and the
             role of the government and SWF managers in executing them.18

Higher values of “Fund Transparency” represent increased SWF accountability and

transparency. Higher values of “Fund Structure” correspond to clearer guidelines for the

structure and scope of SWF activities. Higher values of “Fund Management ” imply more

disclosure about the governance environment. Higher values of “Fund Behavior” indicate that

the SWF utilizes more advanced investment and risk management strategies. In addition, Truman

reports a total score for each SWF, constructed as the sum of the individual index scores. We

interpret an individual fund’s total score as a measure of the quality of its overall governance. It

should be noted that the 4 subindices are not weighted equally in constructing the total score;

“Fund Accountability and Transparency” accounts for almost half of the total, implying that

variations across funds in their total governance score primarily reflect differences in

accountability and transparency.19




17
   Truman also collects governance data for ten sovereign pension funds. We will compare the results for sovereign
wealth and sovereign pension funds below.
18
   We have changed Truman’s actual label for this subindex from “governance” to “management” in order to avoid
confusion when referring to Truman’s total score as a measure of overall governance.
19
   The maximum number of points in the four categories are 14, 8, 6, and 5, respectively, giving an overall score
maximum of 33. Hence transparency accounts for 42 (=14/33) percent of the total score.


                                                        14
        Table 5 reports the correlations of KKM national governance measures and the Truman

governance measures for the SWFs in our sample. For countries with more than one SWF we use

the scores for the SWF fund with the largest amount of assets. There is no score data on SWFs

in Saudi Arabia, Gabon, and Libya, as indicated in Table 1, leaving 26 SWF observations.20

        Observe from Table 5 that the KKM governance average and the Truman total score

measures are positively, but weakly, correlated (the correlation coefficient is 0.28; the p value is

0.16). The top row of the table reveals that almost all of this correlation is attributable to the

voice and accountable variable, which is strongly correlated with the Truman total score (the

coefficient is 0.56; the p value is 0.00) as well as with the Truman subindices. Thus countries

with high (low) national democracy ratings tend to have sovereign wealth funds with high (low)

Truman governance scores as well. In particular, countries with more democratic institutions also

tend to have SWFs that display more accountability and transparency.

        The scatter plots in Figures 10 and 11 give further insight. Figure 10 plots the KKM

average national governance measure against Truman’s total SWF governance score for each

SWF. First, observe that there is a relatively wide dispersion in the Truman fund governance

scores plotted on the horizontal axis. SWFs in Norway, Hong Kong, Chile as well as in

Khazakistan, Azerbaijan, and Timur-Leste all score high in terms of the Truman total score

measure, implying relatively effective governance and transparency. At the other end of the scale

are the SWFs in the oil-producing countries of United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Brunei, and Oman,

as well as in Sudan, Venezuela, Iran, and Nigeria.

        Second, observe that the scatter plot and fitted regression line suggest a weak positive

correlation between the KKM and Truman measures. This is consistent with the correlation

20
  For the SWFs in Truman’s full sample the total score averages 15.1 for SWFs; for our sample of 26 countries,
which uses only the scores for the largest SWF in each country, the average is 19.1 Truman’s average for 10 SPFs is
29.2. For his full sample of 33 SWFs and 10 SPFs pooled together the average is 18.3.


                                                        15
results in Table 5: countries characterized by better governance tend to have SWFs displaying

better overall governance. The weakness of the correlation appears attributable to the outlier

observations in the upper left quadrant – the “older” fuel-producing countries of the United arab

Emirates, Qatar, Brunei, Oman – and the outlying observations in the lower right quadrant – the

“newer” fuel-producing states of Russia, Khazakistan, Azerbaijan, and Timur-Leste. The first

set of countries have relatively high KKM governance scores and low Truman fund scores, while

the second set have relatively low KKM governance scores and high Truman fund scores.

       Figure 11 gives additional insight with a scatter plot of the KKM voice and accountability

subindex vs. Truman’s total SWF score. Here we see that the oil- producing countries of the

UAE, Qatar, Brunei, and Oman have relatively low democracy levels (as indicated by the

downward pointing arrow). Thus despite relatively high overall KKM governance levels, the

“older” fuel producing countries have relatively low democracy scores as well as SWFs with low

Truman fund governance scores, particularly in terms of transparency and accountability. In

contrast, the SWFs of the newer fuel-producing countries – Russia, Khazakistan, Azerbaijan, and

Timur-Leste, – who also have low democracy scores, have higher Truman fund scores, i.e. they

are more transparent than the sovereign funds in the older oil-producing countries. Why might

this be so? One possible explanation is that countries that have only recently begun to develop

their fuel resources have a greater incentive to foster more global integration by establishing

institutions, such as SWFs, with more transparency and accountability. It is easier to change the

level of transparency of a fund than to change a country’s political system.

       Some have suggested that sovereign funds may face more issues when investing abroad

the greater the extent to which the practices of their SWFs diverge from those of domestic

institutions managing public funds in the recipient countries.




                                                16
        Further insight can be obtained from Figures 12 and 13 which present the Truman and

KKM measures for different SWF country groupings – “old” oil-exporting countries with

SWFs,21 Norway, and other SWFs. For comparison, we also report results for 10 sovereign

pension funds (SPFs) in industrial countries (as well as the sub-national SWFs in the U.S. and

Canada), using data from Truman (2008)22 The Truman subindices are normalized to reflect the

percent fraction (up to 100) of the maximum score possible for each subindex.

         Figure 12 shows that the older oil-exporting countries have lower Truman fund

governance scores, primarily because of limited transparency and accountability, in comparison

to other SWF countries. All are well below the standards of sovereign pension funds as well as

Norway’s SWF. Figure 13 shows that the older-exporting countries generally have better KKM

governance levels than those of other SWFS (except Norway, of course), but lower democracy

levels. These figures illustrate how the practices of many large existing sovereign funds,

particularly those originating in less democratic countries, differ from the practices of pension

funds as well as Norway's government fund. Clearly, there is still a great difference between the

governance standards of the economies in which SWFs have been established and the

governance standards of the industrial economies in which they are seeking to invest.

3.D. Determinants of SWF Asset Size

        As shown in Figure 2, SWFs vary greatly in asset size. What explains the size differences

of SWFs? Funds established a long time ago presumably have had more time to accumulate

assets. Increasing oil prices and oil export revenues contribute to national asset accumulation

over time as well.


21
   This grouping consists of the Gulf countries – Oman, Qatar, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates – and
Brunei (Saudi Arabia is excluded from the Truman scores because of the lack of data on this measure).
22
   The SPF sample also includes China’s National Social Security Fund. Omitting this SPF does not affect the
results.


                                                       17
           The bar chart in Figure 14 illustrates this by depicting SWF asset holdings (and foreign

reserves) as a share of GDP, ranked by the duration of the fund (defined as the number of years

between 2008 and the fund’s establishment date, given in Table 1). Observe that the largest

funds are those who are the oldest – Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, United Arab Emirates, Oman,

Singapore, and Brunei. (Qatar, whose SWF was established more recently – in 2003 – is an

outlier.)

           Tables 6 and 7 confirm these findings with cross-section regressions of SWF asset size

relative to GDP for the sample of 26 countries with SWFs (excluding Kiribati, Sao Tome, and

Timur-Leste because of lack of data). We include fuel exports as a share of GDP as well as fund

duration as explanatory variables

           Columns (1) and (2) of Table 6 show that the size of a country’s SWF is greater the

higher the country’s fuel export revenue and the longer the fund’s duration. These effects are

significant at the 10% level or better. The remaining columns of Table 6 report the effect of

Truman fund scores on asset size. Controlling for oil and duration, lower Truman fund

governance scores appear to be associated with higher fund size (though only the effect of

“Structure” is significant, at 10%).23 These results provide somewhat weak evidence that the less

transparent SWFs are relatively large in size.

           Table 7 reports the effects of the KKM national governance measures on SWF size,

controlling or oil revenue and duration. Here we find that that better national governance is

associated with larger fund size, with the notable exception of the “voice and accountability”

measure which is negative (though not significant).24 This is consistent with earlier findings

concerning the likelihood of a country having a SWF. Countries for which oil revenue plays less


23
     The same general results are obtained with univariate regressions without the oil or duration variables.
24
     With controls for oil or duration, the governance variables are still positive, but insignificant.


                                                            18
of a role in explaining the accumulation of SWF foreign assets tend to have better governance as

well as more democratic institutions, compared to other developing countries. Conversely,

countries for which oil revenue plays more of a role, particularly “older” oil exporters, appear to

be characterized by higher levels of governance in terms of government, regulatory, and legal

effectiveness, but relatively less democratic institutions.

         The result that the largest funds appear to be characterized by relatively low standards of

transparency and accountability is part of the basis for why these funds have encountered

concerns when seeking to expand their presence in foreign financial markets.


3.E. SWF Assets and Foreign Reserves

         As countries choose to entrust more of their sovereign wealth to investment funds it is

expected to affect official reserve accumulation, with funds likely shifting away from reserves

held by the central bank. Is there any evidence of such a shift?

         Figure 14 plots the ratio of SWF assets (as of end 2007) and of foreign reserves to GDP

(as of 2006) in the order of decreasing fund duration.25 Observe that the older SWFs not only

have relatively high SWF asset /GDP ratios, they also have relatively low reserve/GDP ratios as

compared to the more newly established SWFs (with the exception of Qatar). Figure 15 supports

this observation by plotting the ratio of SWF assets to reserve assets.26

         To examine the interaction of SWF assets and reserves more formally, we report results

of a panel regression of the determinants of foreign reserves relative to GDP over the period

1985 to 2006. The explanatory variables include reserve volatility (measured by the standard

deviation of reserve holding changes over five years), the ratio of imports to GDP, the ratio of

25
  There are no reserve data for Iran, Kiribati, and Sao Tome. These countries are excluded from Figure 14.
26
  Ziemba (2008) reports that the official reserves of GCC countries (excluding Saudi Arabia), Saudi Arabia, and
Kuwait were roughly $100 billion, $ 30 billion, and $17 billion, respectively in early 2008. These figures are well
below reserve holdings of the central banks in the region.


                                                         19
M2 to reserves, and the occurrence of currency crises.27. Because of data limitations the panel

includes only 22 countries with a SWF.

         Table 8 reports random effects estimates of the panel with a set of year dummies and

error clustering at the country level. As shown in col. (1), reserve holdings rise with the

import/GDP and M2/reserve ratios. These effects are as expected: reserve holdings should be

higher the greater the need to cover the costs of imports and the greater the vulnerability to

liquidity crisis associated with higher short-term domestic currency liabilities of the banking

system relative to reserve holdings. Reserve holdings decline with the occurence of a currency

crisis. The effect of reserve volatility is insignificant.

         Column (1) also includes a 0-1 dummy variable – “SWF present” which has a value of 1

for those years in which a country has a SWF.28 The coefficient on this variable is positive and

significant, indicating that the presence of SWF raises the level of reserve holdings.29 This does

not support the view that establishment of a SWF leads to lower official reserve levels over time.

One possible reason is that most of the SWFs in the sample have been established relatively

recently, leaving insufficient time for effects on the level of central bank reserve holdings to

occur.

         Column (2) of Table 8 adds an additional dummy variable -- SWF “older” oil exporter --

which has a value of 1 only for those countries which had SWFs in place before 1990 that were

also significant oil exporters. Here we find that negative coefficient. This implies that, relative to

all SWF countries, oil-exporting countries with SWFs of long duration, hold lower levels of

27
   We thank Yin-Wong Cheung and Hiro Ito for providing the data for some of these variables; see Cheung and Ito
(2007) on currency crises. We also considered the use of a measure of the opportunity costs to holding reserves
(defined as the domestic lending rate minus the U.S. Treasury bill rate), but the absence of a domestic interest rate
for many of the SWF countries in our sample, lead us to omit it.
28
   The value of this dummy is set equal to 1 in 2006 for any country which established a SWF in 2007 or 2008.
29
   Ideally, we would prefer to be able to utilize time-varying data for SWF assets. Unfortunately we only have the
single data point for SWF assets of year end 2007.


                                                          20
reserves. This is consistent with the view that over time countries with SWFs will tend to hold

relatively less reserves.

        In an Appendix we compare the optimal patterns of portfolio diversification managed by

a central bank and a sovereign wealth fund, possibly acting as an agent for the Treasury.

        We first present a simple model with which we compare the optimal degree of

diversification depending on the authorities’ utility function. We assume that the objective of the

bank is to maintain financial stability by solely focusing on the objective of reducing the

probability of sudden stops.30 In contrast, we presume that the Treasury, acting through a SWF,

maximizes the expected utility of a representative domestic agent In this framework we show

that the central bank’s focus on financial stability implies that it will place a higher weight on the

downside risk of sudden stops than will the SWF. Consequently, the bank tends to bias its

portfolio strategy towards holding more of the safe asset, whereas the SWF opts for greater

diversification towards risky foreign assets. We also show how the diversification gap between

the strategies of the bank and SWF is affected by various parameters of the economy, such as the

volatility of equity returns.

        We follow with a more elaborate model of joint decision making in which we treat the

Treasury as the dominant player and assume that it sets the total level of foreign assets managed

by the central bank, but delegates to the central bank the responsibility for maintaining financial

stability through the composition of its portfolio. Conditional on the actions of the central bank,

the Treasury decides what level of public foreign assets to entrust to the central bank for

management as well as the composition of the residual share of the country’s public foreign

30
  We abstract from other possible central bank objectives, such targeting inflation under flexible
exchange rate regime. We also do not model deeper reasons for our assignment of objectives, such as a
possible bias towards nominating a conservative central bank governor with a narrower policy focus than
the representative agent (see Rogoff, 1985; Walsh, 1995; Obstfeld, 1996; and Aizenman and Glick,
2008).


                                                  21
assets managed through the SWF. In these circumstances, we find that the assignment of the

objective to financial stability to the central bank tends to increase the gap between the optimal

diversification patterns of the bank and the SWF.

        We also discuss how the degree of a country’s internal and external transparency affects

the country’s foreign asset returns and management.


4. Implications of SWFs for Global Financial Markets

        There have been growing concerns about how the size and composition of SWF

portfolios may affect global financial markets. On the one hand, SWFs are viewed as institutions

with relatively long investment horizons, generally operating with little leverage, thus providing

a stable source of cross-border liquidity for the global financial system. In fact, Kotter and Lel

(2008) show that SWF acquisition announcements raise the returns of target firms, particularly if

they are relatively transparent.31 This finding suggests that investors use voluntary SWF

disclosure as a signal of the quality of screening and monitoring by SWFs about investment

opportunities.

        Moreover, during the recent 2007-08 global financial crisis SWFs have been a source of

new capital to foreign banks and investment firms, particularly in the United States. Between

November 2007 and January 2008, SWFs from emerging markets injected more than $44 billion

of capital into needy financial institutions in advance economies; these investments accounted

for roughly 3/4 of the total capital raised by target companies over period (FRBNY). In general,

they have been structured to keep individual investors' ownership stakes below the 5 or 10%

limits that would invite closer regulatory attention.



31
  Specifically, they show that SWF acquisition announcements raise the risk-adjusted returns of target firms by 2.1
percent on average, and by 3.5% if they implement independent audits or make annual reports publicly available.


                                                        22
        On the other hand, there are concerns reflecting the view that the growing size of SWFs

matters and that sovereign fund management may be motivated by non-economic considerations,

deviating from conventional wealth maximization. Apprehension about the size effect of funds,

both private and public, is not new, reflecting the possibility that large funds may use their

market power strategically, potentially leading to greater financial instability. An example of

these concerns is the alleged role of large private hedge funds in coordinating speculative attacks

on the British pound and other currencies participating in the European exchange rate

mechanism in the early 1990s. The extra dimension added by SWFs is the possibility that

sovereign investors may use their strategic leverage for narrow nationalistic objectives (Summers

2007, Kimmitt 2008). The concern is that financial globalization has reached the point where the

sheer size of foreign savings may distort sovereigns’ incentives, shifting them from beneficial

diversification toward zero-sum game policies. These may include supporting domestic “national

champion” firms, buying controlling positions in foreign firms with proprietary knowledge, or

increasing control of financial and tangible infrastructure abroad (telecommunication, energy,

ports, etc.).

        Such developments may also lead to the proliferation of capital controls and financial

protectionism, ultimately risking international trade in goods and services. Already,

globalization, despite its benefits, has raised sensitivities around the world. In particular, there is

rising opposition in many countries to the control or major stakes that state-controlled SWFs are

taking in foreign private companies. The adverse political reaction to efforts by China’s state

owned oil enterprise CNOOC to acquire the U.S. oil firm Unocal in 2005 and by the United Arab

Emirates’ DP World to acquire several major U.S. ports are well known. More recent financial

investments, such as Abu Dhabi Investment Authority’s investment in Citigroup, have prompted




                                                  23
less concern, in part because of assurances that no control or active management of the target

firm would be sought. Emerging markets also at times have expressed sensitivity to certain

investments by other emerging markets. Temasek’s purchase of a controlling stake in the Thai

telecom firm Shin Corp. from the family of then-Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra in January

2006 sparked off a political crisis in Thailand.

       As a result of these concerns, a range of policies have been proposed. Some observers

call for imposing stringent transparency requirements on SWFs, well above the present

requirements on private financial funds (Truman 2007). In this connection, the U.S. Treasury has

suggested that the International Monetary Fund and World Bank play an oversight role to limit

the systemic risks of unregulated SWFs, including the formulation of best practice guidelines. In

the Spring of 2008 twenty-five SWFs formed an international working group, facilitated by the

IMF, to develop a set of voluntary best practices and guidelines (IMF 2008). A preliminary

agreement was announced in early September of this year.

       Others have proposed greater scrutiny of foreign government entities seeking operational

control of companies in which they invest, particularly if they choose to exercise the voting

rights of their equity shares. Accordingly, some have advocated that SWFs should be allowed to

invest only in nonvoting equity shares (Buiter 2007). In addition, some call for restricting SWFs’

operations to reciprocal arrangements, where the ability of a country to buy foreign assets would

be conditioned on granting similar access to foreign funds (Economist 2007).

       Further insight into this issue is gained by noting that economic theory suggests that the

diversification benefits associated with increased globalization can be obtained best by buying a

share of a “global fund,” composed of all the traded assets of all countries. This suggests that the

expanding role of SWFs may be best accommodated by their purchasing shares of a fund




                                                   24
composed of the indexes of all the countries forming the global financial system. Such

diversification provides the best mechanism for eliminating idiosyncratic risks. Short of

engaging in potentially destabilizing zero-sum speculation, large players approaching the size of

SWFs should not expect to get more than the gains associated with holding such wide “country

funds.”

           Taking the insight provided by this benchmark seriously, a policy of encouraging SWFs

to invest in well-diversified index instruments, such as the S&P 500,Wilshire 5000, Dow Jones,

Wilshire Global Total Market Index, etc., has the advantage of providing a workable solution to

challenges associated with SWFs.32 The requirement for stringent transparency tests of SWFs

may be unrealistic, due to costly monitoring and collection of information. Channeling the

activities of SWFs into widely diversified country funds offers diversification gains to investors,

while minimizing the exposure of a given country to strategic “cherry picking,” that is,

selectively buying control in entities due to narrow nationalistic objectives. One may also view it

as a stepping stone towards deeper global diversification, as it may encourage the proliferation of

country indexes in countries that are interested in gaining from financial globalization. Such a

policy could be implemented either with the guidance of international financial institutions or as

the outcome of bilateral negotiations between SWFs and potential recipient countries.


5. Conclusions

           This paper presents statistical analysis supporting stylized facts about sovereign wealth

funds (SWFs). Evidence is provided about the association of SWFs with a country’s fuel export

performance and current account surpluses. The paper also analyzes the degree to which

measures of SWF governance and transparency compare with national governance standards.


32
     This suggestion was first made in Aizenman and Glick (2007).


                                                         25
       We find that countries with SWFs score significantly lower than do industrial countries

for various governance measures. However, in comparison with other developing countries,

countries with SWF countries are characterized by somewhat higher governance standards, with

the exception of voice and accountability – a measure of democratic institutional development --

where they score much lower. Thus, while SWF countries display somewhat better governance

on average than other developing countries, they are characterized by relatively low democracy

performance, particularly in fuel-exporting countries.

       It is also shown that the governance performance of individual SWFs is weakly

correlated with measures of national governance. That is, SWFs funds tend to operate in

accordance with national norms of governance, with the notable exception of some fuel-intensive

exporting countries which are characterized by relatively low democratic performance. In

particular, older SWFs established in fuel-exporting countries appear to be relatively less

transparent, while newer SWFs established in fuel-exporting countries appear to be more

transparent. We suggest that countries that have only recently begun to develop their fuel

resources have a greater incentive to foster more global integration by establishing institutions,

such as SWFs, with more transparency and accountability. It is easier to change the level of

transparency of a fund than to change a country’s political system.

       We also show how the practices of many large existing sovereign funds, particularly

those originating in less democratic countries, differ from the practices of pension funds in

industrial countries. Clearly, there is still great difference between the governance standards of

the economies in which SWFs have been established and the governance standards of the

economies in which they are seeking to invest.




                                                 26
          The evidence presented in this paper suggests that over time countries may transfer a

greater share of the public sector’s foreign assets from official reserves into SWFs. The ultimate

impact that formation of SWFs will have on the dynamics of hoarding international foreign

reserves requires more data and time to resolve.

          The present global financial crisis illustrates the importance of the self insurance services

provided by holding international reserves as well as the usefulness of policies that channel some

share of windfall gains associated with terms of trade improvements into sovereign wealth funds

(e.g., see the experience of Chile in recent years). While the recent drop in global commodity

prices and equity returns may have reduced the relative appeal of SWFs, a resumption of global

growth may restore their attractiveness. However, if the “great moderation” decades are indeed

over and volatility in financial markets remains highs, monetary authorities may place a bigger

weight on holding more reserves as a means of minimizing the expected costs of sudden stop

events.




                                                   27
                                          References


Aizenman, J. (2008), “Large Hoarding of International Reserves and the Emerging Global
Economic Architecture,” The Manchester School, 76: 487-503.

Aizenman, J. and R. Glick (2007), “Sovereign Wealth Funds: Stumbling Blocks or
Stepping Stones to Financial Globalization? FRBSF Economic Letter, No 2007-38.

Aizenman, J. and R. Glick (2008), “Pegged Exchange Rate Regimes – A Trap?” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 40: 817 – 835.

Aizenman J. and J. Lee (2007), “International Reserves: Precautionary versus Mercantilist
Views, Theory and Evidence,” Open Economies Review, 18:191–214.

Balding, Christopher (2008), “A Portfolio Analysis of Sovereign Wealth Funds,” University of
California, Irvine, mimeo.

Buiter,W. (2007), “Taming SovereignWealth Funds in Two Easy Steps,” Maverecon –
Willem Buiter’s Blog, July 24. http://maverecon.blogspot.com

Cheung, Yin-Wong and Hiro Ito (2007), “A Cross-Country Empirical Analysis of International
Reserves,” mimeo, University of California, Santa Cruz,

Diamond D. and P. Dybvig (1983) “Bank runs, Liquidity and dposit Insurance,” Journal of
Political Economy, 91:401–419.

Economist (2007), “Fear of Foreigners,” August 14 (online only).
http://www.economist.com/business/ displaystory.cfm?story_id=9641906

Hermalin, B. and M. Weisbach (2007), “Transparency and Corporate Governance,” NBER
Working Paper No. 12875

IMF (2007), Global Financial Stability Report, September.

IMF (2008a), Sovereign Wealth Funds—A Work Agenda,” February 29, 2008, available at
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2008/022908.pdf.

IMF (2008b), “International Working Group of Sovereign Wealth Funds is
Established to Facilitate Work on Voluntary Principles,” press release, May 1, 2008.

Jen, S. (2007), How Big Could Sovereign Wealth Funds Be by 2015? Morgan Stanley Global
Research, May 04, 2007, available at http://www.morganstanley.com.

Johnson, S. (2007), “The Rise of Sovereign Wealth Funds,” Finance and Development, 44-3.




                                               28
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi (2007), “Governance Matters VI:
Aggregate and Individual Governance Indicators, 1996–2006,” World Bank Working Paper
WPS4280.

Kimmitt, Robert M. (2008), “Public Footprints in Private Markets: Sovereign Wealth Funds and
the World Economy,” Foreign Affairs 87, no.1 (January–February): 119–30.

Kotter, Jason and Ugur Lel (2008), “Friends or Foes? The Stock Price Impact of Sovereign
Wealth Fund Investments and the Price of Keeping Secrets,” Board of Governors, International
Finance Discussion Papers No. 940, August.

Lyons, Gerard (2007), “State Capitalism: The Rise of Sovereign Wealth Funds,” Standard
Charter, November 7.

Maslakovic, M. (2008), “Sovereign Wealth Funds 2008,” International Financial Services
London, available at http://www.ifsl.org.uk.
Corporate Governance

Obstfeld, M. (1996), “Models of Currency Crises with Self Fulfilling Features.” European
Economic Review 40 (April), 1037-1048.

Rogoff, K. (1985), “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1169-1189.

Truman, E. (2007), “Sovereign Wealth Funds: The Need for Greater Transparency and
Accountability,” Peterson Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief No. PB07-6,
Washington DC.

Truman, E. (2008), “A Blueprint for Sovereign Wealth Fund Best Practices,” Peterson
Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief No. PB08-3, Washington DC.

Walsh, Carl. (1995), “Optimal Contracts for Central Bankers,” American Economic Review 85:
150-167

Ziemba, Rachel (2008), “So How Large Are Sovereign Wealth Funds?” Roubini Global
Economics Monitor, April 2.


Corporate Governance



.
.




                                               29
                                                                    Figures and Tables
Figure 1.
                                                 Sovereign Wealth Funds and
                                                Major Global Investment Pools
                                                       trillions of US$


                    Bank assets                                                                                      70.9

    Stock market capitalization                                                                    50.8

                    World GDP                                                                 48.2

         Private debt securities                                                       43.1

                 Pension funds                                            28.5

                   Mutual funds                                         27.3

          Public debt securities                                       25.6

              Insurance assets                                  19.1

      Foreign reserves ex gold                5.1

       Sovereign wealth funds            3.1

                   Hedge funds          1.9

           Private equity funds        0.8

                                   0                10         20        30      40           50          60    70          80


Source: IMF (2007) and Maslakovic (2008)

Figure 2.
                                   Sovereign Wealth Fund Assets by Country
                                                billions of $

     United Arab Emirates
                Singapore
                   Norway
             Saudi Arabia
                    Kuwait
                    China
                   Russia
               Hong Kong
                     Qatar
                     Libya
                   Algeria
                    Brunei
                    Korea
              Kazakhstan
               Venezuela
                 Malaysia
                   Nigeria
                     Chile
                    Oman
                      Iran
                   Russia
                Botswana
                   Mexico
               Azerbaijan
              Timor-Leste
       Trinidad & Tobago
                   Kiribati
                   Gabon
                    Sudan
             São Tomé &
                              0        100           200        300       400    500          600         700   800         900

                                                         total foreign assets    total domestic assets
.


                                                                         30
                        T
                         im
                           or




                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                      70
                                                                                                                                                                           80
                                                                                                                                                                                90
                                                                                                                                                                                     100
                             -L




     -60
           -40
                  -20
                                          0
                                              20
                                                   40
                                                        60
                               es
                                 te
                                                                                                                  B
                                                                                                                   ot
                                                                                                                     sw
                                                                                                                       an
                                                                                                                         a

                          A
                           ze
                             rb
                               ai




                                                                                             Figure 4.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 3.




                                 ja
                                   n


                               S
                                ud
                                  an


                                                                                                                H
                                                                                                                 on
                                                                                                                   g
                                                                                                                       K
                                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                      C ng
                                                                                                                       hi
                                                                                                                      C na
                                                                                                                        hi
                                                                                                                          le




                         K
                          az
                            ak
                              hs
                                 ta
                                   n
                            M                                                                                         K
                              ex                                                                                       or
                                ic                                                                                       ea
                                  o

                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                  in
                                                                                                                    ga




31
                                C                                                                                      po
                                  hi
                                    l                                                                                     re
                                K e
                                 or
                                   ea                                                                             M
                                                                                                                    al
                                                                                                                      ay
                                                                                                                         s
                                                                                                                   M ia
                                                                                                                     ex
                                                                                                                        ic
                                                                                                                          o

                              C                              Current Account/GDP (percent)
                                 hi
                                     na
                                                                                                                                                                                           Fuel Exports / Total Exports (percent)




                                                                                                         ni
                 Tr HBo                                                                                    da
                   in    o   tO
                              swI                                                                            d
                     id nR       mraa                                                                         Kan
                       ad guK                                                                                   azdR
                        VM        sosannna
                                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                   akTuos
                          e&naTl niag                                                                                o bs
                              eaoyb                                                                            A hrw      staiag
                      S N zu         s                                                                           z            aa
                        au No eaiga                                                                          S erb yno
                         Sdi igrw       lao                                                                    au G a
                           in A eray                                                                              diSu aIbriaja
                             gaUra ia                                                                          V Q   A onn
                             GLpAobEia                                                                           en radaa       n
                                                                                                                                n
                             A                                                                                     KeU tb
                             Kla ib
                                  byre                                                                                uzwaira
                                                                                                                         uA
                               Q
                               ugweo rian
                             Ba                                                                                     OLibeaEliat
                                rutaaait                                                                           NB mya
                                    ner                                                                            Airgu an
                                         i                                                                            lgen
                                                                                                                         erreiai
                                                                                                                               ia
                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                 10000
                                                                                                                                                                         20000
                                                                                                                                                                                 30000
                                                                                                                                                                                         40000
                                                                                                                                                                                                 50000
                                                                                                                                                                                                         60000




                           0
                               10
                                    20
                                         30
                                              40
                                                   50
                                                        60
                                                             70
                                                                  80
                                                                       90
                                                                            100
                                                                                                                                        Ti
                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                                           or
                                                                                                                                             -L
                                                                                                                                               es
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 5.



                                                                                                                                                 te
             S
             Bu
              ruda
                 nen
     S              i




                                                                                                                     Figure 6.
      au                                                                                                                                      N
        di                                                                                                                                     ig
             A                                                                                                                                   er
              ra                                                                                                                                   i
                bi                                                                                                                            S a
                  a                                                                                                                             ud
            M                                                                                                                                     an
             ex
               ic
                 o




            Q
           Ka
             uwta
        A
         zeG air
           rbab t                                                                                                                        A
              aio                                                                                                                         ze
                jn                                                                                                                           rb
            C an                                                                                                                                a
              hi
                 le                                                                                                                          C ijan
           O                                                                                                                                    hi
              m                                                                                                                                    na
                an
                                                                                                                                        K
        V                                                                                                                                az
                                                                                                                                           aAklgIr
         en
           ez                                                                                                                                  he a
             Uu                                                                                                                                  strina
               Ae                                                                                                                                   an
                Ela
          N
            or
              w                                                                                                                              R
                ay                                                                                                                              us
                                                                                                                                                   si
                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                                                            oG
                                                                                                                                           Mtsa w
                                                                                                                                             al bao
                                                                                                                                                ay nna




32
                                                                                                                                         V
                                                                                                                                          en sia
       K                                                                                                                                      ez
        az
          ak                                                                                                                                      ue
            hs                                                                                                                                         la
              ta                                                                                                                 Tr          MC
                n                                                                                                                  in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GDP/Capita (2000 US$)




                                                                                                                                                exhil
                                                                                                                                     idS           ice
                                                                                                                                       aadu            o
                                                                                                                                           &
                                                                                                                                           di Li
                                                                                                                                             OTAorbya
                                                                                                                                                 mba
                                                                                                                                                    aabnia
                                                                                  Foreign Reserves / GDP (percent)                                      go
             K                                                                                                                                K
              or                                                                                                                                 or
                ea                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                             B a
                                                                                                                                                ru
     da Ru                                                                                                                                   K ne
       d        s                                                                                                                               uw i
         & sia                                                                                                                                       ai
             To                                                                                                                                          t
                 b                                                                                                                       S U
           N ag                                                                                                                            in A
              ig o                                                                                                                           ga E
             Ce                                                                                                                         H
                                                                                                                                          on por
         M hi ria
           a n                                                                                                                               g          e
      H lay a                                                                                                                                   K
                  si                                                                                                                               on
       BonA
       S  o            a                                                                                                                                 g
         intgslgK
            gaweor                                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                               or
                paonniag                                                                                                                       Qw
              Li ra                                                                                                                               atay
                 by e                                                                                                                                 ar
                      a
     -2.5
            -2
                 -1.5
                        -1
                                        -0.5
                                                        0
                                                            0.5
                                                                  1
                                                                      1.5
                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                 -2.5
                                                                                                                                        -2
                                                                                                                                             -1.5
                                                                                                                                                    -1
                                                                                                                                                                -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.5
                                         Li
                                           b
                                       S ya
                                         u                                                                                                                          S
                                         C da                                                                                                                        ud
                                          hi n                                                                                                                         an
                                   S        na
                                    au




                                                                                                                     Figure 8.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 7.

                                      di                                                                                                                          N
                                         A                                                                                                                         ig
                                          ra                                                                                                                         er
                                             bi                                                                                                                        ia
                                               a                                                                                                           V
                                          Ira                                                                                                                en
                                             n                                                                                                                 ez
                                  A                                                                                                                                ue
                                                                                                                                                                      la
                                   ze
                                     rb                                                                                                                           Ira
                                        ai                                                                                                                Ti         n
                                            ja
                                               n                                                                                                            m
                                                                                                                                                              or
                                 K Br                                                                                                                           -LL
                                  az un                                                                                                                           ib
                                                                                                                                                                   es
                                    ak ei                                                                                                                  A        yate
                         U             hs                                                                                                                    ze
                          ni
                                            ta                                                                                                                 rb
                            te
                              d                n                                                                                                                  ai
                                                                                                                                                                    ja
                                A G
                                 ra a                                                                                                                                  n
                                   b bo
                                    E
                                    R         n
                                    Aum                                                                                                                   K Ru
                                      lgsirsa                                                                                                              az ss
                                    N eriia   te                                                                                                             aAk ia
                                     Oige a s                                                                                                                  lg
                                                                                                                                                                hes
                                       mri
                                  V                                                                                                                                traia
                                                                                                                                                                       n
                                   en ana
                                     ez
                                         ue
                                              la                                                                                                                  G
                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                      Q                                                                                                                           C bo
                                        at                                                                                                                          hi n
                                             ar                                                                                                                       na
                                        K
                                    Ti     u
                                      mM wa
                                       oar       it
                                          -la
                                            Lye                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                                                          au
                                               si                                                                                                           di
                                                tae
                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                        ra
                                                                                                                                                                          bi
                                                                                                                                                                            a

                                        S
                                         in
                                           ga
                                             po
                                               re




33
                                                                                                                                                                  M
                                                                                                                                                     Tr            ex
                                               M                                                                                                       in            ic
                                                ex                                                                                                       id            o
                                                  ic                                                                                                       ad
                                                    o                                                                                                           &
                             Tr                                                                                                                                     To
                               in
                                 id                                                                                                                                   ba
                                   ad                                                                                                                                   go
                                        an
                                          d
                                                                                                                                                                                                              KKM Governance Average Score




                                        To                                                                                                                    K
                                    H     ba                                                                                                                 MBuw




                                                                                KKM Voice and Accountability Score
                                                                                                                                                              aOlru a
                                     on     go                                                                                                                   am neit
                                       g                                                                                                                           ya
                                     B K                                                                                                                            sini
                                                                                                                                                                       a
                                      ot on
                                        sw g                                                                                                                    Q
                                          an                                                                                                                     Uata
                                        K a                                                                                                                        Ar
                                                                                                                                                                     E
                                         or                                                                                                                    K
                                           ea                                                                                                                     or
                                                                                                                                                            B       ea
                                                                                                                                                             ot
                                                                                                                                                               sw
                                                                                                                                                                   an
                                                                                                                                                                       a



                                                                                                                                                           H C
                                                C                                                                                                           on h
                                                                                                                                                               g ile
                                                 hi
                                                   le                                                                                                      S Ko
                                                                                                                                                             in
                                                                                                                                                               ga ng
                                                                                                                                                                  po
                                                                                                                                                                    re
                                                                                                                                                              N
                                                                                                                                                                or
                                           N                                                                                                                      w
                                            or                                                                                                                     ay
                                              w
                                               ay
Figure 9.


                             KKM Governance Scores by Country Groups

   2




  1.5




   1




  0.5




   0




 -0.5




   -1
            GE        PS           VA           ROL             RQ            COC   KKM Average

                            SWF Countries    Other Developing    Industrial




Note: KKM governance categories defined as GE=government effectiveness, PS= political stability
and the absence of violence, VA= voice and accountability, ROL= rule of law, RQ= regulatory
quality, and COC= control of corruption. Higher values associated with “better” governance.




                                                   34
      Figure 10.

                        Trum an Total Score vs. KKM Governance Average Score
                              Nonpension SW F            Linear Trend
  2.5



                                                                                                                NOR
                                                        SG P
  1.5                                                                                HKG

                                                                                           CHL



                                                                        BW A
                                                                 KO R
             UAE
             QAT
  0.5                   OMN
                       BRN
                                                 M YS
                                                          KWT
                                           KIR
                                                                     TTO
KKM
                                                          M EX
Avg
                                                               STP

                                        CHN
  -0.5                                ALG                                      KAZ
                                                                 RUS
                                                                                                  AZE
                                                                                                        TM P
                         VENIRN
                                    NG A

                        SDN
  -1.5




  -2.5
         0         5                        10          15   Trum an 20                          25            30     35
                                                           Total Score



      Figure 11.
                       Trum an Total Score vs. KKM Voice and Accountability S core
                             Nonpension SW F             Linear Trend
  2.5




                                                                                                                NOR

  1.5
                                                                                           CHL



                                                                 KO R
                                                                      BW A           HKG
                                           KIR                       TTO
  0.5
                                                               STP

KKM                                                       M EX
                                                        SG P
 VA
                                                 M YS     KWT                                           TM P
             QAT
  -0.5                   VEN

             UAE        OMN         NG A
                                      ALG                        RUS
                                                                               KAZ
                       BRN
                                                                                                  AZE

                              IRN

  -1.5
                                           CHN
                        SDN




  -2.5
         0         5                        10          15
                                                            Trum an 20                           25            30     35
                                                          Total Score




                                                                     35
Figure 12.
                              Truman Scores for Different Sovereign Fund Groupings

 100


  90


  80


  70


  60


  50


  40


  30


  20


  10


   0
             Behavior            Management            Structure         Accountability and           Total
                                                                           Transparency

                  Oil-Exporting SWFs      Other SWFs      Norway SWF             Sovereign Pensions




 Note: scores normalized as a percent of maximum score possible per category




Figure 13.
                         KKM Governance Measures for Different Sovereign Fund Groupings

  2.5



   2



  1.5



   1



  0.5



   0



 -0.5



   -1
             GE             PS            VA           ROL              RQ            COC        KKM avg

         "Older" Oil-Exporting SWFs        Other SWFs        Norway SWF              Sovereign Pensions




       Note: KKM governance categories defined as GE=government effectiveness, PS= political
       stability and the absence of violence, VA= voice and accountability, ROL= rule of law,
       RQ= regulatory quality, and COC= control of corruption.




                                                                   36
                                                                                                                                                                                  Sa
                                                                                                                                                                                     ud
              Sa                                                                                                                                                        U              iA
                 ud                                                                                                                                                      ni                 ra
                   iA                                                                                                                                                       te                 bi
                                                                                                                                                                                                    a
     U                  ra                                                                                                                                                    d




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          700
      ni                                                                                                                                                                        Ar        Ku (19
        te                 bi
                               a                                                                                                                                                             w
          d                                                                                                                                                                        ab                      52
                                                                                                                                                                                                              )




                                              0
                                                  10
                                                       20
                                                            30
                                                                 40
                                                                      50
                                                                           60
                                                                                70
                                                                                     80
            Ar        Ku (19                                                                                                                                                          Em ait
               ab        w            52
                  Em it      a            )
                                                                                                                                                                                           ira (19
                                                                                                                                                                                               te         53
                       ira (19                                                                                                                                                                      s         )
                                      5                                                                                                                                                   O           (1
                           te          3                                                                                                                                                     m           9
                               s         )                                                                                                                                                      an 76)
                      O          (1                                                                                                                                                  Si
                                    9




                                                                                                                                    Figure 15.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 14.




                         m                                                                                                                                                              ng
                 Si         an 76)                                                                                                                                                         ap (19
                    ng                                                                                                                                                                         or         80
                       ap (19                                                                                                                                                                       e        )
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (1
                          or
                               e
                                     80
                                         )
                                                                                                                                                                                          Br
                                                                                                                                                                                             un          9 81
                      Br         (1
                                                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ei           )
                         un 98
                              ei        1)
                                                                                                                                                                                           or (19
                                                                                                                                                                                             w            8
                     N                                                                                                                                                               Bo         ay          3)
                       or (19                                                                                                                                                            ts
                         w                                                                                                                                                                 w
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (1
                                                                                                                                                                                                         99
                 Bo          ay 83)                                                                                                                                                 H         a             0)
                     ts          (1                                                                                                                                                  on na
                        w           99                                                                                                                                                   g            (
                H         a             0)                                                                                                                                                  Ko 199
                 on na
                     g           (                                                                                                                                                    M ng                  3)
                        Ko 199                                                                                                                                                           al           (
                                        3)                                                                                                                                                  ay 199
                  M ng
                     al          (                                                                                                                                                             si
                                                                                                                                                                                                    a       3)
                        ay 199                                                                                                                                                            G           (1
                            si
                               a       3 )                                                                                                                                                  a            99
                      G          (1                                                                                                                                                 Az bo                   3)
                        a           99                                                                                                                                                  er n (
                                                                                                                                                                                                       19
                Az bo                   3)
                                                                                                                                                                                           ba
                                                                                                                                                                                              ija         98
                    er n (                                                                                                                                                                          n        )
                       ba         19
                          ija        98                                                                                                                                                  A            (1
                               n         )                                                                                                                                                               99
                     A           (1
                                                                                                                                                                                   Ka lge
                                                                                                                                                                                                r ia        9 )




                                                                                                                                                 SWF Assets/GDP
                                                                                                                                                                                      za
                                    99                                                                                                                                                    kh          (1
               Ka lge
                  za ria                9)                                                                                                                                                   st         9
                      kh         (1                                                                                                                                                             an 99)
                         st         9                                                                                                                                                    M            (




37
                             an 99)                                                                                                                                                         ex 200
                     M                                                                                                                                                                         ic           0)
                        ex
                                 (2
                                    00                                                                                                                                                             o
                           ic          0)                                                                                                                                                 Su (20
                               o                                                                                                                                                             da           00
                      Su (20                                                                                                                                                                       n         )
                                     00                                                                                                                                                  N            (2
                         da                                                                                                                                                                ig
                               n         )                                                                                                                                                    er 002
                     N           (2                                                                                                                                                              ia           )
                       ig
                          er 002                                                                                                                                                           Q (20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ordered by Date of SWF Establishment




                              ia         )                                                                                                                                                   at           03
                       Q (20
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ar           )




                                                                                           Ordered by Date of SWF Establishment
                                                                                          SWF Assets / Foreign Reserves (percent)
                         at          03                                                                                                                                                   Ko (20
                             ar          )                                                                                                                                          Ve re                 03
                                                                                                                                                                                                   a         )
                      Ko (20                                                                                                                                                            ne            (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SWF Assets/GDP and Foreign Reserves/GDP (percent)




                                     03
                                                                                                                                                 Foreign Reserves/GDP

                Ve re                                                                                                                                                                       zu 200
                                                                                                                                                                                               el           5)
                    ne a (2 )
                        zu                                                                                                                                                                          a
                                   00                                                                                                                                                                 (2
                           el
                               a       5)                                                                                                                                                   C            00
                                                                                                                                                                                              hi            5)
                                 (2                                                                                                                                                              le
                        C           00                                                                                                                                                                (2
                          hi
                              le        5)                                                                                                                                                 Li
                                                                                                                                                                                              by        0 0
                                                                                                                                                                           Tr                               6)
                                 (2                                                                                                                                          in                     a
       Tr
                       Li
                          by 006                                                                                                                                               id                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                 ad Ch 20
         in                    a         )                                                                                                                                           &         in         0 6
           id                    (                                                                                                                                                       To a (2 )
              ad Ch 200
                 &         i n         6                                                                                                                                                    ba          00
                     To a (2 )                                                                                                                                                                  go          7)
                        ba         0                                                                                                                                                     R            (
                             go 07)                                                                                                                                                         us 200
                     R                                                                                                                                                                         si           7)
                        us
                                 (2
                                    00                                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (2
                           si           7)                                                                                                                                                              00
                               a                                                                                                                                                                            8)
                                 (2
                                    00
                                       8)
                                Table 1. Sovereign Wealth Fund Sample
                                                                                   Date     Total assets
Country                 Fund Name                                               Established    ($ bil.)
United Arab Emirates    Abu Dhabi Investment Authority and others                  1976           817a
Singapore               GIC, Temasek                                               1981           375b
Norway                  Government Pension Fund–Global                             1990           375
Saudi Arabiac           Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency                              1952           270
Kuwait                  Kuwait Investment Authority                                1953           213
China                   China Investment Corporation                               2007           201
Russia                  Reserve Fund, National Welfare Fund                        2008           202
Hong Kong               Exchange Fund Investment Portfolio                         1993           139
Qatar                   Qatar Investment Authority                                 2005            60
Libyac                  Libyan Investment Authority                                2006            50
Algeria                 Revenue Regulation Fund                                    2000            47
Brunei                  Darussalam Brunei Investment Agency                        1983            35
Korea                   Korea Investment Corporation                               2005            30
Kazakhstan              National Fund for the Republic of Kazakhstan               2000            23
Venezuela               National Development Fund, Macro Stabilization Fund        2005            22
Malaysia                Khazanah Nasionald                                         1993            18
Nigeria                 Excess Crude Account                                       2003            17
Chile                   Economic and Social Stabilization Fund                     2006            15
Oman                    State General Reserve Fund                                 1980            13
Iran                    Oil Stabilization Fund                                     2000            10
Botswana                Pula Fund                                                  1993             7
Mexico                  Oil Income Stabilization Fund                              2000             5
Azerbaijan              State Oil Fund of the Republic of Azerbaijan               1999             2
Timor-Leste             Petroleum Fund                                             2005             2
Trinidad & Tobago       Heritage and Stabilization Fund                            2007             2
Kiribati                Revenue Equalization Reserve Fund                          1956             1
Gabonc                  Fund for Future Generations                                1998            0.4
Sudan                   Oil Revenue Stabilization Account                          2002            0.1
São Tomé & Príncipe     National Oil Account                                       2004           0.02
TOTAL                                                                                            2909

 a
   Midpoint of estimate range for Abu Dhabi Investment Authority plus sum of assets of Abu Dhabi
 International Petroleum Investment Company, Mubadala Development Company, Dubai DIFC Investments,
 Dubai International Capital, Investment Corporation of Dubai, Istithmar World.
 b
   Midpoint of estimates for GIC plus assets of Temasek
 c
   Excluded from Truman’s scoreboard.
 Source Truman (2008). Data are from the end of 2007 or the most recent date available. Where more than one
 fund exists per country, size computed as total of all funds, with date established given by largest fund.




                                                      38
                         Table 2. Determinants of SWF Likelihood
    Explanatory Variable            (1)     (2)     (3)       (4)                     (5)        (6)
    Current account/GDP         0.1.014                    0.767                  0.758       0.485
                                      (0.27)***                         (0.27)*** (0.30)**    (0.22)**
    Fuel/total exports                            0.464                 0.309     0.344       0.351
                                                  (0.09)***             (0.09)*** (0.10)***   (0.10)***
    Ore&metals/total exports                                  -0.312    0.079     0.095       0.137
                                                              (0.26)    (0.17)    (0.18)      (0.16)
    GDP per capita                                                                0.167
                                                                                  (0.18)
    Foreign reserves/GDP                                                                      0.378***
                                                                                              (0.14)
    Observations                      166         168         169       162       159         154
    Log likelihood                    -59.232     -47.503     -71.297   -40.327   -38.446     -32.63
    Pseudo R-sq                       0.196       0.344       0.017     0.435     0.457       0.522

Note: The table reports the change in the probability of existence of a SWF in 2007 or 2008 in response to
a 1 unit change in the variable evaluated at the mean of all variables (x100) to convert into percentages
with associated standard errors (for hypothesis of no effect) in parentheses below. Significance at 1%,
5%, 10% indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively, using robust errors. Constants included, but not
reported. Sample confined to countries with populations greater than 250,000 people in 2006.




                                                     39
           Table 3. Determinants of SWF Likelihood: KKM Governance Indicators
Explanatory Variable          (1)      (2)      (3)    (4)      (5)      (6)                   (7)
KKM Governance Average 1.545
                           (2.85)
Government Effectiveness             3.671
                                     (2.47)
Political Stability                              2.342
                                                 (2.94)
Voice and Accountability                                   -5.577
                                                           (2.73)**
Rule of Law                                                           2.252
                                                                      (2.63)
Regulatory Quality                                                               2.609
                                                                                 (2.75)
Control of Corruption                                                                       0.02328
                                                                                            (2.62)
Observations               171       171         171       171        171        171        171
Log likelihood             -74.449   -73.658     -74.247   -72.608    -74.245    -74.139    -74.212
Pseudo R-sq                0.002     0.012       0.005     0.027      0.005      0.006      0.005



           Table 4. Determinants of SWF Likelihood: KKM Governance Indicators
                                Developing Countries Only
Explanatory Variable          (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)   (5)      (6)                   (7)
KKM Governance Average     7.897
                           (4.18)*
Government Effectiveness             10.858
                                     (3.50)***
Political Stability                              5.348
                                                 (3.59)
Voice and Accountability                                   -4.584
                                                           (3.68)
Rule of Law                                                           9.051
                                                                      (3.93)**
Regulatory Quality                                                               7.892
                                                                                 (3.73)**
Control of Corruption                                                                       10.333
                                                                                            (4.02)**
Observations               148       148         148       148        148        148        148
Log likelihood             -66.907   -64.416     -67.511   -68.037    -65.968    -66.258    -65.375
Pseudo R-sq                0.0273    0.0635      0.0185    0.011      0.0410     0.0368     0.0500




                                               40
                                                 Table 5. Correlation of National and SWF Governance Indicators

                                                                       Truman SWF Governance Scores
                                                            Behavior   Structure Transparency Management          Total score
                                      Voice and
                                      Accountability          0.33        0.54          0.49           0.58          0.56
                                                             (0.10)*    (0.00)***     (0.01)***      (0.00)***     (0.00)***

                                      Political Stability    -0.03        0.06           0.16          0.29          0.15
                                                             (0.88)      (0.79)         (0.42)        (0.15)        (0.46)
KKM National Governance Inidicators




                                      Government
                                      Effectiveness           0.10        0.00          0.37           0.28          0.27
                                                             (0.63)      (0.99)        (0.06)*        (0.17)        (0.18)

                                      Regulatory
                                      Quality                 0.05        0.03           0.32          0.21          0.23
                                                             (0.81)      (0.89)         (0.11)        (0.30)        (0.26)


                                      Rule of Law            -0.03        0.01           0.22         0.33           0.18
                                                             (0.89)      (0.96)         (0.28)       (0.10)*        (0.38)


                                      Control of
                                      Corruption             -0.01       -0.02           0.26          0.25          0.19
                                                             (0.98)      (0.93)         (0.19)        (0.22)        (0.36)


                                      KKM
                                      Governance Avg.         0.07        0.10           0.33          0.35          0.28
                                                             (0.74)      (0.63)         (0.10)       (0.08) *       (0.16)




    Note: Table reports correlation of Truman (2008) scores for 26 sovereign (nonpension) wealth funds
    listed in Table 1 with Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi (2007) national governance measures for
    corresponding countries of origin. P-values in parentheses below. Significance at 1%, 5%, 10% indicated
    by ***, **, and *, respectively.




                                                                               41
                  Table 6. Determinants of SWF Assets/GDP with Truman SWF Scores
Explanatory Variable               (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)                    (7)
Fuel exports/GDP                3.106    2.186    2.013     2.451   1.761    1.962                  2.249
                              (1.485)** (1.282)     (1.188)*    (1.587) (1.075)*       (1.080)*     (1.240)*
SWF Duration                            3.932       6.367       6.181     6.154        6.355        6.250
                                        (2.057)*    (2.366)**   (2.329)** (1.916)***   (2.131)***   (2.471)**
Total Fund Score                                    -1.920
                                                    (2.133)
Fund Behavior                                                   4.620
                                                                (14.515)
Fund Structure                                                             -19.853
                                                                           (10.523)*
Fund Transparency                                                                      -12.860
                                                                                       (15.845)
Fund Management                                                                                     -1.090
                                                                                                    (4.076)
Observations                  26        26          23          23         23          23           23
R2                            0.245     0.370       0.527       0.520      0.570       0.532        0.520




              Table 7. Determinants of SWF Assets/GDP with KKM Governance Indicators
Explanatory Variable              (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)     (5)      (6)                     (7)
Fuel exports/GDP               3.032    3.310     2.379     2.690  2.944    3.032                   3.076
                              (1.406)** (1.413)** (1.260)*      (1.542)* (1.372)** (1.473)*         (1.332)**
SWF Duration                  2.191      2.090       2.875      3.703    1.811      2.117           1.389
                              (1.720)    (1.606)     (1.638)*   (2.021)* (1.813)    (1.927)         (1.720)
Governance Average            66.937
                              (25.777)**
Govt. Effectiveness                      71.428
                                         (25.107)***
Political Stability                                  52.097
                                                     (18.447***
Voice and Accountability                                        30.077
                                                                (22.159)
Rule of Law                                                              60.192
                                                                         (22.478)**
Regulatory Quality                                                                  60.223
                                                                                    (25.449)**
Control of Corruption                                                                               68.669
                                                                                                    (24.301) **
Observations                  26        26          26          26         26          26           26
R2                            0.502     0.545       0.479       0.375      0.484       0.490        0.546



                                                   42
                     Table 8. Determinants of Foreign Reserves/GDP
       Explanatory Variable                 (1)                   (2)
       Reserve volatility          -0.151               -0.183
                                     (0.702)               (0.702)
       Imports/GDP                   0.098                 0.100
                                     (0.043)**             (0.044)**
       M2/GDP                        0.124                 0.126
                                     (0.029)***            (0.029)***
       Currency Crisis               -2.036                -2.056
                                     (0.657)***            (0.658)***
       SWF present                   6.595                 7.057
                                     (3.189)**             (3.197)**
       SWF “older” oil exporter                            -6.618
                                                           (3.324)**
       Observations                  2151                  2151
       No. of Countries              116                   116
       No. of Countries with SWFs    22                    22
       R2 (overall)                  0.380                 0.414

Table reports results of panel regression over 1985-2006, with random effects and robust errors
clustered by country. Dummy variable for SWF “older” oil exporters defined as oil-exporting
country with SWF established before 1990.




                                             43
Appendix: Modeling Asset Diversification by a Central Bank and Sovereign Wealth Fund

        This Appendix compares the optimal patterns of portfolio diversification managed by a
central bank (CB) and a sovereign wealth fund (SWF), possibly acting as an agent for the
Treasury.
        We first present a simple model with which we compare the optimal degree of
diversification depending on the authorities’ utility function. We assume that the objective of the
CB is to maintain financial stability by solely focusing on the objective of reducing the
probability of sudden stops. In contrast, we presume that the Treasury, acting through a SWF,
maximizes the expected utility of a representative domestic agent. In this framework we show
that the CB’s focus on financial stability implies that it will place a higher weight on the
downside risk of sudden stops than will the SWF. Consequently, the CB tends to bias its
portfolio strategy towards holding more of the safe asset, whereas the SWF opts for greater
diversification towards risky foreign assets. We also show how the diversification gap between
the strategies of the CB and SWF is affected by various parameters of the economy, such as the
volatility of equity returns.
        We follow with a more elaborate model of joint decision making in which we treat the
Treasury as the dominant player and assume that it sets the total level of foreign assets managed
by the central bank, but delegates to the central bank the responsibility for maintaining financial
stability through the composition of its portfolio. Conditional on the actions of the central bank,
the Treasury decides what level of public foreign assets to entrust to the central bank for
management as well as the composition of the residual share of the country’s public foreign
assets managed through the SWF. In these circumstances, we find that the assignment of the
objective to financial stability to the CB tends to increase the gap between the optimal
diversification patterns of the CB and the SWF.
        In the concluding section we discuss how the degree of a country’s internal and external
transparency affects the country’s foreign asset returns and management.


A1.     The Base Model
        We consider the case where the authorities – either a central bank (CB) or a sovereign
wealth fund (SWF) -- determine the diversification of a given initial level of public foreign asset



                                                 44
holdings, A, between risk-free international reserves, R and risky foreign equities F, such that A
= R + F. International reserves yield a gross risk-free interest rate r0 , whereas equity yields a

stochastic return r0 + e + δ , where e is the expected equity premium and δ is a zero mean

equity-return shock. The realized value of public foreign assets in the following period, A1 , is

given by
         A1 = r0 A + (e + δ ) F ; 0 ≤ F ≤ A .                                                                  (A1)

The probability of a sudden stop, φ , depends negatively on the public sector’s foreign assets, A1,
and positively on the exogenously given level of aggregate foreign liabilities, B, such that
φ = φ [ B / A1 ] ; φ ' > 0 .1 In these circumstances, greater diversification towards foreign equities
entails growing balance sheet vulnerability, where adverse equity return shocks raise the
probability of sudden stops.
         The timing of the model is such that after determination of the degree of diversification
of foreign assets between equities and international reserves, the equity return shock (δ) is
realized at the beginning of the second period. This realization leads with probability φ to a
sudden stop crisis. In the absence of a crisis, the external debt B is repaid, and output Y1 is
realized,2 In the event of a sudden stop crisis, premature costly liquidation occurs, shrinking
end-of-period output and foreign assets to (Y1 + A1 )(1 − τ ) , 1 ≥ τ > 0 .3



1
  In the background of the model agents finance long-term investment via banks, which intermediate short-term
deposits into longer term investment a la Diamond and Dybvig (1983). The economy is assumed only partially
integrated with the global financial system, hence some of the liquidity intermediated by the banking system is the
outcome of inflows of short-term foreign deposits (“hot money”). Financial integration implies exposure to sudden
stops and capital flight shocks, which may drain the liquidity of the domestic banking system. A sudden stop entails
costly pre-mature liquidation of long term investments, reducing thereby the output associated with these projects.
The sudden stop probability can be derived endogenously by allowing for liquidity shocks z to foreign borrowing
(see Aizenman and Lee, 2008). If z < A1, the liquidity shock is financed by A1, without disrupting long-term
investment. If z > A1, it leads to a sudden stop crisis associated with premature and costly liquidation of z – A1 units
of capital.
2
  The model can be generalized by endogenizing the determination of foreign borrowing B. For example, in a two-
period economy, where second-period output is subject to productivity shocks, the possibility that the country may
default in the second period with a bad enough productivity shock implies that foreign borrowing is constrained by
the condition that the cost of funds equals the expected return to lenders (see Aizenman and Marion, 2004). Y1 might
be expressed as a function of borrowing B in this more general framework.
3
  This is a reduced form of the resources left following the premature liquidation of investments needed to finance
deposits and capital flight. To simplify, we assume that that A1 and Y1 shrink at the same rate. The logic of our
analysis continues to hold with different shrinkage rates of A1 and Y1, where the resources left would be
 A1 (1 − τ A ) + Y1 (1 − τ Y ) , 1 ≥ τ A > 0, 1 ≥ τ Y > 0 .


                                                          45
           Agents are risk averse, with utility U. The SWF determines the portfolio allocation in
order to maximize the expected utility of a representative domestic agent, Vsw :

            Vsw = E ⎡⎣{1 − φ [ B / A1 ]}U [ A1 + Y1 − B ] + {φ [ B / A1 ]}U [ ( A1 + Y1 )(1 − τ ) ]⎤⎦ ,                  (A2)

where E is the expectation operator. Assuming an interior solution with diversification, the FOC
determining F is:
            dVsw / dF = E ⎡⎣(1 − φ )U ' [ A1 + Y1 − B ] (e + δ ) + φU ' [ ( A1 + Y1 )(1 − τ ) ] (1 − τ )(e + δ ) ⎤⎦
                          ⎡                                                                  ⎤                           (A3)
                                     (e + δ ) {U [ A1 + Y1 − B ] − U [ ( A1 + Y1 )(1 − τ ) ]}⎥ = 0.
                               B
                      + E ⎢φ '     2
                          ⎣ ( A1 )                                                           ⎦
Rearranging terms,
                              ⎡                                                                       ⎤
                                              ( e + δ ) {U [ A1 + Y1 − B ] − U [ ( A1 + Y1 )(1 − τ )]}⎥ ,
                                        B
            E [ dU / dF ] = E ⎢ −φ '        2
                                                                                                                         (A4)
                              ⎣      ( A1 )                                                           ⎦
where
             E [ dU / dF ] ≡ E ⎡⎣(1 − φ )U ' [ A1 + Y1 − B ] (e + δ ) + φU ' [ ( A1 + Y1 )(1 − τ ) ] (1 − τ )(e + δ ) ⎤⎦ .

The lefthand size of (A4), E [ dU / dF ] , is the expected marginal benefit of diversification, i.e.
the expected marginal utility valuation of the equity premium associated with higher F,
dA1 / dF = e + δ . The righthand side of (A4) is the expected marginal cost of diversification, i.e.

the marginal increase in the probability of a sudden stop, d φ / dF , times the utility cost of lost
consumption associated with a sudden stop, U [ A1 + Y1 − B ] − U [ ( A1 + Y1 )(1 − τ )] .4
           CB management is assumed to focus solely on maintaining financial stability, ignoring
the effects of its behavior on the utility of domestic agents. As long as a crisis is avoided, the CB
manager enjoys a consumption level of Ccb , and utility U [Ccb ] . A financial crisis entails a

penalty at rate p; 1 ≥ p > 0 (possibly involving replacement of the central bank manager),

reducing the central bank’s utility to U [ ccb (1 − p ) ] . In these circumstances, the CB’s expected

utility is




4
    Since φ ' > 0 , note that dφ / dF = −φ ' ( B / A1 )( e + δ ) > 0 for a negative shock large enough such that e + δ < 0 .
Note also that the utility cost is positive as long as ( A1 + Y1 )τ > B , i.e. the penalty costs are greater than the foregone
foreign borrowing obligation.


                                                                46
        Vcb = E ⎡⎣{1 − φ [ B / A1 ]}U [Ccb ] + {φ [ B / A1 ]}U [Ccb (1 − p ) ]⎤⎦ .                (A5)

Consequently, the FOC determining the optimal level of foreign equities for the CB is

                      ⎡    B              ⎤
        dVcb / dF = E ⎢φ '     2
                                 (e + δ ) ⎥ = 0.                                                 (A6)
                      ⎣ ( A1 )            ⎦

Comparing the FOC of optimal portfolio diversification by the SWF, (A3), to the FOC of the
CB, (A6), reveals that the CB ignores the possible expected gains to domestic agents induced by
diversification in the presence of a positive equity premium. Instead, the CB minimizes the
downside risk associated with adverse equity shocks, recognizing that such shocks would
increase the leverage ratio B/A1 at a rate proportionate to the equity portfolio share (since (A1)
implies A1 / A = r0 + (e + δ ) ( F / A ) ), thereby increasing the probability of sudden stops in bad

times. This suggests that the CB will opt for much less diversification into foreign equities than
the SWF.
        Further insight is gained by considering a simple example, where the equity shock, δ ,
takes on two values, either δ or −δ , each with probability one half, implying mean value 0 and
standard deviation δ . Agents’ utility displays constant relative risk aversion, with a CRRA
coefficient β . The left panel of Figure A1 plots the optimal share of foreign equities in a
portfolio managed by the SWF (top curve) and the CB (bottom curve), each as a function of
volatility δ , for the case where the initial public asset position is A = 1, well below the level of
external liabilities, B, assumed to be 1.6. With the initial foreign public asset level A normalized
to 1, F also measures the equity share of the portfolio. For δ = 0.2, the SWF’s diversification
rate is roughly 87%, whereas the CB opts for a much lesser degree of diversification (about
15%). Figure A2 plots the association between the equity shock and the sudden stop probability
for the CB (dotted line) and SWF (bold line), given the optimal equity share F chosen when δ =
0.2, for varying realizations of the equity shock. Note that the limited diversification strategy
pursued by the CB results in a relatively low expected probability of sudden stops, less than 0.1.
In contrast, the greater holdings of risky foreign equities by the SWF exposes the economy to the
greater downside risk of a sudden stop in bad times, e.g. for a δ realization of -0.4, the
probability of a crisis is almost 0.3.



                                                          47
        Our framework suggests that, for relatively low levels of public foreign assets, assigning
portfolio management independence to the CB may advantageous. However, for a large enough
asset base A, the opportunity cost associated with the limited portfolio diversification of the CB
would be high enough to induce the authorities to establish a SWF, treating it as an agent for the
Treasury in pursuit of greater returns. In these circumstances, the SWF would opt for much
higher greater investment in foreign equities, while the CB would manage its assets with limited
diversification, so as to minimize the downside risk of sudden stop crises. The right panel of
Figure A1 illustrates the effects of the size of the asset base on diversification choices, by tripling
A from 1 to 3. As can be observed, the higher level of public assets has a negligible effect on the
CB’s demand for equities, but induces a large increase in the SWF’s equity demand.

A2. Delegation of Financial Stability Objective to Central Bank
        This section extends the base model, recognizing the possibility that the CB has a
comparative advantage in avoiding sudden stops and maintaining financial stability, whereas the
SWF has a comparative advantage in managing risky portfolios. We continue to assume that A ,
the initial foreign assets of the public sector, and B, aggregate foreign borrowing, are
exogenously determined. We now assume that the Treasury, is the dominant player, determining
the split of the given level of public foreign assets A , between the management of the SWF and
the CB, while also managing the composition of the SWF’s portfolio of foreign assets:
A = Asw + Acb ; where Asw , Acb denote the initial assets managed by the SWF and CB,

respectively. Note that if A is given and the CB determines Acb , then Asw is determined as well.

        The realized value of assets under CB management in the following period are A1,cb . The

CB diversifies its portfolio between foreign reserves ( Rcb ) and foreign equities ( Fcb ),

Acb = Rcb + Fcb , implying

         A1,cb = ro Acb + (e + δ ) Fcb ,                                                       (A1’)

where e is the expected equity premium and δ is a zero mean equity-return shock for investment
in risky assets by the central bank.
        The Treasury has a comparative advantage in active management of the external
portfolio, resulting in an equity premium and equity return shock ( esw , δ sw ) that differs from

those affecting the CB’s portfolio, e, δ . This reflects the possibility that the CB diversifies by


                                                  48
passive portfolio investment channels (such as investing in broad and relatively liquid foreign
stock indexes), whereas Treasury diversities by more active portfolio management, including
FDI and possibly less liquid projects, with possible exposure to higher expected returns, but with
the downside of more volatile returns (hence esw ≥ e; σ δ sw ≥ σ δ ). Accordingly, the realized value

of assets under SW management in the following period is A1,sw :

           A1, sw = ro Asw + ( esw + δ sw ) Fsw                                                             (A1”)

          As before, the probability of a sudden stop, φ , depends positively on the exogenously
given level of aggregate foreign liabilities B and negatively on the public sector’s foreign assets
A1, such that φ = φ [ B / A1 ] .
          As the CB deals directly with monitoring and supervising financial intermediation, we
presume that the CB has a comparative advantage in reducing the probability of a financial crisis
triggered by sudden stops, implying that, for a given ratio of foreign borrowing to assets, the
CB’s management results in a lower probability of sudden stops than would that of the SWF, i.e.
φcb [ x ] < φsw [ x ] , where φcb [ x ] ; φsw [ x ] denote the sudden stop probability if assets are managed by

the CB and a Treasury-controlled SWF, respectively, and x = B / A1 .5
          The cost of delegating financial stability management to the CB is that, in case of need,
only a fraction q of Asw would be available to the CB ( 0 ≤ q < 1 ). This may reflect both the
lower liquidity of the SWF’s investment, and institutional frictions that may slow down the
SWF’s ability to mobilize resources. Hence, under CB management,

φcb [ x ] = φcb ⎡⎣ B / ( A1,cb + qA1, sw ) ⎤⎦ . For simplicity, we assume that q = 0, implying

φcb [ x ] = φcb ⎡⎣ B / A1,cb ⎤⎦ .

          The diversification problem facing the CB is identical to the one described in section A1,
i.e. maximize with respect to Fc b the objective function

                  ⎣    {                   }          {                }
          Vcb = E ⎡ 1 − φcb ⎡⎣ B / A1,cb ⎤⎦ U [Ccb ] + φcb ⎡⎣ B / A1,cb ⎤⎦ U [Ccb (1 − p )]⎤
                                                                                           ⎦


5
 One way to capture the CB’s comparative advantage is to suppose that φcb = (1 − b)φsw ; 0 < b < 1 , where b
measures the delegation gain associated with assigning the financial stability objective to the CB. In these
circumstances, delegation implies that the CB will choose a more prudent policy than the one chosen by the SWF.
The financial stability delegation to the CB makes the Treasury and SWF better off if the efficiency gains associated
with CB’s comparative advantage are sizable enough (i.e., for large enough b).


                                                            49
subject to (A1’), where φ is replaced with φcb and B and Acb are exogenous to the CB’s actions.
Hence an analogue to the first order condition (A6) holds:
                            ⎡          B                 ⎤
            dVcb / dFcb = E ⎢φ 'cb             ( e + δ ) ⎥ = 0.                                                            (A6’)
                            ⎣      ( A1,cb ) 2           ⎦
The SWF’s expected utility is akin to (A2), modified by delegating the financial stability
objective to the CB:

                       {                    }                           {               }
            Vsw = E ⎡ 1 − φ cb [ Acb ; B ] U ⎡⎣ A1, sw + Y1 − B ⎤⎦ + φ cb [ Acb ; B ] U ⎡⎣( A1, sw + Y1 )(1 − τ ) ⎤⎦ ⎤
                    ⎣                                                                                                  ⎦
                                                                                                                           (A2’)

where φ cb is the probability of a sudden stop as determined by CB policy, which in turn is

conditional on the CB’s initial foreign asset holdings set by the Treasury Acb as well as
(exogenous) foreign borrowing B. 6
            The Treasury’s problem is to determine, for given initial public assets A , the SWF’s
investment in equities Fsw and the optimal level of initial CB assets Acb , that maximize (A2’),
subject to
                      A1, sw = ro ( A − Acb ) + (esw + δ sw ) Fsw ; 0 ≤ Fsw ≤ Asw ≤ A                                      (A7)

(Recall that setting Acb also determines the SWF’s safe asset holdings Asw , since Asw = A − Acb .)

            The first-order condition for optimal Fsw and asset diversification by the SWF is


  ⎢⎣ ⎣  {        }                              { }
E ⎡ ⎡ 1 − φ cb U ' ⎡⎣ A1, sw + Y1 − B ⎤⎦ + φ cb U ' ⎡⎣( A1, sw + Y1 )(1 − τ ) ⎤⎦ (1 − τ ) ⎤ (esw + δ sw ) ⎤ = 0
                                                                                            ⎦               ⎥⎦
                                                                                                                           (A8)

or E [ dU sw / dFsw ] = 0 . Comparing (A8) to (A4), we infer that delegating financial stability
policy to the CB implies that the SWF equates the expected marginal benefit of diversification,
E [dU sw / dFsw ] , to zero, instead of equating it to the expected cost of increasing the sudden stop
probability.
            Figure A3 illustrates the effect of policy delegation on the SWF’s degree of
diversification. The bottom curve shows the SWF’s diversification pattern in the absence of
delegation, corresponding to the case depicted in the left panel of A1 (with the same parameter
values, including a =20). The top curve (labeled “SWF, CB delegation”) corresponds to the

6                                                                                                      l cb [ A ; B, e, σ ] .
    (A6’) yields an expression for Fcb as an implicit function of Acb , as well as B and e + δ : Fcb = F       cb        δ

             l cb into φ gives φ = φ ⎡ B / A ⎤ = φ ⎡ B / r A + F
Substituting F                  cb  cb ⎣    1, cb ⎦ cb
                                                       ⎣  0 cb      (  cb
                                                                                  ⎦     cb  cb )
                                                               l cb [ A ](e + δ ) ⎤ ≡ φ [ A ; B ] .



                                                                  50
SWF’s diversification pattern with the same asset base ( Asw = 1 ), in circumstances where the CB
is assigned the objective of minimizing the probability of a sudden stop (for the case where
Acb = 1 , a = 10). With delegation, for any given volatility of returns, the SWF chooses to hold a
higher level of foreign equity assets, implying greater diversification.
         Our framework also implies that, as part of its optimal portfolio policy, the Treasury
determines the CB’s initial foreign assets, Acb . The discussion above implies that, above a
threshold of foreign assets A, marginal increases in A lead to greater asset allocation by the

Treasury to the SWF. This holds trivially as the probability of sudden stop, φ cb , approaches
zero.
         More generally, the first-order condition determining Acb is:


                ⎢⎣   ({         }                        { }(                                )        )(
dVsw / dAcb = E ⎡ 1 − φ cb ( −U ' [ A1 + Y1 − B ]) + φ cb −U ' ⎡⎣( A1 + Y ) (1 − τ ) ⎤⎦ (1 − τ ) ro + (e + δ ) F l' ⎤
                                                                                                                     cb ⎥
                                                                                                                        ⎦)
                   ⎡⎛                                                                                       ⎞⎤
                   ⎢ ⎜  
               + E −φ 'cb
                                 B
                                             (         l
                                                               ){                                              }
                                         ro + (e + δ ) F 'cb U [ A1 + Y1 − B ] − U ⎡⎣( A1 + Y ) (1 − τ ) ⎤⎦ ⎟ ⎥ = 0
                   ⎢⎜        ( A1,cb )                                                                      ⎟⎥
                                       2

                   ⎣⎝                                                                                       ⎠⎦
or
                    ⎡                                                                                      ⎤
E [ dU / dAcb ] = E ⎢ −φ 'cb
                                  B
                                         (                ){
                                                        l ' U [ A + Y − B ] − U ⎡( A + Y ) (1 − τ ) ⎤
                                          ro + (e + δ ) F                       ⎣ 1                 ⎦   }⎥⎥ = 0
                    ⎢         ( A1,cb )
                                        2                  cb    1   1

                    ⎣                                                                                      ⎦
where

                           {        }                  { }                                       (
E [ dU / dAcb ] ≡ E ⎡ 1 − φ cb U ' [ A1 + Y1 − B ] + φ cb U ' ⎡⎣( A1 + Y ) (1 − τ ) ⎤⎦ (1 − τ ) ro + (e + δ ) F
                    ⎣                                                                                              )
                                                                                                                l' ⎤.
                                                                                                                  cb
                                                                                                                     ⎦
Thus the Treasury extends more initial foreign assets to the central bank to the point that the
expected marginal benefit of doing so, E [ dU / dAcb ] , i.e. the expected marginal utility valuation

                                                                          l ' , where F
of the return associated with higher Acb -- dA1,cb / dAcb = ro + (e + δ ) F           l ' is the
                                                                             cb          cb


marginal impact on the CB’s optimal foreign equity holdings7 -- equals the marginal increase in

the probability of a sudden stop, φ 'cb , times the utility cost of a sudden stop,

U [ A1 + Y1 − B ] − U [ ( A1 + Y1 )(1 − τ ) ] .


7
 As noted earlier, (A6’) yields an expression for Fcb as an implicit function of Acb , as well as B and e + δ :
F =F l cb [ A ; B, e, σ ] .
    cb       cb        δ




                                                          51
A3. Domestic and External Transparency
         We conclude with a short discussion about the impact of transparency on the behavior of
a SWF. We denote domestic and international transparency indices by tdom , tintl , respectively.
Domestic transparency determines the opaqueness of the SWF to domestic tax payers. If greater
domestic transparency increase the median voter’s support for the SWF, greater resources may
be delegated to it, implying A = A[ tdom ] , A ' > 0 .8        In less democratic countries, SWF
management may reflect the preferences of a narrow power group, and the determination of
internal transparency is more involved. Too little transparency may backfire by fueling popular
dissent, encouraging political instability, and possibly reducing the tenure of the Treasury
management by its forceful removal from office. Yet, “high” domestic transparency may entail
another cost to the Treasury in the form of greater discontent, inducing other power groups to
challenge the size and the mandate of the SWF. In these circumstances, the association between
the resources available to the Treasury and domestic transparency may have an inverted U-shape,
A = A [tdom ] , A ' > 0, A " < 0 .9

         Similarly, international transparency refers to the degree to which the holdings and the
investment strategy of the SWF is transparent to the global financial system. The SWF may face
a complex trade off regarding international transparency. If the SWF benefits from access to
superior talent and information, greater transparency may reduce the effectiveness of any
proprietary strategy used by the fund. Yet, inadequate international transparency tends to reduce
the hospitality shown towards FDI and portfolio investment in the host country and possibly
encourage local efforts to reduce SWF’s access to profitable business opportunities. This




8
  In a more general framework these levels of transparency may be determined endogenously.
9
  The Treasury’s solution may entail running “double accounting books,” where official figures may understate
actual SWF accumulations and allocations. One can model this behavior in a version of a principal-agent model,
extending Hermalin and Weisbach (2007). The Treasury, as the principal, manages the SWF, determining its
transparency. The agents consist of tax payers and other power groups. Monitoring the principal entails a political
struggle that is costly to both the principal (possibly through the loss of control), and agents (exposed to possible
violence and punishment). In these circumstances, if agents believe that the gap between the official and the actual
books is not “large,” they will tolerate an equilibrium with limited domestic transparency. The principal then
determines the “optimal” level of domestic transparency” taking into account that low transparency allows it to gain
by increasing the gap between the actual and official books, balanced against the cost of increasing the probability
of losing control.


                                                         52
suggests that the association between excess equity returns and the SWF’s international
transparency may have an inverted U shape, esw = esw [tintl ] , esw
                                                                 '
                                                                    < 0, esw
                                                                          "
                                                                             > 0 .10

         In our benchmark model, increases in domestic transparency can be interpreted as
parametric shifts in A. As depicted in Figure 1b, in the case that greater transparency primarily
increases the level of foreign assets allocated to the SWF, the level of investment in foreign
equity assets raises significantly for any given volatility level δ .11 Similarly, if the degree of
international transparency increases enough to raise the expected return to foreign assets, the
SWF’s foreign equity investment increases as well.




10
   SWF size also may play an important role: limited transparency by larger funds may encourage greater hostility to
investment in foreign markets, possibly owing to the fear that a large player may use its market clout strategically,
such as for mercantilist trade goals.
11
   In our framework with responsibility for financial stability delegated to the central bank, the Treasury sets Acb ,
given A, while the CB determines Fcb , given Acb . But setting Acb also determines the SWF’s safe asset holdings Asw ,
since Asw = A − Acb . In this case Asw depends on tdom only through A: an increase in domestic transparency that
results in greater initial public foreign entrusted to the Treasury also is associated with greater assets entrusted to the
sovereign wealth fund.



                                                            53
  Figure A1. Equity return volatility, foreign equity holdings, and asset size

       F                                                          F




                      SWF                                                                   SWF



                CB                                                            CB




                                          δ                                                          δ

                  A=1                                                      A=3
Note: The bottom (top) curve corresponds to the CB behavior (SWF). Simulation assumes
φ = MIN {a[ B /( A1 + B )]h ; 1} , the equity shock, δ , takes on two values, either δ or −δ , and
 r0 = 0, β = 2, Y1 = 2, B = 1.6, e = 0.05, τ = 0.2, p = 0.9, h = 12, a = 20 . The lefthand and righthand panels assume
initial asset size levels A of 1 and 3, respectively.

Figure A2. Equity return shock realizations and probability of sudden stop.
                                                                 φ




                                                SWF



                                                                                  CB

                                                                                           δ
                                     δ
Note: Simulation assumes Fcb = 0.15; Fsw = 0.87; A = 1 , and the parameters specified in Figure A1. The bold curve
draws the sudden stop probability for F = 0.87 (the SWF equity share for volatility level δ = 0.2), while the dotted
curve draws the sudden stop probability for F = 0.15 (the CB equity share for volatility 0.2).

                                                           54
Figure A3. Equity return volatility and diversification rate for SWF, with and without CB
delegation
                                    F




                                                             SWF, with CB delegation




                                                     SWF




                                                                               δ

     Note: Bottom curve describes SWF diversification in the absence of delegation. The simulation assumes
     φsw = MIN {a[ B /( A1 + B )]h ; 1} , the equity shock, δ , takes two on values, either δ or −δ , and
     r0 = 0, β = 2, Y1 = 2, ASW = 1, B = 1.6, e = 0.05, τ = 0.2, p = 0.9, h = 12, a = 20 . The top curve describes
     SWF behavior with delegation, where Asw = 1,       Acb = 1 , and φcb = MIN {0.5a[ B /( A1, cb + B )]h ; 1}




                                                       55
