NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON THE CRISIS OF 2007-2008
Michael D. Bordo
Working Paper 14569
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14569

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

Remarks prepared for the Central Bank of Chile Twelfth Annual Conference on Financial Stability,
Monetary Policy and Central Banking. Santiago, Chile November 6-7 2008¸˛¸ The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Michael D. Bordo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

An Historical Perspective on the Crisis of 2007-2008
Michael D. Bordo
NBER Working Paper No. 14569
December 2008
JEL No. N10
ABSTRACT
This paper provides an historical perspective on the crisis of 2007-2008. The crisis is part of a perennial
pattern. It has echoes in earlier big international financial crises which were triggered by events in
the U.S. financial system. Examples include the crises of 1857, 1893 1907 and 1929-33. This crisis
has many similarities to those of the past but also some important modern twists.

Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

An Historical Perspective on the Crisis of 2007-2008

The current international financial crisis is part of a perennial pattern. Today’s events
have echoes in earlier big international financial crises which were triggered by events in
the U.S. financial system. Examples include the crises of 1857,1893, 1907 and 19291933. This crisis has many similarities to those of the past but also some important
modern twists.
The crisis started in the U.S.. with the collapse of the subprime mortgage market in early
2007 and the end of a major housing boom. It occurred following two years of rising
policy interest rates. Its causes include major changes in regulation, lax oversight,
relaxation of normal standards of prudent lending and a prolonged period of abnormally
low interest rates. Defaults on mortgages spread to investment banks and commercial
banks in the U.S. and across the world via an elaborate network of derivatives. It has
recently spilled over into the real economy through a virulent credit crunch and
collapsing equities market which will likely produce a significant recession. The Fed and
other central banks have responded in a classical way by flooding the financial markets
with liquidity and the fiscal authorities are also dealing with the decline in solvency in the
banking system following the template of earlier bailouts like the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation in the 1930s, Sweden in 1992 and Japan in the late 1990s.
This paper provides an historical perspective on the current crisis, contrasts the old with
the modern and offers some lessons for policy. Section 1 describes the crisis in a bit more
detail. Section 2 provides some descriptive empirical evidence putting the crisis in long-

2

run perspective. Section 3 presents some modern parallels and modern twists of the crisis.
Section 4 discusses some of the issues in historical perspective for the emerging market
economies. Finally, section 5 concludes with a discussion of some of the historical lessons
for policy.

1. The Crisis

The crisis occurred following two years of rising policy interest rates. Its causes include :
major changes in regulation, lax regulatory oversight, a relaxation of normal standards of
prudent lending and a period of abnormally low interest rates . The default on a
significant fraction of subprime mortgages produced spillover effects around the world
via the securitized mortgage derivatives into which these mortgages were bundled, to the
balance sheets of investment banks, hedge funds and conduits( which are bank-owned but
off their balance sheets) which intermediate between mortgage and other asset backed
commercial paper and long-term securities. The uncertainty about the value of the
securities collateralized by these mortgages spread uncertainty about the soundness of
loans for leveraged buyouts. All of this led to the freezing of the interbank lending market
in August 2007 and substantial liquidity injections subsequently by the Federal Reserve
and other central banks.
Since then the Fed both extended and expanded its discount window facilities and cut the
funds rate by 300 basis points. The crisis worsened in March 2008 with the rescue of the
Investment bank, Bear Stearns, by JP Morgan backstopped by funds from the Federal

3

Reserve. The rescue was justified on the grounds that Bear Stearns exposure to
counterparties was so extensive that a worse crisis would follow if it were not bailed out.
The March crisis also led to the creation of a number of new discount window facilities
whereby investment banks could access the window and which broadened the collateral
acceptable for discounting. The next major event was a Federal Reserve Treasury bailout
and partial nationalization of the insolvent GSEs, Fannie and Freddie Mac in July on the
grounds that they were crucial to the functioning of the mortgage market.
Events took a turn for the worse in September when the Treasury and Fed allowed the
investment bank Lehman Brothers to fail to discourage the belief that all insolvent
institutions would be saved in an attempt to prevent moral hazard . It was argued that
Lehman was both in worse shape and less exposed to counterparty risk than Bear Stearns.
The next day the authorities bailed out and nationalized the insurance giant AIG fearing
the systemic consequences for collateralized -default swaps ( insurance contracts on
securities) if it were allowed to fail. The fallout from the Lehman bankruptcy then turned
the liquidity crisis into a full fledged global credit crunch and stock market crash (as well
described in Kindleberger’s Manias, Panics and Crashes) as interbank lending effectively
seized up on the fear that no banks were safe.
In the ensuing atmosphere of panic, along with Fed liquidity assistance to the
commercial paper market and the extension of the safety net to money market mutual
funds, the US Treasury sponsored its Troubled Asset Relief Plan ( TARP) whereby $700
billion could be devoted to the purchase of heavily discounted mortgage backed and other
securities to remove them from the banks’ balance sheets and restore bank lending. The

4

bill was initially rejected by the Congress but then after the Senate added on to it many
politically popular and expensive items was finally passed a week later in the midst of
continued financial turmoil.
In early October the crisis spread to Europe and to the emerging countries as the global
interbank market ceased functioning . The UK authorities responded by pumping equity
into British banks, guaranteeing all interbank deposits and providing massive liquidity.
The EU countries responded in kind. And on October 13 the US Treasury followed suit
with a plan to inject $250 billion into the US banks,to provide insurance of senior
interbank debt and unlimited deposit insurance coverage for non interest bearing deposits.
Time will tell whether these plans, which are similar to earlier, mainly successful, rescue
packages like the RFC in the US in the 1930s and the Swedish and Japanese rescues in
the 1990s, may solve the solvency crisis.

2. Some Descriptive Historical Evidence

Today’s turmoil must be viewed in historical perspective. Figure 1 provides some
background evidence for the U.S. over the past century. The upper panel from 1953 to
September 2008 , shows the monthly spreads between the Baa corporate bond rate and
the ten-year Treasury constant maturity bond rate. The spread, inter alia, represents a
measure of the financial market’s assessment of credit risk and also a measure of
financial instability reflecting asymmetric information ( Mishkin 1991). Figure 2 takes a
longer view and shows the Baa corporate bond rate and the Ten year Treasury Composite

5

bond rate from 1921 to September 2008. Also displayed in both figures are National
Bureau of Economic Research ( NBER) recession dates and major financial market
events including stock market crashes, financial crises, and some major political events
that affected financial markets. The lower panels of Figures 1 and 2 show policy interest
rates –the federal funds rate since 1953 and the discount rate for the longer 20th century.
As can be seen , the peaks in the credit cycle ( proxied by the spreads) are often lined up
with the upper turning points in the NBER reference cycles. Also many of the events,
especially the stock market crashes and the banking crises of the 1930s, occur close to the
peaks. Moreover , the lower panel often shows the policy rate peaking very close to or
before the peaks of the credit cycle. Its movements roughly reflect the tightening of
policy before the bust and loosening in reaction to the oncoming recession afterwards. As
can be seen in the recent crisis, by September 2008 the Baa ten year TCM spread reached
levels comparable to that reached in the last recession 2001-2002 and above that of the
credit crunch of 1990-91. The Baa Ten year Composite spread was just below the spreads
in the early 1980s recession after the Volcker shock and President Carter’s credit restraint
program. All of these events were associated with significant recessions.

3. Historical Parallels and Modern Twists

Many of the financial institutions and instruments caught up in the crisis are part of the
centuries old phenomenon of financial innovation. The new instruments often devised to

6

avoid regulation, are then proved to be successful or not by the test of financial stress
such as we have been recently encountering.
The rise and fall of financial institutions and instruments occurs as part of a long standing
pattern of booms and busts in the markets for equities, land , commodities, foreign
exchange and other assets. The cycle is financed by credit. Lending booms and busts and
the credit cycle are also intimately connected to the business cycle.
A well known tradition in monetary economics which goes back to the nineteenth century
and in the twentieth century was fostered by Wesley Mitchell ( 1913), Irving Fisher
( 1933), Hyman Minsky( 1977) ,Charles Kindleberger and others. It tells the tale of a
business cycle upswing driven by what Fisher called a displacement ( an exogenous event
that provides new profitable opportunities for investment) leading to an investment boom
financed by bank money( and accommodative monetary policy) and by new credit
instruments –financial innovation. The boom leads to a state of euphoria where investors
have difficulty distinguishing sound from unsound prospects and where fraud can be
rampant. It can also lead to a bubble characterized by asset prices rising independently
from their fundamentals. The boom inevitably leads to a state of overindebtedness, when
agents have insufficient cash flow to service their liabilities. In such a situation a crisis
can be triggered by errors in judgement by debtors and creditors in an environment
changing from monetary ease to monetary tightening. The crisis can lead to fire sales of
assets, declining net worths, bankruptcies, bank failures and an ensuing recession.
A key dynamic in the crisis stressed by Mishkin(1997) is information asymmetry,
manifest in the spread between risky and safe securities, the consequences of

7

which(adverse selection and moral hazard) are ignored in the boom and come into play
with a vengeance in the bust.
Banks played a key role in the traditional story because bank credit in large part financed
the boom, and the bust was often accompanied by bank failures and banking panics—
events which eventually made the downturn worse. This led to the traditional case for the
monetary authority to act as a lender of last resort and provide liquidity at penalty rates to
the money market and or discount window lending to solvent but liquid banks.
Countercyclical monetary policy is also an integral part of the boom-bust credit cycle.
Bordo and Wheelock( 2007a, 2007b) using data for the US and 9 other countries for the
past century show that stock market booms occur in environments of low inflation, rising
real GDP growth and low policy real interest rates. As the boom progresses and
inflationary pressure builds up, central banks( before World War II, driven by the gold
convertibility constraint) inevitably tighten their policy rates helping to trigger the
ensuing crash. The story is similar for housing booms and busts but they follow a
different cycle because of long gestation lags in construction and in the adjustment
of prices to a collapse in demand ( Leamer 2007).
Stock market crashes can be serious events leading to a decline in wealth and in
consumption and also a scramble for liquidity in turn contributing to incipient banking
crises. Housing busts also have serious consequences for the banking system via defaults
on mortgages, and on the real economy via declining wealth on consumption expenditure,
the collapse of residential investment and a financial accelerator effect as net worths
decline. The recent housing boom in the US was largely triggered by a long period of
abnormally low interest rates, attributed to loose monetary policy from 2001 to 2004 in

8

reaction to earlier financial turbulence and then fear of deflation and to a global savings
glut ( Bernanke 2007). The bust was likely induced by a rise in rates in reaction to the
inevitable inflationary pressure.

The Non Bank Financial Sector, Financial Innovation and Financial Crises

The traditional financial crisis story depicts a shock to a major financial or non financial
firm leading to a banking panic as depositors attempt to convert their deposits into
currency. More recently, especially since the advent of deposit insurance, the source of
the pressure has come from the asset side, rather than the liability side of a bank’s
balance sheet. Examples include the Penn Central episode in 1970 when the collapse of
the railroad led to a panic in the commercial paper market which led, like today to
concern by the Fed that it would spill over into the banking system. This led the New
York Fed to open the discount window to the money center banks to freely discount non
financial firms based on the collateral of sound commercial paper; the Latin American
debt default of 1982 when many money center banks became close to insolvent until a
massive rescue was orchestrated between the Fed and the IMF; and the collapse of the
hedge fund LTCM in 1998 which also was perceived to be a threat to the banking system.
LTCM was rescued by a lifeboat operation by the New York banks orchestrated by the
New York Fed .An historical precedent was a crisis in the market for bills of exchange
that spread from Amsterdam to Hamburg and which like LTCM led to the failure of the
principal player and many others ( Schnabel and Shinn 2001).In each case the crisis

9

broke in the non bank financial sector but spilled over or threatened to spill over onto the
banks who were the ultimate creditors.
Many of the financial crises of the past involved financial innovation which increased
leverage. The 1763 crisis was centered on the market for bills of exchange, Penn Central
on the newly revived ( in the 1960s) commercial paper market, the savings and loan crisis
on the junk bond market, LTCM on derivatives and hedge funds.

Modern Twists

Although there are many historical parallels to the current crisis there are several unique
differences. In the most recent episode, the financial innovation derived from the
securitization of subprime mortgages and other loans has shifted risk away from the
originating banks into mortgage and other asset backed securities which bundle the risk
of less stellar borrowers with more credit worthy ones and which were certified by the
credit rating agencies as prime. These were absorbed by hedge funds in the US and
abroad and in the asset backed commercial paper of the commercial and investment
banks. As Rajan ( 2005) presciently argued, shifting the risk away from banks who used
to have the incentives to monitor their borrowers to hedge funds and other institutions
which do not, rather than reducing overall systemic risk increased it by raising the risk of
a much more widespread meltdown in the event of a tail event as we have recently
witnessed.
A key modern twist was the growth of the non bank financial sector ( shadow banking
system) which was not regulated by the central bank nor covered by the financial safety

10

net. According to Eichengreen (2008) its rapid growth was a consequence of the repeal in
1999 of the Depression era Glass Steagall Act which separated commercial from
Investment banking. These institutions held much lower capital ratios than the traditional
commercial banks and hence were considerably more prone to risk. When the crisis hit
they were forced to engage in major deleveraging involving the fire sale of assets into a
falling market which in turn lowered the value of their assets and those of other financial
firms. A similar negative feedback loop occurred during the Great Depression ( Friedman
and Schwartz 1963).

4. Prospects for the Emerging Markets

Financial crises have always had an international dimension as
Morgenstern( 1959),Kindleberger( 1978) and Bordo( 1986) have shown. Contagion
spreads quickly through asset markets, through international banking and through the
monetary standard. Stock market crashes and banking panics often have occurred in
many countries within a few months of the original shock. A classic example is the
Baring crisis of 1890 which started in Argentina and affected the rest of Latin America
and other emerging countries of the time. It was triggered by central bank tightening in
England, France and Germany. This led to a series of sudden stops and current account
reversals ( Bordo 2006) in the emerging countries and a number of banking crises and
debt defaults. These events were echoed in the late 1990s ( see Calvo and Talvi 2005).

11

The current crisis was initially contained to the advanced countries among which
contagion was spread by the holding of opaque subprime mortgage derivatives in diverse
banks in Europe and elsewhere, and by the seizing up of the asset ( mortgage ) backed
commercial paper market. In recent weeks pressure has spilled over to the emerging
markets , especially those who are highly indebted to the advanced countries ,with high
current account deficits and with significant exposure to the advanced countries boom
such as Iceland, Hungary and Ukraine( IMF WEO chapter 1 September 2008). IMF and
ECB rescues have been initiated. However many of the Asian countries (and some Latin
American countries) have so far avoided the crisis, likely because of the precautionary
measures many have taken in reaction to their meltdowns in the Asian crisis of 1997( eg
the build up of large foreign exchange reserves and reduced exposure to foreign
borrowing.). As the credit crunch continues and the burgeoning recession in the US and
Europe plays out, then the emergers that are exposed to foreign capital will be affected
as well as countries relying for their growth on exports to the US and Europe.

5. Policy Lessons from History

The crisis has implications for monetary policy on the key issues of liquidity, solvency
and the stability of the real economy. With respect to liquidity the central banks reacted
quickly in the Bagehot manner to deal with the freezing of the interbank markets in
August 2007. The ECB flooded the European money market with liquidity as did the Fed
which lowered the discount rate by 50 basis points . This suggests they heeded the first

12

part of Bagehot’s lesson to lend freely but not quite on the second part of lending at a
penalty rate. The Bank of England until mid 2007 followed a strict interpretation of
Bagehot by keeping its discount window open to all comers but at a penalty rate. The
subsequent run on Northern Rock on September 14 led to a large infusion of central bank
liquidity and the announcement of a temporary complete guarantee of all UK bank
deposits. The run on Northern Rock very likely reflected not the failure of the Bank’s
lender of last resort policy but inadequacies in the UK’s provision of deposit insurance,
the ill thought out separation of financial supervision and regulation from the central
bank and political pressure( Milne and Wood 2008).
Since then the pressure on the interbank market and liquidity in general increased during
the winter of 07-08 and in March with the Bear Stearns crisis , the Fed developed a series
of new programs for access to the discount window lending including the term auction
facility(TAF), The Term security Lending Facility( TSLF) and the Primary Dealer Credit
Facility( PDCP).Since March the Fed has also expanded its liquidity provision to the
commercial paper market.
These facilities reflected a change in Fed tactics. The change involved provision of credit
directly to financial firms that the Fed deemed most in need of liquidity in contrast to
delivering liquidity directly to the market by open market purchases of Treasury
securities and leaving the distribution of liquidity to individual firms to the market. The
choice of targeted lending instead of imperial liquidity provision by the market exposed
the Fed to the temptation to politicize its selection of recipients of its credit. In addition
one question that arose is why this complicated method of providing liquidity was
introduced when the uncomplicated system of open market operations is available? A

13

second question is why did the Fed reduce its holdings of government securities. How
would the Fed be able to tighten monetary policy when it finally decides to combat a rise
in the inflation rate? The only way to tighten is to sell government securities. The
mortgage backed securities on the Fed’s balance sheet may not be easily marketable.
With respect to solvency, the Fed and the other US monetary authorities have engaged in
a series of bailouts of incipient insolvent firms deemed too systemically connected to fail.
These include Bear Stearns in March 2008, the GSEs in July and AIG in September. The
investment bank Lehman Brothers had been allowed to fail in September on the grounds
that it was basically insolvent and not as systemically important as the others. One
wonders if Bear Stearns had been allowed to fail if the severe crisis in September/October
2008 could have been avoided. Had Bear Stearns simply been closed and liquidated it is
unlikely that more demand for Fed credit would have come forward than that actually
occurred. The fact that general creditors and derivative counterparties of Bear Stearns
were fully protected by the merger of the firm with JP Morgan Chase had greater
spillover effects on the financial services industry than would have been the case had the
Fed appointed a receiver and frozen old accounts and payments as of the date of the
appointment. Fewer public funds would have been subjected to risk. When Drexel
Burnham Lambert was shut down in 1990, there were no spillover effects.
Furthermore assume, as the Fed argued at the time, that there would have been a crisis in
March like the one that followed Lehman’s failure in September. Would it have been as
bad as the latter event? Assume that the moral hazard implications of bailing out Bear
Stearns led the remaining investment banks and other market players to follow riskier
strategies than otherwise on the assumption that they also would be bailed out. This

14

surely made the financial system more fragile than otherwise. So that when the monetary
authorities decided to let Lehman fail the shock that ensued and the damage to confidence
was much worse.
Since the September 2008 crisis it has finally been realized that the deepest problem
facing the financial system is solvency. The problem stems from the difficulty of pricing
securities backed by a pool of assets, whether mortgage loans, student loans, commercial
paper issues, or credit card receivables. Pricing securities based on a pool of assets is
difficult because the quality of individual components of the pool varies and unless each
component is individually examined and evaluated, no accurate price of the security can
be determined.
As a result, the credit market, confronted by financial firms whose portfolios are filled
with securities of uncertain value, derivatives that are so complex the art of pricing them
has not been mastered, is plagued by the inability to determine which firms are solvent
and which are not. Lenders are unwilling to extend loans when they cannot be sure that a
borrower is creditworthy. This is a serious shortcoming of the securitization process that
is responsible for the paralysis of the credit market.
The Fed was slow to recognize the solvency problem. It emphasized providing liquidity
to the market when that is not the answer to the problem of the market’s uncertainty
about the solvency of individual or sectoral financial firms. No financial market can
function normally when basic information about the solvency of market participants is
lacking. The securities that are the product of securitization are the root of the turmoil in
financial markets that began long before the housing market burst.

15

The Treasury’s plan of October 13, 2008 , based on the UK plan to inject capital into the
banking system was designed to help solve this problem. However an issue that was not
clear is whether funds would be injected into insolvent banks or into solvent banks which
are temporarily short of capital. If funds were to go to insolvent banks this could prolong
the credit crunch.
There is ample historical precedent for the Treasury plan including the Reconstruction
Finance Corporation established by the Hoover administration in 1932. Under Roosevelt
it injected $ 1.3 billion to 6000 banks which is equivalent to $ 200 billion in equity today
( Sylla 2008). In 1932 the Reconstruction Finance Corporation ( RFC)’s efforts were
hampered by the publication of the list of banks raising capital. This led to runs on these
banks and unwillingness by others to participate. It also has precedent in the Swedish
bank bailout of 1992 and in Japan’s long delayed bailout in the late 1990s.
With respect to the real economy, the Fed with its dual mandate of price stability and
high growth ( full employment) focused on growth and cut the Funds rate vigorously.
Considerable empirical and historical evidence suggests that credit crunches exacerbate
recessions ( see figures 1 and 2 and IMF WEO chapter 4 September 2008). Given the
Fed’s dual mandate, the risk of recession consequent upon the credit crunch seemed to
have been a reasonable rationale for a temporary easing of monetary policy. This action
leaves open the possibility that the Fed could return to its emphasis on price stability once
the recovery is in sight.
Another lesson concerns whether the Fed should continue to follow the reactive policy to
asset booms that it has been following or follow a preemptive policy. The traditional
view of monetary policy argues that central banks should act reactively and deal with the

16

consequences for the financial system of an asset price boom after it has burst (Bernanke
and Gertler 2001). An alternative view argues that if an asset bubble ( eg housing) is on
the horizon, then the Fed should act pre-emptively to defuse it ( Cecchetti et al 2000).
Bordo and Jeanne ( 2002) consider a circumstance in which the use of preemptive policy
against the occurrence of a low probability event, which can have catastrophic
consequences, such as a national housing bust, can be welfare improving. The recent
events may spark further debate.
An additional lesson speculates on the genesis of the crisis. The recent financial crisis
likely could have been avoided if the Fed had not provided as much liquidity as it did
from 2001 to 2004. After Y2K when no financial crisis occurred , it promptly withdrew
the massive infusion of liquidity it had provided. By contrast thereafter, it foresaw a
series of shocks to the economy that might lead to financial crisis , eg the tech bust of
2001 and 9/11. In each case it injected liquidity, but when no financial crisis occurred , it
permitted the additional funds it had provided to remain in the money market. In addition
it overreacted to the threat of deflation in 2003-2004 which may have been of the
good( productivity driven)variety rather than of the bad ( recessionary) variety ( Bordo
and Filardo 2005). If consequent upon these events the market had not been infused with
liquidity as much as they were and for so long, then interest rates would not have been as
low in recent years as they were and the housing boom which had just bust may not have
expanded as much as it did . Evidence for this perspective by Taylor ( 2007) suggests
that interest rates in this period were on average considerably lower than would be the
case based on his famous rule.
Some Less Gloomy Lessons from the Crisis

17

Finally, there are some less gloomy lessons from the crisis. First is the compressed
consolidation of the U.S. banking industry. Since the 1990s the U.S. banking system has
been slowly consolidating to take advantage of the removal of barriers to interstate
banking and branch banking. Canada and most European countries went through this
consolidation by mergers and acquisition in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. Evidence suggests that the U.S. banking system historically was both less
stable and less efficient than its Canadian counterpart( Bordo, Redish and Rockoff 1996).
The recent crisis by forcing mergers and exit facilitates the move to a banking system
with features closer to those of the other advanced countries with a few very large banks.
However because of its legacy of community banking with significant local social capital
many smaller banks will likely survive.
Second, the crisis is resolving issues raised by the Glass Steagall act of 1933 which
separated commercial from investment banking. The act was repealed in 1999 and since
then the more lightly regulated investment banks with an advantage of lower capital
requirements competed successfully with the commercial banks , in turn inducing them to
increase leverage and move liabilities off their balance sheets. The resultant increase in
risk contributed to the crisis. The demise of Bear Stearns and Lehman has forced the
other investment banks to merge with major commercial banks, to come under the
umbrella of the Fed and FDIC safety nets. The creation of such universal banks has
returned the US to the system it had before Glass Steagall and moves it closer to that of
the banks in some European countries. Such universal banks have had a long history of
stability and efficiency ( Fohlin 2007).

18

Third the extension of the lender of last resort function to include most types of collateral
and most financial institutions seems to be following some strictures from Bagehot’s
Lombard Street(1873) on what the central bank should do in a panic. Bagehot quotes
what a Bank of England director said about its actions in the crisis of 1825:
“” we lent it by every possible means and in modes we never adopted before; we took in
stock on security, we purchased Exchequer bills, we not only discounted outright, but we
made advances on the deposits of bills of exchange to an immense amount, in short by
every means consistent with the safety of the Bank, and we were not on some occasions
over-nice. Seeing the dreadful state in which the public were, we rendered every
assistance in our power” ( page 52).
Fourth and finally is the speed of response by the monetary authorities in the US and
Europe in resolving both the liquidity and solvency aspects of the crisis. This is in
contrast to the Great Depression when the Fed did virtually nothing and it was up to FDR
by devaluing the dollar in 1933 and the Treasury through its gold purchases thereafter,
to jump start the economy . It is also in contrast to the slow response by the Japanese
authorities in the aftermath of the collapse of Japan’s stock market and real estate bubbles.

References
Walter Bagehot ( 1873). Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. London.
H.S. King
Ben Bernanke ( 2007). “ Global Imbalances: Recent Developments and Prospects.”
Bundesbank Lecture. Berlin. Germany
Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler ( 2001) “ Should Central Banks Respond to Movements
in Asset Prices? American Economic Review 91(2). 253-257.

19

Michael D. Bordo ( 1986). ‘ Financial Crises, Banking Crises, Stock Market Crashes and
the Money supply: Some International Evidence, “ in Financial Crises and the World
Banking System. eds Forrest Capie and Geoffrey Wood. London. MacMillan
Michael Bordo, Angela Redish and Hugh Rockoff ( 1996) “ The U.S. Banking System
from a Northern Exposure: Stability versus Efficiency” Journal of Economic History Vol
54. No. 2 pp 325-341 June
Michael D. Bordo and Olivier Jeanne ( 2002) ‘ Boom- Busts in Asset Prices, Economic
Instability, and Monetary Policy.” NBER WP 8966.
Michael D. Bordo and Andrew Filardo ( 2005). “ Deflation and Monetary Policy in a
Historical Perspective: Remembering the Past or Being Condemned to Repeat it.
“ Economic Policy October.
Michael D. Bordo (2006) “ Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Original Sin in Emerging
Countries: Déjà vu?” NBER WP 12393 July.
Michael D. Bordo and David Wheelock ( 2007a), “ Stock Market Booms and Monetary
Policy in the Twentieth Century” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review . March/
April Vol 89. No.2
Michael D. Bordo and David Wheelock ( 2007b), When Do Stock Market Booms Occur:
The Macroeconomic and Policy Environments of 20th Century Booms” in Jeremy Atack
( ed). The Origins and Development of Financial Markets and Institutions. Cambrideg,
Cambridge University Press( in press )
Guillermo Calvo and Ernesto Talvi (2005) “ Sudden Stops , Financial Factors and
Economic Collapses in Latin America; Lessons from Argentina and Chile” NBER WP
11153
Stephen B. Cecchetti( 2006). Asset Prices and Central Bank Policy. Geneva Reports on
the World Economy. No.2.
Barry Eichengreen ( 2008) “ Origins and Responses to the Crisis” UC Berkeley October
( mimeo)
Irving Fisher ( 1933) ‘ The Debt Deflation Theory of Great Depressions “ Econometrica
Vol 1; 337-57.
Caroline Fohlin ( 2007) Finance Capitalism and Germany’s Rise to Industrial Power.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press
International Monetary Fund. ( 2008) World Economic Outlook. Washington DC.
October

20

Edward E. Leamer ( 2007) “ “ Housing and the Business Cycle “ Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City. Jackson Hole Symposium September 2007.
Alistair Milne and Geoffrey E. Wood ( 2008) “ Banking Crises: Solutions Old and New”
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review Vol 90. No. 5 Sept/Oct .
Hyman Minsky ( 1977) “ A Theory of Systemic Fragility. “ in E.J. Altman and A. W.
Sametz ( eds). Financial Crises: Institutions and Markets in a Fragile Environment. New
York. Wiley, 138-52
Frederic Mishkin ( 1991) “ Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises; A Historical
Perspective.” NBER WP 3400.
Frederic Mishkin ( 1997) “ The Causes and Propagation of Financial Instability : Lessons
for Policy Makers’ in Maintaining Financial Stability in a Global Economy. Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City . Jackson Hole Symposium. 55-96
Wesley C. Mitchell ( 1913) Business Cycles. New York.
Oskar Morgenstern ( 1959) International Financial Transactions and the Business Cycle.
New York, NBER
Raghuram Rajan (2005). “Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier ?”
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium . September

Isabel Schnabel and Hyun Song Shin ( 2001). “ Foreshadowing LTCM: The Crisis of
1763.”University of Mannheim Working Paper.
Richard Sylla ( 2008) Remarks on PBS Jim Lehrer News Hour, October 15.
John B. Taylor ( 2007) “ Housing and Monetary Policy “ Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City . Jackson Hole Symposium

21

22

23

