                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE EFFECTS OF HOUSING ASSISTANCE ON LABOR SUPPLY:
                      EVIDENCE FROM A VOUCHER LOTTERY

                                            Brian A. Jacob
                                             Jens Ludwig

                                        Working Paper 14570
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14570


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008


This paper is part of a larger series of studies of housing vouchers in Chicago with Greg Duncan, Michael
Johnson, James Rosenbaum and Jeffrey Smith. Generous financial support was provided by the National
Consortium on Violence Research, the Northwestern University / University of Chicago Joint Center
for Poverty Research, the Smith Richardson Foundation, the William T. Grant Foundation, a HUD
Urban Studies Postdoctoral Fellowship (to Jacob) and a Brookings Institution post-doctoral fellowship
sponsored by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation (to Ludwig). We thank John Baj, Ken Coles, Robert
Goerge, Ron Graf, Anjali Gupta, Barry Isaacson, Bong Joo Lee, Lucy Mackey Bilaver, Jennifer O'Neil,
Todd Richardson and William Riley for their assistance in obtaining and interpreting the data used
in this study. Thanks to Joe Doyle, Susan Dynarski, Amy Finkelstein, Jeffrey Liebman, Erzo Luttmer,
Ben Olken, Edgar Olsen, Barbara Schone, seminar participants at the Association for Public Policy
Analysis and Management, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Chicago Federal Reserve, Harvard,
and particularly Jeffrey Kling for helpful comments. Thanks to Dave Kirk, Sarah Rose, Elias Walsh,
Wei Ha, Josh Hyman and Thomas Wei for excellent research assistance. Any errors and all opinions
are of course our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Brian A. Jacob and Jens Ludwig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Effects of Housing Assistance on Labor Supply: Evidence from a Voucher Lottery
Brian A. Jacob and Jens Ludwig
NBER Working Paper No. 14570
December 2008
JEL No. I38,J22

                                             ABSTRACT

This study estimates the effects of means-tested housing programs on labor supply using data from
a randomized housing voucher wait-list lottery in Chicago. Evidence for the net effects of housing
programs on labor supply is central to a wide range of policy decisions about how to provide housing
assistance to the poor. Economic theory is ambiguous about the expected sign of any labor supply
response. We find that among working-age, able-bodied adults, housing voucher use reduces quarterly
labor force participation rates by 4 percentage points (6 percent of the control complier mean) and
quarterly earnings by $285 (10 percent), and increases social program participation rates by 2 percentage
points (16 percent of the control mean). These impacts are toward the lower end of the range of recent
estimates from other studies of housing programs, but nonetheless do still imply that housing vouchers
reduce labor supply.


Brian A. Jacob
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
bajacob@umich.edu

Jens Ludwig
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jludwig@uchicago.edu
                                          I. INTRODUCTION
        In 2005 the federal government spent $25.5 billion on housing assistance for the poor,
slightly more than combined federal and state spending on TANF.1 Understanding how housing
assistance affects the behavior of recipients is relevant for policy decisions about how best to
help poor people with their housing needs, including the optimal design of housing programs and
the question of whether to address housing problems among the poor through housing programs
at all. Yet the research literature on the behavioral effects of housing programs is, in the words
of one leading housing economist, “shockingly small” (Olsen, 2003, p. 366).
        The lack of good empirical evidence on this topic is particularly unfortunate because
economic theory yields ambiguous predictions about the sign, much less the magnitude, of any
labor supply response to means-tested housing programs. The standard static labor supply model
predicts housing programs should reduce labor supply through income and substitution effects.
However, the effects of in-kind transfers depend on how the program constrains consumption,
and whether the subsidized good is a complement or substitute to leisure (Murray, 1980,
Leonesio, 1988, Moffitt, 2002, Shroder, 2002). Some analysts claim housing programs may be
work-neutral, or even increase work, by reducing the price of complements to work such as
residential stability, improved housing or neighborhood quality, or proximity to jobs.
        Existing estimates for the effects of means-tested housing assistance on labor supply are
limited and mixed. One widely cited review argues “housing assistance is not persuasively
associated with any effect on employment” (Shroder, 2002, p. 381, 410). But absent a clear
source of exogenous identifying variation, selection bias remains a serious concern with nearly
all prior studies. The one randomized experiment in this area finds that so-called Welfare to
Work (WtW) housing vouchers reduce labor supply, although apparently just for the first year
following random assignment, while also causing a large, persistent increase in TANF receipt
(Gubits et al., 2006). While the WtW experiment has a strong research design, its external
validity may be limited because eligibility for the program was restricted to TANF recipients for
whom local housing agencies decided vouchers were “critical” to their labor market success.
        In this paper, we estimate the effects of means-tested housing assistance on labor supply
using a unique dataset of all applicants for Section 8 housing vouchers in Chicago during the late

1 Total spending on TANF was $25.4 billion. Total spending on housing programs for low-income households by
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development equaled $23.1 billion, and the U.S. Department of
Agriculture spent approximately $2.4 billion for such programs.


                                                     1
1990s. Our identification strategy takes advantage of the fact that housing assistance, unlike
many other social programs, is not an entitlement, and so benefits are rationed. When the
organization running Chicago’s Section 8 housing voucher program2 – Chicago Housing
Authority Corporation, Inc. (CHAC) – constituted a new waiting list for the program in July,
1997, a total of 82,607 income-eligible families applied to CHAC for housing vouchers – far
more than the number of vouchers available. As a fair way to allocate vouchers in the presence
of excess demand, CHAC randomly assigned each applicant a position on the waiting list. By
2003, roughly 18,110 families had been offered a voucher.
        We focus on the roughly 90 percent of CHAC voucher applicants living in private-market
housing at the time they applied, for whom vouchers increase housing consumption, disposable
income and marginal tax rates. In this way, our analysis is very different from the Moving to
Opportunity (MTO) experiment, which offered vouchers to families living in public housing.
For the MTO program population, housing vouchers will not directly affect income or wage rates
(because the program rules for housing vouchers and public housing are similar), but do generate
large changes in neighborhood environments (Kling, Liebman and Katz, 2007). Hence, MTO
tells us something about the effects of changing the type of housing assistance provided to low-
income families (vouchers versus public housing), and more generally helps shed light on the
importance of neighborhood effects on behavior and well-being. Our study instead estimates the
effects of expanding the set of people receiving housing assistance by issuing more vouchers.
        The primary contribution of our paper is to provide what we believe are the first
estimates of the effects of a very large and understudied social program – housing vouchers – on
labor supply that rely on both a clearly exogenous source of identifying variation and a fairly
representative sample of program participants. Our analytic sample consists of the entire
population of families who applied for housing vouchers in Chicago in the late-1990s. We find
that for working-age, able-bodied adults, voucher use reduces quarterly employment rates by
nearly 4 percentage points (6 percent) and quarterly earnings by $328 (11 percent), and increases
TANF receipt by 2 percentage points (16 percent). Unlike with the WtW voucher experiment,


2 For many years, federal rental subsidy programs included both a voucher and a certificate program. The main
difference was that the voucher program allowed families to lease units with rents above the Fair Market Rent,
although families could not pay more than a certain share (usually 40 percent) of income towards rent. Recently
both programs have been combined into the Housing Choice Voucher program. For convenience, we refer to rental
subsidies in our analysis simply as “Section 8 vouchers,” which is how most of the CHAC families knew the
program.


                                                       2
the labor supply impacts we estimate seem to persist. We also see some slight increase in
average labor supply for those families who expect to receive a voucher in the future, consistent
with predictions from the lifecycle labor supply model that people may shift work effort towards
periods when their net wage is relatively higher. We also find that that housing vouchers seem to
have little effect on two of the key housing-specific mechanisms hypothesized to boost
employment: the presence of employed or otherwise affluent neighbors (who might provide
useful job references or otherwise be supportive of work) and residential stability (although we
note that vouchers do seem to change slightly the timing of moves, as families who expect to
receive a voucher delay moves until their voucher offer).
       If it is true that the primary mechanisms through which housing vouchers affect labor
supply are standard income and substitution effects, then our findings may have broader
implications about how people respond to means-tested transfers more generally. Because both
the income and substitution effects induced by housing vouchers should reduce labor supply, our
reduced-form impacts enable us to bound the size of each effect. Our bounds suggest income
and substitution elasticities that are much smaller than most earlier non-experimental studies of
single mothers, but are consistent with those from the Negative Income Tax experiments.
       Section II discusses the behavioral mechanisms through which vouchers might affect
labor supply. Sections III and IV review the prior literature and describe the Chicago voucher
lottery that we study. Sections V and VI discuss our data and empirical strategy. Finally, we
present our findings and discussion in sections VII and VIII.
                                  II. HOUSING VOUCHERS
       In this section, we provide a brief review of the housing voucher program rules and how
vouchers might affect labor supply; for a more detailed discussion, see Appendix A. Housing
vouchers subsidize low-income families to live in private-market housing. Eligibility limits for
housing programs are a function of family size and income. Since 1975, an increasing share of
housing assistance has been devoted to households with incomes below 50 percent of the local
median. Yet, demand far exceeds supply. Only 28 percent of renters with incomes below 50
percent of the local median receive housing assistance (Olsen, 2003). The maximum subsidy
available to families is governed by the Fair Market Rent (FMR), which was equal to the 45th
percentile of the local private-market rent distribution up through 1995, then lowered to the 40th
percentile. Since 2001, selected metropolitan areas, including Chicago, were allowed to set



                                                 3
FMR at the 50th percentile. The FMR for a two-bedroom apartment in Chicago was equal to
$699 in 1994, $732 in 1997, and $762 in 2000 (in nominal dollars). The voucher subsidy equals
the difference between the family’s rent contribution (30 percent of adjusted income) and the
lesser of either FMR or the unit rent. Families with vouchers can keep the subsidy basically for
as long as they stay income eligible, which for our sample should be quite some time: average
baseline income in our sample was $14,000, while the subsidy phase out range is $43,000 (unless
otherwise noted, all figures are reported in 2007 dollars).
       Many families who are offered vouchers do not use them (Olsen, 2003). There are
several candidate explanations for the limited take-up rates. Many housing units have rents
above the voucher program’s FMR. Some landlords may not want to deal with the voucher
program’s requirements on paperwork or minimum quality, which are verified by inspection
although failed units can be modified and re-inspected. And families offered vouchers have a
limited amount of time to lease a unit (usually 3 to 6 months).
       The most obvious way in which housing voucher receipt might affect labor supply is
through the substitution and income effects implied by the standard static labor supply model
illustrated in Figure I. The budget constraint for families who do not receive housing assistance
is given by ADE, with slope equal to minus one times the individual’s market wage (w). The
maximum subsidy for a family with no earnings is the value of the FMR (given by G), which for
the typical CHAC applicant is equal to around $12,000 per year. Voucher rules require
participants to pay 30 percent of their (adjusted) income towards rent, which reduces the after-
tax wage of voucher recipients. The amount of this “tax” will be smaller for families receiving
other social benefits given the way the various program rules interact (see Appendix A). The
subsidy value for families with labor market earnings (given by B in Figure I) will be less than
the full amount of the FMR, but as discussed below, the average voucher subsidy is still
extremely large relative to most means-tested transfer programs.
       Predicting the effect of housing programs on work is complicated for at least two reasons.
The first involves how the dynamics of these programs relate to the life-cycle model of labor
supply (see for example MacCurdy, 1981). In many cities, housing programs have very long
waiting lists. Families on the wait list expect to receive a subsidy in the future, which increases
lifetime permanent income. But these families also know that once they receive a voucher, their
wage rate will be reduced because of the implicit tax. If people wish to supply more labor in



                                                 4
periods when wages are high and intertemporal substitution effects dominate lifetime wealth
effects, we could observe an increase in work effort while they are on the program wait list.
         Second, and perhaps more importantly, the in-kind nature of the subsidy makes it is hard
to predict the effects of housing vouchers on labor supply. The effect on labor supply will
depend in part on the degree to which the in-kind subsidy constrains people’s consumption, and
how the subsidized commodity complements or substitutes for leisure (Murray, 1980, Leonesio,
1988, Moffitt, 2002). If the subsidized good is a complement to leisure, then the transfer
program will lead to an unambiguous decrease in work effort. If the subsidized good is a
substitute for leisure, the transfer will lead to a smaller reduction in work effort than an equally
generous cash transfer.3 In principle, the transfer could increase work effort (Leonesio, 1988).4
                                         III. PREVIOUS EVIDENCE
         Whether and how means-tested housing programs impact work effort is ultimately an
empirical question. In an influential review of the housing literature, Mark Shroder (2002)
laments the “critical theoretical weaknesses” of the standard labor supply model in ignoring the
possibility that increased housing consumption could help increase work, and argues the
empirical research is “consistent with [a housing voucher] … effect of zero” on labor supply.
However, Shroder notes that most studies simply compare the labor supply of program
participants with non-participants, which may confound program impacts with unmeasured
individual attributes associated with both work decisions and program participation. In addition,
many studies measure program participation using survey self-reports, which suffer from
reporting problems that vary systematically by actual program involvement.5
         More recent studies subsequent to Shroder’s review also paint a mixed picture of whether


3 In the case of housing, it is not clear whether one should regard the commodity as a substitute or complement for
leisure. More or better housing may promote work by reducing exposure to environmental toxins, improving sleep,
enabling people to have a consistent residential address or live in an area that is closer to jobs or employed
neighbors (Kain, 1968), or have lower crime rates. On the other hand, better housing may complement leisure, since
it is more pleasurable to spend time in a nicer space.
4 Schone (1992) shows that the non-linearities housing vouchers generate in budget constraints could also
potentially increase work effort. The basic intuition is that housing programs offer participants a “take it or leave it”
level of housing consumption. If housing program participation increases the amount that people contribute out-of-
pocket towards housing, the result could be an increase in work effort in order to meet minimal levels of
consumption for other goods.
5 In a recent paper, Hoynes and Schanzenbach (2007) exploit county-level variation in the timing of the original
implementation of the Food Stamps Program to estimate the impact of this in-kind transfer on consumption and
labor supply. While their labor supply estimates are rather imprecise, they find evidence that the program generates
small work disincentive effects, roughly consistent with the magnitude of those found in the NIT experiments.



                                                           5
housing programs impact labor supply. Yelowitz (2001) exploits across-area variation in FMRs
and housing program rules that relate housing benefits provided by either public housing or
housing vouchers to the sex composition of a family’s children. Yelowitz finds a one standard
deviation increase in housing subsidy ($180 per month) reduces labor force participation by 4
percentage points (from a baseline of 70-75 percent). It is not clear, however, how much of the
identification comes from variation in benefit levels due to the sex composition of children,
which is plausibly exogenous, versus within- and/or across-MSA changes in FMR or income
eligibility limits, which may be correlated with unobserved factors that affect labor supply.
       A more common estimation approach among recent studies is to rely on within-person
over-time variation in housing program participation and labor supply. Olsen et al. (2005) use
data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and find a 30 to 35 percent reduction in
earnings associated with receiving either a housing voucher or a project-based subsidized
housing unit. In contrast, Newman, Holupka and Harkness (forthcoming) use propensity-score
matching methods with the PSID and find no detectable effects of entering project-based
assistance on work or earnings, but find welfare receipt increases by over 50 percent. Using a
similar propensity-score matching design, Susin (2005) finds housing assistance reduces
earnings by 15 percent among respondents to the Survey of Income and Program Participation,
and Carlson et al. (2008) find earnings drop 12 percent the first year following voucher receipt
using administrative data from Wisconsin, although the effect fades out within five years.
       The recent Welfare-to-Work (WtW) experiment by HUD suggests vouchers reduce
quarterly employment rates (earnings) by 5 to 7 (12) percent the first year of the demonstration
(Gubits et al., 2006). The estimated impacts are not statistically significant during years two and
three, but the confidence intervals cannot rule out impacts on work and earnings of up to 10 and
19 percent, respectively. The authors argue that the short-term decline in work is due to
temporary disruptions from moving. But at the same time, the WtW study does find that
vouchers generate large, sustained increases in TANF receipt.
       The main limitation with the WtW voucher experiment has to do with external validity.
The sample is restricted to families who are receiving TANF at baseline, a program that, as noted
above, mutes the effect of voucher receipt on effective marginal tax rates. Of course, having
results applicable to just TANF recipients would still be useful, despite the large decline over
time in TANF receipt rates. But eligibility for WtW was further limited to the subset of TANF



                                                 6
recipients for whom vouchers were, in the judgment of housing officials, “critical to the families’
ability to obtain or retain employment” (Gubits et al., 2006, p. 7). Thus the degree to which
these findings generalize to the broader population of housing program participants is not clear.
                      IV. THE CHICAGO HOUSING VOUCHER LOTTERY
         In July 1997, Chicago Housing Authority Corporation (CHAC) opened the city’s voucher
wait list for the first time in 12 years, and received a total of 82,607 applications from income-
eligible people. CHAC randomly assigned applicants to a waiting list in August 1997, and
notified those in the top 35,000 positions of their wait list number. CHAC told these families on
the “active wait list” that they would be offered a voucher within three years. CHAC informed
the remaining applicants (random lottery numbers 35,001 to 82,607) that they would not receive
vouchers. About 4,625 families were offered vouchers in the first year after the wait-list lottery.
Service of the July 1997 wait list was interrupted in August 1998, as CHAC was required to
provide vouchers to a set of Latino families in response to a discrimination lawsuit against the
City of Chicago. CHAC began to serve the 1997 wait list again at the start of 2000. By May
2003, after offering vouchers to 18,110 families from this original 1997 waiting list, CHAC was
“over-leased” and essentially stopped offering any new vouchers.6
         In the analysis that follows, we define our “treatment group” to be families offered
vouchers by May 2003 (lottery numbers 1 to 18,110). The control group consists of those
applicants with lottery numbers above 35,000 who were told that they were not on the active
wait list and would not get a voucher. In our main analyses we exclude from our sample those
families with lottery numbers between 18,110 and 35,000 because of their ambiguous treatment
status (i.e., their behavior might have been affected by the anticipation of a voucher, but since
CHAC stopped giving out vouchers in 2003, these families may have given up hope of getting
one). We later show that including this group does not change our findings.
                                V. DATA AND SUMMARY STATISTICS
         This section briefly describes the primary data sources used in our analysis. For more
details, see Appendix C. The application forms for the 1997 wait list provide baseline
information on the 82,607 adults and nearly 8,700 spouses who applied to CHAC for a housing

6 That is, CHAC had issued as many or more vouchers than it had funding to pay for. CHAC sent a letter to all
families still on the wait list asking them to verify their address and interest in receiving a voucher. Roughly 9,300
families responded. In a follow-up letter, CHAC indicated families with numbers from 18,110 to 20,853 should
expect to wait at least one year; numbers between 20,854 and 27,455 at least two years; 27,457 to 33,902 at least
three years and the remainder at least four years. (Personal communication with Ken Coles, CHAC, on 4/8/2004).


                                                           7
voucher. These files include information on address, lottery number and basic household
demographics, as well as identifying information for the household heads and spouses. The
baseline application forms do not include identifying information on other members of the
applicant’s household. We use data from the Illinois Department of Human Services (IDHS) to
determine who lived with the CHAC applicants in the period immediately before the wait list
was opened. Because this procedure (described in Appendix B) relies entirely on pre-lottery
data, any measurement error in identifying baseline household members will be orthogonal to
wait list position. Data on voucher utilization comes from HUD 50058 records, which families
must complete at least once each year to verify program eligibility.
         To track residential locations for both the treatment and control groups we rely on a
variety of passive tracking sources such as the National Change of Address (NCOA) registry and
national credit bureau checks. Because of resource constraints, we tracked a random ten percent
sub-sample of all CHAC applicants.7 Using these addresses, we are able to characterize each
household’s residential neighborhood using (among other sources) 2000 census data down to the
block group level. To determine whether a family was in public housing or project-based
Section 8 housing (essentially privately-operated public housing) at the time of the lottery, we
merge baseline addresses from the lottery application files to lists of subsidized units maintained
by the Chicago Housing Authority and HUD.8
         To obtain measures of labor force participation, we merge the applicants to several
different Illinois state administrative databases using probabilistic matching techniques that use
data on name, date of birth and social security number. Illinois Unemployment Insurance (UI)
records from 1990 through the end of 2005 provide quarterly earnings for individuals working
for employers who pay more than $1,500 in total wages in a quarter to all employees, but
excludes those who work for themselves, the military or other branches of the federal



7 We have confirmed that this subset matches the overall applicant pool on a variety of baseline characteristics, and
that the impact estimates on labor supply for this 10 percent sub-sample are virtually identical to the impact
estimates for the full sample. We are also able to (at least partially) verify the accuracy of the passive tracking
techniques using the subset families that received housing vouchers. In the vast majority of these cases, the location
information obtained through passive tracking matches the information found in the administrative 50058 records.
8 Throughout our analysis, we focus on baseline housing status because the outcome of the voucher lottery may
have influenced a family’s living arrangement. This means the group identified as living in a housing project at
baseline may include some families who are in private-market housing by the time they are actually offered a
housing voucher by CHAC because of both the natural transition of families out of project-based housing units over
time, and demolition of public housing in Chicago during this period (Jacob, 2004).


                                                          8
government, or part-time work for schools or selected non-profits.9 We consider an individual to
be employed in a particular quarter if she has positive earnings during that period.
         Public assistance files from the Illinois Department of Human Services (IDHS) provide
information on AFDC/TANF, Food Stamp and Medicaid receipt from 1989 through the end of
2005. This information contains the starting and ending dates of all social program spells, from
which we create indicators for whether any assistance is received during a given quarter.
         For the main analyses presented below, we limit our sample to the set of CHAC
applicants who were working-age (i.e., younger than 65 years old), able-bodied (i.e., not
disabled, as self-reported on the application form) and living in private-market housing when
they applied to the voucher lottery. Table I presents summary statistics of the baseline
characteristics for this sample for our treatment group (lottery numbers 1 to 18,110) and control
group (35,001 to 82,607). The majority of applicants in our sample are low-income African-
American women, with 1.8 children on average. We estimate average annual baseline income
and rent to be $14,000 and $8,160, respectively (see Appendix D), suggesting that even if
families have some unreported income, they must still be devoting a large share of income
towards rent. These figures are consistent with previous estimates that more than one in five of
all renter households in Chicago devote over half their income towards rent.10 The average fair
market rent (FMR) for our sample was approximately $12,000 per year. The average CHAC
applicant would be required to contribute around $3,735 per year towards rent under the voucher
program rules, so that the average maximum subsidy is $8,265 per year. Reeder (1985)
estimates the ratio of mean benefit to mean subsidy for housing vouchers to be around .83, so
that the average equivalent variation of a housing voucher for our sample is $6,860 per year.
Because the average family that leases up with a voucher could reduce out-of-pocket spending
on rent from $8,265 to $3,735, they can essentially take over half of the voucher subsidy as cash.
         The key to estimating the effects of these housing subsidies on labor supply is that CHAC
assigned applicants randomly to the program wait list. Table I provides evidence suggesting that
the CHAC randomized voucher wait-list lottery was indeed random. The mean values for the


9 Kornfeld and Bloom (1999) compare treatment impact estimates using UI and self-reported survey data on
earnings for participants in the National Job Training Partnership Act, and find that while earnings levels are higher
in the survey than UI data, impact estimates were quite similar across the two data sources.
10 The Census Bureau’s Fact Sheet for Chicago indicates there are a total of 515,047 renter households in the city,
while the Chicago Rehab Network estimates that 117,000 renter households are spending more than 50 percent of
their incomes on rent. (www.chicagorehab.org/takeaction/facts.htm, accessed on October 14, 2008).


                                                          9
11,696 treatment applicants and 30,662 control group applicants for the baseline (i.e., pre-
lottery) characteristics listed in Table I are virtually identical. Only two of the 26 pair-wise
differences are significant at the 5 percent level, and the magnitudes of the differences are quite
small. An omnibus test of the differences between the treatment and control groups that
accounts for the correlation among our baseline characteristics yields a p-value of .98.11
         Roughly half of those in the treatment group used a voucher. While the treatment group
“compliers” differ from the “non-compliers,” this does not bias our estimates below because we
focus on the essentially “experimental” comparison of all treatment to all control families.
                                       VI. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY
         Given that the voucher wait list lottery was random, a simple comparison of means
between those offered vouchers and those who were not provides an unbiased estimate of the
effects of being offered a voucher (the intent to treat effect, or ITT). Our application is
complicated slightly by the fact that people were offered vouchers at different points in time. In
this section we discuss how we estimate the ITT effect as well as the effects of using a voucher.
A. The Effect of Receiving a Voucher Offer
         Our data consists of a balanced panel where the unit of observation is the household-
quarter, from 1997:Q3 (the first post-lottery quarter) through 2005:Q4. For some outcome                          for

CHAC applicant i in calendar quarter t, we use OLS to estimate the ITT effect from equation (1):
(1)
              equals 1 if individual i has been offered a housing voucher through the CHAC 1997
lottery in any period prior to t, and zero otherwise. PreOfferit equals 1 for individuals in the
treatment group in the post-lottery quarters prior to their voucher offer. We also control for
calendar year-quarter effects,        , to account for changes over time in economic conditions.
Among the control group, employment rates rose through 2000 then declined, while rates of
public assistance receipt fell steadily over our study period (Appendix Figure I). These patterns
mirror trends in the Chicago-area unemployment rate and rental vacancy rate (Appendix Figure
II). To increase statistical precision, we control for a set of individual and family baseline


11 We conduct an omnibus F-test of the differences between the treatment and control group by estimating a
seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) where all of the characteristics listed in Table I are stacked as Y (outcome)
variables and the only X variable is an indicator for treatment group status and a constant. We conduct this test two
ways, first clustering standard errors at the household level, and then again clustering at the baseline census tract
level. In either case, the p-value is far from the conventional threshold for statistical significance.


                                                         10
characteristics,      , which are described in detail in Appendix C. Standard errors are clustered by
household (Bertrand et al., 2004).
         In equation (1), identification of the main Intent-to-Treat (ITT) effect, given by                    ,
comes from a within-period comparison of the average outcomes of those offered vouchers
versus the control group. If there is heterogeneity in the effects of a voucher offer on labor
supply across people, calendar time or duration of voucher receipt, then our ITT estimate can be
interpreted as an average of the ITT effects across all post-voucher-offer person-quarter
observations in our panel. The coefficient             on the PreOffer indicator provides some evidence
on whether families change their behavior in anticipation of getting a voucher. This coefficient
does not serve as an additional “randomization check,” since it is estimated off of post-
randomization treatment-control differences (recall our panel only includes post-lottery quarters).
         The main threat to the internal validity of our estimates comes from the possibility that
our treatment and control groups might move out of state at differential rates, since we rely on
Illinois data and families can use their vouchers to move elsewhere. However, our address data
show that around 10 percent of households in both the treatment and control groups spent at least
some time between 1997:Q3 and 2005:Q4 out of Illinois; the average fraction of quarters spent
outside of Illinois was .042 for both treatment and control households.
B. The Effects of Using a Voucher
         Under the assumption that the voucher offer does not have an impact on those who
choose not to take it,12 one can use the exogenous variation in voucher offers generated by the
randomized July 1997 CHAC wait-list lottery to estimate the effect of utilizing a housing
voucher. We implement this in a two-stage least squares framework:
(2)
(3)                                                ,
         For the first-stage equation in (2), the outcome is an indicator for whether household i
had utilized a housing voucher provided by any source by period t. Under this definition a
family that uses but then gives up their voucher does not become “untreated.” If we were sure
the only relevant behavioral mechanisms were income and substitution effects, we might define
treatment more narrowly as active use of a voucher in a given quarter. But the housing literature


12 While we do not think this assumption is strictly true, we believe that it is a reasonable approximation.


                                                          11
provides some reasons to believe there could be other channels through which vouchers could
affect work.13 In addition, our definition of “treatment” also includes families who use vouchers
obtained through other special voucher allocations,14 so we are essentially estimating what
happens when we expand the overall number of vouchers in circulation.
         If the effects of a voucher on behavior do not vary by time since lease-up, then our
instrumental variables (IV) estimate for π1 captures the local average treatment effect (LATE) on
those who are induced to use a voucher by being assigned a good lottery number by CHAC
(Angrist, Imbens and Rubin, 1996). If voucher effects instead vary by how long a family has
been leased up, then π1 captures the LATE for those who lease up for a longer period of time due
to treatment group assignment, so long as we are willing to assume that control group cross-
overs would have been leased up for the same amount of time had they instead been assigned to
the treatment group. If we instead use a more conservative assumption that all treatment group
voucher users lease up for a longer period of time than if they had been assigned to the control
group, our IV estimate will capture the effects of treatment on the treated (TOT). We show
below that using alternative definitions of “treatment” does not change our findings, which is not
surprising given that our control group crossover rates are relatively low.
         As a benchmark for judging the size of our IV estimates, we present what Katz, Kling
and Liebman (2001) call the control complier mean (CCM), or the average outcome for controls
who would have used vouchers had they been assigned to the treatment group. The CCM is
estimated by subtracting π1 from the mean outcome for the treatment group compliers.15




13 For instance, if a family uses a voucher to move to a neighborhood that is closer to job opportunities and filled
with more employed neighbors who can provide useful job references, and as a result gets a good job that boosts the
family’s income beyond the eligibility limit of the voucher program, we would not wish to count it as being
“untreated” after it leaves the voucher program.
14 HUD financed the Chicago Housing Authority (CHA) to demolish a number of the city’s most notorious housing
projects through the Hope VI program, and some displaced families were offered housing vouchers instead. Other
families on the CHAC application list could have received vouchers from another program because they contained a
disabled member, or were at risk for having parents separated from children without a change in housing status, or
were Latino and so received vouchers as a result of litigation by Latinos United against the CHA.
15 This CCM calculation assumes a TOT interpretation of the IV estimate, in which all of the treatment group
families who use a voucher are “treated.” If the IV estimate is instead given a LATE interpretation as the average
effect of voucher use on those families who lease up if assigned to the treatment group not but if they are assigned to
the control group, then the CCM will not be quite the right benchmark for the IV, but it should be close given that
control group cross-over rates are relatively low.


                                                          12
C. Changes in Treatment Effects over Time
         We are also interested in how voucher effects might change over time, both for policy
purposes and to learn more about underlying behavioral mechanisms. To do so, we calculate
ITT effects for each period after the voucher offer, using the following equation:
(4)                                           ,

where the binary variables           equal 1 if, in period t, individual i is k periods from when they

were offered a voucher (where k can take on positive and negative values). The coefficients

capture the effect of a voucher offer over time relative to when the voucher was offered. ITT
estimates by time relative to the voucher offer reflect the net (reduced form) effect of a variety of
factors. The ITT effect could be changing over time because the behavioral response to leasing
up with a voucher varies, or because the fraction of treatment or control group families that have
leased up with a voucher changes over time.16 Moreover, changes in the ITT over time may
reflect, in part, the fact that the voucher impact varies over calendar time because, for example,
of changes in the economy. We explore some of these sources of heterogeneity below.
         In principle, we might also like to estimate the effects of actually being leased up for a
given period of time. However we cannot identify this parameter without imposing additional
structure on the data,17 and so instead focus on the simpler ITT-by-time estimates instead.




16 If the treatment effects are heterogeneous, then changes in the composition of compliers (i.e., those treatment and
control families who are utilizing a housing voucher) may also contribute to changes in the ITT effects over time.
17 For example, Gubits et al. (2006, Appendix B) present a method for estimated the effects of being leased up for a
given duration that uses a recursive approach, in which they first calculate the effects of being leased up for one
period (which they can identify with their data) and then use that estimate to back out the effects of being leased up
for two periods, then use both of those estimates to back out the effects of being leased up for three periods and so
on. But their estimation approach assumes that the effect of being leased up for one period in the first period since
random assignment is the same as the effect of being leased up for one period in the second period since random
assignment. This assumption may be violated if the people who lease up with some delay have a different
behavioral response to vouchers from those who lease up right away after the voucher offer. The assumption may
also be violated if the effects of using a voucher depend on the point in calendar time when the voucher is used, as
may be the case for example if housing market conditions influence housing search outcomes. The staggered rollout
of housing vouchers in our case allows us to identify the impact of calendar time on voucher utilization, but still
does not allow us to identify the impact of calendar time x voucher use or time of usage (usage intensity) effects
without further assumptions. Angrist and Imbens (1995) provide a framework in which one can estimate average
causal effects in models with variable treatment intensity, which would be an alternate approach for understanding
how voucher effects differ by time since offer. Thanks to Jeffrey Kling for very helpful discussions on this issue.


                                                         13
                                          VII. RESULTS
       We show that being offered a voucher through the CHAC wait list increases the chances
of using a voucher, and that voucher use reduces work and earnings, increases social program
participation, but has little impact on neighborhood environments or residential stability.
A. Effects of the CHAC Lottery on Voucher Utilization
       The vouchers allocated by CHAC through the 1997 wait list lottery represent the largest,
but not the only, voucher allocation in Chicago during our study period. By the end of our study
period in 2005, nearly 8 percent of control households had used a voucher obtained from some
other allocation (Appendix Figure III). Nonetheless, receiving a voucher offer through the 1997
wait list lottery substantially increases the chances of utilizing a voucher, as shown in Table II.
Column 1 shows the coefficient on the PostOffer indicator from estimating equation (2). The
control mean indicates that, in the average quarter, 5.3 percent of controls used a voucher.
Assignment of a good wait list number by CHAC increased voucher lease-up rates by roughly 40
percentage points (the F-test statistic is over 7,500). To more clearly illustrate the total fraction
of households who ever utilized a housing voucher, in column 2 we regress an indicator of ever
utilizing a housing voucher on an indicator for ever receiving a voucher offer through the 1997
wait list (i.e., at any point between 1997 and 2003), conditional on a set of baseline covariates.
The unit of observation now is the household, not the household-quarter. A total of 7.6 percent
of control families obtained a voucher at some point. Households that received a voucher offer
were 42.6 percentage points more likely than controls to use a voucher over our sample period.
Two-thirds of treatment group compliers use their vouchers within the first quarter of the
voucher offer, and over 90 percent lease up within a year of the offer.
       As noted above, there are a variety of reasons why families may not utilize a housing
voucher when offered one. These take-up rates are in the ballpark of those from other studies
(Rubinowitz and Rosenbaum, 2000, Olsen, 2003, Kling, Liebman and Katz, 2007). Columns 3-7
explore the heterogeneity of voucher utilization by regressing an indicator for whether a
household ever uses a voucher over our sample period against a series of baseline covariates,
using a dataset with one observation for each of the 11,696 treatment households in our sample.
Column 3 presents the results of a series of bivariate regressions in which each baseline
characteristic is entered separately, while columns 4-7 show models that condition on multiple
covariates simultaneously. Households living in more disadvantaged baseline neighborhoods or



                                                  14
receiving TANF at baseline are more likely to lease up if offered a voucher. Older, male or
employed applicants are less likely to lease up. We also see that cohorts offered vouchers in
2000 and 2001 had lease-up rates several percentage points lower than the earlier and later offer
cohorts. We later examine the degree to which trends in labor or housing market conditions
explain these cohort differences.
B. Effects of a Voucher Offer on Employment, Earnings and Social Program Participation
         Table III presents the main results for our sample of working-age, able-bodied applicants
living in private housing at baseline. The table shows both the estimated post-offer ITT and IV
estimates on a variety of outcomes. We defer the discussion of pre-offer (i.e., anticipation)
effects to a later section where we discuss how the impacts vary by time relative to offer.
         Voucher use reduces quarterly employment rates by 3.6 percentage points (6 percent of
the CCM). While we cannot directly measure hours worked, voucher receipt reduces the
likelihood that someone earns what would be the equivalent of working full time at $6 an hour,
or $2,415 a quarter, by 4.5 percentage points, or 10 percent.18 Voucher use reduces quarterly
earnings by $328, or 11 percent of the CCM. Unless the decline in work for the treatment group
is concentrated among high earners, or else treatment group members shift to less well-paid jobs,
then our estimated IV effect of -$228 on earnings conditional on working implies a reduction in
hours worked – that is, an effect on both the intensive and extensive margins of labor supply.
         Table III also shows that voucher use increases participation rates in social programs
(TANF, Medicaid or Food Stamps) by nearly 7 percentage points, equal to around 12 percent of
the CCM. The effect on TANF participation is smaller in absolute terms (about 2 percentage
points) but larger as a share of the CCM, given that only 11 percent of the would-be compliers in
the control group are on TANF during our study period.19 Most of the increase in social program
receipt seems to be concentrated among the Medicaid and Food Stamp programs.
         One limitation of the focus on household heads in Table III is that it will not pick up any
impacts of voucher assistance on other household members. The fact that housing program rules
exclude earnings of children under 18 in calculating income means a household could reduce its
required rent payment by substituting labor supply by teenagers in the home for labor supply by

18 Quarterly earnings would equal $2,415 for someone who was working 35 hours per week, 11.5 weeks, at $6 an
hour. The results in proportional terms are virtually identical if we assumed a wage of $8.
19 Note that TANF receipt rates decline substantially over our study period among our control group, from 41
percent at baseline (Table I), to 15 percent averaged over all post-lottery quarters (Table III), which mirrors the large
declines in welfare caseloads that have been observed throughout the U.S.


                                                           15
adults. But when we replicate our analyses using data on work, earnings, or social program
participation by everyone in the home, we get similar results to Table III (see Appendix Table I).
        Table IV presents estimates for a variety of additional subgroups. To simplify the
presentation we focus on just two outcomes: quarterly labor force participation, shown in the
first four columns, and quarterly participation rates in any social program (TANF, Medicaid or
Food Stamps). The first row replicates the results for our main analytic sample. The second and
third rows show that the behavioral responses among those CHAC voucher applicants who were
elderly (3 percent of all applicants) or disabled (26 percent) are, not surprisingly, smaller in
relation to either the standard errors or the control complier means. Interestingly, voucher use
increases social program participation among disabled voucher applicants, even though we find
no detectable impact on employment rates. It is possible that interaction with voucher program
administrators makes disabled participants aware of their eligibility for other social services,
although this hypothesis is not directly testable with our data. Estimated voucher effects on labor
force participation rates are smaller among male than female household heads, but the men in our
sample seem to be unusual, since they have lower average employment rates than the women.
        While there are no significant differences in voucher effects by baseline employment
status, there are large and statistically significant differences in the effects by baseline social
program participation. Voucher use reduces employment by 6.1 percentage points (9 percent)
among those who were not receiving benefits at baseline, and only by 2.5 percentage points (4
percent) among those receiving benefits. A similar pattern is apparent if one focuses just on
TANF receipt. These differences in voucher effects are consistent with the idea that changes in
marginal tax rates caused by vouchers is a key mechanism behind these labor supply impacts,
since participation in other social programs mitigates the effect of vouchers on marginal tax rates
(see Appendix A). Of course, it is also possible that more disadvantaged families simply have
different preferences about labor supply and levels of labor market attachment, and so are less
responsive to changes in work incentives.20 The last three rows show the voucher effects are
larger in absolute value for those offered vouchers in 1997-98 as compared to later periods.



20 Employment impacts seem to be somewhat smaller among families with relatively more children, but this is not
true when we look at social program participation as the outcome. When we split the sample by baseline
neighborhood characteristics, we find families living in more affluent census tracts experience a smaller labor
supply reduction from using a voucher. But, as above, this pattern does not show up for social program
participation.


                                                      16
         Our results for the effects of using a voucher are qualitatively similar under a variety of
alternative specifications (e.g., defining voucher use as only using a voucher from the 1997
waiting list, defining voucher use as “active” use only, etc.), as shown in Appendix Table II.
This is not surprising given that the share of treatment and control group families who use
vouchers obtained through other special voucher allocations besides the CHAC July 1997
voucher wait-list lottery are relatively low.21
C. Effects of a Voucher Offer by Time Since Offer
         Examining how voucher impacts vary with time since offer can inform our understanding
of the mechanisms underlying the impacts. For example, if the labor supply effects were driven
by the disruption that vouchers impose on families (e.g., the time required to find a suitable
apartment, actually move, and then adjust to the transition), then we would expect any negative
labor supply effects to dissipate over time. On the other hand, we might expect the impacts from
income and substitution effects to increase over time, if it takes families some time to adjust their
employment situations to the new incentives that they face.
         To examine the time path of voucher effects, we estimate equation (4) using a series of
indicators for the year relative to voucher offer. Figure II shows the ITT estimates by time since
offer, along with the 95 percent confidence band, for employment, earnings and public assistance
receipt. For all of the outcomes, we see that the impacts get larger in absolute value with time
since the voucher offer, suggesting our results are not simply due to the disruption of moving. If
we limit our sample to the set of families who are on TANF at baseline, we find a similar pattern
(see Appendix Figure IV). In that sense our findings appear to be at odds with the Welfare-to-
Work (WtW) voucher experiment, which found significant reductions in work the first year after
random assignment, but not in years two and three (Gubits et al., 2006). However, as noted
earlier, the WtW experimental sample was limited to just those determined by the local housing
authority to need a voucher to maintain employment, which may be a quite different group from
the average baseline TANF recipient who applied for a housing voucher in Chicago.


21 Specifically, the Appendix Table II shows that our results are similar when we: add to our control group those
families with lottery numbers from 18,103 to 35,000, who expected to receive CHAC vouchers at some point but
had not been offered vouchers by the end of 2003; redefine “treatment” to be receipt of vouchers only through the
1997 CHAC lottery allocation, rather than from any program, so that we are now estimating the effects of treatment
on the treated (TOT) for the CHAC voucher treatment; define “treatment” as use of a voucher in a given quarter,
rather than having used a voucher at any time in the past (consistent with the idea that treatment group compliers use
their vouchers for some time); or define “treatment” as use of a 1997 CHAC lottery voucher in a given quarter
(combination of latter two specifications).


                                                         17
        These results also provide evidence of some small anticipation effects on employment.
In Figure IIa, for example, we see that treatment families seem to be slightly more likely to work
(relative to control families) in the years after the wait list lottery but prior to their actual
voucher offer. In results not shown here, the coefficient on the single PreOffer indicator in
equation (1) is .006 with a standard error of .003, suggesting the voucher offer increases
employment by roughly six-tenths of a percentage point, or one percent of the control mean.
Note that this statistically significant coefficient is not an indication of model misspecification or
improper randomization, since it comes from comparing post-lottery person-quarter observations
for treatment families while they are waiting for a voucher to the outcomes of control families in
the same calendar quarter. This reflects a real behavioral response, and is consistent with
families wishing to substitute labor supply from periods when real wages are relatively low to
those where real wages are relatively high. There is less clear evidence of any anticipation
effects on social program participation (Figure IIc).
D. Effects of a Voucher Offer on Residential Stability and Neighborhood Environment
        The results thus far indicate that the in-kind subsidy provided by housing vouchers
reduces labor supply to a modest degree. This effect is consistent across a variety of subgroups,
is robust to several alternative specifications, and does not appear to be due to a short-term
disruption effect. In Table V, we explore some of the potential mechanisms underlying these
impacts using the 10 percent random sub-sample for whom we collected address histories.22
        We first consider impacts on residential stability. While it is likely that a housing
voucher will induce higher mobility in the short-run as families lease new apartments, some
observers have hypothesized that rent subsidies will actually decrease residential mobility in the
longer run, which may improve labor market outcomes. In row 1 of Table V, we see that the use
of a housing voucher did not have any significant impact on the number of different addresses at
which the household resided. Figure III, which shows the ITT effects on residential mobility by
time relative to offer, provides greater insight. It appears that voucher offers change the timing
of moves: treatment families who are expecting to receive a voucher are less likely to move than
controls until they are offered a voucher, and then become more likely than controls to move.



22 In results not shown, we replicate the basic findings shown above on labor supply and social program
participation using data just from this 10 percent sub-sample, which gives us more confidence that we can generalize
the address history results found here to our full sample.


                                                        18
Presumably treatment group families are postponing moves so that they can move into better
housing units or neighborhoods with a voucher.
        The remainder of the results in Table V suggest that vouchers have little, if any, impact
on a household’s neighborhood environment, another housing-specific mechanism that has been
hypothesized to promote work. Each row in Table V presents results for a separate
neighborhood characteristic, including tract poverty rate, time spent in “low poverty” tracts
(poverty rate below 20 percent), tract share black, two measures of neighborhood social
functioning – collective efficacy, and social capital, taken from the community survey of the
Project on Human Development in Chicago Neighborhoods23 – and property and violent crime
rates from the Chicago Police Department measured at the beat level. For each neighborhood
measure, the estimated voucher effects are small relative to both the standard errors and CCMs.
We find little evidence that the neighborhood environments of voucher users are improving
relative to controls with time since the voucher offer (Figure III).
E. Non-Experimental Estimates of Voucher Impacts
        As a way to understand how one might reconcile our results with the previous non-
experimental literature, in Table VI we re-estimate the “effects” of vouchers using only the non-
experimental variation in voucher usage within our dataset.24 We do this in the top panel of
Table VI by restricting our analytic sample just to our control group (lottery numbers above
35,000), which could have obtained vouchers through several different “special allocations”
offered during our analysis period. These programs operated independently of the main CHAC
voucher wait list and provided small numbers of vouchers to other families over our study
period. In the bottom panel of Table VI, we use data just from the treatment group, so that all of
the variation in voucher usage comes from the willingness or ability of families who are offered
vouchers through the main CHAC 1997 voucher wait list lottery to actually lease up with one of
these vouchers.


23 These variables come from the 1995 PHDCN community survey, which surveys a random sample of residents
within each of the city’s “neighborhood clusters,” which the PHDCN formed on the basis of grouping together
census tracts. We focus on collective efficacy (willingness of neighbors to work together to promote shared norms)
and social disorder given claims in previous research for their importance in explaining a variety of behavioral
outcomes, including crime (Sampson, Raudenbush and Earls, 1997). Unfortunately the data from the 2002 PHDCN
community survey are not yet publicly available..
24 In a separate ongoing project joint with Jeff Smith, the authors are examining the correspondence between a
range of experimental and non-experimental estimates of the impact of housing vouchers on a variety of outcomes
for children and adults in public as well as private housing at baseline.


                                                       19
       The third column of Table VI replicates our “experimental” IV estimates as a benchmark
for the subsequent non-experimental estimates. In column (4), we present the results of a simple
bivariate OLS regression of our different dependent variables of interest against voucher use.
We see that these bivariate relationships are almost always larger in absolute value than our
experimental IV estimates. Column (5) shows that conditioning on the fairly rich set of baseline
covariates available to us in the CHAC dataset, including baseline labor supply and social
program participation as well as characteristics that are often unmeasured in population surveys
(e.g., disability status) substantially reduces the degree to which the non-experimental estimates
overstate the experimental IV effect for many, but not all, our outcomes of interest. This pattern
is generally similar whether we use the control group or the treatment group to generate our non-
experimental estimates. This suggests that previous non-experimental cross-sectional studies
might overstate the true causal effects of vouchers on labor supply or self sufficiency if the
covariate information available is limited.
       Column (6) takes advantage of the longitudinal structure of our data and controls for
individual fixed effects, so we are identifying off of within-person over-time changes in voucher
status. We are struck by the fact that the correspondence between these non-experimental fixed-
effects estimates and the experimental IV estimates varies so much across our different
dependent variables, regardless of whether we use the control group or the treatment group to
generate our non-experimental results. For example, the fixed-effects estimate understates the
negative effects of voucher use on employment (basically zero, compared to an experimental IV
effect of -3.6 percentage points), suggesting that people who self-select into using a voucher are
predisposed towards working around the time they use their vouchers. We can see this even
more sharply when we look at TANF receipt as the dependent variable of interest, where the
fixed-effects estimates suggest people receiving vouchers are less likely to use TANF (around -8
percentage points), while the experimental IV estimate suggests vouchers increase TANF receipt
by around 1.6 percentage points. On the other hand, the fixed-effects estimate for voucher
effects on earnings conditional on working is almost exactly equal to the experimental IV
estimate. In our sample, it appears that people who are relatively motivated to work and stay off




                                                 20
welfare are the ones most likely to select into using a voucher, but that there is little selection
going on with respect to earnings potential (i.e., market wages).25
         In summary, the pattern of non-experimental estimates shown in Table VI do not provide
a clear story about whether or how voucher usage affects self sufficiency, consistent with the
conclusions of previous reviews of the existing non-experimental literature. In contrast, our
experimental estimates clearly indicate that vouchers lead to a modest reduction in labor supply.
F. The Relationship between Voucher Effects and the Economy
         In Table IV, we presented some evidence indicating that the voucher effects on labor
supply may be largest for those CHAC applicants who were offered vouchers relatively earlier
during the post-lottery period. In Figure II, we saw that voucher effects increased with time
since offer. While this treatment heterogeneity could be caused by a variety of factors, Herbst
(2008) argues that the impact of social policy may vary as a function of the macroeconomy and,
as noted above, there were large changes in the local economy over our sample period.
         To explore this issue further, we estimate a model similar to equation (4) but that includes
a full set of interactions between the quarter-relative-to-offer and the calendar-quarter in which
the household was offered a voucher. In total, this model yields 405 separate post-offer ITT
effects measured at the level of offer quarter × calendar quarter. We then estimate a series of
models with these ITT’s as the dependent variable. As predictors, we include measures of the
unemployment rate both at the time the household was offered a housing voucher as well as the
time in which the outcome was measured, the difference between the treatment and control
groups in voucher utilization rates, and the number of years since families in the treatment group
had been offered vouchers in each calendar-quarter.26 To improve efficiency, we estimate these
via GLS using the covariance matrix from the first-step regression as a weighting matrix in the
second-step regression. Because we estimate clustered standard errors at the household level in
the first-step, and all households are by construction nested in a particular treatment offer cohort
(or in the control group), the resulting covariance matrix of ITT effects captures the serial


25 It is true that because the experimental IV and non-experimental fixed-effects model generate different estimates
for the effects of vouchers on labor force participation rates, the experimental versus non-experimental estimates for
voucher effects on earnings conditional on work will be comparing slightly different sets of people. But because the
labor force participation effects estimated in our IV are relatively small, we would need mean earnings for a small
subset of people to be very far from the average to change the basic story that there is not much selection into
voucher use based on earnings potential.
26 Note that the rental market vacancy rate and the unemployment rate are highly correlated in Chicago during this
period so we cannot distinguish effects of housing versus labor market conditions.


                                                         21
correlation within offer cohorts over time that one would expect, with larger standard errors on
the offer cohort level predictors in our second-step model.27 The top and bottom panels of Table
VII consider employment and social program participation rates, respectively. It is important to
note that this analysis does not exploit any experimental variation, and thus should be interpreted
as a simple association. It is possible that other unobserved factors correlated with the local
economic conditions could be driving the results presented here.
         While the estimates are not particularly precise, several interesting patterns emerge. In
general, it appears that a weak economy in the current period exacerbates the work disincentive
effect associated with using a housing voucher. That is, at times when the unemployment rate is
higher, the treatment-control difference in public assistance usage and employment may also be
larger in absolute value. For example, the coefficient of .002 in the bottom panel suggests that a
one-percentage point increase in the current unemployment rate is associated with a .002
increase in the ITT effect on public assistance receipt. One possible explanation is that
interaction with CHAC may have increased families’ awareness and familiarity with other social
service options, so that in bad economic times they were better positioned to utilize services.
         In contrast, it appears that weak economic conditions at the time of voucher offer might
mitigate the work disincentive effects associated with a voucher offer. For example, the
coefficient on the offer year unemployment rate of .006 in the top panel suggests a 1 percentage
point increase in the unemployment rate would lead to a .006 increase in the ITT effect (relative
to an average ITT of -.017). It is possible that a weak economy reduces the ability of voucher
recipients to change jobs or adjust hours at their current job. In the same way that the economic
conditions that exist when one enters the labor market can influence earnings for many years
(Oreopoulous, von Wachter and Heisz, 2008), the initial conditions at the time of voucher offer
may exert an enduring influence on the labor supply decisions of recipients.
         We had also hypothesized that differences in labor market or housing conditions at the
time families were offered vouchers could help explain differences in voucher effects across
voucher offer cohorts (Table IV). In results not shown, however, we show that proxies for the
macroeconomic conditions cannot explain much of the difference across voucher offer cohorts.




27 The bottom row of Table VII also provides a test of the overidentifying restrictions in this model. The fact that
the p-value for every specification is greater than .05 provides some evidence that the model is correctly specified.


                                                          22
                                       VIII. DISCUSSION
       The random assignment of voucher applicants in Chicago during the late 1990s provides
us with a unique opportunity to identify the causal effects of a large, understudied social program
(housing assistance) on labor supply and self sufficiency. Existing theoretical work yields
ambiguous predictions about the sign, much less the magnitude, of any relationship. In contrast
to the well-known Moving to Opportunity experiment, which offered vouchers to families in
public housing at baseline, we focus in our study on people who were living in private-market
housing at the time they applied for a voucher, the group that accounts for the vast majority of all
voucher applicants in Chicago and other large cities. The treatment we examine, therefore,
consists of both an increase in income and marginal tax rates, but not necessarily a change in
neighborhood environment. Our estimates capture the effect of expanding the set of people
receiving housing assistance by issuing more vouchers, and may shed light on the labor supply
response of in-kind means-tested transfers more generally.
       Our estimates allow us to soundly reject the hypothesis that housing voucher receipt is
work enhancing, or even work neutral. We estimate that voucher receipt reduces quarterly
employment rates by around 3.6 percentage points (about 6 percent of the control complier
mean), reduces earnings by around $328 per quarter (11 percent of the CCM), increases TANF
receipt rates by around 1.6 percentage points (15 percent of the CCM), and increases receipt of
any social program benefits by 6.7 percentage points (12 percent of the CCM). We also find that
the treatment group increases labor supply slightly during the periods before they are offered a
voucher, consistent with the prediction of the life cycle labor supply model that people may shift
work effort towards those periods with relatively higher wage rates (although this effect is quite
small – around 0.6 percentage points, or about one percent of the control mean).
       We find little evidence in support of two of the main work-enhancing mechanisms that
have been hypothesized for housing vouchers, namely significant improvements in
neighborhoods or residential stability. Voucher receipt does seem to change the timing of
moves, as families on the voucher program wait list seem to defer moving until they are offered a
voucher, but does not have much effect on the total number of moves. Moreover, vouchers
appear to have no significant impact on a family’s neighborhood environment.
       Since we find relatively little evidence that housing-specific mechanisms appear to be
very important for labor supply, our findings may also be relevant for understanding labor supply



                                                23
responses to other social programs as well. Since voucher receipt generates income and
substitution effects that work in the same direction to reduce labor supply, our reduced form
estimates for the effects of voucher usage on labor supply enables us to generate bounds for both
effects. Since most CHAC voucher applicants have baseline incomes far below the phase-out
range, and so should remain income-eligible for quite some time, our estimates presumably
capture how people respond to perceived permanent changes in their budget constraints.
         Our reduced-form estimates imply that the wage elasticity with respect to working full
time (35 hours or more per week) is not more than +.3 to +.4, which is far smaller than the
estimate of +1.82 from Keane and Moffitt (1998).28 For total hours worked, our estimates
suggest that the income and substitution elasticities for hours worked by our sample are not any
larger than around -.20 and +.33, respectively.29 Our upper bound of .33 for the substitution
effect is far smaller than that from Kimball and Shapiro (2008), who use survey data about
hypothetical labor supply responses to estimate a utility-constant elasticity of hours with respect
to a permanent change in the wage rate of around .57 for single females. On the other hand, our
upper bounds fit comfortably alongside the income and substitution elasticities that have been
estimated for single female household heads from the Negative Income Tax experiments, equal
to -.16 and +.13, respectively (Robins, 1985, p. 580).
         An alternative way to think about the magnitude of our estimates is to compare the
deadweight losses associated with vouchers to the resources transferred to poor families. As
noted above, the average family in our sample has baseline earnings of around $14,000 per year,
while the average value of a housing voucher subsidy for these families is about $8,265 per year.
We can approximate the size of the deadweight loss induced by labor supply reductions using


28 As noted above, the equivalent variation of a voucher to our sample of $6,860 is equal to around 49 percent of
the mean baseline income of $14,000. For the wage elasticity, Hassett and Moore (2005) suggest the average
marginal tax rate is around zero for unmarried women with children with incomes around the baseline mean in our
sample, so that an increase in the marginal tax rate of 30 percentage points reduces the after-tax wage by 30 percent.
Unfortunately we do not have data on hours worked in our UI data. But if we assume the average wage for CHAC
applicants was $6 an hour for both the treatment and control group, then our results in Table III suggest that a 30
percent reduction in the after-tax wage from using a voucher reduces full-time work by 10 percent (TOT effect of
-.045, and a CCM of .47), so that the elasticity cannot be larger than (.1/.3)=.33. If we assume instead an average
wage of $8 per hour, then Table III implies voucher use reduces full-time work by 11 percent and the elasticity is no
more than (.11/.3)=.37.
29 Without data on hours of work, we assume that a 10 percent reduction in earnings implies a 10 percent reduction
in hours (which in turn assumes treatment assignment has no effect on wages). The equivalent variation of a
voucher is equal to 49 percent of baseline income, so that the income elasticity of hours is no larger than (-.1/.49)=
-.20. If vouchers reduce the after tax wage by 30 percent (see previous footnote), then the elasticity of the
substitution effect of hours worked is no larger than (-.1/.3) = .33.


                                                         24
Arthur Harberger’s welfare triangle (one-half price × change in quantity), which our estimates
suggest is around $660.30 Whether this is large or small in relation to the size of resource
transfer to low-income families is a normative policy judgment.
        We could also consider the magnitude of our estimated effects within the context of what
Arthur Okun (1975) called the “leaky bucket” that society uses to transfer resources to the poor.
How big is the leak? Setting aside for the moment program administration costs and deadweight
losses associated with raising tax revenues, the average government cost of a housing voucher
for families in our study is around $8,400 per year, and the equivalent variation is around $6,860.
Voucher use reduces annual earnings by around $1,312 among program participants, or around
19 percent of the value of the subsidy to voucher recipients. Using the standard for judging the
size of work disincentive effects suggested by Blank (1997), eliminating the housing voucher
program altogether would substantially increase the degree of material deprivation among poor
families despite the fact that they would work and earn more.
        In any case, our results clearly indicate that housing vouchers reduce labor supply to
some degree. This finding is relevant to a variety of policy decisions about the optimal design of
housing programs. A recent HUD white paper on the housing voucher program notes that when
given discretion, local housing agencies seem eager to experiment with different methods of
relating tenant incomes to their rent payments, including flat rent systems, stepped rents, or
expanding the range of income exclusions and deductions used to calculate adjusted income
(HUD, 2004). Olsen (2003, 2008) has proposed to make housing an entitlement and provide a
relatively smaller housing subsidy to all eligible families, which could reduce the implicit tax
rates associated with housing assistance and thus mitigate any work disincentive effects.
Evidence on the sign and magnitude of labor supply responses to the existing housing voucher
program is important for assessing these alternatives to current policies.
        Our findings are also relevant to debates that go back at least to the 1960s about whether
to provide assistance to families through a mix of cash transfer and in-kind benefit programs, or
instead through a single negative income tax program (see, for example, Friedman, 1962). There
are several arguments in favor of in-kind transfers such as housing assistances, including the


30 If the average CHAC applicant earns $6 an hour, our estimates for earnings impacts of $328 per quarter imply 55
fewer hours per quarter, or around 220 fewer hours of work per year. The deadweight loss from reductions in labor
supply then would equal $660. The deadweight loss is about the same if we assume an average wage of $8 per hour
for our sample.


                                                       25
contention that better housing has positive externalities associated with greater human capital
accumulation, and a normative argument for providing a base level of assistance to individuals
that is not conditioned on work. Our estimates suggest that one downside of housing programs is
that it leads to a reduction in work effort, in contrast to the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC),
which has been shown to increase labor force participation rates. In short, complicated tradeoffs
arise in the decision about whether to use in-kind rather than cash subsidies to address housing
problems. Our study provides new evidence that is relevant to assessing these tradeoffs, and
deciding how to best allocate the $25 billion per year currently devoted to helping poor families
meet their housing needs.


                                         REFERENCES
Angrist, Joshua D. and Guido W. Imbens (1995). “Two-Stage Least Squares Estimation of
Average Causal Effects in Models with Variable Treatment Intensity.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 90:431-442.
Angrist, Joshua A., Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin (1996) “Identification of Causal
Effects Using Instrumental Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91: 444-
472
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004) “How Much Should We
Trust Differences-In-Differences?” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119(1): 249-276.
Blank, Rebecca M. (1997) It Takes A Nation: A New Agenda for Fighting Poverty. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Carlson, Deven, Robert Haveman, Thomas Kaplan, and Barbara Wolfe (2008) “Long-Term
Effects of Public Llow-Income Housing Vouchers on Work, Earnings and Neighborhood
Quality.” University of Wisconsin-Madison, Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper
1338-08.
Friedman, Milton (1962) Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gubits, Daniel B., Larry L. Orr, Gregory B. Mills, Michelle L. Wood, Bulbul Kaul, David A.
Long, and Judith D. Feins (2006) The Impact of Housing Choice Vouchers on Employment,
Earnings and Mean-Tested Benefits. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates draft report.
Hassett, Kevin A., and Anne B. Moore (2005) “How Do Tax Policies Affect Low Income
Workers?” University of Michigan National Poverty Center, Policy Brief #5.



                                                26
Herbst, Chris M. (2008). “Do Social Policy Reforms Have Different Impacts on Employment
and Welfare Use as Economic Conditions Change?” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management. 27(4): 867-894.
Hoynes, Hiliary W. and Diane Schanzenbach (2007) “Consumption Responses to In-Kind
Transfers: Evidence from the Introduction of the Food Stamps Program.” National Bureau of
Economic Research, Working Paper, 13025.
Jacob, Brian A. (2004) “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement:
Evidence From Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago.” American Economic Review. 94(1):
233-258.
Kain, John F. (1968) “Housing Segregation, Negro Employment and Metropolitan
Decentralization.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 82(2): 175-197.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman (2001) “Moving to Opportunity in
Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
116(2): 607-654.
Keane, Michael and Robert Moffitt (1998) “A Structural Model of Multiple Welfare Program
Participation and Labor Supply.” International Economic Review. 39(3): 553-589.
Kimball, Miles S. and Matthew D. Shapiro (2008) “Labor supply: Are the Income and
Substitution Effects Both Large or Both Small?” National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working Paper, 14208.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz (2007) “Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica, 75(1): 83-119.
Kornfeld, Robert and Howard S. Bloom (1999) “Measuring Program Impacts on Earnings and
Employment: Do Unemployment Insurance Wage Reports from Employers Agree with Surveys
of Individuals?” Journal of Labor Economics. 17(1): 168-197.
Leonesio, Michael V. (1988) “In-Kind Transfers and Work Incentives.” Journal of Labor
Economics. 6(4): 515-529.
MaCurdy, Thomas (1981) “An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Setting.”
Journal of Political Economy. 89(6): 1059-85.
Moffitt, Robert A. (2002) “Welfare Programs and Labor Supply.” In Handbook of Public
Economics. Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, Editors. Elsevier. Pp. 2393-2430.




                                                27
Murray, Michael (1980) “A Reinterpretation of the Traditional Income-Leisure Model, With
Application to In-Kind Subsidy Programs.” Journal of Public Economics. 14: 69-81.
Newman, Sandra, C. Scott Holupka, and Joseph Harkness (forthcoming) “The Long-Term
Effects of Housing Assistance on Work and Welfare.” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management.
Okun, Arthur M. (1975) Equality and Efficiency, the Big Tradeoff. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution Press.
Olsen, Edgar O. (2003) “Housing Programs for Low-Income Households.” In Means-Tested
Transfer Programs in the United States. Edited by Robert A. Moffitt. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. pp. 365-442.
Olsen, Edgar O. (2008) “Getting More From the Budget for Low-Income Housing Assistance.”
Brookings Institution Hamilton Project Discussion Paper.
Olsen, Edgar O., Catherine A. Tyler, Jonathan W. King, and Paul E. Carrillo (2005) “The Effects
of Different Types of Housing Assistance on Earnings and Employment.” Cityscape. 8(2): 163-
187.
Oreopoulous, Phil, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz (2006). “The Short- and Long-Term
Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession: Hysteresis and Heterogeneity in the Market for
College Graduates.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper, 12159.
Reeder, William J. (1985) “The Benefits and Costs of the Section 8 Existing Housing Program.”
Journal of Public Economics. 26: 349-377.
Robins, Philip K. (1985) “A Comparison of the Labor Supply Findings From the Four Negative
Income Tax Experiments.” Journal of Human Resources. 20(4): 567-582.
Rubinowitz, Leonard S. and James E. Rosenbaum (2000) Crossing the Class and Color Lines:
From Public Housing to White Suburbia. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Sampson, Robert J., Stephen Raudenbush, and Felton Earls (1997) “Neighborhoods and Violent
Crime: A Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy.” Science. 277: 918-924.
Schone, Barbara S. (1992) “Do Means Tested Transfers Reduce Labor Supply?” Economics
Letters. 40: 353-358.
Shroder, Mark (2002) “Does Housing Assistance Perversely Affect Self-Sufficiency? A Review
Essay.” Journal of Housing Economics. 11(4): 381-417.




                                              28
Susin, Scott (2005) “Longitudinal Outcomes of Subsidized Housing Recipients in Matched
Survey and Administrative Data.” Cityscape. 8(2): 189-218.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2004) The Flexible Voucher Program:
Why a New Approach to Housing Subsidy is Needed. Washington, DC: HUD.
http://www.hud.gov/offices/pih/programs/hcv/fvp/wponfvp.pdf
Yelowitz, Aaron S. (2001) “Public Housing and Labor Supply.” Working Paper, Department of
Economics, University of Kentucky.




                                             29
Table I: Baseline characteristics of treatment and control group households

                                                                                    Control Group                        Treatment Group
                                                                                                               All        Compliers    Non-Compliers
HHH male                                                                                 0.121               0.124           0.076         0.173
HHH black                                                                                0.943               0.942           0.956         0.926
HHH Hispanic                                                                             0.035               0.035           0.026         0.045
HHH white                                                                                0.033               0.033           0.018         0.050
HHH other                                                                                0.004               0.005           0.002         0.008
Has spouse                                                                               0.088               0.087           0.057         0.117
Number of adults in HH                                                                   1.254               1.253           1.208         1.298
Number of kids 0-18 in HH                                                                1.752               1.746           1.855         1.638
Age of HHH                                                                              32.023              32.116          30.624        33.615
Indicated interest in the certificate program as well as the voucher program             0.786               0.786           0.792         0.781
Reported receiving Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits                           0.059               0.060           0.061         0.058
Time (in days) of application since applications opened                                  9.944               9.942           9.436        10.451
HHH receiving TANF 1997q2                                                                0.409              0.395**          0.505         0.285
HHH wage (2007$) 1997q2                                                                  2,106               2,152           1,691         2,616
HHH employed 1997q2                                                                      0.562               0.572*          0.544         0.601
HHH receiving TANF, Med, or FS 1997q2                                                    0.600               0.593           0.714         0.471
HHH number of prior violent crime arrests                                                0.133               0.145*          0.147         0.142
HHH number of prior property crime arrests                                               0.167               0.162           0.151         0.173
HHH number of prior drug crime arrests                                                   0.109               0.110           0.091         0.129
HHH number of prior other crime arrests                                                  0.160               0.165           0.155         0.174
Percent black in census tract                                                            0.819               0.820           0.848         0.790
Poverty rate in census tract                                                             0.289               0.289           0.299         0.278
Census tract property crime (crimes per 1,000 residents)                                  84.8               83.2**           86.1          80.3
Census tract violent crime (crimes per 1,000 residents)                                   20.1                19.9            21.3          18.6
Monthy rent, 2007$                                                                        682                 678             671           687
Monthly fair market rent, 2007$                                                          1,053               1,052           1,061         1,044

Number of Households                                                                    30,662               11,696          5,863             5,833

F-statistic (clustering at the HH level)                                                                      0.98
p-value                                                                                                      0.4979

Notes: The unit of analysis is the household head. The sample includes all working-age, able-bodied CHAC applicants who were living in private housing at
baseline. ** = significant at 5% level, * = significant at 10% level. All earnings, rent and FMR are measured in 2007 dollars.
Table II: The Effect of Voucher Offer and Other Baseline Household Characteristics on Voucher Utilization

                                                                  Treatment and Control
                                                                                                                   Treatment Households Only
                                                                        Households
                                                                     (1)          (2)                (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)
HHH received a voucher offer in a prior quarter                   0.399**
                                                                   (0.005)
HHH ever received voucher offer                                                0.426**
                                                                                (0.005)
HHH male                                                                                          -0.222**                  -0.125**     -0.133**      -0.132**
                                                                                                   (0.013)                   (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.014)
Age of HHH                                                                                        -0.021**                  -0.016**     -0.016**      -0.016**
                                                                                                   (0.003)                   (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)
Age (squared) of HHH                                                                              0.000**                   0.000**      0.000**       0.000**
                                                                                                   (0.000)                   (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)
2 people in HH                                                                                     0.089**                    0.006        0.005         0.004
                                                                                                   (0.015)                   (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.015)
3 people in HH                                                                                     0.114**                    0.018        0.016         0.016
                                                                                                   (0.015)                   (0.016)      (0.015)       (0.015)
4 people in HH                                                                                     0.108**                    0.018        0.012         0.012
                                                                                                   (0.016)                   (0.018)      (0.017)       (0.017)
5+ people in HH                                                                                    0.096**                    -0.005       -0.009        -0.009
                                                                                                   (0.017)                   (0.018)      (0.018)       (0.018)
HHH employed 1997q2                                                                               -0.058**                   0.101**      0.105**       0.105**
                                                                                                   (0.009)                   (0.013)      (0.012)       (0.012)
HHH receiving TANF 1997q2                                                                          0.230**                   0.057**      0.066**       0.066**
                                                                                                   (0.009)                   (0.014)      (0.013)       (0.013)
HHH receiving TANF, Med, or FS 1997q2                                                              0.251**                   0.129**      0.130**       0.129**
                                                                                                   (0.009)                   (0.014)      (0.013)       (0.013)
HHH wage (2007$) 1997q2 ($1,000s)                                                                 -0.031**                  -0.023**     -0.023**      -0.023**
                                                                                                    (0.02)                   (0.002)      (0.002)       (0.002)
Combined HH earnings 1997q2 ($1,000s)                                                             -0.006**
                                                                                                    (0.00)
Poverty rate in census tract                                                                       0.009**     0.214**                   0.126**        0.129**
                                                                                                   (0.035)     (0.044)                    (0.042)       (0.042)
Census tract violent crime rate (crimes per 100,000 residents)                                     0.227**       0.139                    0.089**       0.086**
                                                                                                   (0.035)     (0.049)                    (0.042)       (0.042)
Census tract property crime (crimes per 100,000 residents)                                         0.011**     0.010**                   -0.004**      -0.003**
                                                                                                    (0.07)     (0.014)                    (0.008)       (0.007)
Census tract social capital                                                                       -0.070**       0.008                     -0.017        -0.016
                                                                                                   (0.029)     (0.031)                    (0.029)       (0.029)
Missing census tract                                                                              -0.161**      -0.051                     -0.149        -0.143
                                                                                                   (0.016)     (0.114)                    (0.108)       (0.108)
HHH offered voucher in 2000                                                                       -0.054**                                             -0.056**
                                                                                                   (0.015)                                              (0.014)
HHH offered voucher in 2001                                                                       -0.032**                                             -0.033**
                                                                                                   (0.012)                                              (0.012)
HHH offered voucher in 2002                                                                         0.018                                                 0.015
                                                                                                   (0.013)                                              (0.012)
HHH offered voucher in 2003                                                                        -0.060*                                               -0.048
                                                                                                   (0.031)                                              (0.031)
Control Group Mean                                                  0.053         .076
Treatment Group Mean                                                                                0.501        0.501       0.501         0.501         0.501
Number of households                                                42,358       42,358            11,696       11,696      11,696        11,696        11,696
Number of observations                                            1,440,172      42,358            11,696       11,696      11,696        11,696        11,696
Census tract fixed effects                                                                                                    Yes
R-squared                                                           0.262         0.276            varies       0.014        0.155         0.100        0.103
F-Test (Neighborhood characteristics or tract dummies)            7,567.10      8,280.88                        34.67       998.34         22.65        22.26
p-value (Neighborhood characteristics or tract dummies)            [0.000]       [0.000]                       [0.000]      [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]
F-Test (person characteristics)                                                                                              95.08        113.71       114.08
p-value (person characteristics)                                                                                            [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]
F-Test (offer year)                                                                                                                                     8.71
p-value (offer year)                                                                                                                                   [0.000]

Notes: The dependent variable for column (1) is ever used a voucher in prior quarter. For columns (2) - (7), it is ever used a voucher over the sample period. The
unit of observation for column (1) is person-year-quarter, and for columns (2) - (7), it is person. Column (3) runs separate bivariate regressions. Each of the four
census tract bivariate regressions include missing tract. Census tract dummies are included in column (5). For column (1), robust standard errors are clustered at
household level. For columns (2) - (7), robust standard errors are presented. The sample includes all working-age, able-bodied CHAC applicants who were living in
private housing at baseline. ** = significant at 5% level. * = significant at 10%. All earnings are measured in 2007 dollars.
Table III: Effects Of Housing Vouchers On Household Heads
                                                                                                             Number of
                                                       CM             ITT            IV          CCM         Households

HHH employed                                          0.592        -0.014**       -0.036**       0.605          42,358
                                                                    (0.004)        (0.009)
HHH earnings                                         3,291.02     -128.44**      -327.96**      3,112.90        42,358
                                                                   (30.617)       (74.585)
HHH earnings > $2,415 (FT@$6/hr)                      0.464        -0.018**       -0.045**       0.470          42,358
                                                                    (0.004)        (0.009)
HHH earnings conditional on working                  5,557.98      -91.48**      -228.44**      5,129.26        38,628
                                                                   (34.099)       (80.236)
HHH log earnings conditional on working               8.279        -0.029**       -0.073**       8.220          38,628
                                                                    (0.008)        (0.018)
HHH received public assistance                        0.460         0.027**        0.067**       0.552          42,358
                                                                    (0.004)        (0.009)
HHH received TANF                                     0.146         0.006**        0.016**       0.110          42,358
                                                                    (0.002)        (0.004)
HHH received Medicaid                                 0.400         0.023**        0.058**       0.484          42,358
                                                                    (0.004)        (0.009)
HHH received Food Stamps                              0.375         0.030**        0.076**       0.450          42,358
                                                                    (0.003)        (0.008)


Notes: The unit of observation is person-year-quarter. The sample includes all working-age, able-bodied CHAC applicants who
were living in private housing at baseline. CM = Control Mean. ITT = Intent-to-Treat. IV = Instrumental Variables. CCM =
Control Complier Mean. See text for discussion of these estimates. Robust standard errors clustered at household level. ** =
significant at 5% level, * = significant at 10% level. All earnings are measured in 2007 dollars.
Table IV: Housing Voucher Effects by Subgroup
                                                              Number of                             Employed                                      Received public assistance
                                                              Households             CM          ITT           IV        CCM              CM          ITT           IV         CCM

Baseline (all working-age and able-bodied)                       42,358             0.592     -0.014**     -0.036**      0.605           0.460      0.027**      0.067**       0.552
                                                                                               (0.004)      (0.009)                                 (0.004)      (0.009)
Elderly (65+ yrs old)                                            2,002              0.051      -0.001        0.001       0.028           0.509       0.000        -0.018       0.686
                                                                                               (0.006)      (0.024)                                 (0.017)      (0.071)
Disabled                                                         15,237             0.274      -0.001       -0.005       0.288           0.602      0.012*       0.029*        0.688
                                                                                               (0.005)      (0.012)                                 (0.006)      (0.015)
Among working-age and able-bodied sample:
   Male                                                          5,120              0.519      -0.003       -0.018       0.470           0.234      0.018**      0.076**       0.323
                                                                                               (0.010)      (0.043)                                 (0.009)      (0.038)
    Female                                                       37,238             0.602     -0.016**     -0.038**      0.615           0.491      0.029**      0.067**       0.570
                                                                                               (0.004)      (0.009)                                 (0.004)      (0.009)
    Employed in 1997q2                                           23,934             0.748     -0.015**     -0.039**      0.718           0.352      0.028**      0.071**       0.454
                                                                                               (0.005)      (0.011)                                 (0.005)      (0.011)
    Not employed in 1997q2                                       18,424             0.392     -0.011**     -0.030**      0.469           0.599      0.025**      0.061**       0.669
                                                                                               (0.006)      (0.014)                                 (0.006)      (0.013)
    Receiving some form of public assistance in 1997q2           25,317             0.544     -0.011**     -0.025**      0.576           0.653      0.027**      0.056**       0.654
                                                                                               (0.005)      (0.010)                                 (0.005)      (0.010)
    Not receiving any public assistance in 1997q2                17,041             0.664     -0.017**     -0.061**      0.673           0.172      0.027**      0.095**       0.281
                                                                                               (0.005)      (0.019)                                 (0.005)      (0.017)
    No Kids in HH                                                8,137              0.563     -0.017**     -0.058**      0.545           0.299      0.031**      0.109**       0.392
                                                                                               (0.008)      (0.027)                                 (0.008)      (0.026)
    One Kid in HH                                                12,650             0.630     -0.019**     -0.046**      0.628           0.432      0.025**      0.061**       0.545
                                                                                               (0.007)      (0.016)                                 (0.007)      (0.016)
    Two Kids in HH                                               11,053             0.608     -0.016**     -0.038**      0.631           0.492      0.028**      0.063**       0.554
                                                                                               (0.007)      (0.016)                                 (0.007)      (0.015)
    Three+ Kids in HH                                            10,518             0.552      -0.006       -0.015       0.586           0.586      0.026**      0.058**       0.643
                                                                                               (0.007)      (0.016)                                 (0.007)      (0.016)
    Below median poverty rate in census tract                    19,312             0.602     -0.017**     -0.045**      0.603           0.419      0.035**      0.088**       0.524
                                                                                               (0.005)      (0.013)                                 (0.005)      (0.013)
    Above median poverty rate in census tract                    19,474             0.577     -0.011**     -0.027**      0.601           0.515      0.022**      0.051**       0.581
                                                                                               (0.005)      (0.012)                                 (0.005)      (0.012)
    Offer Cohort 1997-1998                                       33,641             0.592     -0.029**     -0.068**      0.643           0.460      0.036**      0.083**       0.544
                                                                                               (0.006)      (0.013)                                 (0.006)      (0.013)
    Offer Cohort 2000-2001                                       36,126             0.592      -0.003       -0.010       0.581           0.460      0.024**      0.064**       0.556
                                                                                               (0.005)      (0.014)                                 (0.005)      (0.013)
    Offer Cohort 2002-2003                                       33,915             0.592      -0.010       -0.023       0.576           0.460      0.019**      0.042**       0.561
                                                                                               (0.007)      (0.016)                                 (0.007)      (0.015)
Notes: The unit of observation is person-year-quarter. The sample varies across the rows based on the subsample. CM = Control Mean. ITT = Intent-to-Treat. IV = Instrumental
Variables. CCM = Control Complier Mean. See text for discussion of these estimates. Robust standard errors clustered at household level. ** = significant at 5% level, * = significant at
10% level.
Table V: Effects of a Voucher Offer on Residential Stability and Neighborhood Environment
                                                                                                                Number of
                                                           CM            ITT            IV           CCM        Households

Number of different residential addresses                 2.668          0.038         0.124         3.176         4,184
                                                                       (0.047)       (0.117)
Poverty rate                                              0.257         -0.004        -0.011         0.275         3,944
                                                                       (0.004)       (0.011)
Poverty rate below 20%                                    0.395         0.008         0.017          0.338         4,138
                                                                       (0.015)       (0.035)
Fraction black                                            0.779         0.002         0.004          0.810         3,944
                                                                       (0.008)       (0.019)
Collective efficacy score                                 3.778         0.000         0.001          3.770         3,860
                                                                       (0.007)       (0.015)
Social capital score                                      3.501         -0.005        -0.011         3.509         3,860
                                                                       (0.005)       (0.011)
Property crime arrest rate                               74.685         -0.546        -1.262        71.424         3,682
                                                                       (0.885)       (2.012)
Violent crime arrest rate                                16.687         -0.128        -0.288        15.693         3,682
                                                                       (0.240)       (0.552)

Notes: The unit of observation is person-year-quarter. The sample includes all working-age, able-bodied CHAC applicants who
were living in private housing at baseline. CM = Control Mean. ITT = Intent-to-Treat. IV = Instrumental Variables. CCM =
Control Complier Mean. See text for discussion of these estimates. Robust standard errors clustered at household level. ** =
significant at 5% level, * = significant at 10% level.
Table VI: Nonexperimental Estimates of the Effect of Housing Vouchers on Labor Market Outcomes


                                                                               IV Estimates             OLS with OLS with
                                                      Number of                             OLS with no
                                                                       CM       from Table              baseline   household
                                                      Households                             controls
                                                                                    III                  controls fixed effects
                                                           (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)
Control Group Non-Experimental Estimates
HHH employed                                             30,750       0.595       -0.036**      -0.068**        -0.004       0.003
                                                                                   (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.009)
HHH earnings                                             30,750     3,348.98     -327.96**    -1,114.18**    -307.75**      -89.94*
                                                                                  (74.585)      (55.498)      (49.040)     (49.445)
HHH earnings > $2415 (FT@$6/hr)                          30,750       0.470       -0.045**      -0.111**      -0.027**     0.024**
                                                                                   (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.008)
HHH earnings > $3220 (FT@$8/hr)                          30,750       0.426       -0.046**      -0.119**      -0.030**     0.021**
                                                                                   (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.008)
HHH earnings conditional on working                      28,030     5,624.65     -228.44**    -1,388.76**    -515.36**    -235.66**
                                                                                  (80.236)      (64.830)      (58.505)     (63.837)
HHH log earnings conditional on working                  28,030       8.296       -0.073**      -0.347**      -0.123**       -0.009
                                                                                   (0.018)       (0.019)       (0.017)      (0.024)
HHH received public assistance                           30,750       0.448       0.067**       0.224**       0.104**      0.081**
                                                                                   (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.009)
HHH received TANF                                        30,750       0.144       0.016**       0.039**       0.017**      -0.083**
                                                                                   (0.004)       (0.005)       (0.004)      (0.009)
HHH received Medicaid                                    30,750       0.388       0.058**       0.206**       0.091**      0.075**
                                                                                   (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.007)      (0.009)
HHH received Food Stamps                                 30,750       0.363       0.076**       0.211**       0.109**      0.071**
                                                                                   (0.008)       (0.008)       (0.007)      (0.009)

Treatment Group Non-Experimental Estimates
HHH employed                                             11,725       0.596       -0.036**      -0.027**      0.029**        0.006
                                                                                   (0.009)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)
HHH earnings                                             11,725     3,463.46     -327.96**     -676.32**     -300.69**       -0.32
                                                                                  (74.585)      (49.079)      (46.899)     (37.681)
HHH earnings > $2,415 (FT@$6/hr)                         11,725       0.473       -0.045**      -0.048**        0.005      0.019**
                                                                                   (0.009)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)
HHH earnings > $3,220 (FT@$8/hr)                         11,725       0.431       -0.046**      -0.056**        -0.004     0.023**
                                                                                   (0.009)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.005)
HHH earnings conditional on working                      10,685     5,812.37     -228.44**     -909.19**     -762.68**    -200.73**
                                                                                  (80.236)      (53.669)      (52.760)     (41.879)
HHH log earnings conditional on working                  10,685       8.325       -0.073**      -0.177**      -0.122**       0.003
                                                                                   (0.018)       (0.013)       (0.013)      (0.012)
HHH received public assistance                           11,725       0.412       0.067**       0.207**       0.148**      0.043**
                                                                                   (0.009)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)
HHH received TANF                                        11,725       0.152       0.016**       -0.025**      0.011**      -0.077**
                                                                                   (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.005)
HHH received Medicaid                                    11,725       0.353       0.058**       0.189**       0.135**      0.035**
                                                                                   (0.009)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)
HHH received Food Stamps                                 11,725       0.329       0.076**       0.197**       0.142**      0.046**
                                                                                   (0.008)       (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)
Notes: The unit of observation is person-year-quarter. The sample includes all working-age, able-bodied CHAC applicants who were
living in private housing at baseline. CM = Control Mean (the mean for the non-experimental control group). See text for discussion
of these estimates. Robust standard errors clustered at household level. ** = significant at 5% level, * = significant at 10% level. All
earnings are in 2007 dollars. All specifications include year-quarter dummies.
Table VII: The Effect of Economic Factors on the Magnitude of Voucher Impacts

                                                   Dependent Variable = ITT Effect of Voucher Offer on Employment
                                                 (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
Difference in treatment cohort and
control fraction leased up                   -0.038**                                  -0.038**                    -0.037**
                                              (0.011)                                   (0.011)                     (0.012)
Years since offer                                           -0.002*                                   -0.001         -0.000
                                                            (0.001)                                  (0.001)        (0.001)
Contemperaneous unemployment rate                                          -0.002        -0.001       -0.002         -0.001
                                                                          (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.001)
Unemployment rate in year surrounding
offer quarter                                                              0.006        0.006*        0.005        0.006*
                                                                          (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.004)       (0.004)
Mean of the dependent variable                 -0.017        -0.017       -0.017        -0.017        -0.017        -0.017
Number of observations                          405           405          405           405           405           405
p-value from the test of the
overidentifying restrictions                   0.1022       0.0598        0.0591        0.1113        0.0632        0.1049

                                             Dependent Variable = ITT Effect of Voucher Offer on Any Public Assistance
                                               (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
Difference in treatment cohort and
control fraction leased up                    0.041**                                  0.039**                     0.022**
                                              (0.009)                                  (0.009)                     (0.010)
Years since offer                                           0.006**                                  0.006**       0.005**
                                                            (0.001)                                  (0.001)       (0.001)
Contemperaneous unemployment rate                                        0.002**        0.002*       0.002**        0.002*
                                                                         (0.001)        (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)
Unemployment rate in year surrounding
offer quarter                                                              -0.005        -0.006       -0.001        -0.002
                                                                          (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)
Mean of the dependent variable                 0.029         0.029         0.029        0.029         0.029         0.029
Number of observations                          405           405           405          405           405           405
p-value from the test of the
overidentifying restrictions                   0.2460       0.4433        0.1289        0.2807        0.4829        0.5341

Notes: The estimates in Table VII are GLS estimates, sometimes referred to as Optimal Minimum Distance (OMD)
estimation (see Chamberlain, 1982). The dependent variable, the Intent-to-Treat (ITT) effect of a voucher offer on an
outcome, is estimated in a first-stage regression of an indicator for employed-in-the-current-quarter on indicators for each
quarter-relative-to-offer interacted with indicators for the quarter-year a voucher was offered, household- and tract-level
control variables, and clustered at the household level. The estimates of the 405 treatment indicator coefficients and the
associated variance-covariance matrix are used to implement second-stage GLS regressions with the vector of 405 ITT
coefficients as the outcome. The reported p-value is from the efficient test of the restrictions of the second-stage model
against the alternative of the fully interacted first-stage model. The sample includes all working-age, able-bodied CHAC
applicants who were living in private housing at baseline. ** = significant at 5% level, * = significant at 10% level.
         Figure I: Budget Constraint With a Means-Tested Transfer




                    Slope = -w

Income

           E                                    Slope = - w (1 - t)


                       D




                                                B                     C

                                                                          G


                                                                      A

                                                                 0
                                 Hours worked




                                      1
                                          Figure II: ITT Effect Of Vouchers Over Time On Employment And Receipt Of Public Assistance




                         .09




                                                                                                                               400
                         .06




                                                                                                                                          200
                         .03




                                                                                                                &&& ()*+ ,*rn/n01 2200345
                                                                                                                                    0
                 ((( *+,-./01
                          0




                                                                                                                         !200
                   !.03




                                                                                                                  !400
                         !.06




                                                                                                                               !600
                         !.09




                                                                                                                               !!00
                         !.12




                                     !6   !5   !4   !3   !2   !1   0    1     2     3   4   5   6   4   8                                       !6   !5   !4    !3   !2   !1   0    1     2     3   4   5   6   3   !
                                                              607r9 :0-7;<=0 ;. >??0r                                                                                     9)*r1 ()+*:/;) :< =>>)r


                                                          (a) HHH Employed                                                                                     (b) HHH Real Earnings (2007$)




                                                                                                                               400
                         .2




                                                                                                                                          200
                         .15




                                                                                                                &&& ()*+ ,*rn/n01 2200745
                 &&& ()*)+,)- ./01




                                                                                                                                    0
                             .1




                                                                                                                         !200
                   .05




                                                                                                                  !400         !600
                         0




                                                                                                                               !800
                         !.05




                                     !6   !5   !4   !3   !2   !1   0    1     2     3   4   5   6   5   8                                       !6   !5   !4    !3   !2   !1   0    1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8
                                                              7)8r: ();8<+,) <= O??)r                                                                                     9)*r1 ()+*:/;) :< =>>)r


                                           (c) HHH Receiving Any Public Assistance                                                                             (d) HHH Conditional Earnings
                                                                                                            a

Notes: Dotted lines represent the 95 percent confidence interval. Solid lines represent the point estimate. Estimates come from equation (4) in the text. Year zero is
defined as the first full year after an offer, measured at the quarter level, and including the quarter of the offer. Sample includes all working-age, able-bodied CHAC
applicants who were living in private housing at baseline.
 Figure III: ITT Effect Of Vouchers Over Time On Residential Stability and Neighborhood Environment
                 !"#




                                                                                                                          .05
                 !#




                                                                                                                          .03
   &'()*+,-.,Addresses
                 !$#




                                                                                                              &o(erty Rate
                                                                                                                      .01
          %




                                                                                                             !.01
  !!$#




                                                                                                                          !.03
                 !!#




                                                                                                                          !.05
                 !!"#




                                  !3   !#   !4   !5   !$   !6   %    6     $     5   4   #   3   "   7                                   !6   !5   !4    !3   !2   !1   0    1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8
                                                           8*9+2,:*;9<=1*,<0,-..*+                                                                                 5ears Relati(e to 9ffer


                                   (a) Number Of Different Residential Addresses                                                                    (b) Neighborhood Poverty Rate
                 .05




                                                                                                                          .02
                                                                                                                          0
                 0
  Collective Efficacy




                                                                                                                       !.02
                                                                                                             S()*+, .+/*0+,
         !.05




                                                                                                             !.04
                 !.1




                                                                                                                          !.06
                                                                                                                          !.08
                 !.15




                                  !6   !5   !4   !3   !2   !1   0    1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8                                   !6   !5   !4    !3   !2   !1   0    1     2     3   4   5   6   4   8
                                                           Years Relative to Offer                                                                                 56+r8 96,+0*:6 0( ;<<6r


                                                 (c) Collective Efficacy Score                                                                            (d) Social Capital Score
                 !#




                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                          "
                             !"
  $%&'(%)*+,%-.(+/%%(0)+12)(




                                                                                                             %&'()*+,-.&/),0..)1+,23+)
                                                                                                                                  #
                   #




                                                                                                                         $
         "




                                                                                                                !#
                 !#




                                                                                                                          !"
                 !!"




                                                                                                                          !!




                                  !3   !#   !4   !5   !6   !!   "    !     6     5   4   #   3   7   8                                   !!   !4   !"    !5   !#   !6   $    6     #     5   "   4   !   7   8
                                                           9(2%0+1(:2)-;(+)&+<==(%                                                                                 9)3.1,2)(3+&:),+',;<<).


                                             (e) Property Crime Arrest Rate                                                                             (f) Violent Crime Arrest Rate
                                                                                                         a

Notes: Dotted lines represent the 95 percent confidence interval. Solid lines represent the point estimate. Estimates come
from equation (4) in the text. Year zero is defined as the first full year after an offer, measured at the quarter level, and
including the quarter of the offer. Sample includes all working-age, able-bodied CHAC applicants who were living in private
housing at baseline.
                                      Appendix A:
               Program Rules for Housing Vouchers, TANF and Food Stamps

Housing vouchers

        Eligibility for the housing voucher program is related to the local median household
income. Specifically, for a family of four, eligibility is limited to 50 percent of the local median
income for all families. (By way of comparison, the federal poverty line is usually around 30
percent of the local median). Some families with incomes up to 80 percent of the local median
income may be eligible, including those who are in Section 8 project-based units when the
private-market landlord opts out of the government program, as well as those who are displaced
as a result of HUD’s Hope VI public housing demolition program. The eligibility limits for
families of different sizes equal the following percentages of the four-person limit (taken from
Olsen, 2003, p. 379):

Table A1: Housing voucher eligibility by family size (relative to four-person limit)

                            Family Size    Percentage Adjustment
                                1                   70%
                                2                   80%
                                3                   90%
                                4                  100%
                                5                  108%
                                6                  116%
                                7                  124%
                                8                  132%

       The maximum subsidy available to families is governed by the Fair Market Rent (FMR),
which was equal to the 45th percentile of the local rent distribution for a unit of a given size up
through 1995. It was then lowered to the 40th percentile in 1995, and beginning in 2001 specific
metropolitan areas, including Chicago, were allowed to set the FMR equal to the 50th percentile.
In Chicago, the FMR is defined for the entire Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). The voucher
subsidy is equal to (taken from HUD, 2002):

Subsidy = [FMR – S]

S      = Family’s monthly rent payment
       = max{ .3×Yah, .3×GR }

Yah    = Adjusted Income under housing program rules
       = Earnings + TANF – ($480×Children) – ($400×Disabled) – Child Care Expenses –
       [Unreimbursed Medical Care Expenses Over 3% of Annual Income] – [Unreimbursed
       Attendant Care or Auxiliary Apparatus Expenses to Disabled Family Members That
       Support Work by Other Family Members, Over 3% of Annual Income]

GR     = Gross Rent



                                                  1
        Note that TANF benefits are counted as part of income for the purposes of calculating
program eligibility and the family’s rent contribution, while the value of both Food Stamp and
Medicaid benefits is not. Income from the EITC is also not counted towards income under the
voucher program rules, nor is any earnings by children under age 18 or payments received for
the care of foster children.

        Note also that families offered housing vouchers have a limited time to lease up a unit
from when they are offered the voucher (usually 3 to 6 months; while they may request an
extension, there is still ultimately a finite search period). Families can also only use vouchers in
private-market units that meet HUD’s minimum quality standards. Landlords may prefer tenants
paying with cash over those with vouchers because of these quality standards and other HUD
paperwork involved with the program. The combination of these three factors helps explain why
many families who are already living in private-market housing fail to use a voucher when it is
offered to them – they fail to successfully find and lease up a new unit that meets the quality
standard within the specified time period.

       Unlike other social programs, once an individual qualifies for a housing voucher, the
person is not removed from the program if his or her income exceeds the eligibility limit.
However, since they are required to pay 30 percent of their income toward their rent, the actual
amount of their subsidy will decrease. Essentially, this means that there is no “notch” in the
budget constraint with housing vouchers – there is simply a smooth phase-out. Since the average
earnings of families in our CHAC applicant sample is so low – $14,000 at baseline – and the
phase-out range is $43,000, most families probably expect to receive some sort of subsidy for a
very extended period if time if they are offered a voucher.

Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)

        The TANF program in Illinois replaced AFDC on July 1, 1997, at almost exactly the
same time as the CHAC housing voucher program. Thus all of the post-lottery data analyzed in
this paper were generated in a social policy environment governed by TANF rules.

        TANF provides cash assistance to: (1) families with children but without any employed
members, and with assets low enough to be eligible; (2) families with children and at least one
employed member, but with incomes and assets low enough to be eligible; and (3) children
whose parents have incomes and assets low enough to be eligible for TANF, but are not because
they are not U.S. citizens or eligible non-citizens, or receive some other form of cash assistance
such as SSI or SSA disability. Asset limits under the TANF program are equal to $2,000 for
one-person TANF filing units, $3,000 for 2-person filing units, and increase by $50 for each
additional person in the filing unit. The TANF benefit is essentially equal to:

TANF benefit = P - .3×Yat

Yat    = Adjusted income under TANF program rules




                                                 2
         = Earnings – Workers Deduction ($90) – Child Care1

        Note that the maximum payment, P, varies by family size and the type of TANF case.
Under the TANF program in Illinois, income in these formulas does not include benefits from
housing vouchers, Food Stamps, the EITC, or government programs such as VISTA or the Job
Corps, nor does it include earnings through college work-study or those earned by dependent
children. If families reduce their work without prior permission from the Illinois Department of
Human Services or they failed to report their earnings (and then those earnings are discovered),
they are taxed at a 100 percent rate.

Food Stamps (FS)

Currie (2003) notes that FS benefits are reduced by 30 cents for each dollar of either earned or
unearned income (including income from cash transfer programs).

Yg       = Gross Income
         = Earnings + TANF

Yn       = Net Income
         = Yg – Standard Deduction($134) – .2×Earnings – Child Care2 - min{$250, R}

R        = Rent – .5×[Yg – Standard Deduction($134) – .2×Earnings – Child Care]

       Note that gross income under the Food Stamp program includes the household’s total
cash income, including earnings and TANF benefits, minus some excluded sources (such as
earnings from dependent children and payments from the EITC).




1 Where applicable, subject to a maximum deduction in eligible cases. See IDHS Program Manual, 08-01-02-d,
http://www.dhs.state.il.us/page.aspx?item=15234
2 Currie (2003), p. 207 reports that the dependent care expenses for those in work activities or training equal up to
$175 per month per child (or $200 for children under age 2).


                                                           3
                                        Appendix B:
                Procedure for Identifying Other CHAC Household Members

        The CHAC application forms ask household heads for information on the total number of
male and female adults, and male and female children, living within the home, but only ask for
individual identifying information (name, date of birth, and social security) for the head and his
or her spouse (if applicable). Only when families with sufficiently good lottery numbers were
offered housing vouchers by CHAC did the organization ask household heads to provide
individual identifying information on all household members.

        In order to preserve the strength of our research design – random assignment of
households to the voucher waiting list – we must identify household members for all families
across the entire CHAC waiting list using the same method. To do this, we subcontracted with
Chapin Hall at the University of Chicago to match the individual identifying information
available for all CHAC applicants and their spouses to administrative data on social program
participation from the Illinois Department of Human Services (IDHS). The essence of our
approach is to identify any other individuals who were listed as a member of the CHAC
applicant’s household (based on the IDHS data) during the pre-CHAC lottery period. As noted
in the text, the imputation strategy we follow means that our estimates involving other household
members will be representative of the subset of CHAC applicants who appear on the IDHS files
prior to July 1997, because they themselves or someone in their household was receiving
AFDC/TANF, food stamps or Medicaid during this period. However, because approximately 94
percent of the 82,607 CHAC applicants appear on the IDHS files prior to the lottery, our
estimates reflect the vast majority of housing applicants. Roughly XX percent of the main
sample for the analysis presented in this paper (i.e., working-age, able-bodied adults living in
private housing at baseline) appear in the IDHS files prior to the voucher lottery.

        This appendix summarizes the procedures we use to impute the identity of other members
of the households that applied to CHAC for vouchers, and then discuss how well these
procedures appear to work.

B1. Household Member Imputation Procedure

       Chapin Hall was able to match around 94 percent of CHAC applicant households to the
IDHS client data base (CDB) using probabilistic matching techniques that use a combination of
name (converted to Soundex), dates of birth, and Social Security numbers. For each CHAC
applicant (or spouse) who matched to the IDHS CDB, Chapin Hall identified their spell of social
program participation that was closest in time prior to the date of the CHAC lottery (7/1/97),
which we call the “target case.” We then identified the other members of the CHAC applicant
household through the following multiple-step process:

   1. Identify everyone who was in the CHAC applicant’s (or spouse’s) target case.
   2. Then determine the target case for everyone identified in step (1). Note that some
      members of the CHAC applicant’s target case could have a different target case if, for
      example, the daughter of a welfare recipient left her mother’s household before the time




                                                4
      of the CHAC lottery and started her own household and then also received welfare
      benefits on her own for this new household.
   3. For individuals whose target case is the same as that of the CHAC applicant, we count
      these people as members of the CHAC applicant’s household.
   4. For individuals whose target case is different from that of the CHAC applicant, we count
      these people as members of the CHAC applicant’s household (as well as anyone else
      listed as part of the household in this target case) only if the address of this other
      household member’s target case is equal to the address of the CHAC applicant’s target
      case. This scenario could occur if, for example, the daughter of a CHAC applicant has
      started her own welfare spell but continues to live with her mother.

        Note that our procedure counts everyone who we believe was living in the CHAC
applicant’s household at the time of the voucher lottery as being part of the study sample. It is
possible that some people living in these baseline households might start their own households
during the post-lottery period, particularly if the CHAC applicant receives a voucher. Under our
definition everyone in the baseline household at the time of the voucher application is counted as
“treated,” even household members who do not move, since they still experience some
“treatment” from a reduction in crowding within the housing unit.

B2. How Well Does This Imputation Procedure Work?

        Our process for identifying household members is necessarily imperfect and will
introduce some measurement error into our measures of household composition. To explore the
extent of measurement error, we examine the subset of CHAC applicant households who
matched to the IDHS files pre-lottery. Starting with this set of 77,666 households, we drop
roughly 2,400 households with missing data on gender for any household member and 84
households that report more than 10 household members on the CHAC application forms (which
we believe is most likely due to a data entry errors). Our final sample thus includes 75,145
households. Note that including cases with missing gender or large number of household
members yields nearly identical results to those reported below.

        Our imputation procedure and the CHAC baseline applications identify the exact same
number of total household members in 47.4 percent of cases (the CHAC applications reported
more in 38.7 percent of cases); the same number of adult females in 70.8 percent of cases (the
CHAC applications reported more in 6.9 percent of cases); the same number of male adults in
71.9 percent of cases (the CHAC applications reported more adult males in 19.4 percent of
cases); and the same number of children for over half (56.5 percent) of applications (the CHAC
forms reported more children in 36.7 percent of cases). Table B1 presents a more thorough
breakdown of whether our IDHS estimation procedure and the CHAC applications are
identifying the same number of household members.




                                                5
Table B1: To what extent does the IDHS estimation procedure over or underestimate
household size? (N=75,145)
                                        Fraction of the cases in which:
                   CHAC and CHAC greater than IDHS by: IDHS greater than CHAC by:
                  IDHS equal       One        More than one         One  More than one
Number of
Female Adults        0.71          0.06            0.01             0.20      0.03
Number of Male
Adults               0.72          0.17            0.02             0.08      0.01
Number of
Female Children      0.71          0.16            0.06             0.05      0.02
Number of Male
Children             0.67          0.19            0.08             0.04      0.01
Number of Total
Adults               0.70          0.10            0.03             0.13      0.04
Number of Total
Children             0.57          0.21            0.15             0.04      0.03
Total Household
Size                 0.48          0.21            0.17             0.08      0.06

       Table B2 presents comparisons for the average household size and compositions implied
by the CHAC applications and our imputation procedure.

Table B2: Comparisons of average household size as reported on CHAC application forms
versus the IDHS estimation procedure (N=75,145)
                                  CHAC Applications      IDHS Estimates
               Number of                0.86                   1.04
               Female Adults
               Number of Male           0.45                   0.33
               Adults
               Number of                0.79                   0.59
               Female Children
               Number of Male           0.92                   0.60
               Children
               Number of Total          1.31                   1.37
               Adults
               Number of Total          1.72                   1.19
               Children
               Total Household          3.03                   2.56
               Size

        One reason the IDHS data may understate household size is that some welfare target
cases may end before 7/1/97, and so we might miss household members who enter between the
end of that target spell and the time of the CHAC voucher lottery. To test this hypothesis, we
replicated the above tables using only those households where the household head’s target case



                                               6
was active at the time of the CHAC voucher application period (that is, the household head’s
most recent social program spell prior to 7/1/97 was still active on that date), and find
comparable results.

         The key question for identification in our study is whether any error in the identification
of household members is systematically related to a family’s position in the CHAC housing-
voucher lottery. Given the procedure we used to impute household members (namely the fact
that it relies entirely on pre-lottery information), there should be no such relationship. To
address this question empirically, we create the following variables to characterize disagreements
between the CHAC applications and our IDHS estimation procedure for each household in our
analytic sample: a dummy variable equal to 1 if the CHAC application reports more people in
the household than does our IDHS estimation procedure, and equal to 0 otherwise; a dummy
indicator equal to 1 if the IDHS data report more people in the household than does the CHAC
data, and equal to 0 otherwise; a variable equal to the difference between the total number of
household members reported on the CHAC application and the total number of household
members suggested by our IDHS estimates; and similar variables for specific sub-groups of
household members (female adults, male adults, total adults, female children, male children and
total children).

        First, we regress each of these outcome measures against each household’s actual lottery
number. Out of the 21 total regressions that we estimate, only one yields a coefficient on the
household lottery variable that is statistically significant at the 5 percent level, about what we
would expect by chance alone. (The one significant coefficient suggests that households with
higher lottery numbers are somewhat more likely to have more male adults reported by our
IDHS estimation procedure than on the CHAC baseline application, with p=.047, although the
measure for the actual difference in the number of male adults between the two datasets, as
opposed to a dummy variable indicating that there is a discrepancy, is not significant). Of course
these 21 regression coefficients for comparing measures from the IDHS and CHAC applications
are not truly independent; if we focus on the four independent measures of household size (actual
difference between the two data sources for female adults, male adults, female children, male
children), none of these are statistically significant.

        The regressions reported above look for some linear relationship between voucher wait
list position and measurement error in our IDHS household identification procedure. But in
principle there could be some non-linear relationship between wait list position and this
measurement error, if for example families who are offered vouchers immediately are more
likely to be captured by the IDHS records for some reason. To explore this possibility, we create
a set of indicator variables that divide families up into groups of 5,000 based on each
household’s CHAC lottery number, and regress each of the outcome measures described above
against these lottery number indicators. Of the 315 total regression coefficients that we generate,
only five are statistically significant at the 5 percent level, about what we would expect based on
chance alone. If we focus only on the raw difference in household members between the two
data sources for the four independent groups (female adults, male adults, female children, male
children), only one of these sixty regression coefficients is statistically significant.




                                                 7
B3. Who gets missed by our household member identification procedure?

       While it is reassuring that there is no systematic relationship between CHAC lottery
numbers and measurement error in household composition, the question of who gets missed by
our IDHS estimation approach to household composition is still of some interest to our study.

         We cannot directly determine who is included in the household count on the CHAC
application forms because the former includes total counts of other household members but not
individual identifying information. We instead take advantage of the fact that households who
lease up with a voucher are required to fill out what are called HUD 50058 forms, which capture
individual identifying information for everyone in the household that is leasing up. So we can
try to learn more about who is missed by our IDHS household identification procedure by
comparing the results of our IDHS procedure with who is listed on the HUD 50058 forms, at
least for those households who lease up.

        There are several limitations to this approach. First, those families who lease-up are
different in some observable and likely unobservable ways from those families who were offered
a voucher but do not lease up (see Table II of the paper). Second, household composition could
change between the time when a family applies to CHAC and when they are actually offered a
voucher and lease up (members could in principle be either lost or added in the interim). For this
reason, we focus this analysis on those households who were offered a voucher by the end of
1998 (within the first 16 months following the start of the program) and who lease up. Tables B3
and B4 indicate that the patterns documented in Tables B1 and B2 are also apparent in this
subsample.3

Table B3: To what extent does the IDHS estimation procedure over or underestimate
household size for those households who were offered a voucher by 1998 and leased up?
(N=2,164)
                    CHAC and CHAC greater than IDHS by: IDHS greater than CHAC by:
                    IDHS equal      One      More than one       One       More than one
Number of
Female Adults          0.70         0.06          0.01           0.20           0.02
Number of Male
Adults                 0.72         0.18          0.02           0.07           0.01
Number of
Female Children        0.71         0.16          0.05           0.05           0.02
Number of Male
Children               0.67         0.19          0.08           0.04           0.02
Number of Total
Adults                 0.73         0.10          0.02           0.12           0.03
Number of Total
Children               0.57         0.21          0.15           0.04           0.03

3 Note that the sample of 2,164 households included in this analysis meet the following sample criteria: (1) the
household head (or spouse) appeared in the IDHS files prior to the voucher lottery; (1) the household was offered a
voucher by 1998; (3) the household utilized the voucher and leased an apartment; (4) the household reported at most
10 total household members on the voucher application form.


                                                         8
Total Household
Size                    0.49           0.21            0.17             0.07             0.05


Table B4: Comparisons of average household size as reported on CHAC application forms
versus IDHS estimation procedure for those households who were offered a voucher by
1998 and leased up? (N=2,164)

                                       CHAC Applications         IDHS Estimates
                  Number of                 0.86                     1.03
                  Female Adults
                  Number of Male               0.42                    0.27
                  Adults
                  Number of                    0.81                    0.64
                  Female Children
                  Number of Male               0.98                    0.66
                  Children
                  Number of Total              1.28                    1.30
                  Adults
                  Number of Total              1.79                    1.30
                  Children
                  Total Household              3.06                    2.60
                  Size


       Our next step is to try to figure out who exactly is in the 50058 data but not identified by
our IDHS procedure, and who is identified by our IDHS procedure but do not show up in the
HUD 50058 forms. We do this by attempting to match specific individuals through some
combination of name, DOB and SSN. We restrict this sample to non-household heads because
the goal of this analysis is to compare who shows up in the 50058 data to who is identified using
our IDHS procedure, and all household heads will show up in the 50058 data by definition. As
above, we limit this analysis to the set of 2,164 households who were offered vouchers in 1997
or 1998 and who utilized these vouchers to lease up.

        Comparing the 50058 records to either the IDHS or CHAC application records for this set
of households, we find the 50058 records contain a larger number of people. Specifically, the
average number of children (non-head adults) in the 50058 records is 2.15 (0.29) compared with
1.79 (0.28) in the CHAC application files and 1.30 (0.30) in the IDHS records. This suggests
that individuals may have “joined” successful CHAC applicants in starting a new household,
which is consistent with evidence that voucher receipt is often accompanied by changes in
household composition (see, for example, Gubits et al., 2006). It may also be the case that
families have a greater incentive to accurately and fully account for all household members on
50058 forms. Individuals had no incentive to accurately report household size or composition on
the CHAC application form. And we know that the IDHS records may not contain information
on individuals who do count toward the benefits calculation for the family, as in the case of other
adults and AFDC/TANF benefits.



                                                 9
        Table B5 shows that roughly 77 percent of the 3,417 non-household heads who appear in
our IDHS sample show up in the 50058 data. However, the match rates for young children in our
IDHS sample are much higher – approximately 90 percent for those children under the age of 11.
Among children age 11-15 that we identify in our IDHS sample, 83 percent also appear in the
50058 records, while the match rate for 16-17 year olds are noticeably lower (i.e., 70 percent).
Interestingly, very few of the adult family members we identify in the IDHS files appear in the
50058 data. This pattern is consistent with a situation in which young children are very likely to
accompany their parent or guardian to a new residence, but that the receipt of a housing voucher
allows adults who had previously been living together to form their own households.

Table B5: The fraction of non-household heads who appear in IDHS records (n=3,417) that
also matched to 50058 records, separately by age
                    Fraction of the total    Fraction of individuals
                      sample of 3,417       that match to the 50058
Age as of 7/1/97
                        individuals                  records
                            (1)                         (2)
All ages                   1.00                        0.77
0-3                        0.20                        0.91
4-6                        0.19                        0.88
7-10                       0.21                        0.90
11-15                      0.18                        0.83
16-17                      0.05                        0.71
18-25                      0.07                        0.30
25-45                      0.07                        0.20
45-65                      0.03                        0.32
65 or older                0.01                        0.35

B4. Summary

        Because the CHAC application forms list the total number of adults and children in the
home but do not provide individual identifying information about household members other than
the household head and his or her spouse (if applicable), we use IDHS data on pre-CHAC-lottery
social program spells to identify other household members using the procedure described above.
Our IDHS procedure suggests household sizes that are about one-half child smaller than what is
suggested by the CHAC application files. However, a comparison of the individuals who appear
in our IDHS data and those who later appear on official HUD 50058 forms among those families
who utilized a housing voucher suggests our IDHS imputation procedure correctly identifies
nearly all of the young children (below the age of 15) in a household and a fairly high (70
percent) fraction of older children. On the other hand, it appears that our IDHS estimation may
not reliably identify other adults associated with the household. Finally, and quite importantly,
the analysis reported here confirms that the measurement error in identifying household members
is unrelated to the randomly assigned CHAC voucher wait list position.




                                                10
                                         Appendix C:
                                        Data Appendix


        Baseline information on the 82,607 adults and nearly 8,700 spouses that applied to
CHAC for a housing voucher in 1997 comes from the lottery application forms. These files
include information on address, lottery number and household demographics such as the number
and gender of other children and adults in the household, as well as identifying information
(names, date of birth, and social security number) for the household heads and spouses. We
impute certain demographic variables that are either incomplete or not included on the
application forms using information from the Illinois Department of Human Services (IDHS)
Client Data Base (CDB). For example, household head gender is not included on the CHAC
application form, so we use gender from the CDB. For household heads who do not appear in
the CDB, we impute gender by comparing their first name with lists of names of known gender
using four data sources: Census data, Social Security Administration data, two websites with lists
of names; and finally using a gender-assigning algorithm. For spouses with missing gender, we
assign them the opposite gender of the household head.

        Similarly, to determine race we start with the CDB race variable and then impute missing
values using the less complete lottery application information. For those observations that are
missing, we check to see whether the “multiple races” box is checked on the CHAC application.
To determine the coding of these multiple races, we create an empirical link by looking at those
individuals with multiple races on the CHAC application forms and who also have race
information in the CDB. For each combination of multiple races we choose the modal race that
is indicated by the CDB. For example, if those who are listed as both white and Hispanic on the
CHAC forms are listed most often as Hispanic in the CDB, then we assume that all people
marked both white and Hispanic in the CHAC forms are Hispanic.

        To create and clean our age variables, we use information from both the CHAC
application forms and the IDHS client database. The age variables we create indicate age during
1997 when the CHAC lottery application takes place. They include two household invariant
variables – household head age and spouse age - and one person invariant age variable for the
person in question. For the household heads, if the CHAC age is missing but we have CDB age,
then we use CDB age. If he or she indicates age less than 16 on the application form and we
have no CDB information, then we set age equal to missing. If the CHAC age is less than 18 or
greater than 70, and the difference between that age and the CDB age is greater than one, then
we use the CDB age. For spouse age, we use date of birth information if available and when
missing we use CDB age as long as it is a reasonable value (ie, not less than 16). For kids and
other household members we first check for members age 0 to 18 that are a household head or
spouse somewhere else in the sample (e.g., a 17 year who applied as a head and is also the child
of a parent who applied separately as a head). For those that we find, we make sure their age is
consistently reported across observations. There a small number of observations that have age
greater than 100 and we set these equal to missing.

      There are several seemingly infeasible outliers in the CHAC information on household
composition. We take the following steps to clean this information: for number of male children



                                               11
and female children we set values ranging from 20 to 29 equal to 2, and values from 10 to 19
equal to 1. Similarly for number of adult females and adult males, we set values of 10, 11 and
one instance of 81, all equal to 1. We set negative values equal to 0. When there are zero adults
listed, we impute one adult, male or female based on household head gender. We then create
total household, total adult, and total child categories by summing the cleaned household
composition variables. We confirm that these cleanings have no impact on our randomization
checks or any other results.

        Data on voucher utilization comes from HUD 50058 records, which families must
complete at least once a year to verify eligibility and also when they exit or enter housing
programs or if household composition or income changes. These HUD 50058 forms provide
complete longitudinal information on housing assistance administered by CHAC (i.e., all tenant-
based rental assistance such as Section 8 vouchers and certificates, but excluding public
housing), including when the household started and stopped receiving assistance and the
different addresses where the household’s lived while on a Section 8 voucher. We merge the
application data to CHAC files on voucher utilization using CHAC tenant identification numbers
coupled with name, social security number and date of birth. We use a probabilistic match that
is robust to misspellings, typos and other minor inconsistencies across data sets. These files also
provide information on the type of apartment leased, and the number of members in the
household.

        To track residential locations for both the treatment and control groups we rely on passive
tracking sources such as the National Change of Address (NCOA) registry and national credit
bureau checks. Because of resource constraints, we tracked a random ten percent sub-sample of
all CHAC applicants. We have confirmed that this subset matches the overall applicant pool on
a variety of baseline characteristics, and that the impact estimates on labor supply for this 10
percent sub-sample are virtually identical to the impact estimates for the full sample. We are
also able to (at least partially) verify the accuracy of the passive tracking techniques using the
subset of families that received housing vouchers. In the vast majority of these cases, the
location information obtained through passive tracking matches the information found in the
administrative 50058 records. Using these addresses along with 2000 census data, we are able to
characterize each household’s residential neighborhood down to the block group level.

         We determine whether a family was living in public housing or a project-based Section 8
housing at the time of the lottery by merging baseline addresses from the CHAC application files
to lists of subsidized units maintained by the Chicago Housing Authority and HUD. We use
baseline housing status because housing arrangements may be influenced by the outcome of the
voucher lottery. This means the group identified as living in a housing project at baseline may
include some families who are in private-market housing by the time they are actually offered a
housing voucher by CHAC. This occurs in part because of the natural transition of families out
of project-based housing units over time, and in part because the city of Chicago was
demolishing thousands of units of public housing during the course of the 1990’s (see Jacob
2004).

        To measure labor market participation and earnings we have obtained quarterly earnings
data from the Illinois unemployment insurance (UI) program, maintained by the Illinois



                                                12
Department of Employment Security (IDES). If an individual works at more than one employer
in a given calendar quarter, we aggregate up earnings from all employers. People in our sample
are counted as working in a given quarter if they report having any earnings at all in the UI data
in a quarter. Household-level employment is defined as having anyone in the CHAC baseline
household show any earnings in a given quarter. We set to missing those person-quarter
observations where quarterly earnings are reported to be less than $5 in nominal terms. We set
equal to the 99th percentile of the distribution those outlier observations greater than the 99th
percentile. Earnings figures are then converted into constant 2007 dollars.

        We obtain our welfare information from the IDHS administrative data bases. They
provide us with start and end dates of ACDF/TANF, Food Stamp and Medicaid spells for every
household member of those households that we match to the CDB. From these start and end
dates we then create for each of the welfare programs, a variable indicating the number of days
during the current quarter a person was receiving assistance and separate binary indicators for
whether the person received assistance during the current quarter, the first quarter of 1997, and
second quarter of 1997. We also create binary indicators for whether the household head
received assistance of any type during the current quarter, the first quarter of 1997, and the
second quarter of 1997.

         Unless otherwise noted, the baseline covariates in all of our models include the following
variables: binary indicators for black, Hispanic, white, other race, male, disabled, spouse present;
a quartic in age interacted with the male indicator; continuous measures of the number of adults
in the household, the number of children in the household, and the number of days after the
opening of the waiting list that the family submitted an application; binary indicators based on
self-reported information from the CHAC application form of whether the household head was
willing to accept a certificate as well as voucher, currently receiving any earned income,
currently receiving any SSI benefits, currently receiving AFDC/TANF; a series of measures
drawn from Illinois administrative databases describing the household head’s public assistance
receipt and employment in the first and second quarter of 1997, including binary indicators for
whether the household head worked, received TANF, received any public assistance (Medicaid,
Food Stamps or TANF), and total earnings in the quarter; a series of 12 binary indicators of total
prior arrests for different crimes (1,2,3+ prior arrests for a violent crime, property crime, drug
crime or other crime); measures of the applicant’s baseline neighborhood, all measured at the
tract level, which include percent minority, percent black, poverty rate, collective efficacy, social
capital, violent crime rate, property crime rate; the average earnings, employment and public
assistance receipt of all household members in the second quarter of 1997; the average prior
criminal history of all household members (i.e., 12 variables which are merely the household
averages of the 12 binary prior crime variables above); the household’s imputed fair market rent
and baseline rent.




                                                 13
                                        Appendix D:
           Calculation of Baseline Rent, Income, and Effects of Housing Vouchers
                       on Disposable Cash and Housing Consumption

        In order to understand the magnitude of the voucher “treatment dose,” we would like to
measure baseline income for CHAC applicants as well as their baseline rent contributions.
Baseline rent and income are relevant because the maximum value of a voucher subsidy is a
function of the family’s income, while the amount of rent families are paying at baseline will
determine how much of the voucher subsidy that families can take in the form of cash (by
reducing their out-of-pocket spending on housing). Unfortunately, baseline rent and income are
not reported on the CHAC application forms, and so we must estimate these values for families
using the other sources of administrative data that we have available to us. Our estimation
procedure will unavoidably add some error to our measures of baseline rent and income values.
But since our estimation procedure for baseline rent and income relies entirely on pre-baseline
administrative records, this measurement error should be orthogonal to each family’s randomly
assigned position on the CHAC voucher wait list.

D1. Voucher subsidy effects on consumption of housing versus all other goods

       As discussed in detail in Appendix A, the maximum value of a family’s housing voucher
subsidy is equal to the HUD-defined Fair Market Rent (FMR) for a housing unit of the size to
which the family is eligible, minus the family’s rent payment, which under 1997 program rules
was defined as the greater of .3 times net income (what most families pay), or in some cases, .1
times gross income (or the welfare rent payment – that is, the minimum amount of a family’s
welfare contribution towards rent).

        The total subsidy value will equal Subsidy = [FMR – S] = C+H, where FMR is the Fair
Market Rent (essentially the maximum rent of units that families can lease up with housing
vouchers; see Appendix A), S is the family’s required rent contribution under voucher program
rules, C equals the amount of the subsidy value that the family can essentially take as cash (by
reducing out-of-pocket spending on housing) and H is the increase in housing consumption from
voucher receipt. C and H are calculated from three parameters: the FMR; baseline rent (BR);
and baseline income (I), each of which we calculate from pre-lottery information for each CHAC
family. Most families will be in the situation of being eligible for an apartment with FMR above
their baseline rent, and will be spending far more on rent than 30 percent of their adjusted
income (which is less than total income because the voucher program rules exclude certain
sources of income, and allow families deductions for dependents and other reasons; see
Appendix A). For these families, the amount of the voucher subsidy that they can take as cash is
equal to the difference between their baseline out of pocket spending on rent (i.e., their baseline
rent) less the amount they are required to spend on rent under the voucher program rules (30
percent of their adjusted income). The increase in housing consumption for a family that leases a
unit with rent equal to the FMR is equal to the difference between the FMR and the family’s
baseline rent. Table D1 shows that the degree to which the family is able to take part of the
voucher subsidy as cash versus increased housing consumption will be somewhat different for
families with baseline rents above the FMR (second row) or required rent contributions under the
voucher program rules that exceed their baseline rents (third row).



                                                14
Table D1: Effects of housing voucher for families already in private housing as function of
baseline rent, income, and HUD-defined Fair Market Rent (FMR)

 Baseline rent and           Extra cash from            Extra housing from
     income                  getting voucher              getting voucher
 FMR > BR > .3*I            C = (BR - .3*I) > 0         H = (FMR-BR) > 0
 BR > FMR > .3*I           C = (FMR - .3*I) > 0         H = (BR-FMR) < 0
 FMR > .3*I > BR                  C=0                    H = (FMR - .3*I)
   .3*I > FMR                     C=0                          H=0

D2. Estimating Fair Market Rents (FMR) for CHAC Applicants

        The FMR is a function of the number and gender composition of the adults and children
in the household, the metropolitan area the family is living in, and the calendar year. CHAC
applicants are required to report all the relevant information for household size and gender
composition, and HUD publishes the FMR for a 2 bedroom unit for each local metro area for
each year at www.huduser.org/datasets/fmr.html. We estimate the FMR for each CHAC family
for 1997 using the baseline information on household composition that they report to CHAC on
their voucher application to identify the largest apartment the family is entitled to, and then
assign them the FMR for that size unit using the FMR reported by HUD for a 2 bedroom unit at
the URL above, using the adjustment to the FMR for number of bedrooms to which the family is
entitled described in Appendix A. The average 1997 FMR for CHAC applicant households
headed by a working age, able-bodied adult in our dataset was around $1,000 per month, or
$12,000 per year.4

D3. Estimating Baseline Incomes (I) for CHAC Applicants

        We begin by estimating total baseline income for households from all sources, without
regard to the specific housing program rules about what does and does not count in the voucher
program’s “adjusted income” calculation for purposes of determining each household’s voucher
rent contribution. We sum all quarterly UI earnings reported for all household members for the
four quarters prior to the CHAC application period (from 1996:Q3 through 1997:Q2). We know
who is receiving TANF at baseline from both the CHAC application forms and IDHS
administrative data. We do not know the exact amount of the TANF payments that families
receive, so we use published TANF program rules for Illinois to estimate the TANF benefit


4 This FMR calculation uses the household size and gender composition that we estimate using the Illinois
Department of Human Services (IDHS) data and estimation procedure described in Appendix B for households that
ever show up in the IDHS data system; for those who do not show up in the IDHS system, we use the household
composition and gender composition reported directly on the CHAC application forms. If we look at just the
household composition among those who show up in the IDHS data, the FMR is equal to $12,010, while if we use
just the CHAC application data we have available for everyone (whether they show up in the IDHS data system or
not), the FMR is equal to $12,600. We prioritize the estimates for household composition obtained from the IDHS
data using our Appendix B procedure because we can only calculate earnings and total income for people we can
specifically identify through that IDHS procedure, and so the FMR calculation will be conceptually consistent with
the income figures we estimate for each families.


                                                        15
amounts for those whom our administrative data indicate are receiving TANF benefits.5 We also
assume that every working household receives the EITC, and assign EITC income based on that
program’s benefit schedule for 1997 taken from Hotz and Scholz (2003). In principle one
limitation with our procedure for estimating baseline income is that we do not have any data on
family asset income (HUD voucher rules require families to count 2-3 percent of total net
household assets as income), nor can we capture earnings from jobs that are not covered under
the state’s UI system. The omission of assets at least does not seem to matter much in practice –
when we examine 50058 data on voucher recipients in Chicago, average monthly asset income is
on the order of $5 per family. We estimate the average household income for CHAC applicants
in the year before their voucher application to be $14,000.

        After calculating total family baseline income, we then tabulate the adjusted income
value (the value for I in Table D1 above) that is used under housing voucher program rules to
determine the family’s rent contribution. We first subtract from total household income those
sources that are not counted as income by the voucher program, namely EITC benefits as well as
any earnings by household members under the age of 18. We then also subtract allowable
deductions that we can identify with the data available to us, namely the $480 per child
deduction under voucher program rules. Mean adjusted income for our sample of able-bodied,
working-age CHAC adult applicants is $12,450.

D4. Estimating Baseline Rent for CHAC Applicants

        For our calculations we require a way of determining each CHAC applicant’s baseline
rent that we can apply consistently for all families across the entire voucher wait list.
Unfortunately direct data on baseline rents is only available for families in our treatment group
who were offered vouchers by CHAC, and then use their voucher to lease up in their same
baseline apartment. The HUD 50058 forms that these families will be required to fill out as a
condition of their voucher receipt will include complete information on their unit’s rent.

        To estimate baseline rents for our entire sample of CHAC applicants (treatment and
control families), we use data from a special tabulation conducted for us by the Census Bureau
using 2000 Census data for Chicago. We basically assign each CHAC applicant the average rent
paid by households with similar basic demographic characteristics living in the CHAC
applicant’s same baseline census tract. We define household “types” or categories on the basis
of the census tract of residence, race of the household head, number of adults in the home, and
number of children in the home. The Census Bureau suppresses rent figures in cases where there
are too few households of a given type in a given census tract. In these cases, we assign CHAC
applicants the average rent for households with the same number of adults and children in the
same census tract (regardless of race). In cases where the relevant rent figures for a given
household type in a tract are also suppressed by Census confidentiality requirements, we assign
the average rent from households in the same tract with the same number of children (ignoring
race and number of adults).6

5 Program rules are taken from Lewis et al. (2000). The maximum welfare benefit is defined by family size and is
basically equal to the maximum benefit minus one third of earned income by adults in the home.
6 Around 20 percent of our CHAC sample are assigned baseline rents for families of the same race, number of
adults, and number of children in the same tract; around 75 percent of the CHAC sample are assigned rents based on


                                                       16
        A final complication in estimating baseline rents for CHAC applicants from the Census
2000 special tabulation is that we are interested in rents paid by families living in private-market
housing, yet the 2000 Census questionnaire does not ask families whether they are living in
public- or private-market housing. It is not clear what a family living in public housing would
actually answer to a Census question about unit rent; would they, or should they, report their own
out-of-pocket rent contribution, equal to 30 percent of adjusted income just as in the housing
voucher program? Or would a family in public housing instead report some guess about the true
market-equivalent “rent” for their public housing unit? (How a family would even begin to
make such an assessment if they tried is not clear). We try to deal with this problem by
estimating baseline rents under three different procedures: (a) using the mean rent reported by
families in the 2000 Census, with no adjustments; (b) using median rent; (c) using an adjusted
mean rent, where the adjustment assumes a truncated normal distribution for rents and truncates
the rent distribution at the minimum rent cutoff used by HUD in their own calculations of the
FMR (to weed out what HUD believes are likely to believe either public housing rents reported
in the Census, or sub-standard private-market units).7 The results under each of these approaches
are quite similar. We have also asked the Census Research Data Center at the University of
Michigan to do some tabulations with restricted-use individual-level Census data excluding
households with rents below the cutoff HUD uses; those mean rent figures across family types
and tracts are generally similar to what the Census has estimated for us without any adjustment
for low rents. The average baseline rent in our sample is estimated to be on the order of $680 per
month, or $8,160 per year.

D5. Summary of Results

        We estimate baseline total household income for the average able-bodied working-age
adult CHAC applicant to be $14,000. We estimate average baseline rent to equal $8,160 per
year, while the average FMR is equal to $12,000. These calculations imply an average
maximum voucher subsidy value (cost to the government) of $8,265. Since Reeder (1985)
estimates the ratio of benefit to the recipient to cost to the government for vouchers to be around
.83, this implies an average equivalent variation for a voucher on the order of $6,860. Our
calculations also imply that on average, the extra cash a family can take out of a voucher (C) will
be around (BR - .3*I) = ($8,160 - $3,735) = $4,425 per month, while the family will increase
their housing consumption (H) by (FMR – BR) = $12,000 - $8,160 = $3,840. Put differently, the
fact that families spend such a large amount of their baseline income on rent, and can then
substantially reduce their spending on housing upon receipt of a voucher, means that the typical
CHAC applicant is able to take more than half of the dollar value of the housing voucher subsidy
in the form of cash.



households in the Census with the same number of adults and children in the same tract (pooling all races together);
and the remaining 5 percent or so of CHAC applicants are assigned baseline rents of households with the same
number of children in the same tract.
7 For the truncated mean adjustment we try this once using a common standard deviation calculated for households
of all sizes citywide, and once trying to calculate tract-specific standard deviations for the rent distribution Here the
data become quite limited given Census bureau data suppression at the tract level. In any case both procedures yield
similar results.


                                                           17
                                     Appendix References

Angrist, Joshua A., Guido W. Imbens, and Donald B. Rubin (1996) “Identification of Causal
Effects Using Instrumental Variables,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 91: 444-
472

Currie, Janet (2003) “U.S. Food and Nutrition Programs” In Means-Tested Transfer Programs in
the United States. Edited by Robert A. Moffitt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 199-
290.

“Fact Sheet for HUD Assisted Residents, Rent Supplement, How Your Rent is Determined,”
HUD, Office of Housing, January 2002.
http://www.hud.gov/offices/hsg/mfh/gendocs/factsrentsup.pdf, 6/12/04

Gubits, Daniel B., Larry L. Orr, Gregory B. Mills, Michelle L. Wood, Bulbul Kaul, David A.
Long and Judith D. Feins (2006) The Impact of Housing Choice Vouchers on Employment,
Earnings and Mean-Tested Benefits. Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates draft report.

Jacob, Brian A. (2004) “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement:
Evidence From Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago.” American Economic Review. 94(1):
233-258.

Illinois Department of Human Services Policy Manual for Temporary Assistance to Needy
Families, Deductions from Earned Income (Cash). 08-01-02-d: Adult/Teen/Child Care
Disregard. http://www.dhs.state.il.us/rulesPolicy

Lewis, Dan A., Kristen L. Shook, Amy Bush Stevens, Paul Kleppner, James Lewis, and
Stephanie Riger (2000) “Work, Welfare, and Well-Being: An Independent Look At Welfare
Reform in Illinois.” Illinois Family Study: Project Description and First Year Report. University
Consortium of Welfare Reform

Olsen, Edgar O. (2003) “Housing Programs for Low-Income Households.” In Means-Tested
Transfer Programs in the United States. Edited by Robert A. Moffitt. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. pp. 365-442.

Reeder, William J. (1985) “The Benefits and Costs of the Section 8 Existing Housing Program.”
Journal of Public Economics. 26: 349-377.




                                               18
Appendix Table I: Effects Of Housing Vouchers On All Household Members
                                                                                                                                        Number of
                                                                             CM             ITT              IV            CCM          Households

At least one member of HH employed                                          0.665         -0.011**       -0.029**          0.680          42,358
                                                                                           (0.004)        (0.009)
At least one member of HH on public assistance                              0.558         0.023**        0.058**           0.666          42,358
                                                                                           (0.004)        (0.009)
At least one member of HH on TANF                                           0.182         0.005**        0.013**           0.150          42,358
                                                                                           (0.002)        (0.005)
Fraction of people in HH employed                                           0.396         -0.007**       -0.019**          0.378          42,358
                                                                                           (0.003)        (0.006)
Fraction of people in HH on public assistance                               0.464         0.023**        0.056**           0.554          42,358
                                                                                           (0.003)        (0.008)
Fraction of people in HH on TANF                                            0.143         0.004**        0.012**           0.111          42,358
                                                                                           (0.002)        (0.004)
Total HH earnings                                                         4,390.22       -104.28**      -269.02**        4,130.32         42,358
                                                                                          (44.924)      (108.852)
Total HH earnings per capita                                              2,178.73        -84.67**      -213.73**        1,912.70         42,358
                                                                                          (21.228)       (51.659)
Total HH earnings conditional on at least one working                     6,599.27         -53.26         -142.06        6,072.94         40,021
                                                                                          (51.773)      (122.028)
Log total HH earnings conditional on at least one working                   8.407         -0.024**       -0.060**          8.352          40,021
                                                                                           (0.008)        (0.020)

Notes: The unit of observation is person-year-quarter. The sample includes all working-age, able-bodied CHAC applicants who were living in
private housing at baseline. CM = Control Mean. ITT = Intent-to-Treat. IV = Instrumental Variables. CCM = Control Complier Mean. See text
for discussion of these estimates. Robust standard errors clustered at household level. ** = significant at 5% level, * = significant at 10% level. All
earnings are measured in 2007 dollars.
Appendix Table II: Alternative IV Estimates
                                                                                                     Receiving TANF,
                                                          Number of
                                                                                Employed             Food Stamps, or
                                                          Households
                                                                                                        Medicaid
                                                                              IV         CCM          IV        CCM
      Baseline                                               42,358        -0.036**      0.605      0.067**       0.552
                                                                            (0.009)                 (0.009)
      Include households with lottery numbers                53,135        -0.038**      0.606      0.069**       0.550
(1)
      18,103-35,000                                                         (0.009)                 (0.008)
      Scale by receipt of voucher through the 1997           42,358        -0.034**      0.607      0.062**       0.555
(2) lottery (rather than simply receiving a voucher
      through any program)                                                  (0.008)                 (0.008)
    Scale by actual voucher usage in each quarter            42,358        -0.044**      0.622      0.081**       0.590
(3) (rather than defining voucher usage as all quarters
    post initial lease-up)                                                  (0.011)                 (0.010)
      Scale by actual usage of 1997 voucher                  42,358        -0.042**      0.625      0.076**       0.589
(4)
      (combination of changes in both rows 2 and 3)                         (0.010)                 (0.010)

      Notes: The unit of observation is person-year-quarter. The sample includes all working-age, able-bodied CHAC
      applicants who were living in private housing at baseline. CM = Control Mean. ITT = Intent-to-Treat. IV = Instrumental
      Variables. CCM = Control Complier Mean. See text for discussion of these estimates. Robust standard errors clustered
      at household level. ** = significant at 5% level, * = significant at 10% level.
                                                                        Appendix Figure I: Control Group Outcomes Over Time




                                                                                                                                4000
                             .65




                                                                                                                              3500
                                  .6




                                                                                                            Real Wage (2007$)
                Fraction Employed




                                                                                                                    3000
                       .55




                                                                                                          2500
                             .5




                                                                                                                                2000
                             .45




                                             1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005                                                     1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
                                                                        Year                                                                                                       Year


                                                              (a) HHH Employed                                                                                     (b) HHH Real Earnings (2007$)
                             .5




                                                                                                                                                   .6
                                                                                                          Fraction Receiving Any Public Assistance
                                        .4




                                                                                                                                        .55
                Fraction Receiving TANF
                                .3




                                                                                                                            .5
                       .2




                                                                                                                .45
                             .1




                                                                                                                                .4
                             0




                                             1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005                                                     1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
                                                                        Year                                                                                                       Year


                                                      (c) HHH Receiving Cash Assistance                                                                       (d) HHH Receiving Any Public Assistance
                                                                                                      a

Notes: Control group defined as CHAC applicants with lottery number greater than 35,000. Sample includes all working-age, able-bodied CHAC applicants who were
living in private housing at baseline.
                            Appendix Figure II: Chicago Metropolitan Area Vacancy And Unemployment Rates 1995-2005




                      15
                  Percent
                     10
                      5




                            1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
                                                    Time in years

                                                         Unemployment Rate                      Vacancy Rate

                                                                                a

Notes: Unemployment rates, reported quarterly, are taken from http://data.bls.gov/PDQ/outside.jsp?survey=la. Rental vacancy rates, reported annually, are taken
from http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/hvs/prevann.html
                                              Appendix Figure III: Offer And Lease Up Rates Over Time




                       1
                       .& .6
                   Fractio/
                  .4   .2
                       0




                                100&         1000          2000         2001        2002          2003          2004         2005
                                                                                  Year

                                   Treat6e/t 8ro9: Offer Rate                          Treat6e/t 8ro9: >ease!9: Rate
                                   @o/trol 8ro9: >ease!9: Rate

                                                                              a

Notes: Treatment group defined as CHAC appicants with lottery number less than or equal to 18,100. Control group defined as CHAC applicants with lottery number
greater than 35,000. Sample includes all working-age, able-bodied CHAC applicants who were living in private housing at baseline.
  Appendix Figure IV: ITT Effect Of Vouchers Over Time On Employment And Receipt Of Public Assistance, By Baseline TANF Receipt




                              .09




                                                                                                                            .2
                              .06




                                                                                                                            .15
                                   .03




                                                                                                                    HHH Received TANF
                      HHH Employed




                                                                                                                                .1
                       !.03   0




                                                                                                                      .05
                              !.06




                                                                                                                            0
                              !.09
                              !.12




                                                                                                                            !.05
                                         !6   !5   !4   !3   !2   !1   0    1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8                           !6    !5   !4   !3   !2   !1   0    1     2     3   4   5   6   7   8
                                                                  Years Relative to Offer                                                                         Years Relative to Offer


                                                   (a) Employment, TANF in 1997 Q2                                                            (b) Public Assistance, TANF in 1997 Q2
                              .0%




                                                                                                                            .2
                              .06




                                                                                                                            .$#
                                   .03




                                                                                                                    &&& (eceived ./01
                      ((( *+plo/ed




                                                                                                                                .$
                       !.03   0




                                                                                                                      .0#
                              !.06




                                                                                                                            0
                              !.0%
                              !.12




                                                                                                                            !.0#

                                         !6   !2   !4   !3   !2   !1   0    1     2     3   4   2   6   4   8                           !6    !#   !4   !3   !2   !$   0    $     2     3   4   #   6   5   6
                                                                  6ears :elative to >ffer                                                                         7ears (elative to >ffer


                                               (c) Employment, No TANF in 1997 Q2                                                            (d) Public Assistance, No TANF in 1997 Q2
                                                                                                                a

Notes: Dotted lines represent the 95 percent confidence interval. Solid lines represent the point estimate. Estimates come from equation (4) in the text. Year zero is
defined as the first full year after an offer, measured at the quarter level, and including the quarter of the offer. The sample for panels (a) and (b) includes all
working-age, able-bodied CHAC applicants who were living in private housing and receiving TANF at baseline. The sample for panels (c) and (d) includes all
working-age, able-bodied CHAC applicants who were living in private housing and not receiving TANF at baseline.
