                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE FIRST OF THE MONTH EFFECT:
                     CONSUMER BEHAVIOR AND STORE RESPONSES

                                        Justine S. Hastings
                                       Ebonya L. Washington

                                        Working Paper 14578
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14578


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008




We thank Joseph Altonji, Steven Berry, Keith Chen, Raj Chetty, Judy Chevalier, Nada Eissa, Tim
Guinnane, Patrick Kline, Camille Landais, Jesse Shapiro, Sharon Oster and seminar participants at
Boston University, Brown University, IIES, the NBER TAPES Conference, University of California
at Berkeley, University of Chicago GSB and the Yale Industrial Organization lunch for valuable input.
Lydia Ashton and Alexander Torgovitsky provided excellent research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge
funding from the Yale University Institution for Social and Policy Studies. All remaining errors are
ours. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Justine S. Hastings and Ebonya L. Washington. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The First of the Month Effect: Consumer Behavior and Store Responses
Justine S. Hastings and Ebonya L. Washington
NBER Working Paper No. 14578
December 2008
JEL No. H0,H2,H31,H32,L1

                                            ABSTRACT

Previous research has used survey and diary data to carefully document that Food Stamp recipients
decrease their expenditures and consumption of food throughout the benefit month, the beginning
of which is defined by the date on which benefits are distributed. The reliance on survey and diary
data has meant that researchers could not test two rational hypotheses for why food consumption cycles.
Using detailed grocery store scanner data we ask 1) whether cycling is due to a desire for variation
in foods consumed that leads to substitution across product quality within the month and 2) whether
cycling is driven by countercyclical pricing by grocery retailers. We find support for neither of these
hypotheses. We find that the decrease in food expenditures is largely driven by reductions in food
quantity, not quality, and that prices for foods purchased by benefit households vary pro-cyclically
with demand implying that benefit households could save money by delaying their food purchases
until later in the month. The price effects are small relative to demand changes and relative to impacts
found for other subsidy programs such as EITC, suggesting that most of the benefits accrue to the
intended recipients particularly in product categories and stores where benefit recipients represent
a small fraction of overall demand. We conclude by concurring with previous literature that food cycling
behavior is most likely due to short-run impatience.


Justine S. Hastings
Yale University
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
justine.hastings@yale.edu

Ebonya L. Washington
Yale University
Box 8264
37 Hillhouse, Room 2
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
ebonya.washington@yale.edu
1.       Introduction

There is a growing line of empirical literature demonstrating the sensitivity of the timing
of household purchases to the timing of the receipt of income. Stephens (2003, 2006)
finds evidence of a purchasing cycle in two distinct populations: social security recipients
in the United States and paycheck recipients in the United Kingdom, both of whom
receive checks monthly. In samples of both groups he finds that spending on
instantaneous consumption, which he defines as fresh food, food away from home and
entertainment, increases following income receipt. Stephens concludes that he finds
evidence in violation of the permanent income hypothesis. Other researchers, such as
Huffman and Barenstein (2005) who examine the same United Kingdom data as Stephens
(2006), push the interpretation further, concluding that the cycling patterns in purchases
constitute real world evidence of short run impatience or quasi-hyperbolic discounting. 1


Researchers investigating the prevalence of short run impatience have paid particular
attention to populations receiving government benefits, presumably because of the
group’s policy relevance; utility losses suffered by recipients due to impatience could be
inexpensively undone through public policy. 2 Wilde and Ranney (2000) and Shapiro
(2005) use survey data to document, not only that Food Stamp recipients buy relatively
more food at the beginning of their Food Stamp month, but more importantly that they
consume relatively more calories as well. Shapiro (2005) estimates that calorie intake
decreases by 0.45 percent per day within the Food Stamp month. He presents evidence
against food spoilage, theft, strategic considerations vis-à-vis other family members and
community members, or naïveté driving the results. He interprets this as evidence of
short run impatience. His policy prescription is for localities to divide Food Stamp
distribution into smaller, more frequent payments to each household.



1
  Laibson (1997) develops the notion of quasi-hyperblic discounting in which individuals have distinct
short and long run time preferences and evaluate trade offs with a present bias. The majority of empirically
support for impatience has been found in laboratory settings (Frederick et. al, 2002).
2
  For example Dobkin and Puller (2007) find that that SSI and DI recipients see an increase in drug related
hospitalizations and mortality at the beginning of their payment month. Foley (2008) shows that
financially motivated crime is higher at the end of the Food Stamp/TANF payment month.


                                                                                                           3
In this paper we consider two alternative explanations for the benefit household food
consumption cycle that could not be tested using survey data. First, recipients may have a
preference for variation in the quantity and quality of food consumed, providing a
rational explanation for expenditure and consumption patterns over the course of the
month. Because of data limitations Shapiro (2005) presents only indirect evidence against
the desire for a few “feast” days. He points to survey data demonstrating cycling in Food
Stamp recipients’ hypothetical willingness to accept a smaller immediate payment in
place of a larger payment in the future. As the month goes on recipients are more willing
to accept the smaller payment. He interprets this finding as evidence that the marginal
utility of income (to buy food) is not constant, but rather increases throughout the month,
suggesting that benefit households do not desire this variance in food consumption.
Households who show the greatest increases in marginal utility are the most likely to
report food shortfalls at the end of the month. Second, cycling in purchasing behavior
could also be consistent with rational behavior if, as in previous literature (e.g., Warner
and Barsky 1995, MacDonald, 2000, Chevalier, Kashyap and Rossi, 2003) prices decline
at times of peak demand and therefore groceries are less expensive at the beginning of the
month. Prior research relying on survey or diary data cannot address store pricing
response to demand cycles, and lack the detail to test for substitution across product
quality within grocery category over the course of the month.


Access to two years of item-level scanner data from three Nevada stores belonging to a
national supermarket chain allows us to present direct evidence on the relevance of these
alternative hypotheses. We first document, consistent with previous literature, that benefit
recipients—defined as customers who ever purchase with Food Stamps or cash welfare
assistance currency—do relatively more of their food shopping at the beginning of the
month— defined as the date on which benefits are distributed. We find a sharp decrease
in benefit households’ food expenditures of more than 20 percent from the first to the
second week of the month. Expenditures continue to decline less steeply through the
remainder of the month. The decline from the first to the fourth week of the month is 34
percent. This result is robust across the three stores, which differ in their share of
purchases by benefit households. Further the result is robust across products from



                                                                                          4
storable to perishable items. We see no such cycle in food expenditures amongst store
patrons who do not receive benefits, whether low or high income.


Second, we examine to what extent the decrease in food expenditures is driven by
changes in quantities versus changes in the quality of food purchased. We find
overwhelming evidence in favor of the former. In fact point estimates suggest that
quantity reductions can explain the full decrease in food expenditures. From week one to
week four benefit households reduce their quantities purchased by 35 percent. Quality
reductions are much smaller. From week one to week four benefit households increase
their relative (to non-benefit households) propensity to buy generic by one percent and
decrease their relative propensity to buy premium by two percent. Benefit households
also exhibit a small increase (one percent) in their relative propensity to purchase sale
items. Thus we find no evidence that the food spending cycle is driven by a desire for
variation in food in food products consumed throughout the month.


While some states stagger benefit delivery, in Nevada Food Stamps and cash benefits are
distributed to all recipients on the same day. Thus each month grocery stores face a large
and predictable increase in demand for goods most heavily purchased by benefit
recipients. Finally, we explore the store’s pricing response to this demand shift. We do
not find evidence of counter-cyclical pricing, but instead find that the increase in
aggregate demand induced by benefit delivery results in food price increases. While the
pricing response is small—prices fall 3 percent as quantities purchased fall 34 percent—
the fact that prices move pro-cyclically with demand rules out the desire to purchase food
when it is relatively cheaper as an explanation for the food purchasing cycle. The fact that
prices rise, even slightly, with demand provides additional support for impatience as the
best explanation of the purchasing behavior. Even if households have non-convex
preferences, they would do better to shift their expenditure peak to a later point in the
month.


These findings add further support to the hypothesis that food stamp recipients display
impatience. They also suggest that the bulk of food stamp subsidies accrue to the



                                                                                          5
intended recipients, particularly in markets and products where subsidy recipients
represent a lower overall percentage of demand. The relatively small price effects stand
in contrast to estimates of incidence in other subsidy programs, such as EITC, where
recipients make up a large fraction of the market and their behavior is likely to have a
large impact on equilibrium market prices (e.g. labor supply and wages in Rothstein
(2008) and used car prices in Adams, Einav and Levin (2008)).


One key limitation of our study is that we only have data for one grocery store per
neighborhood. If low income shoppers’ choice of food retailer is correlated with timing
within the month then our purchasing pattern results will be biased. However, our
expenditure results are of a similar magnitude to Shapiro (2005) who relies on survey
data which is not prone to such bias. Further, our results are unchanged when we limit
consideration to those shoppers who make purchases during both the first and the last two
weeks within the month. A second concern stemming from our use of grocery data
concerns the generalizeability of our pricing results. We know that grocery chains are far
more likely to locate in low poverty neighborhoods (Chung and Myers, 1999). However,
across the nation 83 percent of Food Stamps are cashed in super markets and 50 percent
of Food Stamp recipients spend their benefits exclusively in super markets (Cole and Lee,
2005). Thus our pricing results are relevant for the majority of Food Stamp recipients, but
likely not as relevant for the recipients who are least well off. We present both our
expenditure and pricing results in detail, after describing our data in the following
section.


2.     Data


Previous investigations of the monthly food expenditure/consumption cycle have relied
on household survey data. Such data have been extremely valuable in allowing
researchers to carefully document cycling amongst benefit-receiving populations.
However, because household survey data do not provide the full menu of products from
which households are able to choose nor the monthly variation in price of products,
chosen or unchosen, survey data do not allow for the investigation of two possible causes


                                                                                         6
of such cycling: 1) a desire to consume a variety of food products across the month and
2) a response to variation in food prices across the month. We are fortunate to have
access to grocery store scanner data that will allow us to investigate both of these
possibilities.


Our scanner data cover transactions at three focal stores in a national grocery chain over
the 26 month period from January 2006 to February 2008. The data include an
observation for each item purchased, detailing the quantity, price and any discounts
applied. While our supermarket chain carries both food and non-food items such as
would be found in a drug store, in keeping with previous literature, we analyze only food
purchases. Our data set includes an observation for each food item scanned at the register
during our 26 month period. Each item is uniquely identified by its Universal Product
Code (UPC), an identifier which is specific to the product and size of container where
applicable (e.g. extra large Red Delicious apples, or General Mills Cheerios Cereal 18 Oz
Box). There are thousands of UPCs for food items. The store groups the UPCs into
higher order classifications. For example, Red Delicious Apples are a subset of apples
which are a subset of the category fresh produce. For tractability, when we present results
by food type, we will do so by these 38 most macro categories, of which Fresh Produce is
one and Cereal and Breakfast is another.


For each scanned item, the data also record the form of payment which can include
among others cash, credit, debit and most importantly for our purposes currency from the
social programs, Food Stamps, cash welfare and WIC. Finally each record includes a
household loyalty card identifier. We use the loyalty card number and payment
information to identify benefit recipients. In particular, we categorize a loyalty card
number as belonging to a welfare recipient if that loyalty card was associated with any
purchases settled with currency from social programs over the 26 month period. We will
refer to such loyalty card holders as “benefit households” from here forward. 3



3
  We tried a couple of different measures including defining the welfare households over one year period
instead of over the entire period. The results are robust to changes in this definition.


                                                                                                           7
We analyze purchases at three stores located in the state of Nevada. We focus on Nevada
because Food Stamp and cash assistance benefits are delivered to all recipients on the
first day of the month in that state. 4 This concentrated benefit delivery schedule is
important for our ability to identify the start of the benefit recipient income month and
thus to be able to chart the pattern of expenditures throughout that month.


In Nevada both Food Stamps and cash assistance are distributed electronically to a
benefits card that works like a debit card. Benefits do not expire; they may be carried
over from month to month. Nevada’s cash assistance program is less generous than the
national average. In 2002 the maximum benefit for a family of three with no income was
$348 compared to a national mean of $413 and median of $390 (Rowe and Russell,
2002). Even including Food Stamp benefits—which are determined according to a single
national formula which takes cash benefits into account—Nevada residence’s maximum
benefit level is below the national median (United States House of Representatives,
Committee on Ways and Means, 2004).


Within Nevada, we select our three focal stores based on the demographic characteristics
of their patrons. In particular we select stores in which a relatively large share of food
purchases (more than 15 percent) were made by benefit recipient households. We further
seek variation in percent of purchases made by benefit households so that we can shed
light not only on how store pricing responds to benefit households’ monthly expenditure
cycle, but further how that response varies with the stores’ share of purchases by benefit
households. (Food prices are set weekly and can vary by store.) We have therefore
chosen stores in which 15 percent (Store 1), 28 percent (Store 2) and 47 percent (Store 3)
of purchases are made by benefit recipients. The stores are all located in zip codes in
which Latinos and families in poverty are overrepresented (by two to three times) and
educational attainment levels are lower than national averages. In all neighborhoods, our




4
 WIC benefits are distributed upon request. Our results are robust to excluding WIC recipients from the
benefit household category.


                                                                                                          8
focal store faces competition from both small ethnic grocers as well as larger chain
retailers. 5


Table 1 presents summary statistics of household expenditures for benefit and non-
benefit households over the twenty-six month period. The first three columns show
expenditure patterns over the course of the month for all stores pooled together, and each
subsequent set of three columns presents statistics for an individual store. Twenty-seven
percent of all purchases are made by benefit-receiving households across the three stores.
Looking at percent of purchases by time of the month, we see that benefit households’
share of store purchases falls by eight percentage points overall, by between four and ten
percentage points by store. Benefit households spend an average of $42 dollars per week
on food items at our supermarket, while non-benefit households spend slightly less per
week ($31.23). Previewing our results we see that average weekly expenditures fall
between the first and second half of the month for benefit households, but remains
constant for non-benefit households.


The remaining rows of the table examine purchasing patterns by purchase type. We
divide all products into three quality categories: generic, mainstream, and premium. Our
categorization is based on product descriptions provided to us by the grocery chain. We
code as premium any product that is so categorized in the store’s description. We code as
generic, non-premium items that are marketed under the store’s private-label. Any
premium private-label products are classified as premium. Mainstream is the residual
category capturing all items that are neither generic nor premium. Table 1 indicates that
the share of purchases devoted to each product category is quite similar for benefit and
non-benefit households. About 55 percent of purchases for both groups are of mainstream
products, about 10 percent generic and the remainder premium. Dividing products simply
according to whether they are on promotion (on sale) or not, we see that 59 percent of
products purchases by the poor are on sale, compared with 57 percent of purchases by the



5
 Zip code demographic data are drawn from the 2000 census using the American Fact finder website.
Competition data from www.switchboard.com.


                                                                                                    9
non-poor. These patterns are quite consistent across stores and across the month. 6 Benefit
households are only slightly more likely than other households to purchase generics or
sale items. Further, that these relative patterns are consistent across the month previews
our results that benefit households do not substitute across product types over the course
of the month.


However, it is not the case, that benefit and non-benefit households are buying the exact
same products, as Figure 1 demonstrates. The figure displays the share of purchases,
across the three stores, made by benefit households, by the 38 food categories. The darker
bars indicate the share of purchases in the first two weeks of the month. The lighter bars
correspond to the second two weeks. While across all products, benefit households make
27 percent of purchases, we see that there is considerable variation by category. Benefit
households are relatively less likely to purchase alcohol, fresh produce, frozen fruits and
fresh bread. On the other hand, these families are relatively more likely to purchase rice
and beans, prepared foods, meat, commercial sweet baked goods, flour/sugar/corn meal
and frozen juices and vegetables. Within products, benefit households account for a
larger share of revenue in the first two weeks than the second two weeks of the month.
This is true for all products which previews our confirmation of the cycling expenditure
result. We provide our results formally in the next section.


3.      Regression Analysis of Expenditures


Table 2 documents monthly food expenditure patterns for benefit recipient and non-
recipient households. The table cells report coefficients from regressions of the following
form:


                    Yits = beni * week t β ' + week t δ '+ hi λ '+ s sη '+ε its   (1)




6
 The scanner data include information on markdowns and discounts for each item. If an item is purchased
and a discount is posted at the register, we consider that item to be ‘on sale’.


                                                                                                     10
where Yits is the log of total expenditures for household i in week t at store s, beni is an
indicator for whether household i is classified as a benefit household, weekt is a row
vector of dummies for each 7 day period beginning at the first of each month (week of the
pay month dummies, where we exclude from the sample the days past the 28th day of the
month), hi is a row vector of household id fixed-effects, ss is a row vector of store fixed-
effects. The first week of the pay month and its interaction with the benefit household
indicator are omitted so that each coefficient (multiplied by 100) is the percentage decline
in total expenditures relative to the first week. Each column of Table 2 presents the
coefficients for β and δ. Standard errors, clustered at the household level, are reported in
parentheses. The first column presents results for all stores pooled together, while the
subsequent columns present results by store.


Turning to the first column, we see that benefit households decrease their grocery
purchases throughout the month. Relative to non-benefit receiving households, benefit
households’ total purchases (first row) decline by 20.53 percent from week one to week
two and continue to decline, though not as steeply, as we move from week three to week
four, when the reduction is 33.52 percent relative to week one. In contrast, non-benefit
households exhibit almost no decline in expenditures over the course of the month. The
coefficients on the week dummies are generally an order of magnitude smaller than the
coefficients on the interactions indicating a much smaller decrease (off a smaller mean)
in purchases across the month for non recipient purchasers.


Our results are consistent with Wilde and Ranney (2000) and Shapiro (2005) who
document food spending decreases across the month for low-income households. The
magnitude of the decline we demonstrate is similar to Shapiro (2005) who focuses
exclusively on Food Stamp recipients and finds a decrease in the market value of
purchased food of 20 percent from the first to the 28th day of the month. Shapiro’s market
value of food is not measured directly through prices, however. The Nationwide Food
Consumption Survey, whose data he uses, assigns this value based on the food the
household reports that it consumes. That our results are slightly greater in magnitude is
not surprising given that we focus on a population who receive both their Food Stamp



                                                                                         11
and their cash welfare benefits on the exact same day of the month. The similarity of our
results to those of Shapiro (2005) lends credence to our claim that despite our focus on
only one retail outlet per community we are capturing representative grocery purchases of
benefit households.


The food expenditure cycle we identify is consistent across the three stores, the remaining
columns of Table 2 show. In each store benefit households’ relative decrease in
expenditures from week one to week two is 15 to 20 percent, with smaller decreases in
subsequent weeks. In week 4, expenditures have fallen 20 to 30 percent, compared to
week one, across the three outlets. The similarity in food expenditure cycle amongst the
three different populations of low-income shoppers not only demonstrates the robustness
of the result, but further indicates that a comparison of pricing behavior amongst the three
focal stores is likely to tease out the stores’ response to variation in fluctuation in
aggregate demand induced by the relative sizes of their benefit-receiving population.


In Table 3 we demonstrate that the food expenditure cycle is also robust to food category.
The table presents the coefficients and standard errors for β from regressions of the form
(1) run separately for each food category in our sample. The results show that the decline
in benefit recipients’ expenditures over the monthly cycle is remarkably consistent across
food categories. In fact, there is no category of food for which there is not a significant
decline in relative purchases by benefit-recipient households from the first to the fourth
week of the month. In only one category—frozen fruits—is that decline not significant at
the one percent level.


The robustness of the result across food type suggests a violation of the permanent
income hypothesis. We group food categories into four types of goods to reinforce this
point. Looking at food items by groupings, we first see that relative purchases of storable
items fall by 10 to 25 percent from week one to week four. But of course precisely
because the purchasing and consumption of these items can be decoupled temporally, the
cycle of purchase of storable items may not constitute a violation of the permanent
income hypothesis. Likewise we might not be surprised to see that relative purchases of



                                                                                         12
splurge items falls by 11 to 18 percent from week one to week four. The idea that
households may indulge in “feast” days at the beginning of the month is one explanation
that has been put forth to explain the purchasing cycle that we consider later in this
section. However, there is no rational theory under which we should see cycling amongst
perishable staples, like produce, meat and bread. But in fact we see the largest relative
declines in meat purchases. In general we see that amongst perishable items the relative
decline in purchases is between six and 29 percent suggesting that that benefit households
are not smoothing expenditures and consumption over the predictable monthly income
cycle.


Finally, it is interesting to note that we see a purchasing cycle even in those products that
cannot be purchased using Food Stamps: namely alcohol and tobacco products (of course
these items can be purchased either with cash benefits or with cash itself.) Benefit
households decrease their relative purchases of alcohol and tobacco by five percent from
week one to week two and by nine percent from week one to week four.


Table 4 employs information on household income to investigate if the identified decline
in expenditures generalizes to low-income households who may be budget constrained
but do not depend on the monthly benefits cycle for income. We use estimated household
income data that the supermarket chain collects for a sample of loyalty card holders, and
add interactions between weekly dummies and income quartiles to equation (1). The first
specification in Table 4 (columns 1 and 2) repeats the base specification in Table 2 for
the subsample of households with demographic data, and confirms the same expenditure
decline is present in this subsample. The second specification (columns 3 and 4) add
interactions between income quartiles and weekly effects among non-benefit households.
Coefficients on these interactions, even for the least well off quartile, are an order of
magnitude smaller than our focal benefit households * week coefficients. Our results
indicate that the purchasing pattern is particular to benefit households.


There are at least two threats to the identification strategy we use to document how food
spending responds to income payments. First, the increase in food expenditure at the



                                                                                          13
beginning of the month may be driven by other events on the calendar, and not the receipt
of payment. A concern for this possibility leads us to augment our model of the form (1)
with controls for month, time trend, holiday dummies and gasoline prices. 7 These
additions do not change our results of Tables 2 and 3 because of the structure of the
monthly pay cycle. Few events will occur consistently on the first each month.


A second concern is that our results are driven by selection. Perhaps the type of
household who purchases food at one of our supermarkets at the beginning of the month
is distinct from the type of household who purchases food at the supermarket at month’s
end. If this is the case, then we need to consider two possibilities. First, in weeks when
we do not observe a household shopping at one of our focal stores, the household could
be purchasing food at another establishment. Second, it is possible in the weeks that a
household does not appear in our data they are not purchasing any food at all. To ensure
that the alternative shopping venue form of selection is not driving our results, we run
models of the form of (1) limiting our sample to households who purchase in a focal store
in both the first and second two weeks of the month. Results are robust to this change in
sample. To investigate whether variation in purchasing on the extensive margin is biasing
our results we run linear probability models of the decision to purchase in a particular
week 8 and then recover the total (not conditional on expenditures greater than zero)
derivative of expenditures with respect to benefit weeks by following the procedure laid
out by McDonald and Moffitt (1980). 9 We find that the probability of purchase for
benefit households declines by eight percentage points (off of a mean of 49 percent) from
the first to the fourth week of the month. The decline is less than one percentage point
(off of a mean of 40 percent) for non-benefit households. The unconditional decline in
expenditures over the same time period is $13.64 (off of a mean of $21.17) for benefit
households and only $0.14 (off of a mean of $12.34) for non-benefit households. Thus

7
  Gicheva, Hastings and Villas-Boas (2007) show sensitivity in grocery purchases to sharp changes in
gasoline prices.
8
  For tractability and because of the possibility of household relocation, we eliminate household-weeks that
occur in months in which the household made no purchases in a focal store.
9
  Specifically, let E(y) be the expected value of y, E(y*) be the expected value of y, conditional on y being
greater than zero and F(z) be the probability that y is greater than zero. Then E(y) = F(z)*E(y*) and
dEy/dx= F(z)dEy*/dx + Ey*(dF(z)/dx.



                                                                                                          14
this exercise supports the conclusion that there is a monthly benefits grocery expenditure
cycle.


In Table 5 we decompose this $13.64 decrease into decreases due to changes in purchases
on the extensive and intensive margins. We find that across all goods changes in purchase
conditional on purchasing accounts for about 65 percent of the total decrease for benefit
households. But while relatively few households discontinue all grocery store purchases
by month’s end, more households will discontinue all purchases within a particular
category of goods. In fact, across good type we find that an average of only 18 percent of
declines is due to declines on the intensive margin.


Our results thus far provide a robust replication of findings in previous literature: benefit-
receiving households’ grocery expenditures fall across the month. Because we have
replicated this finding with scanner data as opposed to survey data, we can now explore
patterns in household expenditures over the monthly cycle that would not be possible to
investigate with data on expenditures from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, for
example. We can examine if benefit households display further non-standard income
effects. For instance, do they feel relatively wealthy at the beginning of the month,
substituting towards premium and brand-name products and away from generics (Allenby
and Rossi (1991))? Given that they do not smooth consumption, do they shift towards
inferior goods or become more sensitive to promotional items as the month proceeds and
their relative income level decreases in an attempt to stretch their marginal dollars further
(Gicheva, Hastings and Villas-Boas (2007))? Our scanner data allow us to move beyond
what previous literature has been able to do with diary data. We are able to decompose
this change in expenditures to examine to what extent cycling is driven by changes in
quantity versus quality of food items purchased. This distinction is important. One
untested hypothesis for the monthly expenditure cycle is that households have a desire for
a variety of products throughout the month. If the decrease in expenditures is driven by
quality adjustments, households moving from the purchase of high to low quality
products throughout the month, that would lend support to this theory. On the other hand




                                                                                           15
if the decrease in expenditures is driven primarily through quantity adjustments, then that
would be further evidence of impatience on the part of benefit recipients.


In Table 6 we examine how quantity purchased changes throughout the month. Because
different items have different sizes, we report all quantities in ounces. We have sizes for
approximately 90 percent of the items purchased so the sample size decreases slightly as
we move to Table 6. The specification remains of the form (1), but the dependent
variable is now log weekly quantity purchased (measured in total ounces). The
coefficients show the decline in total number of ounces purchased by household i in week
t at store s as we move from the first to the last week of the month. The first column
shows coefficients from a regression pooling data from all stores with store fixed-effects,
while the next three columns show regression results run separately for each store. The
results of the first column demonstrate that benefit recipients exhibit a large relative
decline in total quantity purchased across the month. The results are of a similar
magnitude to the results for log expenditures in Table 2. Across all food types, low
income households reduce their relative quantity purchased by 24 percent from week one
to week two and by 35 percent from week one to week four. Recall that these same
households reduce total expenditures by 34 percent across the four weeks. This suggests
that the decline in expenditures is coming solely from a decline in quantity purchased,
rather than in price savings from substitution towards less expensive products. Once
again our main week effects are an order of magnitude smaller than our interactions
indicating a small decline in quantities purchased across the month for households who
do not receive benefits. And once again our results are robust across stores, the remaining
columns of the table indicate. In all three stores benefit recipients see a fall in quantity
purchased from week one to week four that is within three percentage points of the fall in
expenditures over the same time period.


This decrease in quantities purchased amongst benefit recipients is quite robust to type of
food, the results of Table 7 demonstrate. In all categories point estimates indicate a
decline in relative quantities purchased from week one to week four. That decline is
insignificant in only two of 38 categories: tobacco products and frozen juices. And in



                                                                                         16
another two-- frozen fruits and frozen desserts--that decline is only significant at the 5
percent level. In the remaining 34 of 38 categories covering storable, perishable, splurge
and uncovered (by Food Stamps) products, we see highly significant reductions, on the
order of 10 to 25 percent, in quantities purchased from week one to week four. Once
again the results are robust to the inclusion of additional controls and to limiting the
sample to households who purchase at month’s beginning and end. Thus Tables 6 and 7
show that benefit households reduce food expenditures throughout the month largely
through reductions in quantities purchased.


In Tables 8 and 9 we examine measures of the quality margin. We examine how families
substitute among mainstream, generic and premium products and between sale and non-
sale over the course of the month, using regressions of the form (1) where the dependent
variable is either the quantity-weighted fraction of purchases for household i in week t
from store s that are classified as ‘generic’, ‘premium’ or on sale. Because the extent to
which generic (premium/sale) products are available differs by product and over time, we
control for share of products available to consumer i at store s in week t in category k that
are generic (premium/sale). Classic income effects may lead households to substitute
away from normal and luxury goods towards inferior goods as income drops, and this has
been proposed as a reason for disparate cross-price elasticities between private label and
brand name products (Allenby and Rossi 1991). While benefits households are not
experiencing a change in permanent income over the course of the month, it is interesting
to compare their substitution patterns across products to those identified elsewhere in
response to changes in permanent income.


The first column of the Generic Panel of Table 8 indicates that across all food categories,
benefit receiving households show a small increase in their share of generic products
purchased throughout the month. In week two their relative purchases of generic products
increase a half of a percent (compared to week one) off of a mean of 15 percent. The
increase in weeks three and four over week one are 8/10 of a percent and a full percent
respectively. The one percentage point increase across the month is true for all three
stores, the remaining columns demonstrate. The small negative week four main effect



                                                                                          17
coefficient indicates that non-welfare households very slightly decrease their share of
generic products purchased in week four compared to week one. (This decrease amongst
non-benefit households is driven by Stores 2 and 3 only.)


As Table 9A shows, this substitution to cheaper generic brands amongst the benefit
receiving households is driven by significant movements to generic in just 8 of 34 food
categories: cookies, soft beverages, cereal, soup, rice and beans, cheese, refrigerated juice
and drinks and meat. Across these eight categories the increase in benefit households’
relative share generic increases by one to three percent in week four over week one.
Benefit households significantly decrease their purchases across the month in just one
food category: commercial fresh bread. There is no significant shift away or toward
generic products across the month by low income households in the remaining 25
categories. Thus Table 9 demonstrates that substitution toward less expensive generic
products accounts for only a small portion of benefit recipients’ monthly decrease in food
expenditures.


The results of the Premium panel of Table 8 reinforce the notion that benefit-receiving
households decrease food expenditures by reducing quantity more than by reducing
quality. In this panel the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the item
purchased is a premium label. Complementing the small increase in generic products
purchased, we see here a small decrease in premium products purchased across the
month. Benefit recipient households’ share of premium products decreases by one
percent from week one to week two and by two percent from week one to week four. In
the aggregate, the mean share premium is 24 percent for benefit receiving households and
25 percent for non-benefit receiving households. The positive week effects indicate that
non-benefit households increase their share of premium products purchased as the month
moves towards its end. Both the decrease in premium purchases for recipient households
and the increase for non-recipient households are robust across stores.


The aggregate substitution away from premium products for benefit recipients is driven,
once again, by only a few food types. Benefit receiving households significantly decrease



                                                                                          18
share premium of salty snacks, meat, commercial fresh bread and refrigerated juice and
drinks. The extent of substitution ranges from less than a percent decrease from week one
to week four for salty snacks to a four percent decrease for commercial fresh bread across
that time period. Benefit households significantly increase their share of premium
purchases on only one food category: flour/sugar/corn meal. This increase is only
significant at the 5 percent level. For the remainder of products, we see no substitution
between premium and non-premium across the month. Thus the premium specification
provides further evidence that benefit recipients decrease their food expenditures
throughout the month primarily by reducing quantities rather than substituting across
foods of various qualities.


The final panel of Table 8 examines whether benefit households become more sensitive
to promotional items as the month proceeds. Gicheva, Hastings, and Villas-Boas (2007)
use scanner data to examine how grocery expenditures shift in response to changes in
permanent income generated by gasoline price spikes. They find that households respond
by substituting towards promotional items, increasing the fraction of items purchased on
sale by 10 to 50 percent when gasoline prices double, saving approximately 5 to 10
percent on grocery expenditures. Table 8 shows that low income household exhibit only a
small substitution toward promotional products as the month wanes. Their relative
fraction of promotional items increases by one percent from week 1 to week 4. The week
dummies, of a similar magnitude, indicate that non-benefit households increase their
purchases of sales items by less than one percent. Thus for benefit-receiving households
the total increase in propensity to purchase sale items is less than two percent from week
one to week 4. This result is driven by only 13 food categories, as shown in Table 9C.


The results of this section indicate that benefit recipients show a steep drop in food
expenditures over the course of the month. Grocery expenditures in week four are thirty
percent smaller than those in week one. The results are true for both storable and
perishable items and thus constitute a violation of the permanent income hypothesis. Our
results are consistent with those found in prior literature using survey and diary data on
household food expenditures. Authors of earlier work have theorized that the purchase



                                                                                         19
cycling is due to irrationality or impatience on the part of low-income households. Two
alternative explanations for these purchasing patterns could not be explored with survey
data. The first is that benefit households enjoy a “feast day” at the start of the month,
purchasing premium products at the beginning of the month, and substituting towards
inferior products towards month’s end. However, using detailed scanner data we have
found no evidence to support this hypothesis. We find that the vast majority of the
expenditure declines result from declines in quantities purchased, rather than substitution
to lower quality or even sale items. 10


The second untested hypothesis is that the purchasing cycle can be rationalized by
changes in stores prices. We test this second hypothesis in the next section.


4.       Regression Analysis of Retail Response to Cyclical Demand


In this section, we examine the firms’ response to benefit households’ predictable
demand cycles. There are three possible responses. First, retailers may price counter-
cyclically, decreasing prices during periods of peak demand. This strategy has been
documented in several settings, including retail grocery where both MacDonald (2000)
and Chevalier, Kashyap and Rossi (2003) find large decreases in the price of food items
during their high demand season. MacDonald (2005) shows that across 48 products with
seasonal fluctuation in demand, prices fall an average of 8 percent as demand rises by
199 percent. Chevalier, Kashyap and Rossi (2003) demonstrate that the price of tuna
drops 13 percent during lent and that the prices of snack crackers and cheese fall by more
than 10 percent during the Christmas season. The authors argue that their findings are
consistent with a loss leader model of pricing in which stores compete for customers

10
  We tested several alternative measures of product quality in addition to generic/premium categories and
sale items. In particular we generated a quantity-weighted income index for each UPC of the income of
households who purchased it over our sample period. This measure might capture items that wealthier
people are more likely to purchase, and thus may be higher quality. We also constructed a z-score of price
(per standardized quantity unit such as ounce) within product categories and sub-categories to measure the
relative expense of a product. We estimated (1) using these alternative measures of quality as the dependent
variable. We find statistically significant but economically very small declines in these measures of quality
for benefit household purchases over the course of the month. Thus the results from these alternative
specifications are very similar to those found for fraction generic vs. premium and fraction purchased on
sale.


                                                                                                          20
through advertised prices on items of high relative demand. However, Nevo and
Hatzitaskos (2005) decompose the seasonal price paid reductions into substitution (to less
expensive brands) and price reduction effects. They find that the substitution effects are
the larger of the two, which is less consistent with the loss leader model. While the loss
leader model makes no predictions for pricing during increases in aggregate demand for
all products, which we document occur monthly in our three grocery stores, Warner and
Barsky (1995) show that countercyclical pricing may be optimal if consumer demand
elasticity increases in periods of peak demand due to economies of scale in search.
Consumers who make one large shopping trip at the start of the month, search more for
the lowest price retailer for their large purchases at the start of the month than they do for
their small purchases at the end of the month. At the start of the month consumers have
more expenditures and items over which to reap the gains to finding the lowest price
store. This makes demand more elastic during peak-demand, generating counter-cyclical
retailer pricing. Such counter-cyclical pricing on the part of our grocery retailers would
provide a rational explanation for the food purchase cycle – benefit-receiving shoppers
purchase relatively more food at the beginning of the month because this is when prices
are lowest. Such a finding would provide evidence against irrationality or impatience on
the part of low-income households as an explanation for cycling behavior.


The second possibility is that stores do not respond to this early month increase in
aggregate demand. Shapiro (2005) makes this assumption. Empirical evidence of
constant within month food prices would offer no evidence against his hypothesis that
monthly food consumption cycling is due to short-run impatience.


Finally, grocery retailers may pursue the traditional response to an increase in demand or
decrease in demand elasticity: They may raise prices cyclically as demand rises. Cyclical
pricing would mean that benefit households could increase welfare by delaying their
purchases until later in the month when prices fall. For example, Adams, Einav and Levin
(2008) show that demand for sub-prime used auto loans increase by 30 percent at the
time of EITC receipt and required cash down-payments increase in response by 20
percent, implying that liquidity-constrained purchasers could do better to slightly delay



                                                                                           21
their car purchase after receiving their EITC check. Hence cyclical demand accompanied
by cyclical pricing would provide additional support for short-run impatience on the part
of welfare recipient households as an explanation for their food purchase behavior.


In order to examine store pricing behavior, and whether benefit recipients are responding
to prices rationally or whether they could save money from altering purchase timing, we
create a price index that measures the change in the within month variation in the cost of
benefit households’ typical food basket. The price index is constructed as follows:


                                ln pricets = ∑ ω k ln( ptsk )     (2)
                                               k




where ωk is the total share, across the three stores, that benefit-receiving households
spend on product k (identified by UPC) over the 26 month period; ptsk is the price for
product k at store s on day t. Hence this price index gives the share-weighted price on
each day in each store for the typical basket of groceries for a benefit household. We
calculate the weights in two ways. First we calculate the weight as stated above – the
share low income households spend on product k over the 26 month period. Second we
calculate the weights as the share that benefit households spend on product k during the
first week of the month for any month in our 26 month sample. This second weighting
allows us to hone in on how prices vary for those goods that benefit households purchase
during their most active shopping period. This weighting will allow us to answer the
question of whether households could save money by altering the timing of that most
active shopping period.


       Table 8 presents results from regressions of the form


          ln pricets = β1 + β 2 week _ 2 ts + β 3 week _ 3ts + β 4 week _ 4 ts + ε ts   (3)


where week_i is an indicator for the week of the month that each store-day observation
falls into. We exclude days after the 28th day of the month, so the first week becomes the



                                                                                              22
excluded category. The top panel of the table uses the basket based on purchases of
benefit-receiving households regardless of timing. The bottom panel uses the basket
based solely on purchases made during the first week of each month.


The first four columns of Table 10 provide price results for our three focal grocery stores.
The coefficients in the first column of the top panel indicate that the basket of goods
purchased by benefit recipient households is two percent less expensive in week two
compared to week 1. The basket’s price falls to 2.7 percent less expensive in week 4,
compared to week 1. The bottom panel of the table examines changes in the price of the
benefit households’ week 1 basket. The first column of this panel indicates that the
magnitude of the cyclical movement in the price of this basket of goods is even larger
than the movement in price for the whole month basket. The week 1 to week 4 price
change is 3.3 percent. This finding suggests the opportunity for welfare gains on the part
of benefit households by substituting intertemporally and/or across products in their food
purchase behavior.


Returning to the first panel to examine the store by store changes in the price of the
benefit household food basket, we see that the magnitude of the price decline increases
with the percentage of store’s merchandise purchased by benefit recipients. Store 1, at
which recipients account for 15 percent of purchases, reduces the prices of the food
basket 1.7 percent in week four compared to week one. At Store 2 with 28 percent of
purchases made by benefit recipients the figure is 3 percent; at Store 3 with 47 percent of
purchases made by benefit households the number rises to 3.5 percent. The difference
between the four week price change at Store 1 and Store 3 is statistically significant. The
pattern of greater price changes with a larger benefit-receiving population is retained as
we shift our focus to results for the week 1 basket, shown in the bottom panel of the table.
Stores with a higher fraction of purchases by benefit households face larger fluctuations
in aggregate demand.


Further evidence that the variation in the price of the benefit households’ food bundle is
driven by fluctuations in aggregate demand comes from the remaining columns of Table



                                                                                         23
10 where we run models of the form of (3) for Nevada stores at which a much smaller
share—3 to 6 percent—of purchases are made by benefit households. The benefit
households who shop at these stores show a similar decline in relative expenditures (we
find in untabled regressions), but clearly their food purchase cycling has a small impact
on fluctuations in aggregate demand. While the benefit households’ food bundle is less
expensive as the month continues, point estimates indicate that at these low poverty
stores the decline in price is less than one percent from week one to week four and is
statistically insignificant. The result is robust for all stores collectively and for each store
individually. As for the stores with a higher share of benefit customers, when we move to
the week 1 basket we see larger (in magnitude) price changes. The decrease from week
one to week four for all stores remains under one percent but is now statistically
significant. This result is driven by a one percent drop at Store 1 and its statistical
significance is not robust across stores. Thus the results of Table 10 suggest that our high
poverty focal stores increase their prices cyclically in response to changes in aggregate
demand.


A final specification check is presented in Table 11. This table presents regression results
for four stores in Colorado and California with similar concentrations of benefit
household patrons, but where benefits are distributed over the first ten days of the month
instead of just on the first of the month11. In these stores, we would expect the decline in
expenditures to start after the first 10 to 17 days, and to perhaps be smaller in magnitude
since during the first part of the month, some recipients are in their first food-stamp week
while others are in their last. We would expect the price response for these stores to be
delayed a week as well and perhaps smaller in magnitude if the results generalize outside
of the Nevada stores we have examined so far. The results in Table 11 show exactly this
pattern. The first column of results present OLS estimates from our base specification (1),
where the dependent variable is log weekly expenditures. We find that expenditures
decline significantly beginning in the third week of the month for benefit households,


11
  In both states Food Stamps are distributed to each recipient on a date between the first and the tenth of
the month, based on the last digit of the recipient’s social security number. Cash benefits are delivered,
again as a function of social security number, between the first and the third of the month in Colorado and
in Los Angeles, where our California stores are located.


                                                                                                         24
after most recipients have past their first week after receiving benefits. The second
column presents OLS results from (3) for the Colorado and California stores. As
expected, we find a significant price decline that begins in week 3 instead of week 2.
Again, the price response is small in magnitude, but statistically significant.
In Figure 2, we explore how the high poverty stores’ pricing varies across product
categories. To do so we construct price indexes based solely on the products in a
particular category at our core set of Nevada high-poverty stores (recall that within each
broad category like “Fresh Produce” there are many individual products). The figure
shows a scatter plot of the change in quantity purchased by benefit households from week
one to week four against the change in product pricing across the three stores over the
same time period. The figure displays results using the weights generated by benefit
household purchases during any first week of any month throughout our 26 month time
period. The point estimates using both basket definitions are shown in Appendix Tables 1
and 2.


The figure is notable for the positive slope of the points. As quantity purchased increases,
so does price. Across categories, the correlation between within-month quantity changes
and change in price is 0.45. For instance, products such as meat and rice and beans for
which quantities purchased fell by more than 20 percent across the month also see some
of the greatest (in magnitude) price changes across the same time period. Products for
which there is less variation in benefit households’ demand such as canned fruits, frozen
juices, in store fresh bread and alcohol and tobacco, see less price change. The figure
provides further evidence that the cyclical price changes are driven by cyclical increases
in product demand.


Thus our pricing results reveal that the prices of food items purchased by benefit
households fall by about three percent from the first to the fourth week of the month.
Relative to the 30 percent decrease in quantities purchased by this population over the
same time period, the price fluctuations are small. Our average benefit household spends
a little over $200 per month at our grocery store. A savings of three percent is only $6.
Nonetheless are findings are notable for two reasons. First, our pricing results indicate



                                                                                         25
that benefit households could stretch their food dollar a little further by shifting food
purchases to later in the month. In the previous section we find that benefit households
could lower their food spending by shifting purchases across products (from premium to
generic or from non-sale to sale items). Taken together our findings suggest that benefit
households are fairly inert in their substitution patterns. These households could smooth
consumption and minimize the costs of their food basket through intertemporal and/or
cross product substitution.


Second, our pricing results speak to the question of whether the observed food
expenditure cycle amongst low-income households should be interpreted as short term
impatience on the part of these households. While countercyclical pricing would have
provided an alternative explanation for the purchasing patterns, our results of slightly
pro-cyclical food pricing provide additional support for impatience as explanation.
Furthermore, while one alternative explanation for monthly expenditure patterns is non-
convex preferences, adding in evidence on prices shows that even if benefit households
prefer lumpy expenditures which vary in quantity or quality of food consumed across the
month given their budget constraint, they would be significantly better off to shift their
consumption peak slightly to take advantage of lower prices at periods of lower
aggregated demand.




5. Conclusion


Using detailed scanner data from a national grocery retailer we document a food
expenditure cycle amongst benefit recipients in the state of Nevada. Households, who
receive Food Stamps and/or cash welfare, increase their food expenditures in the first
week following benefit distribution. The decline in food expenditures from week 1 to
week 2 is 20 percent amongst these households, with smaller additional declines across
the remainder of the month. By week four, food expenditures, relative to non-benefit
recipients, have fallen 34 percent from expenditures in week one. We identify no such
expenditure cycle for non-benefit recipients. Our findings for benefit households are


                                                                                       26
robust across stores at which benefit recipients purchase a varying share of the food
items. Results are also robust across food categories, from perishable to storable, and
thus constitute a violation of the permanent income hypothesis. Our results are consistent
with those of Wilde and Ranney (2000) and Shapiro (2005) who use expenditure survey
data to document a food spending cycle amongst Food Stamp recipients. The latter
author concludes that this pattern is evidence of hyperbolic discounting or short-run
impatience on the part of benefit recipients.


Our scanner data allow us to explore two alternative explanations that could not be tested
using survey data. First, we consider the possibility that benefit recipients desire variety
in their food consumption and thus purchase splurge items at the beginning of the month
and shift to lower cost items at month’s end. Second, we investigate the store’s pricing
response to understand whether the expenditure cycle is a rational response to decreased
food prices early in the month.


We find no support for either of these alternative hypotheses. Benefit households do
little cross-product substitution as the month progresses. The decreased expenditure at
month’s end can be entirely accounted for by a change in quantities purchased. Point
estimates indicate that the relative ounces of food product purchased by benefit
households fall 35 percent from week four to week one. While benefit households are
only one percent more likely to purchase generic items and about two percent less likely
to purchase premium items over the same time period. The relative tendency for benefit
households to purchase sale items also increases only slightly (one percent) throughout
the month. Thus there is no evidence that benefit households food expenditure cycle is
driven by a desire for higher quality feast days upon check receipt.


We further find no evidence that the purchasing cycle is spawned by lower prices during
the high demand early month period. We compute a price index for the basket of food
goods consumed by benefit-recipient households. The price of this basket falls about 3
percent from week one to week four. While this price decrease is small relative to the
change in quantities purchased, it provides strong evidence against the expenditure cycle



                                                                                         27
being driven by a desire to purchase food items at lower prices. In fact even had we
found evidence that benefit households substitute across quality within the month, or
even if benefit households define splurge days as increases in only quantity, the fact that
the greater expenditures occur during the time of highest prices, would mean that the
substitution patterns could not be interpreted as rational behavior. Thus both our food
quality/quantity results and our pricing results lend support to the notion that food
expenditure cycling is due to short-run impatience on the part of low-income households.
Evidence of short run impatience has also been found in other populations in labor
market behavior (Della Vigna and Paserman, 2001), health club plan choice (Della
Vigna and Malmendier, 2006), and credit card usage (Laibson, Repetto and Tobacmanm
2003).


Shapiro (2005) makes a policy prescription based on benefit recipients’ impatience. He
proposes that Food Stamp benefits which are currently distributed to each household
monthly in all states, be distributed more frequently, in smaller amounts. Our store
pricing results suggest a second policy innovation should be considered if the goal is to
improve the welfare of benefit recipients. While in Nevada and eight other states Food
Stamp benefits are distributed to all recipients on a single day, in other states benefit
delivery is staggered, generally across a week or two. 12 Staggering the delivery of Food
Stamp and cash benefits across the full month would eliminate the large swings in
aggregate demand amongst benefit recipients and would likely curtail the variation in the
price of their food basket. Staggering is low cost given that benefits are now delivered
electronically. However, what can not be inferred based on this investigation is at what
price level the food basket would settle under staggering. Would the equilibrium food
prices that results be closer to the lower cost end of the month price or the slightly higher
cost beginning of the month price? Calculating the equilibrium prices over the course of
the month and the welfare implications for staggering benefits would require estimating
the parameters of individual demand for grocer products (i.e does food stamp receipt
increase demand, make it less elastic, or both), as well as the pricing decision of a multi
product firm that prices both national and private label products.

12
     Email from the Department of Agriculture dated February 26, 2007.


                                                                                          28
Secondly, we do not know about the generalizeability of our pricing results. While we
have focused on a grocery chain, we know that chains generally locate in lower poverty
neighborhoods. Chung and Myers (1999) show that 89 percent of chain grocery stores in
the Minneapolis-St. Paul are located in neighborhoods of less than 10 percent poverty.
While the majority of Food Stamps are cashed in supermarkets, in order to understand
how benefit recipients in the poorest neighborhoods would be affected by staggering, it is
important to understand how non chain food retailers respond to the first of the month
increase in aggregate demand.




                                                                                       29
References

Adams, William, Liran Einav and Jonathan Levin (2008). “Liquidity Constraints and
Imperfect Information in Subprime Lending.” American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Allenby, Greg and Peter Rossi (1991). “Quality Perceptions and Asymmetric Switching
Between Brands.” Marketing Science, 10, 3, 185-204.

Chevalier, Judith, Anil Kasyhap and Peter Rossi (2003). “Why Don’t Prices Rise During
Periods of Peak Demand? Evidence from Scanner Data.” American Economic Review,
93, 1, 15-37.

Chanjin, Chung and Samuel L. Myers, Jr. (1999). “Do the Poor Pay More for Food? An
Analysis of Grocery Store Availability and Food Price Disparities.” The Journal of
Consumer Affairs, 33, 2, 276-296.

Cole, Nancy and Ellie Lee (2005). Analysis of EBT Benefit Redemption Patterns:
Methods for Obtaining, Preparing and Analyzing the Data. Cambridge, MA: Abt
Associates.”

Della Vigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmendier (2006). “Paying Not to Go to the Gym.”
American Economic Review, 96, 694-719.

Della Vigna, Stefano and M. Daniele Paserman (2005). “Job Search and Impatience.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 23, 527-588.

Dobkin, Carlos and Steve Puller (2007). “The Effects of Government Transfers on
Monthly Cycles in Drug Abuse, Hospitalization and Mortality.” Journal of Public
Economics, 91, 2137-2151.

Foley, C. Fritz (2008). “Welfare Payments and Crime.” Working Paper.

Frederick, Shane, George Lowenstein and Ted O’Donoghue (2002). “Time Discounting
and Time Preference: A Critical Review.” Journal of Economic Literature, 40, 351-4-1.

Gicheva, Dora, Justine Hastings and Sofia Villa-Boas (2007). “Revisiting the Income
Effect: Gasoline Prices and Grocery Purchases.” NBER Working Paper Number 13614.

Huffman, David and Matias Barenstein (2005). “A Monthly Struggle for Self Control?
Hyperbolic Discounting, Mental Accounting and the Fall in Consumption Between Pay
Days.” Working Paper.

Laibson, David (1997). “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 112, 2, 443-477.




                                                                                  30
Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto and Jeremy Tobacman (2003) “A Debt Puzzle.” in eds.
Philippe Aghion, Roman Frydman, Joseph Stiglitz, Michael Woodford, Knowledge,
Information, and Expectations in Modern Economics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 228-266.

MacDonald, James (2000). “Demand, Information and Competition: Why Do Food
Prices Fall at Seasonal Demand Peaks?” Journal of Industrial Economics, 48, 1, 27-45.

Mcdonald, John and Robert Moffit (1980). “The Use of Tobit Analysis.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 62, 2, 318-321.

Nevo, Aviv and Konstantinos Hatzitaskos (2005). “Why Does the Average Price of Tuna
Fall During Lent?” NBER Working Paper Number 11572.

Rothstein, Jesse (2008). “The Unintended Consequences of Encouraging Work: Tax
Incidence and the EITC.” Working paper, Princeton University.

Rowe, Gretchen and Victoria Russell (2002). The Welfare Rules Databook: State Policies
as of July 2002. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.

Shapiro, Jesse (2005). “Is There a Daily Discount Rate? Evidence from the Food Stamp
Nutrition Cycle?” Journal of Public Economics, 89, 303-325.

Stephens, Mel (2003). “3rd of tha month: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth
Consumption Between Checks?” The American Economic Review, 93, 1, 406-422.

Stephens, Mel (2006). “Paycheque Receipt and the Timing of Consumption.” The
Economic Journal, 116, 7, 680-701

United States House of Representatives Committee on Ways and Means (2004). 2004
Green Book: Background Material and Data on the Programs within the Jurisdiction of
the Committee on Ways and Means. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office.

Warner, Elizabeth and Robert Barsky (1995). “The Timing and Magnitude of Retail Store
Markdowns: Evidence from Weekends and Holidays.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
110, 2, 321-352.

Wilde, Parke and Christine Ranney (2000). “The Monthly Food Stamp Cycle: Shopping
Frequency and Food Intake Decisions in an Endogenous Switching Regression
Framework.” Journal of Agricultural Economics, 82, 200-213.




                                                                                   31
                                                                                                                                                      AL
                                                                                                                                                           C
                                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                                                                              O
        IN                                                                                                                                                       LI
          -S                               H                                                                                                              C         C
             T   O                          IS




                                                           0
                                                               0.05
                                                                      0.1
                                                                            0.15
                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                     0.25
                                                                                                            0.3
                                                                                                                  0.35
                                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                                                                               0.45
                                                                                                                                                                      BE
                  R                              PA
                                                                                                                                                            AN
                   E                                N                                                                                                           D         VE
        IN                                                                                                                                                                   R




                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.45


                       BA
                                          IC         IC                                                                                                           Y,
          -S              K                 E                                                                                                             C          G         AG
             T   O
                              ER
                                                C                                                                                                           AN         U
                  R             Y                   R                                                                                                           N        M         ES
                   E                FR               EA                                                                                                           ED        &
                       SW                ES            M                                                                                                                       M
                            EE              H                                                                                                                         FI        IN
                JA             T         BR                                                                                                                              SH         TS
                  M           BA              EA                                                                                                                 C           &
                     S,           KE              D                                                                                                      C          AN         M
                        JE            D                                                                                                                    AN          N         EA
                           LL           G                                                                                                                      N         ED           T
                              IE           O                                                                                                         C
                                 S           O                                                                                                                   ED
                                                D                                                                                                      ER                    FR
                                   &              S                                                                                                                  V           U
                                      SP                                                                                                                  EA
                                                                                                                                                              L
                                                                                                                                                                       EG          I T
                                          R                                                                                                                                ET         S
                                            EA                                                                                                                  AN
                    PA                          D                                                                                                                   D         AB
                                                  S
                        ST                                                                                                            C          C                     BR        LE
                           A                                                                                                            O          O                                  S
              PR             &              M                                                                                             M          M                     EA
      R          EP             PA              EA                                                                                         M           M                      KF
        EA           AR            ST              T                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                              ER         ER
           D                           A                                                                                               O          C          C
                                                                                                                                                                                 AS
            Y            ED
                                                                                                                                         O         IA          IA                     T
               TO            FR           SA
                                                                                                                                                      L           L         C
                                 O             U                                                                                           KI                                 H
                   EA                            C                                                                                            ES        SW          FR
                                                  E
                                   ZE
                                                                                                                                                                                EE
                       T               N                                                                                                         /C         EE         ES            SE
                         PR
                                         FO                                                                                                         R           T          H
                             EP                                                                                                                       AC
                                              O                                                                                                                    BA        BR
                     R           AR             D
                                                  S
                                                                                                                                                         KE           KE         EA
                      EF            ED
                                                                                                                                                    D        R            D           D
                          R
                            IG           FO                                                                                                          ES S &                 G
                   R
                               ER            O                                                                                                                      M         O
        R                                       D                                                                                                        SE                     O
                     EF            AT             S                                                                                                         R         IS          D
         EF              R            ED                                                                                                                      T          C            S
             R             IG                                                                                                                                    &
               IG            E             D                                                                                                                               SN
                  ER           R              AI                                                                                                                    BA
                                 A               R                                                                                                                     K
                                                                                                                                                                               AC
                     AT            TE              Y                                                                                                                     IN       K
                         ED            D                                                                                                           FL
                                                                                                                                                                            G         S
                                          FO                                                                                                          O
                             JU                O                                                                                                        U                     M
                                IC               D                                                                                                       R                      IX
                                   E               S                                                                                                       /S            D         E
                                      &                                                                                                                       U                       S
                                        D                                                                                                                       G          ES
                                           R                                                                                                                       AR         SE
                                R            IN                                                                                                                       /C         R
                                  IC            KS                                                                                    FR
                                     E                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                                  FR                                 TS
                                        &                                                                                                  ZE         O         FR OR
                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                          BE                                                                                                            ZE                     M
                               S
                                                                                                                                                                    ES
     SH                          AL            AN                                                                                              N           N           H         E
       EL                           TY             S                                                                                             D                                  AL
          F                                                                                                                                        ES         BR          PR
             ST                         SN                                                                                                                        EA         O
                                                                                                                                                       SE                      D
                AB                          AC                                                                                                            R          KF          U
                   LE                            KS                                                                                                         T/                     C
                                                                                                                                                               BA        AS           E
                        JU            SE                                                                                                                                    T
                          IC              AF                                                                                                                       KE         IT
                             ES                O                                                                                                                      R         EM
                                                 O
                                                   D                                                                                                                                  S
                                  AN                                                                                                                                    Y/
                                     D                                                                                                                            FR TO
                          SO            D                                                                                                                                     P
                                          R                                                                                                                          O
                              FT            IN                                                                                                                         ZE PIN
        TO                        BE            K S                                                                                                                        N         G
           BA                         VE                                                                                                                          FR         FR
              C                           R                                                                                                              FR          O           U
                 C                          AG
                                                                                                                                                             O                    IT
                   O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            by Food Category and Time of the Month




                                                                                                                                                                       ZE
                     AN                          ES                                                                                                            ZE          N          S
                         D                                                                                                                                         N         JU
                            SM            SO                                                                                                                         VE         IC
                                O              U                                                                                                                         G          E S
                                  KI             PS                                                                                                                        ET
                                     N
                                      G                                                                                                                                       AB
                                         N                                                                                                                                       LE
                                           EE
                                                D                                                                                                                                     S
                                                  S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 1: Percent of Revenues Coming from Benefit Households




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1st Two weeks




                                                                                     1st Two weeks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2nd Two weeks




                                                                                     2nd Two weeks




32
                                     Figure 2: Scatterplot of Change in Quantities Purchased and Change in Price, by
                                                                  Product Category


                                     -0.1        -0.08          -0.06                 -0.04                          -0.02                               0             0.02
                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                  28
                                                                                                                                                35



                                                                                                                      19                                                  -0.05
                                                                                                                      12
                                                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                      36
                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                                  34
                                                                                              37             23
                                                                                                                                       7                                  -0.1
                                                                                 24                         18
                                                                            29                                    3 17        13
                                                                                                                                                             26
                          Quantity




                                                                                                   2                                   31
                                                                                                        38                                      1
                                                                          27                                                 22
                                                                                                       14                                                                 -0.15
                                                                                      6                                                             11
                                                                                              21                 9                 15
                                                                                                                         4
                                                   32
                                                                                              5

                                            30                                                                                                                            -0.2
                                                                                                       16

                                                                                                                                   20
                                                                 33                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                          -0.25




                                                                                                                                                                          -0.3
                                                                                 Price Index

Legend: 1. Candy, Gum and Mints; 2. Cookies/Crackers and Misc Snacks; 3. Jams, Jellies and Spreads; 4. Soft Beverages; 5. Salty Snacks; 6. Cereal and
Breakfast; 7. Desserts; 8. Desserts and Baking Mixes; 9. Flour/Sugar/Corn Meal; 10. Shelf Stable Juices and Drinks; 11. Canned Vegetables; 12. Canned Fruits;
13. Canned Fish and Meat; 14. Ready-to-Eat Prepared Foods; 15. Soups; 16; Rice & Beans; 17. Pasta and Pasta Sauce; 18. Hispanic; 19. Tobacco and Smoking
Needs. 20. Refrigerated Dairy; 21. Cheese; 22. Refrigerated Foods; 23. Refrigerated Juice and Drinks; 24. Ice Cram; 25. Frozen Dessert; 15. Frozen Fruits 27.
Frozen Breakfast Items; 28. Frozen Juices; 29. Frozen Vegetables; 30. Prepared Frozen Foods; 31. Fresh Produce; 32. Seafood 33. Meat 34. 35. In Store Fresh
Bread 36. In Store Bakery Fresh Bread 37. Commercial Fresh Bread 38. Snacks




                                                                                                                                                                                  33
Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                        All                       Store 1                         Store 2                         Store 3
                                                        1st       2nd               1st   2nd                       1st   2nd                       1st   2nd
                                            All        Two       Two         All   Two    Two                All   Two    Two                All   Two    Two
                                           Weeks       weeks     weeks      Weeks weeks weeks               Weeks weeks weeks               Weeks weeks weeks
Benefit Households (N=29,367)
%Store Purchases                            0.274      0.310     0.235      0.153      0.173      0.133     0.280      0.318      0.237      0.473      0.517     0.422
Average Weekly Expenditure                  41.98      47.19     36.19      41.54      45.26      37.42     43.21      49.12      36.61      38.34      42.92     33.32
Purchased Product Quality
  % Generic                                 0.118      0.116     0.121      0.098      0.097      0.099     0.117      0.116      0.119      0.131      0.127     0.136
  % Mainstream                              0.544      0.539     0.552      0.565      0.559      0.573     0.537      0.530      0.546      0.547      0.544     0.551
  % Premium                                 0.338      0.346     0.327      0.337      0.344      0.328     0.346      0.354      0.334      0.323      0.330     0.313
%Purchases that are On sale                 0.586      0.582     0.593      0.579      0.575      0.583     0.592      0.587      0.600      0.580      0.575     0.587

Non-Benefit Households (N=229,643)
%Store Purchases                0.726                  0.690     0.765      0.847      0.827      0.867     0.721      0.682      0.763      0.527      0.483     0.578
Average Weekly Expenditure      31.23                  31.03     31.43      33.14      32.88      33.40     31.62      31.52      31.72      24.88      24.47     25.30
Purchased Product Quality
  % Generic                     0.090                  0.089     0.091      0.082      0.081      0.083     0.092      0.090      0.093      0.108      0.107     0.108
  % Mainstream                  0.569                  0.568     0.570      0.569      0.567      0.570     0.569      0.568      0.570      0.569      0.569     0.569
  % Premium                     0.341                  0.344     0.339      0.349      0.352      0.347     0.340      0.343      0.337      0.324      0.325     0.323
%Purchases that are On Sale     0.567                  0.563     0.571      0.570      0.566      0.574     0.560      0.557      0.564      0.589      0.585     0.593
Notes: A household is defined by an anonymous loyalty card identification number. Transactions from benefit households are defined as any transaction made with a loyalty
card number that was used with food stamp payment method at an time during our sample period. Product quality categories were constructed from product classifications and
product descriptions provided with the scanner data. On Sale items are items that registered a discount off the list price in the transaction record.




                                                                                                                                                                        34
Table 2: Change in Expenditures across Stores
                                       All                         Store 1          Store 2         Store3
Benefit Household*Week2            -0.2053**                       -0.2337**        -0.1439**       -0.1944**
                                     (0.007)                         (0.010)          (0.015)         (0.014)
Benefit Household*Week3            -0.2907**                       -0.3167**        -0.2027**       -0.2853**
                                     (0.008)                         (0.010)          (0.017)         (0.015)
Benefit Household*Week4            -0.3352**                       -0.3768**        -0.2293**       -0.3208**
                                     (0.008)                         (0.011)          (0.017)         (0.015)
Week2                              -0.0186**                       -0.0104**        -0.0310**       -0.0223**
                                     (0.003)                         (0.004)          (0.005)         (0.007)
Week3                               -0.0062*                        -0.0071          -0.0025         -0.0132
                                     (0.003)                         (0.004)          (0.005)         (0.007)
Week4                               -0.0061*                       -0.0147**         -0.0019          0.0087
                                     (0.003)                         (0.004)          (0.005)         (0.007)
Mean Expenditures By
       Benefit Households             58.19                             63.8           59.98           47.86
       Non-Benefit Households         30.66                            31.13           32.76           24.56
Obs.                                1398145                           731353          404386          262406
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Columns present results
from an OLS regression of log weekly expenditures per household and store on an indicator if the household is a
benefit household, the week number in the month, and their interactions. All regressions include household fixed
effects with standard errors clustered at the household level. A household is defined by an anonymous loyalty card
identification number. Transactions from benefit households are defined as any transaction made with a loyalty
card number that was used with food stamp payment method at any time during our sample period. Regressions
pooling data from all three stores also include store-level fixed effects.




                                                                                                                35
Table 3.A: Change in Expenditures across Different Types of Goods
                                       Benefit Household                                       Mean Expenditures
                                                                                             Benefit    Non-Benefit
TYPE OF GOODS                                Week2           Week3           Week4          Household    Household                  Obs.
Storable
   Canned Fish and Meat                    -0.0713**       -0.1109**       -0.1296**            6.49                5.35            64401
                                             (0.020)         (0.020)         (0.020)
   Canned Fruits                           -0.0872**       -0.1069**       -0.0834**            4.96                4.01            61299
                                             (0.020)         (0.021)         (0.022)
   Canned Vegetables                       -0.1225**       -0.1413**       -0.1621**            4.08                3.24            99489
                                             (0.018)         (0.019)         (0.019)
   Cereal and Breakfast                    -0.1344**       -0.1681**       -0.1871**            12.14               6.47           205472
                                             (0.011)         (0.011)         (0.012)
   Cookies and Crackers                    -0.0954**       -0.1396**       -0.1557**            7.33                4.93           183670
                                             (0.011)         (0.012)         (0.012)
   Flour, Sugar and Cornmeal               -0.1067**       -0.1213**       -0.1498**            4.68                3.45            67819
                                             (0.017)         (0.017)         (0.018)
   Frozen Breakfast Items                  -0.0840**       -0.1237**       -0.1441**            6.62                4.96            42588
                                             (0.023)         (0.023)         (0.026)
   Frozen Fruits                              -0.09          -0.0183        -0.1309*            7.03                 7.2             4950
                                             (0.061)         (0.072)         (0.059)
   Frozen Juices                            -0.0700*        -0.0785*       -0.1006**            7.78                4.36            14959
                                             (0.036)         (0.038)         (0.039)
   Frozen Vegetables                       -0.1001**       -0.1300**       -0.1512**            5.68                4.57            97640
                                             (0.014)         (0.015)         (0.015)
   Hispanic Products                       -0.0632**       -0.1404**       -0.1396**            6.74                4.23           151746
                                             (0.013)         (0.013)         (0.013)
   Jams, Jellies and Spreads               -0.0757**       -0.1184**       -0.1269**             7.6                 4.8            58248
                                             (0.019)         (0.019)         (0.020)
   Pasta and Pasta Sauce                   -0.1126**       -0.1525**       -0.1355**            5.42                4.27            91198
                                             (0.017)         (0.018)         (0.019)
   Prep. Frozen Foods                      -0.1452**       -0.2036**       -0.2336**            14.36              11.03           244537
                                             (0.011)         (0.012)         (0.012)
   Ready-To-Eat Foods                      -0.1057**       -0.1344**       -0.1559**            5.21                3.84            86984
                                             (0.017)         (0.017)         (0.017)
   Rice and Beans                          -0.1518**       -0.2171**       -0.2207**            6.12                4.23           117898
                                             (0.015)         (0.015)         (0.016)
   Salty Snacks                            -0.1164**       -0.1691**       -0.1961**            7.71                4.95           298941
                                             (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.010)
   Shelf Juices and Drinks                 -0.1359**       -0.2011**       -0.2107**            12.47                5.6           135349
                                             (0.014)         (0.015)         (0.015)
   Soups                                   -0.0825**       -0.1681**       -0.1853**            5.81                5.07           134324
                                             (0.016)         (0.016)         (0.016)
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Each row present coefficients and standard errors
from a separate OLS regression of household-level log weekly expenditures for the category of food listed in each row on an indicator if the
household is a benefit household, the week number in the month, and their interactions. All regressions include household fixed effects with
standard errors clustered at the household level. A household is defined by an anonymous loyalty card identification number. Transactions
from benefit households are defined as any transaction made with a loyalty card number that was used with food stamp payment method at
any time during our sample period. Regressions pooling data from all three stores also include store-level fixed effects.




                                                                                                                              36
Table 3.B: Change in Expenditures across Different Types of Goods
                                        Benefit Household                                      Mean Expenditures
                                                                                             Benefit    Non-Benefit
TYPE OF GOODS                                Week2           Week3           Week4          Household    Household                  Obs.
Splurge
  Candy, Gum and Mints                     -0.0816**       -0.1315**       -0.1626**            5.71                3.27           239450
                                               (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.012)
   Sweet Baked Goods                       -0.0903**       -0.1457**       -0.1767**            4.53                3.32           108863
                                               (0.016)        (0.016)         (0.017)
   Dessert and Baking Mixes                -0.0837**       -0.1504**       -0.1222**            5.53                 4.4            79352
                                               (0.020)        (0.020)         (0.022)
   Desserts                                -0.0896**       -0.1026**       -0.1053**            4.26                3.52            42730
                                               (0.025)        (0.025)         (0.026)
   Frozen Desserts, etc.                    -0.0697*       -0.1020**       -0.1096**            7.08                5.51            29386
                                               (0.032)        (0.035)         (0.035)
   Ice Cream                               -0.0792**       -0.1028**       -0.1231**            8.51                6.36           195178
                                               (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.009)
   In-Store Sweet Baked Goods              -0.0750**       -0.0983**       -0.1185**            15.89               6.17           122097
                                               (0.019)        (0.019)         (0.019)
   Soft Beverages                          -0.1155**       -0.1778**       -0.2153**            11.52               7.38           656587
                                               (0.008)        (0.008)         (0.008)
Perishable
  Cheese                                   -0.1073**       -0.1487**       -0.1737**            9.84                5.64           233186
                                             (0.010)         (0.010)         (0.011)
   Fresh Bread                             -0.1044**       -0.1457**       -0.1743**            4.39                3.44           373012
                                               (0.007)         (0.008)         (0.008)
   Fresh Produce                           -0.1020**       -0.1571**       -0.1670**            12.31               8.56           608458
                                               (0.009)         (0.009)         (0.010)
   In-Store Fresh Bead                      -0.0295*       -0.0555**       -0.0578**            6.09                2.61           130119
                                               (0.013)         (0.014)         (0.015)
   Meat                                    -0.2032**       -0.2469**       -0.2864**            20.32               13.6           496527
                                               (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.010)
   Ref. Dairy                              -0.0843**       -0.1253**       -0.1434**            9.71                5.15           535028
                                               (0.006)         (0.007)         (0.007)
   Ref. Foods                              -0.0913**       -0.1494**       -0.1643**            6.93                4.22           283029
                                               (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.010)
   Ref. Juice and Drinks                   -0.0883**       -0.1211**       -0.1463**            5.74                 4.3           197585
                                               (0.009)         (0.010)         (0.010)
   Seafood                                 -0.1122**       -0.1661**       -0.1292**            14.07               10.2            67482
                                               (0.021)         (0.021)         (0.023)
Not Covered
  Alcoholic Beverages                      -0.0509**       -0.0813**       -0.0925**            36.09              18.47           218771
                                               (0.013)        (0.013)         (0.014)
   Tobacco and Smoking                      -0.0506*       -0.0764**       -0.0828**            26.66               8.64            41422
                                               (0.022)        (0.023)         (0.023)
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Each row present coefficients and standard errors
from a separate OLS regression of household-level log weekly expenditures for the category of food listed in each row on an indicator if the
household is a benefit household, the week number in the month, and their interactions. All regressions include household fixed effects with
standard errors clustered at the household level. A household is defined by an anonymous loyalty card identification number. Transactions
from benefit households are defined as any transaction made with a loyalty card number that was used with food stamp payment method at
any time during our sample period. Regressions pooling data from all three stores also include store-level fixed effects.



                                                                                                                              37
                  Table 4: Expenditures Patterns, All Stores, with Income Interactions
                                                          Base Model for                            Interactions with
                                                      Subsample with Income                        Income Quartiles
                                                        Coeff.      St. Error                     Coeff.       St. Error
Benefit Households
   Week 2                                             -0.1864**              (0.012)           -0.2105**               (0.011)
   Week 3                                             -0.2599**              (0.013)           -0.2726**               (0.012)
   Week 4                                             -0.2927**              (0.014)           -0.3008**               (0.013)
Non-benefit Households
   Week 2                                             -0.0241**              (0.005)               --                     --
   Week 3                                             -0.0127**              (0.005)               --                     --
   Week 4                                               -0.008               (0.005)               --                     --
   Week 2 *Income Quartile 1                               --                   --             -0.0232**               (0.007)
   Week 3 *Income Quartile 1                               --                   --             -0.0199**               (0.006)
   Week 4 *Income Quartile 1                               --                   --             -0.0176**               (0.007)
   Week 2 *Income Quartile 2                               --                   --             -0.0345**               (0.010)
   Week 3 *Income Quartile 2                               --                   --               -0.009                (0.010)
   Week 4 *Income Quartile 2                               --                   --               0.002                 (0.010)
   Week 2 *Income Quartile 3                               --                   --               -0.017                (0.011)
   Week 3 *Income Quartile 3                               --                   --               0.000                 (0.011)
   Week 4 *Income Quartile 3                               --                   --               -0.001                (0.011)
   Week 2 *Income Quartile 4                               --                   --               -0.018                (0.014)
   Week 3 *Income Quartile 4                               --                   --               -0.008                (0.014)
   Week 4 *Income Quartile 4                               --                   --               0.001                 (0.014)

     Observations                                           571602
     R-squared                                                 0.45
     Mean NetAmt                                              34.08
     Mean NetAmt Welfare HH                                   40.18
     Mean NetAmt Non-Welfare HH                                32.3
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Columns present coefficients and standard
errors from OLS regressions of household-level log weekly expenditures on the independent variables listed in each row. All
regressions include household fixed effects with standard errors clustered at the household level. Household income is defined based
on the retailer’s demographic data for loyalty card holders. Approximately 40% of the observations in our scanner data had income
information present in the demographic data. Quartiles of the income distribution are defined using the retailer demographic data for
club card holders purchasing from a representative subsample of the retailer’s stores. The cut-points for the first 3 quartiles are
$37,000, 68,000, and 116,000. The income information is top-coded at $500,000. Earners in the first quartile have income levels
similar to those of benefit recipient households. The categories are not additive, implying that the coefficients in column 3 give the
effect of each successive week on the expenditures for people in each of 5 categories: benefit households, non-benefit households
with income in quartile 1, non-benefit households with income in quartile 2, etc.




                                                                                                                           38
          Table 5: Decomposition of Total Expenditure Changes: Weeks 1 to 4, Benefit Households
                                                        Change in       Change in
                                          Change in Expenditures Expenditures              Change in
                                            Total      on Extensive   on Intensive     Intensive/Change
TYPE OF GOODS                            Expenditure     Margin          Margin             in Total
All goods                                  -13.648        -3.625          -8.839             0.648

Storable            Canned Fish and Meat                 -0.329              -0.241                -0.061                   0.184
                    Canned Fruits                        -0.198              -0.133                -0.041                   0.206
                    Canned Vegetables                    -0.246              -0.158                -0.055                   0.225
                    Cereal and Breakfast                 -0.911              -0.634                -0.194                   0.213
                    Cookies and Crackers                 -0.500              -0.375                -0.089                   0.178
                    Flour, Sugar, Cornmeal               -0.212              -0.146                -0.039                   0.186
                    Frozen Breakfast Items               -0.394              -0.268                -0.075                   0.190
                    Frozen Fruits                        -0.114              -0.105                 0.004                  -0.036
                    Frozen Juices                        -0.203              -0.151                -0.032                   0.156
                    Frozen Vegetables                    -0.430              -0.296                -0.091                   0.213
                    Hispanic Products                    -0.425              -0.330                -0.067                   0.158
                    Jams, Jellies, Spreads               -0.287              -0.206                -0.046                   0.160
                    Pasta and Pasta Sauce                -0.284              -0.199                -0.058                   0.206
                    Prep. Frozen Foods                   -1.863              -1.196                -0.473                   0.254
                    Ready-To-Eat Foods                   -0.353              -0.241                -0.077                   0.217
                    Rice and Beans                       -0.534              -0.299                -0.154                   0.289
                    Salty Snacks                         -0.739              -0.510                -0.170                   0.230
                    Shelf Juices and Drinks              -0.489              -0.368                -0.089                   0.182
                    Soups                                -0.368              -0.238                -0.086                   0.235
Splurge             Candy, Gum and Mints                 -0.361              -0.278                -0.075                   0.208
                    Sweet Baked Goods                    -0.387              -0.255                -0.110                   0.285
                    Dessert, Baking Mixes                -0.191              -0.151                -0.025                   0.131
                    Desserts                             -0.146              -0.116                -0.015                   0.105
                    Frozen Desserts, etc.                -0.157              -0.116                -0.027                   0.170
                    Ice Cream                            -0.609              -0.502                -0.080                   0.131
                    In-Store Sweet Baked
                    Goods                                -0.351              -0.290                -0.047                   0.135
                    Soft Beverages                       -1.256              -0.935                -0.273                   0.217
Perishable          Cheese                               -0.727              -0.534                -0.128                   0.176
                    Fresh Bread                          -0.290              -0.189                -0.076                   0.262
                    Fresh Produce                        -1.270              -0.924                -0.263                   0.207
                    In-Store Fresh Bead                  -0.120              -0.118                -0.004                   0.303
                    Meat                                 -4.091              -2.200                -1.301                   0.318
                    Ref. Dairy                           -0.739              -0.572                -0.141                   0.191
                    Ref. Foods                           -0.526              -0.356                -0.122                   0.232
                    Ref. Juice and Drinks                -0.380              -0.300                -0.064                   0.168
                    Seafood                              -0.856              -0.652                -0.107                   0.125
Not Covered         Alcoholic Beverages                  -0.663              -0.778                 0.084                  -0.127
                    Tobacco and Smoking                  -0.240              -0.211                -0.023                   0.096
Notes: Let E(y) be the expected value of expenditures, E(y*) be the expected value of expenditures conditional on y being greater than zero
and F(z) be the probability that y is greater than zero. Column 1 gives dEy/dx calculated as F(z)dEy*/dx + Ey*(dF(z)/dx. Column 2 and 3
decompose this total derivative into changes on the extensive (Ey*(dF(z)/dx) and intensive (as F(z)dEy*/dx) margins respectively.
Columns 2 and 3 may not sum to 1 because of rounding.




                                                                                                                             39
Table 6: Change in Quantity (in ounces) Purchases across Stores
                                        All        Store 1                         Store 2         Store3
Benefit Household*Week2             -0.2386**       -0.2807**                      -0.1537**       -0.2214**
                                      (0.010)         (0.014)                        (0.020)         (0.020)
Benefit Household*Week3             -0.3198**       -0.3472**                      -0.2447**       -0.3102**
                                      (0.010)         (0.014)                        (0.020)         (0.020)
Benefit Household*Week4             -0.3479**       -0.4091**                      -0.2257**       -0.3275**
                                      (0.011)         (0.015)                        (0.021)         (0.021)
Week2                               -0.0173**        -0.0104                       -0.0315**         -0.0096
                                      (0.004)         (0.006)                        (0.011)         (0.011)
Week3                                0.0198**         0.0091                        0.0268**        0.0344**
                                      (0.004)         (0.006)                        (0.011)         (0.011)
Week4                                 0.0053         -0.0088                         0.0036         0.0496**
                                      (0.004)         (0.006)                        (0.011)         (0.011)
Mean Qty. Oz. Purchased By
       Benefit Households             252.61          275.71                         247.72           216.5
       Non-Benefit Households         135.06          135.05                         144.08          115.86
Obs.                                 1380582         722389                          398373          259820
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Columns present OLS
results from a regression of household-level log weekly quantity purchased in ounces on an indicator if the
household is a benefit household, the week number in the month, and their interactions. All regressions include
household fixed effects with standard errors clustered at the household level. A household is defined by an
anonymous loyalty card identification number. Transactions from benefit households are defined as any transaction
made with a loyalty card number that was used with food stamp payment method at any time during our sample
period. Regressions pooling data from all three stores also include store-level fixed effects.




                                                                                                               40
Table 7.A: Change in Quantity (in ounces) Purchases across Different Types of Goods
                                          Benefit Household                 Mean Qty. Oz.
                                                                       Benefit      Non-Benefit
TYPE OF GOODS                     Week2        Week3        Week4     Household     Household                                      Obs.
Storable
   Canned Fish and Meat         -0.0698** -0.1030** -0.1347**           27.81           21.2                                       64401
                                  (0.020)      (0.021)      (0.020)
   Canned Fruits                -0.0703** -0.0917** -0.0605**           52.47          41.81                                       61299
                                  (0.021)      (0.021)      (0.022)
   Canned Vegetables            -0.1237** -0.1394** -0.1559**           58.13          43.83                                       99489
                                  (0.019)      (0.019)      (0.020)
   Cereal and Breakfast         -0.1225** -0.1466** -0.1520**            58.4          32.18                                      205141
                                  (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.012)
   Cookies and Crackers         -0.0942** -0.1180** -0.1219**           34.33          21.79                                      183450
                                  (0.012)      (0.013)      (0.013)
   Flour, Sugar and Cornmeal    -0.1021** -0.1090** -0.1660**          111.64          71.17                                       65907
                                  (0.024)      (0.025)      (0.025)
   Frozen Breakfast Items       -0.0664** -0.1197** -0.1433**           32.94          24.16                                       42588
                                  (0.021)      (0.021)      (0.024)
   Frozen Fruits                 -0.0273       0.0337     -0.1280*      36.21          33.54                                        4950
                                  (0.057)      (0.073)      (0.059)
   Frozen Juices                  0.0204      -0.0184       -0.007       4.81           1.26                                       14959
                                  (0.051)      (0.053)      (0.050)
   Frozen Vegetables            -0.1004** -0.1120** -0.1242**           54.71          41.33                                       93469
                                  (0.015)      (0.016)      (0.016)
   Hispanic Products             -0.0446     -0.1080** -0.1251**        62.89          38.07                                      146881
                                  (0.023)      (0.023)      (0.024)
   Jams, Jellies and Spreads    -0.0695** -0.1364** -0.1267**           53.76          31.88                                       58216
                                  (0.020)      (0.021)      (0.022)
   Pasta and Pasta Sauce        -0.1150** -0.1537** -0.1380**           65.08          48.37                                       91198
                                  (0.017)      (0.018)      (0.018)
   Prep. Frozen Foods           -0.1319** -0.1814** -0.2026**           78.94           54.5                                      244536
                                  (0.011)      (0.012)      (0.012)
   Ready-To-Eat Foods           -0.1059** -0.1436** -0.1476**           59.69          44.18                                       86984
                                  (0.017)      (0.017)      (0.017)
   Rice and Beans               -0.1607** -0.2127** -0.2158**           47.07          31.12                                      117729
                                  (0.017)      (0.017)      (0.017)
   Salty Snacks                 -0.1125** -0.1570** -0.1840**           31.38          20.91                                      297114
                                  (0.010)      (0.011)      (0.011)
   Shelf Juices and Drinks      -0.1805** -0.2437** -0.2456**           11.27           5.15                                      134852
                                  (0.022)      (0.022)      (0.023)
   Soups                        -0.0785** -0.1243** -0.1518**            49.7          42.46                                      131819
                                  (0.020)      (0.020)      (0.020)
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Each row presents OLS results from a regression of
household-level log weekly quantity purchased in ounces for the food category listed in each row on an indicator if the household is a
benefit household, the week number in the month, and their interactions. All regressions include household fixed effects with standard
errors clustered at the household level. A household is defined by an anonymous loyalty card identification number. Transactions from
benefit households are defined as any transaction made with a loyalty card number that was used with food stamp payment method at any
time during our sample period. Regressions pooling data from all three stores also include store-level fixed effects.




                                                                                                                             41
Table 7.B: Change in Quantity (in ounces) Purchases across Different Types of Goods
                                          Benefit Household                 Mean Qty. Oz.
                                                                       Benefit      Non-Benefit
TYPE OF GOODS                     Week2        Week3        Week4     Household     Household                                      Obs.
Splurge
  Candy, Gum and Mints          -0.0633** -0.1157** -0.1510**           15.71           9.91                                      179965
                                  (0.015)      (0.016)      (0.016)
  Sweet Baked Goods             -0.0820** -0.1244** -0.1388**           27.83           17.8                                      107247
                                  (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.015)
  Dessert and Baking Mixes        -0.0288    -0.0878** -0.0659**        39.58          29.07                                       76710
                                  (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.025)
  Desserts                      -0.1078** -0.0975** -0.1010**            23.4          20.03                                       35915
                                  (0.036)      (0.035)      (0.035)
  Frozen Desserts, etc.           -0.0327     -0.0879*     -0.0777*      34.6          26.39                                       29386
                                  (0.036)      (0.036)      (0.036)
  Ice Cream                     -0.0564** -0.0792** -0.1100**            2.32           1.75                                      194349
                                  (0.013)      (0.014)      (0.014)
  In-Store Sweet Baked Goods      -0.0083      -0.0235    -0.0734**     51.57            20                                        78234
                                  (0.017)      (0.017)      (0.017)
  Soft Beverages                -0.1009** -0.1544** -0.1697**            8.02           5.47                                      653346
                                  (0.009)      (0.009)      (0.009)
Perishable
  Cheese                        -0.1047** -0.1465** -0.1663**           34.69          20.32                                      233186
                                  (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.012)
  Fresh Bread                   -0.0768** -0.0927** -0.1096**           45.64          30.72                                      364352
                                  (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.007)
  Fresh Produce                 -0.0977** -0.1343** -0.1366**          107.77          69.96                                      572026
                                  (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.012)
  In-Store Fresh Bead             -0.0279      -0.0311      -0.0209      12.4           6.22                                       37942
                                  (0.021)      (0.020)      (0.020)
  Meat                          -0.1857** -0.2229** -0.2482**          118.49          75.76                                      495781
                                  (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)
  Ref. Dairy                    -0.1393** -0.1976** -0.2345**           18.17          14.02                                      527433
                                  (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.014)
  Ref. Foods                    -0.0895** -0.1493** -0.1467**           25.52          16.08                                      156833
                                  (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.013)
  Ref. Juice and Drinks         -0.0550** -0.0714** -0.0955**            4.6            3.47                                      197585
                                  (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.012)
  Seafood                       -0.1235** -0.1667** -0.1772**           38.33          26.44                                       67270
                                  (0.026)      (0.027)      (0.028)
Not Covered
  Alcoholic Beverages           -0.0387** -0.0684** -0.0887**            4.31           2.32                                      218765
                                  (0.014)      (0.014)      (0.015)
  Tobacco and Smoking             -0.0531       0.0521      -0.0533      0.37           0.05                                        1752
                                  (0.069)      (0.079)      (0.089)
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Each row presents OLS results from a regression of
household-level log weekly quantity purchased in ounces for the food category listed in each row on an indicator if the household is a
benefit household, the week number in the month, and their interactions. All regressions include household fixed effects with standard
errors clustered at the household level. Regressions pooling data from all three stores also include store-level fixed effects.




                                                                                                                             42
Table 8: Change in Generic, Premium and On Sale Purchases across Stores
                                                All      Store 1       Store 2                                    Store3
Generic: Benefit Household*Week2            0.0048**    0.0048**        0.0037                                   0.0060*
                                             (0.002)     (0.003)       (0.002)                                   (0.003)
          Benefit Household*Week3           0.0082**    0.0067**      0.0086**                                  0.0122**
                                             (0.002)     (0.003)       (0.002)                                   (0.003)
          Benefit Household*Week4           0.0106**    0.0096**      0.0125**                                  0.0124**
                                             (0.002)     (0.003)       (0.002)                                   (0.003)
          Week2                              0.0012*     0.0014         0.0012                                   -0.0003
                                             (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)                                   (0.002)
          Week3                            -0.0021**      -0.001     -0.0027**                                 -0.0061**
                                             (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)                                   (0.002)
          Week4                             -0.0011*     0.0002       -0.0019*                                 -0.0045**
                                             (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)                                   (0.002)
 Mean Generic Purchased by: Benefit            0.15        0.14          0.12                                      0.17
                             Non-Benefit       0.12        0.11          0.12                                      0.14
Premium: Benefit Household*Week2           -0.0096**   -0.0105** -0.0115**                                     -0.0091**
                                             (0.002)     (0.004)       (0.002)                                   (0.003)
          Benefit Household*Week3          -0.0151**   -0.0170** -0.0118**                                     -0.0153**
                                             (0.002)     (0.004)       (0.002)                                   (0.003)
          Benefit Household*Week4          -0.0170**   -0.0189** -0.0186**                                     -0.0160**
                                             (0.002)     (0.004)       (0.002)                                   (0.003)
          Week2                             0.0022**    0.0035**       -0.0004                                   0.0045*
                                             (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)                                   (0.002)
          Week3                             0.0066**    0.0066**      0.0043**                                  0.0123**
                                             (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)                                   (0.002)
          Week4                             0.0067**    0.0064**      0.0046**                                  0.0123**
                                             (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)                                   (0.002)
 Mean Premium Purchased by: Benefit            0.24        0.24          0.24                                      0.23
                              Non-Benefit      0.25        0.26          0.25                                      0.24
On Sale: Benefit Household*Week2              0.0027     0.0031         0.0005                                   -0.0002
                                             (0.002)     (0.004)       (0.002)                                   (0.003)
          Benefit Household*Week3           0.0057**    0.0057**        0.0031                                    0.0048
                                             (0.002)     (0.004)       (0.002)                                   (0.003)
          Benefit Household*Week4           0.0101**    0.0121**        0.0044                                   0.0067*
                                             (0.002)     (0.004)       (0.002)                                   (0.003)
          Week2                             0.0058**    0.0062**       0.0037*                                  0.0099**
                                             (0.001)     (0.002)       (0.001)                                   (0.002)
          Week3                             0.0094**    0.0094**      0.0083**                                  0.0122**
                                             (0.001)     (0.002)       (0.001)                                   (0.002)
          Week4                             0.0056**    0.0069**        0.0027                                  0.0075**
                                             (0.001)     (0.002)       (0.001)                                   (0.002)
  Mean On Sale Purchased by: Benefit           0.61        0.61           0.6                                       0.6
                             Non-Benefit       0.58        0.59          0.58                                      0.61
 Obs.                                      1,398,138     731,346       404,386                                   262,406
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Each Panel presents results from an
OLS regression of fraction of weekly purchases (standardized weight) from Generic, Premium or On Sale items on weekly
dummies and their interactions with an indicator if the household is a benefit household. All specifications include
household fixed-effects as well as store-level fixed-effects. Standard Errors are clustered at the household level. Product
categories for Generic and Premium were created based on the categorization made by the retailer and the product names.




                                                                                                                      43
Table 9.A: Change in Purchases of Generic Products, Only Significant Food Groups Presented
                                        Benefit Household            Mean Generic Purchases
                                                                      Benefit    Non-Benefit
TYPE OF GOODS                    Week2       Week3       Week4      Household     Household                                        Obs.
Storable
   Cereal and Breakfast          0.0054     0.0140** 0.0234**          0.16          0.12                                          205472
                                 (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
   Cookies and Crackers          0.0089      0.0131*    0.0170**       0.2           0.14                                          183670
                                 (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)
   Rice and Beans                 0.012     0.0203**    0.0137*        0.22          0.18                                          117898
                                 (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)
   Soups                         0.0087      0.0133*    0.0145*        0.16          0.16                                          134324
                                 (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)
Splurge
   Soft Beverages               0.0133** 0.0211** 0.0179**             0.22          0.15                                          656587
                                 (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
Perishable
   Cheese                        0.0076     0.0225** 0.0284**          0.39          0.33                                          233186
                                 (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)
   Fresh Bread                 -0.0086** -0.0119** -0.0117**           0.16          0.14                                          373012
                                 (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
   Meat                          0.0028     0.0073** 0.0104**          0.11          0.08                                          496527
                                 (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
   Ref. Juice and Drinks        0.0123** 0.0222** 0.0173**             0.25          0.11                                          197585
                                 (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Each row presents results from an OLS regression
of fraction of weekly purchases (standardized weight) from Generic items on weekly dummies and their interactions with an indicator if
the household is a benefit household for the product category listed in the row heading. All specifications include household fixed-effects
as well as store-level fixed-effects. Standard Errors are clustered at the household level. Product categories for Generic and Premium were
created based on the categorization made by the retailer and the product names.




                                                                                                                              44
Table 9.B: Change in Purchases of Premium Products, Only Significant Food Groups Presented
                                       Benefit Household          Mean Premium Purchases
                                                                   Benefit    Non-Benefit
TYPE OF GOODS                   Week2       Week3       Week4     Household    Household                                           Obs.
Storable
   Flour, Sugar and Cornmeal     0.0177     0.0198     0.0245*       0.31         0.23                                              67819
                                (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
   Salty Snacks                -0.0063* -0.0102** -0.0076*           0.08         0.11                                             298941
                                (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Perishable
   Fresh Bread                -0.0171** -0.0281** -0.0362**          0.39         0.58                                             373012
                                (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
   Meat                        -0.0078* -0.0127** -0.0294**          0.6          0.67                                             496527
                                (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
   Ref. Juice and Drinks        -0.0093   -0.0189** -0.0168**        0.25         0.44                                             197585
                                (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Each row presents results from an OLS regression
of fraction of weekly purchases (standardized weight) from Premium items on weekly dummies and their interactions with an indicator if
the household is a benefit household for the product category listed in the row heading. All specifications include household fixed-effects
as well as store-level fixed-effects. Standard Errors are clustered at the household level. Product categories for Generic and Premium were
created based on the categorization made by the retailer and the product names.




                                                                                                                              45
Table 9.C: Change in Purchases of On Sale Products, Only Significant Food Groups Presented
                                        Benefit Household              Mean On Sale Purchases
                                                                       Benefit    Non-Benefit
TYPE OF GOODS                   Week2        Week3        Week4       Household    Household                                        Obs.
Storable
   Cereal and Breakfast         -0.0012       0.0108     0.0183**       0.41          0.37                                          205472
                                (0.006)      (0.007)      (0.007)
   Frozen Juices                -0.0049     0.0364**      0.0294*       0.88          0.93                                           14959
                                (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.013)
   Frozen Vegetables            -0.0001     0.0412**     0.0393**       0.58          0.54                                           97640
                                (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)
   Hispanic Products            -0.0049      -0.0101     -0.0185*       0.33          0.32                                          151589
                                (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)
   Prep. Frozen Foods            0.0035       0.0084     0.0188**       0.78          0.77                                          244442
                                (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)
   Ready-To-Eat Foods            0.0149       0.0082     0.0277**       0.49          0.46                                           86984
                                (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.011)
Splurge
   In-Store Sweet Baked Goods   -0.0022       0.0115     0.0257**       0.19          0.21                                          122097
                                (0.008)      (0.008)      (0.008)
   Soft Beverages                 0.001      0.0080*     0.0170**       0.72           0.7                                          656587
                                (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)
Perishable
   Fresh Bread                 0.0160**     0.0675**     0.0782**       0.56          0.51                                          373012
                                (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)
   In-Store Fresh Bead           0.0008      -0.0098    -0.0198**       0.12          0.12                                          130119
                                (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)
   Ref. Juice and Drinks         -0.006    -0.0191**    -0.0175**       0.62          0.73                                          197585
                                (0.006)      (0.006)      (0.006)
Not Covered
   Alcoholic Beverages         -0.0134*      -0.0075    -0.0172**       0.54          0.68                                          218771
                                (0.007)      (0.007)      (0.007)
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Each row presents results from an OLS regression of
fraction of weekly purchases (standardized weight) from On Sale items on weekly dummies and their interactions with an indicator if the
household is a benefit household for the product category listed in the row heading. All specifications include household fixed-effects as
well as store-level fixed-effects. Standard Errors are clustered at the household level. A product is categorized as On Sale if a discount is
recorded for the product purchase in the transaction data.




                                                                                                                               46
Table 10: Change in Log(Price Index) and Log (Price Index of The First Week of The Month) across Stores
                                  NV High Poverty                                NV Low Poverty
                       All       Store 1     Store 2      Store3       All      Store 1    Store 2    Store3

Log.(Price Index)
  Week2                     -0.0195**       -0.0172**        -0.0212**       -0.0204**         -0.0012        -0.0011         -0.0038         0.0014
                              (0.002)         (0.004)          (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.005)
   Week3                    -0.0243**       -0.0138**        -0.0268**       -0.0334**          0.0015         0.0021         -0.0005         0.0027
                              (0.002)         (0.004)          (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.005)
   Week4                    -0.0266**       -0.0165**        -0.0293**       -0.0349**         -0.0046        -0.0075         -0.0036        -0.0027
                              (0.002)         (0.005)          (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.003)        (0.005)         (0.005)        (0.005)

Log.(1st Week Price Index)
  Week2               -0.0236**             -0.0202**        -0.0260**       -0.0248**        -0.0026          -0.002         -0.0054        -0.0003
                        (0.002)               (0.005)          (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.003)         (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.005)
  Week3               -0.0301**             -0.0175**        -0.0335**       -0.0404**         -0.001          0.0001         -0.0031         0.0001
                        (0.002)               (0.005)          (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.003)         (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.005)
  Week4               -0.0327**             -0.0210**        -0.0365**       -0.0417**       -0.0074**        -0.0096*        -0.0068        -0.0057
                        (0.002)               (0.005)          (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.003)         (0.005)        (0.004)        (0.005)

   Obs.                        2086             723             723              640            2169             723            723            723
   %Store Benefit              0.274           0.153           0.280            0.473           0.044           0.024          0.053          0.056
   Purchases
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses, * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Each column presents results from OLS regressions of log price
index, calculated according to equation (2) in the text, on weekly dummies. Specifications that pool stores also include store-level fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                     47
Table 11: Results from Four Stores in States with 10-day Staggered Benefits Distribution
                                                     Dependent Variable:
                                                (1)                          (2)
                                    Log Weekly Expenditures            Log Price Index
Benefit Household*Week2                      0.0102*                          --
                                             (0.0046)                         --
Benefit Household*Week3                     -0.1191**                         --
                                             (0.0046)                         --
Benefit Household*Week4                     -0.1667**                         --
                                             (0.0048)                         --
Week2                                       -0.0261**                     -0.0024
                                             (0.0020)                     (0.0016)
Week3                                         0.0015                     -0.0130**
                                             (0.0020)                     (0.0016)
Week4                                       -0.0165**                    -0.0245**
                                             (0.0020)                     (0.0017)
Mean Expenditures By:
       Benefit Households                      50.45
       Non-Benefit Households                  30.86
Obs.                                        2,798,917                      2,891
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Data are from four stores in
Colorado and California (Los Angeles County) where food stamp benefits are distributed over the first 10 days of
the month. The first column present results from an OLS regression of log weekly expenditures per household and
store on an indicator if the household is a benefit household, the week number in the month, and their interactions.
Specification (1) includes store-level and household-level fixed effects with standard errors clustered at the
household level. Specification (2) includes store-level fixed effects. A household is defined by an anonymous
loyalty card identification number. Transactions from benefit households are defined as any transaction made with a
loyalty card number that was used with food stamp payment method at any time during our sample period.
Regressions pooling data from all three stores also include store-level fixed effects.




                                                                                                                   48
Appendix Table A.1: Change in Log (Price Index) by Product Category
                                      Week2                Week3               Week4
TYPE OF GOODS                    Coeff.    Std.Err.   Coeff.   Std.Err.    Coeff.  Std.Err       Obs.
Storable
   Canned Fish and Meat       -0.0108** (0.002) -0.0139** (0.002)         -0.0140**   (0.002)    2086
   Canned Fruits              -0.0116** (0.002) -0.0143** (0.002)         -0.0151**   (0.002)    2086
   Canned Vegetables          -0.0067** (0.002) -0.0040* (0.002)            -0.0033   (0.002)    2086
   Cereal and Breakfast       -0.0205** (0.005) -0.0230** (0.005)         -0.0311**   (0.005)    2086
   Cookies and Crackers       -0.0193** (0.003) -0.0264** (0.003)         -0.0310**   (0.003)    2086
   Flour, Sugar and Cornmeal  -0.0412** (0.008) -0.0344** (0.008)         -0.0234**   (0.008)    2086
   Frozen Breakfast Items     -0.0370** (0.004) -0.0369** (0.004)         -0.0440**   (0.004)    2086
   Frozen Fruits                -0.0033    (0.011)   -0.0004    (0.011)      0.0072   (0.011)    1743
   Frozen Juices                 0.0027    (0.004)    0.0048    (0.004)      0.0079   (0.004)    2044
   Frozen Vegetables          -0.0273** (0.003) -0.0342** (0.003)         -0.0389**   (0.003)    2086
   Hispanic Products          -0.0234** (0.003) -0.0223** (0.003)         -0.0259**   (0.003)    2086
   Jams, Jellies and Spreads  -0.0246** (0.004) -0.0265** (0.004)         -0.0228**   (0.004)    2086
   Pasta and Pasta Sauce      -0.0108** (0.003) -0.0169** (0.003)         -0.0212**   (0.003)    2086
   Prep. Frozen Foods         -0.0397** (0.003) -0.0600** (0.003)         -0.0643**   (0.003)    2086
   Ready-To-Eat Foods         -0.0215** (0.002) -0.0245** (0.002)         -0.0266**   (0.002)    2086
   Rice and Beans             -0.0225** (0.003) -0.0233** (0.003)         -0.0266**   (0.003)    2086
   Salty Snacks               -0.0196** (0.004) -0.0299** (0.004)         -0.0307**   (0.004)    2086
   Shelf Juices and Drinks     -0.0186* (0.008) -0.0227** (0.008)          -0.0148*   (0.008)    2086
   Soups                        -0.0056    (0.004)    -0.004    (0.004)   -0.0102**   (0.004)    2086
Splurge
   Candy, Gum and Mints         -0.0048    (0.003) -0.0066* (0.003)       -0.0083**   (0.003)    2086
   Sweet Baked Goods          -0.0159** (0.004) -0.0166** (0.004)         -0.0257**   (0.004)    2085
   Dessert and Baking Mixes     -0.0039    (0.002) -0.0050* (0.002)        -0.0049*   (0.002)    2086
   Desserts                    -0.0041* (0.002) -0.0073** (0.002)         -0.0088**   (0.002)    2086
   Frozen Desserts, etc.      -0.0386** (0.007) -0.0355** (0.007)         -0.0356**   (0.007)    2086
   Ice Cream                  -0.0242** (0.005) -0.0369** (0.005)         -0.0376**   (0.005)    2086
   In-Store Sweet Baked Goods   -0.0021    (0.005)   -0.0094    (0.005)    -0.0128*   (0.005)    2083
   Soft Beverages               -0.0047    (0.003) -0.0109** (0.003)      -0.0209**   (0.003)    2086
Perishable
   Cheese                     -0.0267** (0.005) -0.0254** (0.005)         -0.0246**   (0.005)    2086
   Fresh Bread                -0.0122** (0.003) -0.0312** (0.003)         -0.0356**   (0.003)    2086
   Fresh Produce                 0.0024    (0.003)   -0.0043    (0.003)   -0.0130**   (0.003)    2086
   In-Store Fresh Bead          -0.0015    (0.003)   -0.0015    (0.003)     -0.0029   (0.003)    2080
   Meat                       -0.0427** (0.005) -0.0491** (0.005)         -0.0487**   (0.005)    2086
   Ref. Dairy                  -0.0149* (0.007) -0.0174* (0.007)           -0.0150*   (0.007)    2086
   Ref. Foods                   -0.0128    (0.008)   -0.0094    (0.008)      -0.013   (0.008)    2086
   Ref. Juice and Drinks      -0.0187** (0.004) -0.0185** (0.004)         -0.0216**   (0.004)    2086
   Seafood                    -0.0458** (0.008) -0.0634** (0.008)         -0.0699**   (0.008)    2086
Not Covered
   Alcoholic Beverages         -0.0217* (0.009)      -0.0161    (0.009)    -0.0079    (0.009)    2086
   Tobacco and Smoking          -0.0042    (0.005)   -0.0034    (0.005)   -0.0150**   (0.005)    2086




                                                                                            49
Appendix Table A.2: Change in Log (Price Index of the First Week of The Month) by Product Category
                                       Week2                Week3               Week4
                                             Std.                  Std.                Std.
TYPE OF GOODS                     Coeff.     Error     Coeff.     Error    Coeff.     Error    Obs.
Storable
   Canned Fish and Meat        -0.0115** (0.002) -0.0149** (0.002) -0.0154** (0.002)           2086
   Canned Fruits               -0.0132** (0.002) -0.0168** (0.002) -0.0168** (0.002)           2086
   Canned Vegetables           -0.0059** (0.002)       -0.003    (0.002)  -0.0018    (0.002)   2086
   Cereal and Breakfast        -0.0262** (0.005) -0.0306** (0.005) -0.0388** (0.005)           2086
   Cookies and Crackers        -0.0207** (0.003) -0.0278** (0.003) -0.0333** (0.003)           2086
   Flour, Sugar and Cornmeal   -0.0452** (0.009) -0.0381** (0.009) -0.0274** (0.009)           2086
   Frozen Breakfast Items      -0.0385** (0.004) -0.0405** (0.004) -0.0476** (0.004)           2086
   Frozen Fruits                 -0.0054   (0.010)    -0.0005    (0.010)   0.0068    (0.010)   1743
   Frozen Juices                  0.0005   (0.004)     0.0022    (0.004)   0.0042    (0.004)   2044
   Frozen Vegetables           -0.0295** (0.004) -0.0402** (0.004) -0.0453** (0.004)           2086
   Hispanic Products           -0.0256** (0.003) -0.0246** (0.003) -0.0285** (0.003)           2086
   Jams, Jellies and Spreads   -0.0306** (0.004) -0.0326** (0.004) -0.0266** (0.004)           2086
   Pasta and Pasta Sauce       -0.0106** (0.003) -0.0165** (0.003) -0.0216** (0.003)           2086
   Prep. Frozen Foods          -0.0451** (0.003) -0.0795** (0.003) -0.0856** (0.004)           2086
   Ready-To-Eat Foods          -0.0228** (0.003) -0.0258** (0.003) -0.0283** (0.003)           2086
   Rice and Beans              -0.0228** (0.003) -0.0230** (0.003) -0.0282** (0.003)           2086
   Salty Snacks                -0.0217** (0.004) -0.0335** (0.004) -0.0340** (0.004)           2086
   Shelf Juices and Drinks     -0.0207** (0.006) -0.0246** (0.006) -0.0184** (0.006)           2086
   Soups                        -0.0075* (0.003) -0.0069* (0.003) -0.0121** (0.004)            2086
Splurge
   Candy, Gum and Mints         -0.0063* (0.003)       -0.001    (0.003)  -0.0017    (0.003)   2086
   Sweet Baked Goods           -0.0172** (0.004) -0.0179** (0.004) -0.0275** (0.004)           2085
   Dessert and Baking Mixes     -0.0054* (0.002) -0.0066** (0.002) -0.0063** (0.002)           2086
   Desserts                     -0.0042* (0.002) -0.0082** (0.002) -0.0100** (0.002)           2086
   Frozen Desserts, etc.       -0.0429** (0.007) -0.0389** (0.007) -0.0379** (0.007)           2086
   Ice Cream                   -0.0268** (0.005) -0.0408** (0.005) -0.0415** (0.005)           2086
   In-Store Sweet Baked Goods    -0.0063   (0.005) -0.0136* (0.005) -0.0169** (0.005)          2083
   Soft Beverages                -0.0052   (0.003) -0.0113** (0.003) -0.0219** (0.003)         2086
Perishable
   Cheese                      -0.0323** (0.005) -0.0316** (0.005) -0.0317** (0.005)           2086
   Fresh Bread                 -0.0117** (0.003) -0.0303** (0.003) -0.0354** (0.003)           2086
   Fresh Produce                  0.0023   (0.003)    -0.0044    (0.003) -0.0143** (0.003)     2086
   In-Store Fresh Bead            -0.002   (0.003)    -0.0022    (0.003)  -0.0035    (0.003)   2080
   Meat                        -0.0494** (0.006) -0.0578** (0.006) -0.0570** (0.006)           2086
   Ref. Dairy                   -0.0147* (0.007) -0.0171** (0.007) -0.0155* (0.007)            2086
   Ref. Foods                    -0.0142   (0.008)    -0.0113    (0.008)  -0.0147    (0.008)   2086
   Ref. Juice and Drinks       -0.0198** (0.004) -0.0207** (0.004) -0.0237** (0.004)           2086
   Seafood                     -0.0512** (0.008) -0.0696** (0.008) -0.0756** (0.008)           2086
Not Covered
   Alcoholic Beverages         -0.0264** (0.009) -0.0202* (0.009)         -0.0117    (0.009)   2086
   Tobacco and Smoking            -0.005   (0.005)    -0.0048    (0.005) -0.0166** (0.006)     2086




                                                                                          50
