                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE ECONOMICS OF CONTENT PROTECTION


                          Michael Mussa



                      Working Paper No. 1)457




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 198)4




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research prograni
in International Studies and project in Productivity (World
Economy). Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #1457
                                            September 1984



                The Economics of Content Protection


                               ABSTRACT



     In a model that allows smooth substitution between domestic and imoorted

inputs, content protection distorts inout choice but does not force a divergence

between price and unit production cost. Content protection biases gains in

technical efficiency away from those saving domestic input and toward those

saving imported input. By increasing derived demand for the domestic input,

a marginally effective content requirement benefits suppliers of this input.

Increases in the content requirement above the marginally effective level

increase such benefits to suppliers of the domestic input provided that the

price elasticity of demand for the final product is less than a critical value.

The consequences of content protection are not materially affected by monopoly

in the domestic final product market or monopsony in the domestic input market

unless such monopoly or monopsony are created by content protection. The

situation of a monopolistic supplier of the domestic input is enhanced by

content protection.




                                                 Michael Mussa
                                                 Graduate School of Business
                                                 University of Chicago
                                                 1101 East 58th Street
                                                 Chicago, Illinois 60637

                                                  (312) 962—7143
                       The Economics of Content Protection



1. Introduction

    This paper analyzes economic effects of policies of content protection,

such as the proposal to require automobiles sold in the United States to

embody a prescribed minimum share of domestic value added. Similar policies

have been implemented in a number of developing countries, as well as in

Australia and Canada. Included in this broad class of policies are both

requirements that final goods assembled in a country should use a minimum

amount of domestic input, and requirements that final goods exported to a

country should use a minimum amount of domestic input in their foreign

assembly processes.1

     To analyze the consequences of such policies of content protection, it is

assumed that the final product is produced in accord with a neo—classical

production function, specified in section 2, that employs domestic inputs and

imported (or foreign) inputs. This specification allows for smooth substi-

tution possibilities between domestic and imported inputs which, it is argued,

characterize the situation of many industries that are the actual or potential

subjects of content protection policies. This specification differs from that

of Grossman (1981) who assumes that the imported material input is a perfect

substitute for a domestically produced material input and that total material

input (imported plus domestic) substitute against domestic labor in the

production of final output.2 Using the present specification, it is shown

that a domestic content requirement, specified as a required minimum share of

domestic input in the value of final product and enforced by a penalty tariff

imposed against violators, raises the ratio of domestic input to imported

input and creates a production distortion by raising unit production cost
                                         2




above    the cost minimizing level. Because of the all—or--nothing nature of the
enforcement penalty, however, content protection has the virtue of not
inducing    a distortion between the social cost of production (given the

distortion of input choice) and the price charged to consumers of the final

product. For this reason, content protection is preferable to a tariff on

imported inputs or a subsidy on domestic inputs as a policy to increase the

ratio of domestic to imported input in final output.

        Content protection has less salutory effects when account is taken, in

section 3, of the effects on incentives for improvements in techincal effi-

ciency. The private and social benefit of technical improvements that save on

domestic input is artificially reduced and the private and social benefit of

technical improvements that save on imported inputs is artificially increased

by a domestic content requirement. Taking account of the cost of finding and

implementing improvements in technical efficiency, therefore, content pro-

tection will impede progress in making production processes that employ

domestic inputs more efficient, and will lead to excess investment in

technical improvements that reduced required amounts of imported inputs.

        The effects of content protection on the equilibrium price and quantity

of the domestic input are obviously of central concern to the suppliers of

this input, who are frequently the most ardent advocates of content protec-

tion.     In section 4, it is shown that under competitive market conditions, a

small increase in the domestic content requirement above the level that firms

would voluntarily choose will increase the derived demand for the domestic

input and (assuming a positive but less than infinite elasticity of supply of

the domestic input) will also increase the equilibrium quantity and price of

the domestic input. The direct effect of further increases in the domestic

content requirement above this marginally effective level are at least
                                      3




partially offset by reductions in demand for the final product resulting from

increases in its price due to increased unit cost that are the consequence of

content protection. However, provided that the price elasticity of demand for

the final product is less than a critical value, the overall effect of an

increase in the domestic content requirement will still be to increase the

derived demand for the domestic input and, hence, the equilibrium quantity and

price of that input.

     The condition for an increase in the content requirement to increase

demand for the domestic input is modified in situations, examined in section

5, where only foreign firms (and not domestic firms) are effectively con-

strained by content protection. In such situations, the own price elasticity

of demand for the foreign firms' product is likely to be larger than the over-

all price elasticity of demand for the products of domestic and the foreign

firms because an increase in the price of the foreign firms' product shifts

demand toward the domestic firms' product. Hence, the increase in the price

of the foreign firms' product due to an increased domestic content requirement

will be a more powerful force in reducing demand for the domestic input.

 However, since a shift of demand toward the domestic product increases domes-

 tic firms' demands for the domestic input, the overall effect of an increase

 in the content requirement for foreign firms is still likely to be an increase

 in demand for the domestic input.

      The implications of non—competitive behavior in the final product and

 domestic factor markets are examined in section 6. Content protection does

 not alter the usual difference between monopolistic and competitive behavior

 by sellers of the final product or between rnonopsonistic and competitive

 behavior by buyers of the domestic input, unless content protection creates a

 monopoly or monopsony situation when one would not otherwise exist. Content
                                             4




protection, however, does interact in an interesting way with monopoly behav-

ior of suppliers of the domestic input since it alters the elasticity of

demand for this input in a way that can always be exploited by these

suppliers.

     The main results of this analysis of content protection are summarized in

section 7, and extensions and modifications of these results are briefly

discussed.



2. Effects on Input Choice, Production Cost and C).itput Price

     The technology of the industry subject to content protection is assumed

to be described by a neo—classical, linear homogeneous production function,


     X =   F(I,   D)   or X/I E x =   f(d)       F(l, d), with d E D/I       (1)


where X is the quantity of final output, I is the quantity of imported (or

foreign) input, and D is the quantity of domestic input. This production

function applies equally well to a final product assembled at home using

domestic and imported inputs, and to a final product assembled abroad using

domestic and foreign inputs and then exported back to the home country. The

smooth shape of the isoquants of this production function illustrated in

figure 1 reflect the assumption that domestic input can be substituted contin-

uously, but with increasing difficulty, for imported (or foreign) input. The

idea is that as the required share of domestic content rises, production of

more components and more assembly processes must employ domestic inputs,

starting first with the production activities in which domestic inputs are

relatively most efficient and moving progressively to activities where these

inputs are less and less efficient in comparison with imported (or foreign)

inputs. This description applies fairly well to the automobile industry which
                                   5




   D




                      D/I =   d1
  p2




  p1



  p0




                                                    D/I =   d0




  DA
                                                             F(I, D) = 1   +       t:

                                                                 (I, D) =      1

                                                                        I
       0
                 'B                    'A   G


Fig.——1: The Effect of Content Protection on Input Choice and the
          Iso—cost Locus.
                                                   6



is a favorite subject of such requirements in developing countries and a

possible subject in the United States. .rguably, this description also

applies to a wide range of manufactured goods, from apparel to televisions,

that are or might become subjects of content protection.3

       Xmestic nominal prices of final product, domestic input, and imported

input are denoted by P,             U, and V1 respectively. Using the domestic input

as numeraire, relative prices of the final output and the imported input are

denoted by p = P/U and v = V/U,                  respectively. The zero profit condition

for final goods producers requires that


       P=aD.U+aI.V or paD+aIv .                                                            (2)

where aD = D/x        is the amount of domestic input per unit of output and

a1 =   I/X   is the amount of imported input per unit of output. Using the fact

that aD =    d/f(d)    and a1 =        1/f(d),    it follows that the relative output

price consistent with zero profits is given by


       p = (d + v)/f(d)                                                                    (3)



       The cost minimizing input ratio is determined by the requirement that the

marginal technical rate of substitution equal the relative input price;


                          =   [f(d)    —
                                           df'(d)]/f'(d)     E 4(d) =   v                  (4)



For example, if the input price ratio is v0, then as illustrated in figure

1, the cost minimizing input ratio                     is determined by the point 7 along

the iso—quant F(I, D) =         1     at which the marginal technical rate of substi-

tution is equal to v0. For any v, choice of d =                      1(v)     clearly results

in the minimum relative output price, p(v) =                 [1(v)      + v]/f(1(v)), that is
consistent with zero profits for that input price ratio.
                                                               7




       Imestic content requirements may sometimes be set in terms of physical

units, but because of difficulties in comparing physical units of different

inputs and outputs, it is more common for a domestic content requirement to be

stated in terms of share of domestic inputs in the value of final output.

This share is given by


           6   =
                   aU/(aD
                            +   va1) = d/(d    +   v)      .                                                   (5)

An effective domestic content requirement that sets a minimum value                                     5* for

6     implies that the input ratio must be


       d*(6*, v) =              (v6*)/(1   — 6*)       ,                                                       (6)

which is greater than the input ratio d =                               1(v)    that would minimize

costs. The relative output price necessary to yield zero profits with such a

content            requirement,

       p*(ó* v) = (d*              +   v)/f(d*)    =   (v/(1       —
                                                                       6*)J/f((v.6*/(1     —   6*))            (7)



is greater than the price p                       [1(v) +           v]/f(1(v))      that yields zero

profits when producers minimize cost. For example, if the domestic content

requirement necessitates an input ratio d1 =
                                                                          d*(v0,   3*) >         = 1(v0),      then

as illustrated in figure 1, production occurs at the point B along the unit

iso—quant, rather than at the cost minimizing point A. The relative output

price that yields zero profits with this content requirement p1 =                                              6*) =
                                                                                                      p*(v0,
       +                        is indicated by the vertical intercept of the line passing
(d1            v0)/f(d1),
through B with slope equal to —v0• This price is clearly greater than the

price P that yields zero profits under cost minimization, as indicated by

the vertical intercept of the tangent to the unit iso—quant (with slope equal

to -v0) at the cost minimizing production point A.
                                              8




       ¶I enforce an effective domestic content requirement, there must be an

incentive for compliance or a penalty for violation. When the final product

is produced at home with imported inputs, it is natural for this incentive or

penalty to be a tariff charged on imported inputs for producers violating the

content requirement but rebated to producers complying with the requirement.4

The penalty tariff necessary to enforce the content requirement must make the

minimum     cost for violators at least as great as the cost for those who
comply.      For example, in the situation illustrated in figure 1,        an input
tariff            which makes the relative   price of imported inputs for violators

v1
     = (1   + t1)v0 is sufficient to enforce the      content requirement because the

isocost     line for violators with intercept p1      and slope v1 passes below the

unit   isoquant. Producers who satisfy the content requirement, however, can
produce at B and enjoy unit costs of only P1. The content requirement and
the enforcement penalty make the isocost locus for unit cost of p1 corre-
spond to the kinked line that  connects the points p1, B, E and G. With
this jsocost locus, the optimum production point is clearly B.
       When the final good is     produced abroad with   exported domestic inputs, it

is natural that the incentive for compliance be a penalty tariff (at an ad
valorem rate t) on imports of the final product that do not satisfy the
content requirement. Since 1 + t imported units of final product subject to
this tariff generate the same revenue as one unit satisfying the content
requirement, producers will satisfy the requirement when the cost of pro-

ducing      1 +   t   units with a free choice of inputs is greater than the cost of

producing     1 unit under the content requirement. In terms of figure 1, the
penalty     tariff rate t1, for which the iso—quant        F(I, D) =   1   +   t1 lies
everywhere above the iso—cost line connecting p1,           B, E and G is suffi-
cient to enforce the content requirement.
                                      9



     It is an important property of content protection that the output price

consistent with zero profits does not depend on the penalty used to enforce

the content requirement, so long as the penalty is high enough to induce

compliance. This property reflects the all—or—nothing nature of the penalty

imposed for any violation of the content requirement. If the requirement is

satisfied, no penalty at all must be paid and the zero profit price of a unit

of output embodies only unit production cost and no penalty. Unit production

cost, of course, exceeds the minimum achievable when producers are allowed

free choice of inputs, but a content requirement generates no additional

distortion by forcing a divergence between true social production cost (with

the distored choice of inputs) and the price producers must charge to earn

zero profit.5

     This property of content protection schemes accounts for their superi-

ority over alternative policies for increasing the ratio of domestic input to

imported input. Another policy that could achieve this same objective, in the

case where the final output is produced at home using imported inputs, is an

ad valorem tariff on imported inputs, with no rebates for producers. Specif-

ically, to achieve the same input ratio d1 as the content protection policy

illustrated in figure 1, a tariff on the imported input would have to raise

the domestic relative price of this input to the level        determined by the

slope of the unit iso—quant at the point B. Since this tariff is collected,

producers must charge a price p2, determined by the vertical intercept of the

tangent to the unit iso—quant at B, in order to earn zero profit. Since

p1 is the true social cost of producing a unit of output using the input

combination at B, the difference p2 —          measures an excess of price
                                          p1

charged to consumers over true social production cost and implies a consump-

tion distortion loss in excess of the distortion loss from content protection.6
                                       10




Alternatively, the domestic input ratio could be raised to d1 by paying a

subsidy on the use of domestic inputs that raises the relative price of

imported inputs to v2. Since this subsidy reduces the output price for

consumers (at the expense of the government) to below true social production

cost, this subsidy creates consumption distortion loss in excess of the

distortion loss from content protection. Because a content requirement avoids

the excess consumption distortion loss generated by a tariff on imported

inputs or a subsidy on domestic inputs, it is the second best policy for

achieving a prescribed increase in the ratio of domestic input to imported

input. This question remains, of course, why society should tolerate the

production inefficiency that inevitably results from content protection in

order to raise the ratio of domestic to imported input.



3. Incentives for Improvements in Technical Efficiency

     The conclusion concerning the second—best optimality of a content protec-

tion policy requires qualification in situations where firms incur costs to

maintain and improve the efficiency of their production processes. While

analysis of such situations is not fully compatible with assumptions of

perfect competition and a common constant-returns—to—scale technology for all

firms, we can use the model of the preceding section to indicate the distor-

tion of incentives for improvements in technical efficiency created by content

protection.   'lb this end, consider the reduction in unit production cost

resulting from improvements in technical efficiency for a firm initially

operating under the content protection policy described by the point B in

figure 1, which corresponds to the points B in figures 2 and 3. An improve-

ment in technical efficiency that allows for a small reduction D < 0      in the

amount of domestic unit used to produce a unit of output shifts the unit iso—
                                                           11




quant downward in figure 2 to the iso—quant passing through the point G. To

satisfy the domestic content requirement with the new technology, the firm

must move up the unit iso—quant to the point H that lies along the ray

where D/I =     d1          Substitution of domestic for imported inputs in the move

from G to       I-!       occurs at the rate v2 which is equal to the marginal

technical rate of substitution at G and at B. The reduction in unit pro-

duction cost made possible by the improvement in technical efficiency is

measured units of domestic input by p =                                  —             where p1 and p3 are
                                                                    p3       p1,
the vertical intercepts of the lines passing through B and H, respectively,

with slopes equal to —v0 'lb the first order of approximation, the reduction

in unit production cost per unit reduction in required domestic input is given

by


            =    1    —           —             +                                                             (8)
                           [(v2       v0)/(v2       d1)1
                                                                .




     This result indicates the benefit to the firm and to society from an

improvement in technical efficiency that saves domestic input, given that the

content protection policy is in force. However, the benefit to society from

this improvement in technical efficiency in the absence of the content protec-

tion policy is greater than the amount indicated by (8) because saving one

unit of domestic input in the absence of this policy would be worth exactly

one unit of domestic input. Since (v2 —                                            +         must be less than 1,
                                                                    v0)/(v2            d1)
the distortion created by content protection cannot eliminate all of the

benefit from improvements in technical efficiency that save domestic input.

But, if the difference between v2 and v0 is large, the distortion could

substantially reduce this benefit.

     For improvements in technical efficiency that save imported input, the

disortion created by content protection works in the opposite direction. s
                                 12




        D




                                         D/I =
                                                 d1




                                                              I
       0




Fig.—-2: The Effects of a Reduction in Domestic Input Necessary
          to Produce a Unit of Output.
                                             13




illustrated in figure 3, saving a small amount I of imported input shifts

the unit iso—quant to the left to the new iso—quant passing through the

point J.   Pit J, the firm can substitute increased imported input for

reduced domestic input (at a rate equal to the marginal technical rate of

substitution v2) and still satisfy the domestic content requirement by

producing at the point K. Th the first order of approximation, the reduction

in unit production cost resulting from this increase in technical efficiency

is


           =        + (v2 —                                                    (9)
               v0             v0)[d1/(v2   + d1)]   .




In this result, the amount v0 represents the social and private benefit of

saving a unit of imported input in the absence of content protection. The

additional amount (v2 -
                               v0) [d1/(v2 + d1)1 > 0 is the distortionary effect
of content protection that arises because content protection forces a differ-

ential between the marginal value imported input in production (measured by

the marginal technical rate of substitution V2) and the price        v0 of this

input.

     Content protection does not create any distortion for a neutral improve-.

ment in technical efficiency that saves domestic and imported inputs in the

same proportion as these inputs are initially used in producing a unit of

output. Under content protection, however, economic incentives operate

against neutral improvements in technical efficiency and in favor of improve-

ments that save on imported input rather than domestic input. Diminished

incentives for improvements in technical efficiency that save on domestic

inputs provide a serious argument against use of content protection to provide

temporary protection for infant industries or mature industries that need to

regain international competitiveness since achievement of world standards of

efficiency is likely to depend on efficiency in the use of domestic inputs.
                                14




           D




                                               D/I =


       p




                                                                  I
           0



Fig.——3: The Effects of a Reduction in Imported Input Necessary
          to Produce a Unit of Output.
                                                           15




 4. Price and Quantity of Etnestic Input

        To assess these effects of content protection on the equilibrium price

 and quantity of the domestic input, assume that demand for the final product

 is a declining function, H(P), of its absolute price, with an elasticity of
 demand n = (P/H) H'(P). The imported input is assumed to be in
                                                                infinitely
 elastic supply at a given level of its absolute price,                          V. Supply of the
domestic input is assumed to be an increasing function, S(U), of its

absolute price, with an elasticity of supply C =                         (U/S) S'(U) When compe-
tition prevails in all markets, derived demand for the domestic input is

determined by multiplying x =                    s(p)    by D/X = aD     =   d/f(d).   Using the fact
that P =      U[(d         +   v)/f(d)J,    it follows that


       D =   (d/f(d))•H[(rjj/f(d))               +   (V/f(d))J    .
                                                                                                   (10)

Using a hat              " to
                                 denote a proportionate change, the proportionate

responses of D, to proportionate changes in d,                               U, and V, are given by

             [1- +             n.(- Y)]                                                           (11)


       D =   [J     .Cj
                                                                                                  (12)


         =   [(1    -     ) .J .                                                                  (13)

As before,         S =    d/(d   +   v)   is the share of domestic input in the cost of
producing a unit of output.                 y =      (d/f(d))   f'(d)   is the elasticity of X/i =
f(d)    with respect to d =               D/I.
       When content protection is not in force, the input ratio d is the cost

minimizing input ratio d =                 1(v),        where (d) =      [f(d)   —
                                                                                     df'(d)J/f'(d).
Substituting (d) for v, it is easily shown that in the absence of content
                                                 16




protection, the share of domestic input,               5 = d/(d +   v),   is equal to y;


       = d/(d +   v)   = d/(d +     (d))   = df'(d)/f(d) = y, when v = +(d).               (14)


Further, since in the absence of content protection d =                          it follows

that the proportionate change in the input ratio is given by


     d = c(U — v)                                                                          (15)


where a = (1 — 1) [f'(d)/d'f"(d)] < 0 is the elasticity of substitution

between domestic and imported inputs. This result together with (11), (12),

and (13) implies that


     D = [niS + (1 — 1) aJ u                                                               (16)


     D= [(1 —     tS)....   (1 —   y)'a]v    •                                             (17)


     Equation (17) reveals the condition for a tariff on the imported input,

which induces a positive V, to increase demand for the domestic input: the

elasticity of substitution between the domestic and the imported input must be

greater in absolute value than the price elasticity of demand for the final

output. Otherwise, the negative effect on the derived demand for D from the

increase in the output price caused by the increased cost of the imported

input will outweigh the positive substitution effect of the increase in the

price of the imported input relative to the domestic input. It follows that

suppliers of the domestic input will benefit from a tariff imposed on the

imported input only when the elasticity of substitution between domestic and

imported inputs is greater (in absolute value) than the price elasticity of

demand for the final product.

     Under content protection, the input ratio is no longer d =                            but

rather ci = d*(S*, v) = (vscS*)/(1 — S*)•             With a fixed content requirement,
                                                                   17




therefore,


       d=v=V—U .                                                                                           (18)

Further, the proportionate response of d to a proportionate change in the

content requirement is


         =   [1/(1     - (5*)]                •
                                       .(5*
                                                                                                           (19)

These results together with (11), (12), and (13), determine the proportionate

response of demand for the domestic input to proportionate changes in U,

V, and       (5*   when content protection is in force:


       D= [(5* - (1            -   ') + n.(y-               (5*)].tJ    F•u                                (20)

       D =   [(1   —   5*).        + (1       —    y)   —   rp(y — 5*)].V                                  (21)

       D =             y   +   .((5* - y)]/(i                -   (5*)] .*       •                          (22)

       In all of these results, the difference between y =                            df'(d)/f(d)         and

5* is important. I measures the share of domestic input when the price of

imported input equals the marginal technical rate of substitution; whereas

(5*
      is the minimum required share of domestic input when imported input is

valued at its market price. Without a content requirement, I = 5.                                      When the

content requirement is more than marginally effective, however, the narginal

technical rate of substitution is greater than the market relative price of

the imported input and hence 5* is > y.

      It follows that starting with a content requirement that is on the margin

of effectiveness, a small proportionate increase                              5* causes art equal propor-

tionate increase in demand for the domestic input;7 that is


      D =    [(1 — 1)/Cl           —     5*)]     .5*       5* when 5* =       (v)/( 4i   Cv) +   v)       (23)
                                                                   18




The reason for this equal proportionate effect is that with only a marginally

effective content requirement, a small increase in                              6* has only a second

order of small effect on unit cost and output price. The direct first order

effect of an increase in                         6* on demand for the domestic input, therefore, is

not offset by any first order indirect effect of a reduction in final output

demand due to an increase in the final output price.

     When the content requirement is more than marginally effective, an

increase in 6* causes a first order increase in the final output price to

the extent of p =                [(6*       —             — 6*)]   .6*   This increase in P at least

partially offsets the direct effect on the demand for domestic input of the

increase in 5* When content protection is sufficiently stringent to produce

a large difference between 6* and 1, it is possible that further increases

in   5* will reduce demand for the domestic input. For this not to happen,

the price elasticity of demand for the final product must not be too large;

specifically, for                     defined in (22) to be positive, it is necessary that



      JnJ
             (1 —          1)/(6*       —       1).                                                    (24)



Since 6*         1,        it is clear that this condition is always satisfied if                  I n <      1.
     The the equilibrium responses of D and U to changes in                                  5* depend on

the elasticity of supply of the domestic input. Specifically, equating

D = E'tJ,   to        D =       r•u    +    c.6*,         it follows that the equilibrium responses of

U and D to a change in the content requirement are given by


     u =                  - r)J ..6*                                                                   (25)


      D =   [c/(c         -    r)J   .c2.5*                                                            (26)



Since C     is        >    0     and        r is      <    0, an    increase in 6* will increase both the

equilibrium price and the equilibrium quantity of the domestic input if and
                                         19




only if 2 is positive for which the necessary and sufficient condition is

given by (24).

     In summary, when competition prevails in all markets, imposition of a

marginally effective content requirement always protects suppliers of the

domestic input by raising demand for this input thereby increasing its

equilibrium price and the quantity employed in the industry subject to the

content requirement. In contrast, a tariff imposed on the imported input

benefits suppliers of the domestic input only when the elasticity of substi-

tution between domestic and imported inputs is greater (in absolute value)

than the price elasticity of demand for the final product. Increases in the

required share of domestic content above the marginally effective level will

further increase the equilibrium price and quantity of the domestic input when

the price elasticity of demand for the final product is less (in absolute

value) than the critical value   (1 —   y)/(5*   — 'y').   For moderate price elas-

ticities of demand for the final product, this condition can be violated only

when a very stringent content requirement forces a substantial divergence

between      and 1. Hence, over a fairly broad range, it is reasonable to

expect that increases in the required share of domestic content will provide

increased protection to suppliers of the domestic input.



5. Differences between 1mestic and Foreign Producers

     In some situations where content protection is used or contemplated, such

as the 3. S. auto industry, domestic firms typically use a much higher ratio

of domestic to imported input than foreign firms who export to the domestic

market. Th deal with this case, it is convenient to assume that foreign firms

use both domestic and imported (or foreign) inputs to produce their output

X, in accord with the production technology described in section 2, while
                                             20



domestic firms produce their output, Y, using a only fixed amount, b, of

domestic input per unit of output. ()itputs of domestic and foreign firms are

assumed to be good but imperfect substitutes. The demand for foreign output

is X = H(P, R), where P is the absolute price of the foreign product and

R is the absolute price of the domestic product, w = (P/H) ( /aP) < 0 is

the elasticity of demand for the foreign product with respect to its own

price, and       = (R/H) .( d/) > 0 is the elasticity of demand for the foreign

product with respect to the absolute price of the domestic product. The

demand for domestic output is Y = N(R, P), where V = (R/N) 'C N/) < 0 is

the elasticity of demand for the domestic product with respect to its own

price, and i = (P/N) 'C /3P) > 0 is the elasticity of demand for domestic

product with respect to the price of the foreign product. Imported (or

foreign) input is assumed to be in infinitely elastic supply at a given value

of its absolute price, V. Supply of the domestic input is S(TJ), with an

elasticity of      C = (tJ/S(U))s'(u) > 0.

        Given these assumptions, the derived demand for the domestic input may be

expressed as


        D = (d/f(d)) H(P, R) + b'N(R, P)1                                     (27)



where d is the ratio of domestic to imported input used by foreign pro-

ducers, P = (Ud/f(d)) + (V/f(d)), and R = bU. The general expression for

the proportional change in the derived demand for the domestic input is


            cz•{(1 -   i)d+   w.p+ yR] + (1 - cz)•[v'R÷ •pj   ,               (28)

where     cz = (d/f(d)) .[.j(p, R)/D is the fraction of total demand for domestic

input accounted for by foreign firms; where, as before, I = d'f'(d)/f(d);

and where
                                                     21




     P= (6- 1)'d÷            6ri+     (1 -                                                          (29)

     R=U .                                                                                          (30)

Using these results and (19), we may derive the expression for the propor-

tionate change in the derived demand for the domestic input (at constant

values of      (3 and V) in response to a proportionate change in the domestic

content requirement;


     D =    (1/(1   -   6*)) .{a•(i   -   1) + (6*     -    y) [aw + (1 - a) •]      }.*            (31)

It follows that the condition for an increase in the domestic content

requirement to increase demand for the domestic input is


           —   [(1 —    a) .ji/aJ <   ((1 —   y)/(6*       — 1)1
                                                                                                    (32)

     Since the right hand side of (32), which is identical to the right hand

side of (24), has a value of infinity when                     6* =   1,   it follows that impo-

sition   of a marginally effective content requirement for foreign firms

necessarily increases demand for the domestic input. As                        the   content require-

ment rises above the marginally effective level, further increases in                          6*

diminish foreign firms demand for domestic input by raising the price and

decreasing the demand for the output of these firms. This effect is captured

by the term Iwl         on the right hand side of (32). This effect, however, is at

least partially offset by the increased demand of domestic firms for domestic

input resulting from the shift of final product demand toward domestic firms

due to the increased price of the output of foreign firms. This effect is

captured by the term — (1 — a) •i/a on the right hand side of (32). It

follows that if the reduction in demand for the foreign firms' product due to

a price increase is largely a shift of demand toward the product of domestic
                                               22




firms (which use a higher ratio of domestic input than foreign firms), then an

increase in the required share of domestic content for foreign firms is likely

to increase demand for the domestic input and hence benefit suppliers of this

input. Suppliers of the domestic input can lose at the margin from an

increase in the domestic content requirement only when the required share of

domestic content already significantly exceeds the share foreign firms would

voluntarily choose and when an increase in the price of the foreign firms'

product significantly diminishes total demand for the product of foreign and

domestic firms.



6. Non-Competitive Behavior

        Returning to the simpler case where all firms produce the same product

using the same technology, it is interesting to consider the effects of

content protection when markets for the final product or the domestic input

are not competitive. We continue with the assumption that the imported input

is competitively supplied at a constant absolute price.

        Only minor modifications of the preceding analysis are required to deal

with monopoly power in the final product market, if this power was already

being exercised prior to the introduction of content protection. For a given

demand function, X = H(P),          there is a marginal revenue function, X =

J(M),     which expresses the relationship between output sold, X, and the

monopolist's marginal revenue,            i.8 The monopolist equates marginal revenue to

unit production cost, implying that derived demand for the domestic input is

determined by


        D =   (d/f(d))   J[(U'd/f(d)) +   (v/f(d))]   .                            (33)
                                                23




This derived demand relationship is identical to the derived demand rela-

tionship (10) for the competitive case, except that the marginal revenue

function J has replaced the demand function H. All results for the

competitive case, with both free input choice and with content protection,

remain valid, provided that the elasticity of demand for the final product,

fl =   (P/H(P)) H'(P); is everywhere replaced by the elasticity of the marginal
revenue function,        =     (M/J(M))J'(M).
       Of course, a monopolist will generally sell a smaller amount of final

product and use a smaller amount of domestic input than would be the case

under competition. Introduction of content protection, however, need not

affect these differences between monopoly and competition in the final product

market because content protection directly affects the cost conditions of

final goods producers, not the conditions of demand for their output.

       Monopsony in the domestic input market can be handled in much the same

way as monopoly in the final product market. The supply function for the

domestic input, S(U), implies a marginal factor cost function, Q(W), which

specifies the relationship between the quantity of this input and its marginal

cost, W, for a purchaser who recognizes that supply price rises with the

number of units purchased. The analysis of section 4 goes through, when the

price of domestic input, U, is everywhere replaced by its marginal factor

cost, W, and when the elasticity of the supply function,              C   = (tJ/S(U))   (U)

is everywhere replaced by the the elasticity of the marginal factor cost

function,     A =   (W/Q(w))   Q' (W) •   As with the case of monopoly in the final

product market, monopsony in the domestic input market will generally reduce

the equilibrium price and quantity of the domestic input to below the levels

that would prevail under competition. However, since content protection does

not directly affect the conditions of supply of the domestic input, it need
                                      24




not affect, in an important way, these differences between the monopsonistic

and the competitive equilibrium in the market for the domestic input.

     Content protection interacts in an important way with monopoly in the

final product market and monopsony in the domestic input market if it creates

monopoly and monopsony power in these markets when it would not otherwise have

existed. This might happen, for example, if a single domestic firm which used

a high ratio of domestic to imported input originally competed with foreign

firms that found it efficient to use lower ratios of domestic to imported

input. A content protection requirement that forced the foreign firms to use

much higher ratios of domestic input to imported input than they would

otherwise choose might remove these firms as competitors both in the market

for the final product and in the market for the domestic input, thereby

allowing the domestic firm to exercise both monopoly power in the final

product market and monopsony power in the market for the domestic input.

     Exercise of monopoly power by suppliers of the domestic input against

demanders of this input is almost always affected by content protection

because content protection directly affects the elasticity as well as the

level of derived demand for the domestic input, as illustrated in figures 4

and 5. In these figures, the curve labeled D(U) shows the derived demand

for the domestic input when producers exercise free choice of input

combinatori. The curve labeled D*(U) shows the derived demand for domestic

input when the content requirement    )    &   is imposed. It is assumed that

this content requirement is only marginally effective, in the sense that

is equal to the share of domestic input that producers voluntarily choose in

the equilibrium that prevails before content protection, with suppliers of the

domestic input optimally exploiting their monopoly power. In figure 4, it is

assumed that the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign
                                   25




       U


                       D*(U; 5*)


           D(U; 5(v)

  U
   1




  U0                                             Marginal Cost




                                                                    D
       0
                                   D0

Fig.--4. Marginally Effective Content Protection When the Supplier of
          the Domestic Input Acts as a Monopolist and c > 1.
                                26




       U




  U0
                                            Marginal Cost
  U1




                                                     D*(U; ô*)


                                                            (v))




                                                                   D
       0
                           D0        D1

Fig.—-5. Marginally Effective Content Protection When the Supplier of
          the Domestic Input Acts as a Monopolist and al < 1.
                                             27




inputs,     a,   is greater than one in absolute value. This implies that the

share of the domestic input grows as we move down along the D(U) curve.

The D*(U) curve therefore corresponds to the D(U) curve below the initial

equilibrium price and lies to the right of this demand curve above the initial

equilibrium price. In contrast, in figure 5, it is assumed that id

is <   1.   This implies that the share of domestic input declines as we move

down along the D(U) curve. The D*(U) curve therefore corresponds to the

D(TJ) curve above the initial equilibrium price, and lies to the right of this

demand curve below the initial equilibrium price. Constructing the marginal

revenue curves that are appropriate with and without marginally effective

content protection, it is apparent from figure 4 that when          J a > 1,

marginally effective content protection raises the monopoly price and lowers

the monopoly quantity of the domestic input.          In contrast, as illustrated in

figure 5, when       d   is   <   1,   marginally effective content protection lowers

the monopoly price and raises the monopoly quantity of the domestic input.9

       1spite the differences in the direction of change in the monopoly equi-

librium price and quantity of the domestic input, depending on the elasticity

of substitution, the monopolistic supplier of the domestic input always gains

from the introduction of marginally effective content protection. The

monopolist clearly cannot lose because the initial monopoly equilibrium point

remains available. The monopolist actually gains from marginally effective

content protection by moving away from this initial equilibrium point in

whichever direction allows him to take advantage of marginally effective

content protection. Increases in the domestic content requirement above the

marginally effective level are clearly beneficial to the monopolistic supplier

of the domestic input so long as they increase the demand for this input at

the price that the monopolist is already charging.
                                      28




7. Conclusions and   Extensions
     The main conclusions of the preceding analysis may be summarized as

follows. First, content protection creates a production distortion by forcing

an inefficient choice of domestic and imported (or foreign) inputs, but it

does not create an excess consumption distortion by forcing a divergence

between social production cost (given the inefficiency in input choice) and

output price. Second, content protection biases investments in improvements

in technical efficiency away from improvements that save domestic input and

toward improvements that save imported (or foreign) input. Third, under

competitive conditions, introduction of a marginally effective content

requirement increases demand for the domestic input and benefits suppliers of

this input. Fourth, increases in the domestic content requirement above the

marginally effective level further increase demand for the domestic input and

further benefit suppliers of this input provided that the price elasticity of

demand for the final product is smaller (in absolute value) than a critical

value that varies inversely with the stringency of the content requirement.

Fifth, the consequences of monopoly in the final product market and monopsony

in the domestic input market are not materially affected by content protection

unless such a policy creates a monopoly or monopsony situation when one would

not otherwise have existed. Sixth, content protection does in general enhance

the monopoly power of suppliers of the domestic input.

     Among these conclusions, those that deal with effects on the suppliers of

domestic inputs are sensitive to the assumption of a single domestic input and

hence a unity of interests among the suppliers of this input. Suppose instead

that the domestic input D is produced by t more basic inputs, L and

K, in accord with a neo—classical, linear homogeneous production function,
                                          29



ID   = G(LD, 1(D). Suppose further that these t inputs are mobile between

industries, are fixed in aggregate supply, and are used in the rieo—classical,

linear homogeneous production function Z =        H(L,       to produce the

economy's other genic output,    Z, whose absolute price is denoted by T.

Under these assumptions, the economy may be thought of as producing two

products, D and Z, with absolute prices U and T, using the technology

of the standard, Hechscher—Ohlin—Samuelson model.° Content protection which

increases the demand for D at given values of all prices will increase the

equilibrium relative product price U/T. Hence, the combination of L and

K used in D (which earns U for each unit of D produced) will gain

relative to the combination of L and K used in Z              (which earns T per

unit of Z produced). When we look at individual factors, however, the

Stolper—Samuelson    theorem tells us that the    reward to the factor used inten-

sively in     D will rise relative to U and T, while the reward to the other

factor declines in terms of both products. With this production structure,

therefore, it is the factor used intensively in D that is the beneficiary of

content protection.

        Modifying the assumptions of the preceding paragraph, suppose that only

the factor L is mobile between       ID   and Z and that K is specific to the

industry where it is employed. The production structure for D and Z is

now described by the specific capital or Viner—Ricardo model.11 Content

protection which raises the demand for         ID at given prices will, as in

Heckscher—Ohlin—Samuelson structure of the preceding paragraph, increase the

equilibrium relative product price U/T. The combination of L and K used

in     ID will gain relative to the combination of L and K used in Z. With

respect to individual factors, the reward to KID will rise relative to U

and T, the reward to mobile L will rise relative to T but fall relative
                                         30




to U, and the reward to i will fall relative to T and U. Thus, K
specific to D will be the clear winner from content protection, with K

specific to Z the clear loser, and mobile L somewhere in between.

       Modifying further the technology for production of X to allow for

different substitution relations between imported inputs and particular

domestic inputs, the production function X      F(I, D) might he written as

x =   J(I,   LD, 1(D). With this technology for X production, the effect of

content protection on demands for LD and KD at given prices depends on the

nature and strength of complementarity and substitution relations among the

factors cooperating to produce X. If, for example, LD was a strong cornple—

rnent for I IL > 0) while 1(D was a strong substitute for I and L (J11(

< 0 and LK < 0), then content protection might increase demand for

while reducing demand for L0. Equilibrium effects on rewards to individual

domestic factors would depend additionally on the specificity or mobility of

LD and KD and the intensity with which these factors are used in other

domestic production activities. Rather than enumerating the possible out-

comes, suffice it to emphasize that the gains and losses of individual

domestic factors from content protection depend on the details of the

production structure of the economy.

       Finally, it is important to note two assumptions of the preceding

analysis that are not always satisfied when content protection is an active

issue. First, foreign firms induced to establish domestic production facil-

ities because of content protection may not pay the same price or face the

same conditions in the market for domestic factors as domestic firms in their

industry. In developing countries, foreign firms typically pay higher wage

rates than domestic firms. It is argued that these higher wage rates attract

a queue of unemployed workers who wait for a high wage job at a foreign firm

rather than accepting a lower wage job at a domestic firm.    If so, then
                                      31




content protection that increases the number of high wage jobs at foreign

firms may have a significant efficiency cost in terms of higher unem-

ployment. For the U.S. auto industry, this situation is probably reversed:

the effect of content protection on automobile prices, on wages of auto

workers and on profits of U.S. auto firms depends on whether foreign firms

induced to locate production facilities in the U.S. accept the high wage rates

and work rules currently prevailing at U.S. firms. Second, constant returns

to scale is not an accurate assumption for automobile industries in developing

countries that have frequently been subjects of content protection and may not

be an accurate assumption for other industries in these countries or for

industries in developed countries that are actual or potential subjects of

such policies. Reasonable efficiency in final assembly and in manufacture of

some automobile parts and components may be achievable at a scale commensurate

with final sales (and desirable product diversity) in the markets of the

largest developing countries. Efficient manufacture of some automobile

components (with allowance for desirable product diversity), however,

apparently requires a scale achieved only in the largest automobile markets

(North America, Europe, and Japan).12 Stringent domestic content requirements

that force small scale production of these automobile components necessarily

have significant efficiency costs beyond the increase in unit production cost

indicated by the analysis in section 2. The same point applies to content

requirements in other industries where scale economies remain important for

some components of the final product at scales beyond the size of the domestic

market. Moreover, when scale economies are important, there is the danger

that content protection will artificially create a "natural monopoly" in which

a single, efficient domestic producer keeps out domestic rivals (who cannot

reach efficient scale) and is freed of competition from foreign firms who do

not meet the content requirement.
                                      32




                                  Footnotes



1. The United States, for example, permits foreign assembled products

normally subject to tariffs or other import restraints to enter the U.S. with

reduced duties if they embody a minimum specified value of U.S. produced

components.

2. analyses of content protection schemes are also provided by Corden (1971,

pp. 45—50), by Johnson (1972, pp. 285—306) for the case of the Canadian auto

industry before the Canada—U.S. auto pact, and by 4unk (1969) for automobile

industries in several Latin American countries.

3. Grossman (1981) writes the production function as X = F(L, M + M*)

where L is a domestic primary input called labor" arid M and M* are

domestic and imported material inputs that are perfect substitutes in

producing the final product. Grossman specifies that a physical content

requirement sets a maximum ratio of M* to M and that a value (or share)

content requirement sets a maximum value of P M/P X where P is the price

of the iinjorted material input and P is the output price. While this

formulation may be reasonable for some industries subject to content protec-

tion, I would argue that the production function (1) which allows a more

flexible representation of substitution possibilities between domestic and

imported inputs is more appropriate for a general analysis of content

protection. Moreover, in most domestic content schemes, the cost of primary

domestic inputs, as well as purchased domestic material inputs or components,

is allowable in the calculation of domestic content. The present analysis of

content protection is consistent with this practice rather than with

Grossman's assumption that only domestic material inputs count as domestic

content.
                                            33




4.   ThO   protect   domestic firms whose costs are raised by the content require-

ment from foreign firms that produce entirely abroad it will generally be

necessary either to prohibit imports of foreign goods that fail to meet the

content requirement or charge a suitable tariff on such goods. In some cases,

protective tariffs on the final product may already be in force before content

protection is introduced. Then, as Corden (1971) notes, introduction of

content protection will reduce effective protection for domestic producers of

the final product by raising the price they must pay for purchased domestic

inputs.

5.   In his analysis of the content protection scheme for the Canadian auto

industry, Johnson (1972) concludes, "The content requirement, when effective,

forces the manufacturer to spend the increased profit he would obtain [from

remission of duties on imported inputs], not on lower prices to the consumer,

but on the excess cost of parts production in Canada." This conclusion is

only partially correct. Some fraction of the remitted penalty tariff is

effectively absorbed by the increase in unit production cost for firms that

satisfy the domestic content requirement. However, provided that competition

prevails, the part of the remitted penalty tariff that is not absorbed by this

increased cost is passed through to purchasers of the final product.

6. There is some consumption distortion loss from content protection because

the price to consumers is raised above the price that would prevail in the

absence of such protection. There is not, however, any excess consumption

distortion loss from content protection due to a divergence between true

social domestic production cost and the price charged to consumers.

7. This result differs from Grossman's conclusions (see his propositions 3

and 5) that a "small" (marginally effective) content requirement could raise

or lower domestic value added. The reason for the difference is in Grossman's
                                         34




specification of technology arid in his definition of the magnitude to which

the domestic content requirement is applied. Specifically, Grossman includes

only domestic material inputs in his definition domestic content that sat-

isfies the content requirement. A marginally effective content requirement in

his model increases the quantity of the domestic material input, but may

reduce value added from the primary domestic input sufficiently to reduce

total domestic value added.

8. For the purpose of this discussion, it is assumed that marginal revenue,

M, is a well—defined, monotonically decreasing function of output, X.

9. Grossman (proposition 6) concludes that imposition of a marginally

effective content requirement will always induce a monopolistic supplier of

the domestic material input to raise his price and reduce his quantity. This

is because in Grossman's model the demand curve facing the supplier of the

domestic material input is infinitely elastic at the world market price of the

imported input before content protection is imposed. When a marginally

effective domestic content requirement is imposed, the demand curve facing the

domestic supplier of the material input has finite elasticity at and in a

region to the left of the old equilibrium point without this requirement. kt

the old equilibrium, therefore, marginal revenue must he less than marginal

cost when the marginally effective content requirement is imposed, implying

that the monopolistic supplier of the domestic material input will increase

his   price   and reduce his quantity.

10. see Jones (1965) for a clear discussion and summary of the properties of

this model.

11. See Jones (1971), Mayer (1974) or Mussa (1974) for an exposition of the

essential properties of the model.
                                      35




12. Munk (1969) cites evidence from the 1950's and 1960's that indicates

differing degrees of scale economies for different processes in automobile

manufacturing, with some meaningful economies for total vehicle production

remaining at a scale of three or four hundred thousand vehicles per year. The

shift toward production of "world cars" by leading manufacturers suggests that

scale economies in automobiles today are at least as important as they were a

decade or two decades ago.
                                              36




                                          References

Corden, W. M., 1971, The Theory of Protection. Oxford: Oxford University

    Press.

Grossman, Gene M., 1981, "The Theory of 1)Dmestic Content Protection and

    Content Preference," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 96, no. 4 (November),

    583—603.

Johnson, Harry G., 1972, Aspects of the Theory of Tariffs. Cambridge,

    Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Jones, Ronald W., 1971, "The Three Factor Model in Theory, Trade and History,"

    in Bhagwati, et. al. (eds.), Trade, the Balance of Payments and Growth.

    Amsterdam: North Holland.

Jones, Ronald W., 1965, "The Structure of Simple General juilibrium Models,"

    Journal of Political      Economy, 73, no.     4    (August), 557—572.
Mayer, Wolfgang, 1974, "Short-Run and Long—Run Equilibrium for a Small Open

    Economy,"    Journal   of Political    Economy, 82, no.    5   (September), 955—967,
Munk, Bernard, 1969, "The Welfare Costs of             Content Protection: The Automobile

    Industry    in Latin   America," Journal of Political Economy, 77, no         1



    (February), 85—98.
Mussa, Michael, 1974, "Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance
    of Factor Specificity, Substitutability and Intensity in the Short and
    Long Run," Journal of Political Fonomy, 82, no. 6 (November), 1191—1203.
