NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ADJUSTMENT PROCESS AND THE
TIMING OF TRADE LIBERALIZATION

Michael

Mussa

Working Paper No. 1158

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1981L

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1458
September 1984

The Adjustment Process and the
Timing of Trade Liberalization

ABSTRACT

This paper examines the appropriate time path of the tariff rate for a
small open economy that has decided to move from protection of import competing

industries to free trade. Adjustment costs for moving resources to alternative
uses do not provide a rationale for gradual adjustment of the tariff rate because
in the absence of distortions, rational optimizing agents will make socially
appropriate investment decisions with respect to adjustment when they are qiven

correct price signals. Some distortions of the adjustment process imply the
desirability of gradual adjustment of the tariff rate to slow adjustment, but
other distortions imply the desirability of subsidizing imports in the short
run in order to speed movement of resources out of previously protected industries.
Concern with the income redistribution effects of reductions in the tariff rate
(which usually injure owners of factors in previously protected industries)

does provide a general rationale for a gradual move to free trade. The influence
of the unemployment consequences of tariff reduction on the appropriate path

of commercial policy depends on the nature and shape of the resoone of the rate
of resource reallocation to the level of unemployment in previously protected
industries.

Michael Mussa
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street

Chicago, Illinois 60637
(312) 962—7143

The Adjustment Process and the Timing

of Trade Liberalization*
by

Michael Mussa

Introduction and Summary
This study is concerned with the appropriate time path of commercial policy
for a country that has already determined that a more liberal trade policy is in

its long run best interest. In contrast to the question of a country's best
static trade policy which has been extensively discussed in the economic literature,

the sublect of the present study has received scant attention.1 However, unless
one believes that most countries have already achieved their optimum trade
policies or that the best time path of policy is always and unquestionably to

move immediately to the best long run policy, then the question of the annrooriate
time path of commercial policy should be regarded as an interesting and iurnortant
issue.

The approach that will be adopted in examining this issue in the present
study is to assume that a country with a high level of protection granted to

domestic industries that produce goods competing with imports has decided, for
whatever reasons, that a more liberal commercial policy, with a much lower level
of protection for import conmeting domestic industries, is in its long run best

*
This paper was written while the author was a consultant to the Strategy and
Trade Division of the Country Policy Department of the World Bank. The World
Bank does not accept responsibility for the views expressed, which are those of
the author and should not be attributed to the World Bank or its affiliated
organizations. The findings, interpretations and conclusions are the result of
research supported by the Bank; they do not necessarily represent official policy
of the Bank. The designations employed, the presentation of material and any
maps used in this document are solely for the convenience of the reader and do
not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Bank or its
affiliates concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city, area, or
of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its boundaries or national
affiliation.

1. Among the papers that do examine the appropriate timing of trade liberalization
or closely related-issues are Lapan (1976), Learner (1980), Mussa (1978 and l982b)
Neary (1982) and Martin and Selowsky (1982).

2

interest. To keep matters as simple as possible, it will usually be assumed
that this country is sufficiently small that it has no influence on the world
prices of the goods it trades, and that there are no distortions or externalities
that make any policy other than complete free trade the optimal long run policy

for this country. The issue for policy makers in this country is how to alter
commercial policy over time in order to move in an optimal manner from a policy
that grants substantial protection to imnort competing industries to a policy
of free trade.

This statement of the issue under study is not meant to suggest that the
problem with respect to the optimal path of commercial policy is always how

to move optimally to free trade. As is well known, there are circumstances
in which a country's best long run commercial policy is not free trade——especially

when its economy is infected by distortions that have some relationship to
international trade and that are beyond the scope of government policy to

eliminate completely. Rather, the suggestion is that by considering a simple
and well defined question, in the context of a well specified analytical structure,
some principles will emerge that will have relevance in more general situations.

Moreover, while the specific issue under study is the optimal path for commercial
policy leading from protectionism to free trade, the principles that emerge in
the exinination of this issue will presumably have some relevance for related

issues concerning domestic policies dealing with taxes, subsidies, price controls

and other government interventions into the economic system. No attemnt will be
made here, however, to draw any conclusions for this broader range of issues
from the present analysis.

To limit further the range of the present investigation, it will consider
only the optimal path of commercial policy in a program of trade liberalization,

and not the appropriate paths of other policies that would normally be used in

3

conjunction with, and in support of, commercial policy in a sensible and

comprehensive program of trade liberalization. Among the policies that will
not be considered are the monetary, fiscal, and exchange rate policies that
would have to be pursued in conjunction with a more liberal commercial policy
in order to insure an adequate level of aggregate demand and to prevent, to
the extent possible, the more liberal commercial policy from resulting in an

increase in the general level of unemployment. Also not considered are
policies of "adjustment assistance" that might be used either to facilitate
the movement of resources out of previously protected industries or to compensate the owners of these resources for income lost due to the removal of

protection. Further, the only commercial policy that will be considered
explicitly is a tariff applied to imported products. No consideration will be
given to the interesting and important question of how to move from a complicated
system of tariffs, quotas, export taxes and subsidies, content requirements,

multiple exchange rates, and other commercial policy interventions to a more
uniform and liberal system of commercial policy.

Having described the limitations of this study, it is now appropriate
to summarize the specific issues it does investigate and the results of this

investigation. First, the study considers the effect of adjustment costs
incurred in moving resources out of previously protected industries and into

other activities on the appropriate time path of trade liberalization. In the
absence of such costs, the economy could, in principle, adjust immediately to
the new long run equilibrium position consistent with its optimal long run

commercial policy. The question is——Then such instantaneous adjustment is not
possible because of costs incurred in moving resources, Is there a case for
moving more gradually from a policy of protectionism to a liberal trade policy?

The answer, in general, is no. Specifically, when private economic agents who

4

control the disposition of productive resources have rational expectations which
allow them to calculate correctly the values of locating these resources in
alternative activities, and when there are no distortions of the adjustment
process that cause these agents to see private adjustment costs that differ
from social adjustment costs, then the adjustment process subsequent to an
immediate change of commercial policy to its long run optimum will be socially

efficient. By implication, a slowing down of the implementation of the policy
of trade liberalization, which would reduce the privately perceived incentive
to relocate resources outside of previously protected industries, would result
in less socially desirable adjustment path for the economy.
Second, when there are distortions that affect the adjustment process, then
the strong presumption in favor of an immediate move to the best long run com-

mercial policy as the best time path of policy disappears. Unfortunately, for
the variety of distortions that might reasonably be thought to affect the adjust-

ment process, there is no general indication of how the time path of commercial
policy should deviate from the policy of an immediate move to the best long

run commercial policy. For some distortions, such as the distortion that arises
when economic agents hold static expectations concerning the incomes that will
be earned by factors located in different activities, adjustment occurs too
rapidly following an immediate move to the best long run commercial policy.
tn these cases, there is an argument for gradualism in reducing the level of

protection in order to slow down the adjustment process. For other distortions,
such as the distortion created by taxes on factor incomes which affect the
privately perceived benefits of factor movements, adjustment occurs too slowly

following an immediate move to the bet long run commercial policy. In these
cases, it is desirable for the level of protection initially to be reduced to
below its long run optimal level (imports or exports should be subsidized if

5

free trade is the best long run policy) in order to increase the speed with

which resources are moved out of the previously protected industries. Thus,
no general case for gradualism in implementing a policy of trade liberalization
emerges from consideration of the implications of distortions that might affect
the adjustment process.

Third, a general case for gradualism in trade liberalization can be based
on a desire to limit the income and wealth losses sustained by owners of resources

initially employed in protected industries. For reasons that will be discussed,
limitation of such losses may be a valid and Important objective of policy
makers even if the owners of these resources are not among the poorer members
of society (and even if their private losses do not correspond to any social

loss). Under reasonable assumptions about the structure of the economic system
including the nature of the adjustment process, it can be shown that a more
gradual policy of trade liberalization moderates the income and wealth losses
sustained by owners of resources initially employed in protected industries,
but at some cost in terms of the efficiency of the economy's adjustment path.

The issue for policy makers concerned with limiting the losses of these resource
owners is to make the appropriate trade off between limiting these losses and

securing reasonable efficiency of the adjustment process. Among the factors
that influence the nature of this trade off are the degree to which resources
employed in protected industries are specific to those industries and must be

allowed to depreciate In order to move them to other activities. When adjustment
must occur primarily through wearing out existing plant and equipment and by
waiting for skilled workers with specific human capital to retire, little may
be gained in terms of the efficiency of the adjustment process by pushing trade
liberalization more rapidly than the rate required to Induce no new capital to
be Invested and no new workers to train for skilled jobs in the previously
protected industries.

6

Fourth and finally, the appropriate time path of commercial policy in a
program of trade liberalization may be influenced by the possibility that
resources employed in protected industries may become unemployed as a conse-

quence of reductions in the level of protection. Because of the difficulty
in specifying a completely satisfactory and widely acceptable model of why
resources become unemployed (and remain in that state for substantial periods),
the analysis of this issue in the present study is based on an assumed reduced
form relationship which relates the rate at which resources are moved out of
protected industries to the amount of unemployment experienced by resources that

continue to seek employment in these industries. Doubts about the existence
and stability of this reduced form relationship imply doubts about the validity

and generality of conclusions based upon its use. Accepting the general approach
as valid, however, the key result that emerges is that the optimal path of
commercial policy is the path that balances the marginal social cost of increased
unemployment of resources in protected industries (which results in a loss of
output) against the marginal social benefit of stimulating more rapid movement

of resources out of these industries. The time path of the level of protection
that maintains this balance depends critically on the shape of the reduced form
relationship between the rate of movement of resources and the level of unemployment.

With a proportional relationship, it turns out that the optimal long run commercial

policy is not free trade. This is so because when the economy gets sufficiently
close to its free trade equilibrium, the marginal social benefit of moving
additional resources out of protected industries becomes very small and ultimately
becomes smaller than the social cost for the output lost due to unemployment of

these resources. Along the path of convergence to this optimal long run commercial
policy, however, the level of protection exhibits peculiar rovershootingT behavior.
Specifically, in the optimal program of trade liberalization, the level of

7

protection is initially reduced to below its long run optimal level (and perhaps
to below zero) and is subsequently raised back up to this optimal long run level.
This peculiarity disappears when the reduced form relationship between the rate
of resource reallocation and the level of unemployment is not proportional, but
instead has theproperty that the rate of resource reallocation relative to the

level of unemployment becomes large at low levels of unemployment. It is
argued that this property is reasonable if decisions about the industries of

employment for newly produced capital and new workers entering the labor force
are strongly influenced by relatively small differences in expected earnings

between industries. If this argument is generally correct, then the time path
of commerical policy that trades off appropriately the marginal social cost of
increased unemployment against the marginal social benefit of more rapid adjustment
will be a path along which the level of protection is gradually reduced to its
long run optimal level.

8

I. Adjustment Costs and the Timing of Trade Liberalization
If productive resources could move costlessly and instantaneously among
alternative uses and product and factor prices adjusted immediately to clear
markets, there would be no interesting issue concerning the optimal timing

for a policy of trade liberalization. The optimal policy would be to move
immediately to the stance of commercial policy that is optimal in the long

run. For a small country without any monopoly power in trade and without any
domestic distortions requiring trade interventions as part of a second—best

policy regime, this optimal policy would be an immediate move to complete

free trade. For a more complicated economy, the optimal long run policy would
not necessarily be free trade, but it would still be optimal to move immediately
to this most desirable long run policy.

In real world economies, of course, productive resources cannot be moved
instantaneously among alternative uses, and movement of many resources is a
costly activity either in terms of direct costs of movement or in terms of
foregone output while resources undergo transformations necessary to make them

productive in alternative uses. Because of the time and cost involved in moving
resources to alternative uses, the adjustment to any sudden change in economic
conditions, including a sudden shift to a liberal commercial policy regime,

will not occur all at once, but will be spread out over time. Moreover, during
the period of adlustment subsequent to a sudden trade liberalization, the value
of final output produced in the economy will be reduced to the extent that costs

are incurred in the adjustment process. Because these costs tend to be higher,
at a moment of time and in total, the more rapidly adjustment takes place, it
desirable that the economic system not adjust too rapidly to any change in

economic conditions. To some, this might suggest the desirability of slowing

9

the process of trade liberalization in order to limit the costs that the economy
incurs in adjusting to the new, long run commercial policy regime.

The main purpose of this section is to demonstrate that this intuitively

plausible notion is not in general correct. Even though adjustment costs rise
as the pace of adjustment quickens, it is not generally desirable to slow the
pace of trade liberalization in order to limit the cost of adjusting to the

new commercial policy regime. Provided that the economic agents who control
the allocation of resources perceive a private benefit from resource movements
that corresponds to the true social benefit, and provided that they see costs

of resource movements that correspond to true social costs, they will make the
socially correct decisions concerning the appropriate pace of adjustment subsequent

to an immediate trade liberalization. The case for gradualism in implementing
a policy of trade liberalization, therefore, depends on the existence of distortions affecting the social efficiency of private decisions about resource movement (discussed in section II), or on concern about the income redistribution
effects of a sudden trade liberalization (discussed in section III), or on the
unemployment effects of trade liberalization (discussed in section IV), rather
than on any general argument based on the existence of adjustment costs.

10

A. A Two—Sector Economy with Adjustment Costs
To develop the main proposition concerning the influence of adjustment
costs on the appropriate timing of trade liberalization, it suffices to consider

a relatively simple model of a two—sector economy. It is assumed that the output
of the protected sector, X, and the output of the rest of the economy, Z, are

produced in accord with standard, neo—classical, constant—returns—to—scale
production functions, using two inputs, labor and capital:
(1)

X =

F(L)(

Kx)

(2)

z =

C(L

Kz)

Labor is assumed to be freely and instantaneously mobile between X and Z, but
capital (which presumably includes human capital) is assumed to be specific,

at least at a moment of time, to the industry where it is located. The assumption of free mobility of labor is intended as a convenient simplifying assumption,

not as a description of the situation of most workers in a real world economy.
An essential element of the present model is the specification of the
technology of the adjustment process for the redistribution of existing capital

and for the construction and allocation of new capital. There are many ways in
which the technologies of these two adjustment activities might be specified
that would be consistent with the assumption that they are resource—using
activities with rising marginal costs——the assumption that is crucial for the

conclusions of the present analysis. For analytical simplicity, it is convenient
to assume that these two adjustment activities are pursued separately and that

each utilizes only labor in its production process. Formally, it is assumed
that the amounts of labor used in capital movement, LN, and in investment in
new capital, L1, are determined by
LM =

1J(IMI),

i(O) =

0,

'

> 0,

iv"

>0

L1 =

cIJ),

(O)

0,

' > 0,

"

>0

=

11

where M is the rate of movement of old capital out of Z and into X. and I is
the rate of production of new capital which may be allocated to either industry
to replace depreciating old capital or to add to the industry's capital stock.

Taking account of movement of old capital, allocation of new capital, and
depreciation of old capital, the rules governing the rates of change of the
capital stocks in the two industries are given by
(5)

Kx=M+Ix_•Kx

(6)

Kz=_M+Iz_6•Kz

where I >

C)

>

and

0 are the amounts of new capital allocated to X and Z,

respectively, subject to the constraint

+

(7)

and where cS

is

=

I,

the deoreciation rate of capital which is assumed to be the same

for both industries.

Aside from the assumption that capital movement and investment in new capital
use only labor as a factor of production, this specification of the technology
of the adjustment process captures, in a stylized form, key elements of the
processes governing adjustments of physical and human capital in actual economies.
Many types of existing plant and equipment can be transferred to alternative
uses, but usually only at some cost for restructuring, remodeling, retooling,

or relocation. In addition, physical capital may be transferred to alternative
uses by allowing existing plant and equipment to depreciate and by locating the
new capital that corresponds to such depreciation in some other industry.
Similarly, for human capital, it is possible to retrain and relocate workers
who have already acquired substantial human capital that is specific to a

particular industry. It is also possible to achieve a reallocation of human
capital by not replacing retiring workers in one industry and training new
entrants to the labor force in the skills required for other industries.

12

Given the specification of the technology for producing the final outputs
X and Z and the technology of the adjustment process, we may address the question
of the optimal timing of trade liberalization by considering the considering
the policy that would be adopted by a social planner whose objective Is to

maximize the welfare of a representative consumer in the economy. Assuming
for simplicity that the economy is small and takes the world relative price
of X in terms of Z, denoted by P, and the world interest, r, as given, the

objective of this social planner may be stated as the maximization of the
present discounted value of the economy's final output, V, as defined by

(8)

V =

f0 [P F(Lx, Kx) + G(L , K )Iexp(—rt)
z

z

dt,

subject to the technology of the adjustment process specified in (3) through
(7), and subject to the overall employment constraint,
(9)

Lx+Lz4LM+LIL,

where L is the fixed supply of freely mobile labor) The Initial condition for
this dynamic optimization problem is determined by the initial amounts of capital

that are located in the X and Z industries, Kx(O) and K(O). Since the initial
state of the economy is assumed to be the long run equilibrium position for the

economy before trade liberalization when the X industry was protected by an
import tariff, it is correct to assume that K(O) exceeds the equilibrium size
of the capital stock in X that is appropriate under free trade, K, and that
Kz(O) is less than the equilibrium size of the capital stock in Z that is
appropriate under free trade,

1. Since the optimum policy is to move immediately to free trade, we may safely
disregard the consumption distortion cost of a tariff. We could treat the case
where the interest rate is endogenously determined by equilibrium in the domestic
credit market (with no international capital mobility), but this would complicate
the analysis without altering its basic conclusions. If the country faced an
upward rising foreign borrowing cost schedule, the planner would need to tax

13

Without going into the formal details of the analysis of the planner's
optimization problem (which are discussed in an appendix), it is possible to

explain the economic principles that govern the planner's behavior. The
world market price of X in terms of Z, P. tells the planner the correct way

to value output of X in terms of output of Z. In addition to this price,
the planner needs to calculate a shadow price for a unit of capital located

in X, denoted by p, and a shadow price for a unit of capital located in Z,
denoted by pg,, and a, shadow wage rate for a unit of mobile labor, denoted by w.

The appropriate shadow prices for units of capital located in the two industries
are the present discounted values of the value of the marginal product of capital
in the respective Industries, adjusted for the rate of depreciation of capital;

(10)

Px(t) =

I PFL(Lx(s),

(11)

z(t) =

I

GL(L?(s),

K(s))exp(_(r+).(s_t)) ds

Kz(s)).exp(_(r+).(s_t)) ds

Given the socially correct prices for output of X and for units of capital
located in the two industries, the planner sets the shadow wage rate to achieve
the socially appropriate distribution of labor among X production, Z production,

movement of existing capital, and production of new capital. The correct amount
of labor to employ in X is the amount for which the value of the marginal product

of labor in X, PFL(Lx, Kx), is equal to the shadow wage rate, w. Taking account
of constant returns to scale In production of X, this amount of labor can be
d
d
expressed as Kx9.x(w/P), where 9(w/P) is the labor demand function of an

foreign borrowing at a rate that would make the privately perceived cost of
such borrowing correspond to the true social cost. With this tax in place,
however, there would be no reason for gradualism in trade policy.

2. In the present model, the long run stock of capital,

+ Kz, is not fixed.

It is possible to show that if X production is relatively labor intensive, the
long run stock of capital will rise due to the removal of protection; whereas
it will decline if X production is relatively capital intensive.

14

X producer with one unit of capital. Similarly, the correct amount of labor
to employ in Z is determined by the requirement that the value of the marginal
product of labor in Z, GL(L7, Kz), equal W; and is equal to K7'9(U), where
is the labor demand function of a Z producer with one unit of capital.
The correct amount of labor to employ in moving existing capital is

determined by the requirement that the marginal social cost of this activity

must equal the marginal social benefit. The marginal social cost of capital
movement is equal to the shadow wage rate (which measures the social cost of
a unit of labor) multiplied by the amount of labor required for a marginal
increment in the race of capital movement, lp'(INI). As shown in figure 1, the

marginal social cost of capital movement, for a given W,

is

an increasing

function of the rate of capital movement, MI. The marginal benefit of capital
movement is equal to the absolute value of the difference between the shadow
prices of capital in the two industries, with the sign of the difference
determining the appropriate direction of capital movement. Thus, as illustrated
in figure 1, when

=

=

and W

= (' the

appropriate rate of capital

movement is 1M01 and the appropriate direction of capital movement is out of X

and into Z. Applying this condition more generally, we determine that the
appropriate amount of labor to employ in capital movement is given by
(12)

L(w/IPx

- 7I)

=

The correct amount of labor to employ in producing new capital is determined
by the requirement that the marginal social cost of investment in new capital

must equal the marginal social benefit. The marginal social cost of new investment
is equal to the shadow wage rate multiplied by the amount of labor required for

an increment in investment, '(I). Since it does not make economic sense to
locate any new capital in the industry with a lower shadow value of capital,

15

— liz1

w.'(lMl)

IPxo — zo

0

Fig.——l. Determination of the Rate of Capital Movement.

16

the marginal benefit of investment in new capital is determined by the shadow
price of capital for the industry with the higher shadow price of capital;
that is, by p = maximum of p and

As illustrated in figure 2, therefore,

the correct amount of investment in new capital is determined by the condition

that the marginal cost of such investment equal p. From this condition, we
determine that the correct amount of labor to employ in producing new capital
is given by
(13)

T4(w/) =

Adding together the amounts of labor allocated to its four different
uses, it follows that the total amount of labor allocated by the social planner
is given by
(14)

Ld(w, 1'x' 1z' Kx.

P) =

K.4(wIP) + Kz.9(w) + L(w/ki_p)
+ L1(w/inax( p,

The constraint that the total amount of labor allocated must equal the available
supply, that is,
(15)

Ld(w, 'x' 'z' Kx, Kz, P) =

determines the appropriate value of the shadow wage rate, given the shadow prices
of capital for the two industries, the amounts of capital in the two industries,
and the relative output price.

With the determination of the shadow wage rate, every aspect of the planner's

optimal behavior at a moment of time is completely determined. Specifically,
the allocation of labor among its four uses determines the outputs of X and Z,
the rate of movement of existing capital between industries, and the rate of

production of new capital. The sign of the difference between

and

determines the direction of movement of existing capital and the allocation of
all new capital to the industry with the higher shadow price of capital.

17

3-I

w0.(I)

U0

I

10

Fig.——2. Determination of the Rate of Investment in New Capital.

18

Starting from the long run equilibrium position of the economy when the
X industry is protected by a tariff, the tath that the economy will traverse
under the guidance of the social planner may be described as follows.

Since

at the starting point for the economy, the capital stock in X is too large

and the capital stock in Z is too small, relative to their appropriate long
run equilibrium levels under free trade, the initial shadow price for a unit
of capital in X,
capital in Z,

is less than the initial shadow price for a unit of

This implies that at the starting point along the

economy's optimal path, the planner allocates a positive amount of labor to

the task of moving existing capital out of X and into Z. In addition, the
planner directs that all newly produced capital be located in the Z industry.

The result is that the stock of capital in X declines through outward movement
of existing capital and through depreciation, while the stock of capital in Z
grows because of inward movement of existing capital and because the total
amount of newly produced capital that is all allocated to this industry exceeds

depreciation of existing capital. As Kx declines and K7 rises, the differential
between

and ii? narrows and the rate of movement of existing capital out of X

and into Z declines. All newly produced capital, however, continues to be
allocated to the Z industry. Ultimately, a point is reached where the value
of the marginal product of capital in X is equal to the value of the marginal
product of capital in Z, and this condition is subsequently maintained so that

thereafter remains equal to p. When this point is reached, the economy
will not, in general, have yet reached the long run equilibrium position appro-

priate for free trade. Subsequent adjustment does not involve any movement of
existing capital out of X and into Z, since devoting resources to this activity
is not optimal when

equals p7. Rather, adjustment is achieved by distributing

newly produced capital between X and Z in an appropriate manner, with the share

19

of investment going to X gradually rising (from zero) and the share of investment going to Z gradually declining (from unity) until the level and distribution
of the capital stock reaches the long run equilibrium level and distribution
of capital appropriate for free trade.

It should be noted that for the planner to move the economy along this
optimal adjustment path, he must calculate the appropriate time paths for the

shadow prices of units of capital in the two industries. At any given date,
these shadow prices depend on the present discounted value of the value of

the marginal product of capital in the respective industries. To know what
these shadow prices should be, therefore, the planner must know the future course
of the amounts of labor and capital that will be employed in the two industries.
The future course of these variables, however, depends on the future course of

the shadow prices for units of capital in the two industries. Hence, to move
the economy along its optimal adjustment path, the planner must solve a complex
dynamic optimization problem in which he jointly and simultaneously determines
the appropriate paths for the shadow prices of capital in the two industries
and the appropriate paths for the amounts of labor and capital employed in
these industries and the amounts of labor allocated to movement of existing
capital and production of new capital.

20

B. Optimal Commercial Policy with Private Agents
When decisions about the allocation of resources are made by private

economic agents rather than by an all powerful social planner, government
policy influences the adjustment path of the economy only indirectly by
affecting the economic conditions that influence the decisions of these

agents. The issue with respect to the optimal timing of trade liberalization
is how the government should vary the level of protection over time in order
to induce private economic agents to follow a socially optimal adjustment

path. If there are no distortions in the economic system other than the
pre—existing protection granted to import competing industries, and if private
economic agents have rational expectations about future economic conditions

relevant to their current decisions, it can be shown that the optimal policy
is to reduce the level of protection immediately to its long run optimum level
and to allow private agents to adjust as they see fit to this change in economic

circumstances. In particular, for small country that was described analytically
in the preceding subsection, the optimal policy is to cut the import tariff rate
immediately to zero and hold it there permanently.

To understand why this policy of an immediate move to free trade induces
private economic agents to pursue a socially optimal adjustment path, it is
useful to consider the way in which such agents, acting exclusively in their
own private interest, would determine the adjustment path of the economy.

Economic agents who own units of capital in the X and Z industries must decide
at each moment of time whether they wish to retain their capital in its present

industry or pay the cost of moving it to the other industry. They must also
decide on the amount of new capital they wish to purchase to replace capital that
is depreciating or to add to their stock of capital and on the industry in which

21

to locate this new capital. To make these decisions, these agents need to
calculate the value (to them) of a unit of capital located in each of the two

industries. Since there are no distortions in the economy, these agents face
the same interest rate as the social planner and Income from each unit of capital
that is equal to the value of the marginal product of capital in the industry

where the capital is located, adjusted for the physical depreciation of capital

at the rate .

By the assumption of rationality of expectations, the path that

these agents will expect the value of the marginal product of capital to follow
in each industry will correspond to the path that is calculated by the social
planner.

Hence, the values that private agents will assign to units of capital

located in the two industries will correspond to the shadow prices,

li and 117

that are calculated by the social planner, as defined in equations (10) and (11).

Indeed, if there were a market in which economic agents could trade claims to
units of capital located in the two Industries,

and

would be the market

prices of these claims.

Given the values that agents assign to units of capital in the two Industries,
the benefit that they will see from moving an existing unit of capital out of X
and into Z must be the difference between

and

This difference determines

the price owners of capital will be willing to pay for the service of moving
capital out of X and into Z.

In figure 1, this fact is represented by showing

a horizontal demand curve for the service of movement of capital at a height
equal to [IJXO —

'zot

.

The supply curve of producers of this service must

correspond (under the assumed absence of all distortions) to the marginal cost
curve for producing this service, as determined by the wage rate that producers
of this service must pay for the labor they employ, multiplied by the amount of

labor required to produce a marginal increment in this service. It follows that
if the wage rate paid by producers of this service is the same as the shadow

22

wage rate used by the social planner, the amount of capital movement determined
by the equilibrium of demand and supply of this service on the part of private
agents will correspond exactly to the amount determined by the social planner.
Obviously, the direction of movement of existing capital determined by private
agents (out of the industry with the lower value of capital and Into the industry

with the higher value of capital) is the same as that determined by the social
planner.

With respect to investment in new capital, It is clear that private agents
will direct all such Investment into the industry with a higher value of capital,
since to do otherwise would imply a loss to the owner of new capital relative to

what he could costlessly achieve by making the socially correct decision concerning

the distribution of newly produced capital) It follows that the value that
private agents will assign to newly produced capital is the value of a unit of
capital in the industry where capital has Its highest value; that is, the same

value p max[p, p1J that is used by the social planner to determine the benefit
of investment in new capital. This value to capital owners of newly produced
capital Is the demand price that faces suppliers of such capital, as represented

by the horizontal demand curve at height p in figure 2. The supply curve for
new capital corresponds to the marginal cost curve for its producers, as
determined by the wage rate multiplied by the amount of labor required to

increase new capital production by a marginal unit. It follows that if the wage
rate facing producers of new capital is the same as the shadow wage rate used
by the social planner, then the level of new capital production determined by
private agents (as well as its distribution) will be the same as that determined
by the social planner.

1. When p =

p7,

private agents will also behave exactly like the social planner

in allocating investment between X and Z so as to keep the economy along its
optimal path.

23

The wage rate that faces suppliers of new capital and of the service of
capital movement in the economy controlled by the behavior of private agents

must be the same as the shadow wage rate used by the social planner because
the condition of labor market equilibrium in the privately controlled economy
is the same as the condition (15) that the planner uses to determine the

appropriate value of the shadow wage rate. Specifically, since labor is
freely mobile between its four productive uses, it is clear that maximizing
behavior by workers who supply a fixed amount of labor L will compel the wage

rate to be the same for all demanders of labor. The demand for labor in each
of these uses is determined in the privately controlled economy by the same
functional relationship that the planner uses to allocate labor to each use.

Producers of X and producers of Z each demand labor up to the point where the
value of the marginal product of labor in their respective industries is equal

to the market wage rate. Movers of existing capital and producers of new
capital demand labor up to the point where the value of its marginal product

in their respective activities (using p —
of capital movement and p =

max[p,

as the price of the service

p] as the price of new capital) is equal

to the market wage rate. Since the sum of these four demand functions yields
the aggregate labor demand function defined in (13), and since the supply of
labor L is the same as for the social planner, it follows that the market equilibrium wage rate implied by the behavior of individual economic agents is the

same as the shadow wage rate used by the social planner. This, in turn,
guarantees that all aspects of the behavior of the economy when it is controlled
by the behavior of individual economic agents are the same as when it is under
the control of the social planner.

If the tariff imposed on imported units of X were not immediately reduced
to zero at the start of the process of trade liberalization, the economy would

24

not converge to its appropriate long run equilibrium position along the socially

optimal adjustment path. This is so because with a positive tariff remaining
imports of X, domestic producers of X will see a price for their output that
exceeds Its true social value.1 Consequently, they will employ more labor in
producing X than is socially desirable, at the expense of other more valuable

uses of this labor. Moreover, because the market price of domestically produced
X is kept artificially high by a tariff, owners of capital in X will see a
value of the marginal product of this capital which exceeds the true social

value of its marginal product and will calculate a value for a unit of this

capital that exceeds its true social value. This will slow down the rate at
which existing capital is moved out of X and into Z to below the socially

optimal rate. In addition, because the increased use of labor in X comes
partly at the expense of labor that should be used in Z, the value of the
marginal product of capital in Z will be reduced to below its socially appropriate level (along the economy's optimal adjustment path), resulting in a
reduction in the value assigned to a unit of capital located in Z (relative to

its value along the economy's optimal adlustment path). Since the value of
a unit of capital in Z is the demand price for new capital that determines the
rate of production of new capital, this reduction in the value of a unit of
capital in Z implies that adjustment through production of new capital and its

location in Z will proceed at less than the socially optimal rate.2 Thus,
any policy of gradually reducing the tariff rate to zero, rather than reducing it
all at once, results in a suboptimal adjustment path.

1. In addition, so long as any tariff remains in effect, there is a consumption
distortion loss that results from this tariff.
2. Even if there is no immediate reduction in the tariff rate but only an
announcement of reductions to occur in the future, the value of a unit of capital
in X will fall relative to the value of a unit of capital in Z. Thus, the effect
of any program of trade liberalization should be to make the value of a unit of
capital in Z the effective determinant of the demand price for additions to
the capital stock.

25

If the assumptions about the structure of the economy or about the technology of the adjustment process were modified from those described in the
previous subsection, the description of the optimal policy of the social
planner and of the behavior of the economy when under the control of private

agents would require corresponding modification. The basic conclusion of the
present discussion, however, would not be modified. In the absence of distortions
in the economy other than protection and with rationality of expectations on
the part of private agents, immediate cutting of the level of protection to

zero will be the optimal path of commercial policy (for a small country). The
reason is that this policy provides private economic agents with the correct
price signals upon which to base their individual decisions with respect to

the allocation of the economy's scarce resources. These are the signals that
make the privately perceived costs and benefits of any action correspond to
its true social costs and benefits and, hence, lead individual economic agents
to behave in a way that is consistent with the maximization of social welfare.

This proposition, of course, is not new in economics. It dates back to
Adam Smith's description of the mechanism of the "invisible hand" through which
the forces of competition in an economic system compel individual agents who

seek only their own interest to serve the social interest. The main point of
the present discussion is that the validity of this proposition is not suspended
in an economic system where the movement of resources among alternative uses is
a time consuming and costly activity and where the agents who control the
disposition of these resources must solve dynamic rather than static optimization
problems.

26

II. Distortions of the Adiustment Process
A key assumption in demonstrating the desirability of free trade as a
country's optimal static commercial policy is that its economy is free of
distortions other than the distortions that would be introduced by some other

commercial policy. When this assumption is invalid because the country has
market power in some of its exports or imports or because there are externalities
associated with producing or consuming these products or because of other rele-

vant distortions, free trade is not, in general, the best static commercial

policy. Similar reasoning, suggests that while an immediate move to a country's
best long run commercial policy is the best time path for commercial policy in
the absence of distortions affecting the adjustment process, it is not necessarily

the best path in the presence of such distortions. However, in contrast to the
theory of static commercial policy, where we have some understanding of the
distortions that would justify specific divergences from free trade, we have as
yet little understanding of the distortions of the adjustment process that would

justify gradualism in moving commercial policy to its long run optimum. Indeed,
nothing rules out the possibility that the optimal path for commercial policy
in an economy with excessive protection and with other distortions affecting the
adjustment process would be to reduce the level of protection initially to below
its long run optimal level in order to speed the movement of resources out of
previously protected activities.

The purpose of this section is to examine the implications of a variety
of distortions that might affect the adjustment process for the optimal path

of commercial policy. For simplicity, we will focus on the case of a small
country where the optimal long run commercial policy is free trade, but where
imports are initially restricted by a tariff.

The analysis is based on the

27

model presented in the preceding section. No attempt will be made, however,
to demonstrate rigorously the conclusions of the present analysis (though such

a demonstration is certainly possible). Rather, the discussion will be directed
toward explaining the economic rationale for these conclusions and suggesting

the generality of their application. To limit somewhat the range of discussion,
we will consider only the implications of distortions of the adjustment process
for the optimal path of the tariff rate, and we will ignore the importance
of other policies that might be used in conjunction with variations in the tariff

rate to offset these distortions and obtain a more efficient adjustment path)

A. Distortions Arising from the Tax System
One potentially important cause of distortions in the adjustment process

arises from taxes that governments impose on incomes and on products. Consider
specifically, a general income tax levied on all factor incomes or on income
from capital (the resource that is subject to costly and time consuming adjust-

ment in response to trade liberalization). Such a tax distorts the adjustment
process because it reduces the privately perceived benefit of adjustment to

below the true social benefit. As discussed in the preceding section, the
true social benefit of moving capital out of the previously protected
industry, X, and into the other industry, Z, is equal to the difference between

the present discounted value of the value of the marginal product of capital in
in the two industries.

When income from capital is not taxed and private

capital owners have rational expectations and face the same interest rate as
the social planner, the privately perceived benefit of capital movement will

correspond to the true social benefit. However, when the income of capital is

1.

Some of the policies that might be used to offset distortions affecting the
process are examined in Mussa (1982b).

adjustment

28

taxed, private capital owners will see only the present discounted value of the
after tax difference in returns to capital in the two industries as the benefit
they will receive from costly investments in moving capital out of the previously

protected industry. Accordingly, if the tariff Is immediately reduced to zero
in the program of trade liberalization, adjustment through the movement of

existing capital would proceed at less than the socially optimal rate. Moreover,
taxation of income from capital which reduces the present discounted value of
the after tax return to capital in both industries reduces the aggregate level
of investment in new capital and, hence, slows down the process of adlustment

through location of new capital in the Z industry. In this situation (if the
tax on factor incomes or on income from capital cannot be eliminated or offset

by an investment tax credit), it is surely not desirable to slow down the process

of trade liberalization since adjustment is already too slow. If anything, it
would be desirable to reduce the tariff rate initially to below its optimal long
run level (that is, to subsized imports initially) in order to stimulate more
rapid adlustment.

The distortionary effect of product taxes on the adlustment process is less
clear than for income taxes since the effect clearly depends on the particular
products being taxed and on their role in the adjustment process.

If products

used in moving existing capital among industries are heavily taxed, then the
privately perceived cost of adjustment through movement of existing capital will

exceed the true social cost, and adlustment will occur too slowly. On the other
hand, if these products are subsidized, adjustment will occur too rapidly. The
case for gradualism in reducing the tariff rate would be strengthened if the
latter form of distortion is more important than the former.

29

B. Distortions Arising in the Capital Market
Another important source of distortions that might affect the adjustment
process and the appropriate path of trade liberalization arises from distortions

in the capital market. One such distortion would be a divergence between the
discount rate used by private capital owners in valuing future income streams
and the appropriate social discount rate used by the social planner.

The

usual assumption here is that the social discount rate is tvically lower than
the private discount rate. If so, then the privately perceived benefit of moving
existing capital or investing in new capital will be below the true social benefit.

This means that adjustment in response to an immediate reduction of the tariff

rate to zero will proceed at less than the socially optimal rate. To correct
this problem it would clearly not be desirable to slow down the process of trade

liberalization. If anything, it would be desirable to spur adjustment by initially
subsidizing imports and gradually reducing this subsidy as the economy approaches
its long run equilibrium.

In many countries, capital markets are also distorted because credit is
not allocated among firms in an efficient manner through freely functioning

credit markets. If existing firms in the protected industry receive allocations
of cheap credit that they would lose if they shifted their activities to another
industry, or if new entrants to industries that should expand as a consequence
of a move to free trade do not have adequate access to credit at interest rates
that reflect its social cost, then the process of adlustment subsequent to art

immediate move to free trade would be impeded. If this situation cannot be
remedied by altering the policies that control the allocation of credit, it might
be desirable to increase the incentive for more rapid adjustment by initially

subsidizing imports. Such a policy could easily backfire, however, if the

30

financial institutions that have granted credit to the previously protected
sector feel compelled to continue to extend credit (or even expand credit)
to these enterprises rather than write off bad loans and visibly impair their

own financial condition. In this situation, a more gradual reduction in the
level of protection might be desirable as a means of allowing credit to be

withdrawn from firms In the protected industries and reallocated to firms in
expanding industries.

Capital markets would also be distorted if the country as a whole faced
an upward rising supply schedule for foreign loans, but individual enterprises
believed that they faced a horizontal supply curve for their own foreign
borrowings at an interest rate equal to the average interest rate for the

country as a whole. To correct this distortion, the government should tax
all foreign borrowing at a rate that makes the private cost of such borrowing

correspond to its true social cost. In the absence of such a tax, the private
discount rate will he less than the social discount rate, implying that the
privately perceived benefit of adjustment in response to an immediate move to

free trade exceeds the true social benefit. To retard what would otherwise
be an overly rapid adjustment to free trade (and an excessive accumulation of
foreign debt to finance such adjustment), it would be appropriate to reduce the
tariff rate gradually to zero, rather than doing so all at once.

C. Distortions Arising from Errors in Expectations
To determine the benefit of moving capital out of the previously protected
industry and of investing new capital in the other industry, private capital
owners must calculate calculate the values of units of capital located in these

two industries. Such calculations are necessarily based on expectations concerning
the future paths of the earnings of units of capital located in these industries.

31

If these expectations are not correct, then private capital owners will assign
incorrect values to units of capital in the two industries and the adjustment

process will be distorted. For example, if capital owners had "static expectations" under which they always expected that current returns to'capital in each
industry would persist into the indefinite future, then the privately calculated

value of moving capital out of X and into Z subsequent to an immediate reduction
in the tariff rate to zero would exceed the true social value of such a movement
of capital.

Adjustment through movement of existing capital would proceed

more rapidly than is socially optimal. To correct this problem, it would be
appropriate to slow down the rate at which the tariff is reduced in order to
make the privately perceived benefit of capital movement (for capital owners
who have static expectations) correspond more closely to the true social benefit
of such capital movement.

There is no good reason to believe, however, that capital owners will always
expect that current differences between returns to capital will persist into

the indefinite future. They well might recognize that as capital moves out of
the previously protected industry and as new investment is concentrated in other
industries, the differential between the return to capital in these other indus-

tries and the return to capital in the previously protected industry

will gradually diminish. If the rate at which they expect this differential
to diminish is greater than the rate at which it would diminish (along the socially
optimal adjustment path), then private capital owners will calculate too small
a benefit from capital movement and adjustment through this process will proceed

too slowly. To correct this problem, it would be approDriate to subsize imports
initially in order to stimulate more rapid adjustment.

A specific problem concerning errors in expectations arises in regard to
expectations concerning the future course of the governments commercial policy.

32

The government might reduce the tariff rate to zero and announce its commitment
to a continuing policy of free trade, but private agents might not believe that
the government (or its successors) would actually continue to pursue this policy

or at least might perceive a positive probability of a policy reversal. Unless
private agents perceive an offsetting possibility that the government might go
beyond a policy of free trade and subsidize imports (or subsidize exports), the
value that they will assign to moving capital out of the previously protected
industry, taking account of the possibility of a policy reversal, will be less

than the social value of such capital movement. For this reason, adjustment to
the new policy of free trade will proceed at less than the socially optimal rate.

To correct this problem the government might wish to subsidize imports initially
which will stimulate move rapid adjustment both by its direct effect on the
actual returns to capital in the two industries and by its indirect effect of
pursuading private capital owners of the possibility of such an action in the
future.

The difficulty with this solution to the problem of persuading private
agents of the government's commitment to a more liberal commercial policy is
that the government might be compelled by political pressures to modify its

policy, or might be replaced by another government so inclined. The likelihood
that political pressures will compel a policy reversal may well be positively

related to the aggressiveness of the liberalization policy. Thus, a policy of
an immediate move to free trade or beyond that to the subsidization of imports
might be thought so unlikely to survive that it would actually stimulate less

rapid adjustment than a policy of more gradual liberalization) On the other

1. If a rapid reversal of a policy of trade liberalization is anticipated there
may be a surge of imports (particularly of capital goods and consumer durables)
as consumers attempt to take advantage of what they regard as a temporary opportunity to buy these goods at low prices. Such an import surge, in turn, makes
it more difficult to sustain the policy of trade liberalization.

33

hand, a policy of very gradual liberalization might be regarded as such a
concession of political and weakness and indecision on the part of the govern-

ment that it would have no credibility with private agents and would stimulate

little or no adjustment. A balance must be struck, therefore, between a policy
that is so aggressive that reversal is thought highly probable and a policy
that is so feeble that it too lacks credibility.

D. Distortions Arising from Monotoly and Monopsony Behavior
The exercise of monopoly or monopsony power distorts the economic system

by creating divergences between the effective price or cost of a product or
factor to its purchaser and the marginal cost to its supplier. Exercise of
such power either by the suppliers of services used in the adjustment process
or by the suppliers of factors used in producing such services should normally
result in a slowing of the adjustment process to less than its socially optimal

rate. If this problem could not be addressed directly, it might provide an
argument for a policy of reducing the level of protection initially to less
than its optimal steady state level in order to induce more rapid adjustment.

However, in the absence of specific evidence of the importance of monopoly and
monopsony behavior in the activities involved in the adjustment process, this
seems like a rather weak reed upon which to base a general argument for ati
excessively aggressive path of commercial policy.

Another circumstance in which the exercise of market power would impede
the adjustment process in response to a trade liberalization is if firms in
the industries benefited by liberalization are able to impede the entry of
new firms and new capital into these industries or if workers and labor unions

are able to impede the entry of new workers. Suppose, for example, that a
labor union in the Z industry of the model described in the preceding section

34

is able to prevent entry of any new workers into that industry subsequent to
a trade liberalization and that all workers not in that industry remain fully

employed but at wage rates that are below the wage paid to workers in Z. In
this case it can be shown that if there are no other distortions in the economic
system, the optimal time path for commercial policy is to move immediately to

free trade. This policy does not result in the same adjustment path for the
economy (or the same long run equilibrium) as would prevail in the absence of

the barrier to the movement of labor into the Z industry. But, taking this
barrier as given, this is still the best path for commercial policy.

This conclusion would be altered if the barrier to the movement into the
Z industry was not absolute but tended to break down over time at a rate that
is positively related to the differential between the wage earned by workers

in Z and the wage prevailing elsewhere in the economy. Maintaining the assumption that labor always remains fully employed, it can be shown that there is
a social gain from initially reducing the tariff rate to less than zero (subsidizing imports or subsidizing exports) in order to speed the movement of labor

into the Z industry. This conclusion might be reversed, however, If labor
outside the Z industry became unemployed with the amount of such unemployment
depending (as it does in the Harris—Todaro (1970) model) on the differential
between the wage rate in Z and the wage rate in other activities.

E. Distortions Arising from Price Rigidities
Failure of prices to adjust immediately (or ever) to market clearing levels
due to government controls or rigidities in the operation of price adlustment
mechanisms are another source of distbrtions that might affect the optimal timing

of trade liberalization. Consider specifically the case of a minimum wage rate
fixed by law that cannot be altered in connection with the policy of trade

35

liberalization. To eliminate the possibility that monetary and exchange rate
policy could be used to neutralize the effects of this minimum wage by raising
the general price level, suppose that the minimum wage is Indexed to the cost
of a consumption basket that includes the economy's two final goods, X and Z.

Further, suppose that the wage rate prior to the removal of protection from
the X industry is above the legal minimum, that it would fall to less than the
legal minimum as an immediate consequence of the removal of all protection from
X if all labor remained employed, but that its long run equilibrium level

under free trade would exceed both the legal minimum and the level prevailing

prior to the removal of protection from the X industry.2 In these circumstances
it may be desirable to cut the tariff rate immediately only to the level at

which the equilibrium wage rate with all labor employed is equal to the legal

minimum wage. This will be so if the marginal social cost from the unemployment
resulting from a further reduction in the tariff rate exceeds the benefit of
such a reduction in reducing the consumption distortion cost of the tariff and
in speeding the adjustment of the economy toward its optimal steady state position.

On the other hand, it is possible that the optimal commercial policy would be

to reduce the tariff rate initially to below zero. This can happen because a
lower tariff rate creates a greater incentive to move

capital out of X and into Z,

and the more rapidly capital moves in this direction the more rapidly the wage
rate that is consistent with labor market equilibrium with full employment
rises above the legally required minimum wage.

This analysis of the effects of a minimum wage can be extended to more
realistic descriptions of conditions prevailing in labor markets and more

1. See van Wijnbergen (1983) for an interesting analysis of implications of
wage indexing for the effectiveness of commercial policy as a means of stimulating
employment.
2. In the model of the preceding section, if Z production is labor intensive
in long run equilibrium, then the long run effect of a reduction in protection
of X should be an increase in the wage rate in terms of both final products.

36

generally in the economy. It might be assumed, for example, that individual
workers differ in the amounts of labor that they can supply in each industry,

measured in efficiency units. This would introduce the possibility that workers
in the same industry and in different industries could earn different wage rates

as an equilibrium phenomenon, and it would allow for the result that a minimum

wage would exclude specific workers from employment) The ambiguity would still
remain, however, concerning whether it is better to reduce the tariff rate
initially by only a fraction of its appropriate long run adjustment in order
to limit the unemployment effects of decreased protection, or whether it is

better to reduce the level of protection initially to below its long run optimal
level in order to stimulate more rapid adjustment of the disposition of the
capital stock.

F. Conclusions Concerning the Implications of Distortions
From the consideration of these examples of distortions that might affect
the adlustment process, no general presumption appears to emerge that a policy
of gradualism in reducing protection is superior to a policy of moving immediately
to a country's long run optimum commercial policy or even an "overshooting" policy
in which the level of protection is initially reduced to below its long run

optimum level. For some types of distortions, gradualism is the best policy.
If the circumstances of a particular economy indicate that these types of
distortions are especially important, then gradualism in trade liberalization
would be lustified for that economy.

For other types of distortions, however,

gradualism is not the best policy; and for economies where these distortions
are important, an "overshooting' policy would be justified.

1. A model with these characteristics is presented and analyzed in Mussa (1982a).

37

An explanation for this ambiguity concerning the implications of distortions
affecting the adjustment process for the optimal time path of trade liberaliza-

tion may be given in the following terms. The condition that must be satisfied
for the economy to be moving along its optimal adjustment path is that marginal
social benefit of more rapid adjustment (which would be stimulated by a small
further reduction in the level of protection) must equal the marginal social

cost of more rapid adjustment. When there are distortions affecting the adjustment process, the adjustment path induced by an immediate move to the economys
long run optimal commercial policy no longer has an unambiguous claim on optimality

because the privately perceived benefits and costs of more rapid adjustment along
this path do not necessarily correspond to the true social benefits and costs.

There is no strong presumption, however, that the nature of distortions will
generally be such that the privately perceived benefit of more rapid adjustment
exceeds the true social benefit or that the privately perceived cost of more

rapid adjustment is less than the true social cost. Hence, there is no general
presumption that pace of adjustment subsequent to an immediate move to the optimum

long run commercial policy is too rapid rather than too slow. Only if there
were a presumption that the pace of adjustment in response to immediate and
complete trade liberalization were too rapid would there be a presumption in
favor of gradualism in trade liberalization.

It follows that to build a case for gradualism in the reform of commercial
policy on the basis of distortions afflicting the adjustment process, it is
necessary either to identify specific distortions in specific cases where the
second best policy involves gradual adjustment of commercial policy, or to
identify a general class of distortions frequently affecting adjustment processes

for which the second best policy involves such gradualism. Obviously, no general

conclusion can be stated concerning the outcome of case by case analyses. With

38

respect to a general class of distortions that might provide a rationale for
gradualism, one candidate is the distortions associated with unemployment of

resources previously employed in protected sectors of the economy. This issue

is examined in section IV. Another candidate is the distortions associated
with failures and bankruptcies of enterprises in previously protected industries.
Failures and bankruptcies, of course, are a normal part of the functioning of
the economic system, and their occurence as a consequence of a trade liberalization does not necessarily imply any distortion of the functioning of the

adjustment process. However, if socially valuable capital associated with
continued operation of firms as going concerns (such as the organizational
capital of such firms) is destroyed as a consequence of failures and bankruptcies,

there may be an important distortion of the adjustment process) Gradualism
in trade liberalization which would reduce the failure rate of previously
protected firms might be justified in this situation as a method for reducing
the social losses associated with failures and bankruptcies.

1. Failures and bankruptcies almost always involve private losses as individual
asset holders are forced to write down the value of their assets. Social losses
occur only when socially valuable capital is destroyed as a consequence of a
failure or bankruptcy.

39

III. Income Redistribution and the Case for Gradualism
A policy of trade liberalization will almost inevitably alter the distri-

bution of income and wealth within society. Consumers will gain from reductions
in the relative prices of previously restricted imports and their domestic
substitutes to the extent that they consume such products; and they will lose
from increases in the relative prices of products whose output is stimulated

by trade liberalization. On net, consumers should gain from trade liberalization
(up to the point of the optimum trade policy) because of the reduction in the

consumption distortion loss resulting from excessive protection. But, nothing
generally guarantees that each individual consumer will gain as a consequence

of the changes in relative prices resulting from trade liberalization. Owners
of factors of production specific to or used intensively in previously protected
industries are likely to suffer substantial declines in income and wealth as
a consequence of trade liberalization; while owners of factors of production
specific to or used intensively in industries stimulated by trade liberalization

should enjoy gains in income and wealth from this policy. On net, income and
wealth should rise due to the reduction in the production distortion loss of

excessive protection. But, rarely if ever are the net winners from trade
liberalization compelled to compensate the net losers; nor is it clear that they
ought to be.

Decisions about commercial policy are necessarily political decisions,

and politics is at least as much concerned with the distribution of income

as it is with economic efficiency. For this reason, an analysis of the
appropriate time path of trade liberalization should consider the effects of

1. In the model of section I, if X is relatively labor intensive, then capital
of capital initially located in X will suffer a short run decline in their income
as a consequence of trade liberalization, but will enjoy a long run increase in
their income. Whether these capital owners end up as net winners or net losers
from trade liberalization depends on the speed with which the economy moves from
the short run to the long run; see Mayer (1974) and Mussa (1974) for further

40

alternative paths of commercial policy on the income redistribution effects of

trade liberalization. For reasons that are intuitively apparent and that will
be examined in greater detail in this section, a more gradual policy of trade
liberalization should reduce the intensity of the income redistribution effects
of the liberalization, but only at the expense of some loss in the efficiency

of the adjustment process. The key issue with respect to the design of the
policy of trade liberalization, therefore, becomes making the appropriate
trade—off between reducing the intensity of the income redistribution effects
of the liberalization and maintaining the efficiency of the adjustment process.

A. The Significance of the Income Redistribution Issue
Before examining the analytical issue of the factors that influence this
trade—off between income redistribution and efficiency, it is important to
discuss significance of income redistribution in the context of a program of

trade liberalization. One reason why the income redistribtion effects of
trade liberalization might be important is because the poorest members of

society are injured (or assisted) as a consequence of liberalization. If the
heavily protected industries prior to liberalization are primarily low wage
industries whose workers would have difficulty in finding re—employment
if protection were substantially reduced, then losses sustained by these workers

would be a serious consequence of liberalization. If these losses could be
reduced by a more gradual program of liberalization, this would be a valid and
important argument in favor of gradualism even at the expense of some loss in

efficiency. In the highly developed countries where some heavily protected
industries (especially textiles and to some extent agriculture) are low wage

industries, this argument may have practical relevance. In many developing
countries, however, the heavily protected industries are not typically the

low wage industries that employ the poorest members of society. Indeed, in

41

many developing countries, the poorest workers are employed in agriculture——
an industry that is usually disadvantaged by protection that is granted to

manufacturing industries. Of course, protected industries in developing countries
will usually employ some low wage workers who might experience difficulty in
finding other jobs, and the capital employed in these industries might be owned

by the less wealthy in society. It is difficult to see, however, that a general
case for gradualism in trade liberalization in developing countries could be
built on the argument that rapid liberalization would typically benefit the
richer members of society at the expense of the poorer.

Even if those who suffer reductions in income and wealth as a consequence
of trade liberalization are not typically among the poorest In society, the
income redistribution effects of liberalization are likely to be important

to policy makers because of their political consequences. Those who are
injured as a consequence of trade liberalization are likely to see more liberal
trade policies as a cause of their injury and are likely to make use of whatever
opportunities the political system provides to seek redress of their grievances.

In many instances, the political power of these groups will be substantial——as
testified to by their previous success in securing and maintaining protection for
their industries.

Few governments can afford to ignore completely the complaints

of those who are inlured as a consequence of trade liberalization, even (or
perhaps especially) if these people are not among the poorest in society.

Moreover, apart from political necessity or expediency, there may he good
reason for governments to pay special attention to those who are injured as a
consequence of trade liberalization.

In this circumstance, inlury is suffered

not as a consequence of unforeseen changes in economic conditions that are
under no one's control, but rather as the direct consequence of a deliberate

42

change in government policy. Among those who suffer the greatest loss from
trade liberalization will be those who have made costly investments in physical
and human capital that is relatively specific to the previously protected

industries, in the expectation that protection would be continued. In many
instances, the return that would have been earned on these investments with
the continuation of protection would not have exceeded the normal rate of
return on other investments in physical and human capital.

Hence, the losses

these individuals suffer as a consequence of trade liberalization cannot legi-

timately be regarded as merely a surrender of ill gotten gains. Rather, these
are losses sustained as a consequence of pursuing investments that it was the
previous objective of government policy to promote. For this reason, it might
be argued that the goverment has a responsibility to protect these individuals
from inordinately large losses so long as it can do so without exceptionally

high cost to the rest of society. Moreover, if a government adopts the general
attitude that those who are injured as a consequence of policy changes are
entitled to no consideration even if those losses are a consequence of performing
in accord with past policies, then It is likely to find that people are less

willing to pursue those actions that the government would like to promote with

its new policy. In the case of trade liberalization, the incentive to invest
in the industries that ought to expand under a more liberal commercial policy
will be blunted if potential investors see the possibility of a later policy
reversal and fear that they will receive no consideration for the losses they

would sustain in the event of such a reversal. Hence, on grounds of promoting
more effecient functioning of the economic and political system (broadly conceived),
it may be desirable to provide some compensation to those who are injured as
a consequence of trade liberalization even if they are not among the poorest in
society.

43

B. The Redistributive Consequences of Alternative Paths of Commercial Policy
In principle, compensation could be paid to those injured by trade liberalization without altering the path of commercial policy from that which yields

greatest economic efficiency. In practice such means of paying compensation
have occasionally been used. As a general matter, however, it is difficult to
design and implement policies that compensate directly those injured by trade

liberalization without distorting economic incentives. The practical means of
providing compensation that is generally available is simply to slow the pace
of liberalization.

The theory of international trade generally identifies two considerations
that relevant in determining the extent to which the income of a particular
factor of production is raised or lowered as a consequence of variations in

relative output prices induced by changes in commercial policy. If all factors
are mobile between industries, then the income of each factor tends to be linked
positively to the relative prices of the products of the industries in which it

is used relatively intensively. In particular, in a two—product, two—factor
economy, the Stolper—Samuelson theorem indicates that a factor's income will
rise in terms of both products when the relative price of the product in which
it is used intensively rises and, corresponding, a factor's income will decline
in terms of both products when the relative price of the product in which it
is used intensively declines. When all factors are not perfectly arid immediately
mobile between industries, the incomes of factors that are not immediately
mobile tend to be positively linked to the relative prices of the products of
the industries where they are presently employed, while the incomes immediately
mobile factors tend not to be so strongly linked to the relative prices of

particularproductsJ In particular, In a two—product, three—factor model where

1. In an economy with many products and many factors used to produce each product,
some perfectly mobile and some not, virtually any result is possible if one assumes

44

labor is assumed to be perfectly mobile between industries and capital is assumed
to be specific (at least in the short run) to each Industry, an increase in the
relative price of one industry's nroduct increases the income of capital specific
to that industry in terms of both goods, reduces the income of capital specific
to the other industry in terms of both goods, and reduces the wage in terms of
that industry's product while raising it in terms of the other industry's product.1
In my iudgment, the theory that focuses on the short run specificity of
factors of production to particular industries as the prime determinant of the
income redistribution effects of relative price changes is the most relevant

theory for understanding the likely redistributive effects of trade liberalization

in most economies. In making use of this theory, however, it should be recognized
that "labor" which is assumed to be a perfectly mobile factor of production does

not correspond to all labor in actual economies. Much of the labor that is
employed in many industries embodies a substantial amount of human capital that
is relatively specific, at least in the short run, to the particular industry

where it is employed. In the discussion that follows, therefore, "capital
located in an industry" should be thought of as including not only physical
plant and equipment that is specific, in the short run, to that industry but
also human capital that shares this property of short run specificity.
Using the model of section I, it can be shown than a permanent reduction in
the level of protection, as measured by the tariff applied to imports of X,

implies an immediate reduction of the income of capital located in X relative

the income of capital located in Z. Under reasonable additional assumptions,

sufficiently wierd complementary and substitution relations among factors. While
these oossibilities may occasionally have practical relevance, they will not be
considered in this discussion.
1. The specific capital model is described in Jones (1971), Mayer (1974), and
Mussa (1974). The last of these papers presents specific formulas that indicate
the extent to which each factor's income is affected by a relative price change
as a function of parameters describing the production processes. It also indicates
how these results generalize to an economy that produces many goods using one
specific factor in each industry and one mobile factor common to all industries,

45

it may be shown that the income of capital located in X falls absolutely in
terms of both goods while the income of capital located in Z rises absolutely

in terms of both goods. The effect of a permanent reduction in the tariff on
the values of units of capital located in the two industries, as determined by
the present discounted values of their future income streams
less clear, except that

and

is

must fall relative to p. This ambiguity arises

because the long run effect of a permanent reduction in the tariff on the income
of capital must be the same for both industries and depends on which industry

is relatively capital intensive. If X is relatively capital intensive, the long
run level of income of capital will fall in terms of both goods; while if Z is

relatively capital intensive, the long run level of income of capital will fall

in terms of both goods. If adjustment to the economy's long run equilibrium
occurs sufficiently rapidly subsequently to a tariff reduction, the long run
effect of the tariff reduction on the income of capital in both industries
could dominate the short run differential effect on the income of capital in
each industry, with the result that the value of a unit of capital could rise

in both industries or could fall in both industries. I do not believe that
either of these results is a likely consequence of tariff reductions in most

instances. Rather, I think it more likely that the adjustment process works
sufficiently slowly that the short run effects of capital specificity dominate
over the long run effects of capital intensity, with the implication that a
tariff reduction initially reduces the value of a unit of capital located in X

while raising the value of a unit of capital located in Z. This result will
be assumed in the discussion that follows.

It is clear that if a permanent teduction in the tariff rate reduces the
income and wealth of owners of capital initially located in the protected

industry, then one way to reduce the (private) losses suffered by these capital

46

owners is diminishing the extent of the reduction in the tariff rate. The disadvantage of this policy is that it leaves the economy with permanent efficiency
losses resulting from a tariff that exceeds its optimal level (zero for a small

country. An alternative policy that achieves the objective of diminishing the
losses sustained by owners of capital located in the protected industry while

avoiding permanent efficiency losses from the continuation of protection in
excess of its optimal level is a policy of gradually reducing the level of

protection to its long run optimal level. There are two Important reasons why
a gradual reduction In the level of protection diminishes the losses suffered

by owners of capital located in the protected industry. First, by delaying
the losses of income implied by future scheduled reductions in the tariff rate,

the program of gradually reducing the level of protection reduces the magnitude
of the initial decline in the present discounted value of the income stream
generated by a unit of capital originally located in the protected industry.
Second, even a small initial decline in the value of a unit of capital located
in X relative to the value of units of capital located elsewhere in the economy
(which would be induced by an announced program of very gradual reductions in
the tariff rate) induces some capital to move out of the protected Industry and,
perhaps more important, encourages new investment not to be located in this

industry. If the demand curve for the protected industry's product is to any
extent downward sloping or the supply curve of other inputs is to any extent
upward sloping, the reduction in the industry's capital stock through outward
movement of existing capital and non—replacement of depreciating capital should
moderate the decline in the income earned by capital that remains in the protected
industry.'

In the model of section I, the supply curve of the other input, mobile labor,
Is upward sloping to the X industry, but the demand curve for the industry's
product is horizontal at the world market price multiplied by one plus the tariff
rate. In circumstances where domestically produced products are imperfect substitutes for Imported products, the demand curve facing the protected domestic
Industry should be downward sloping.
1.

47

Formally, the problem of determining the optimal path of trade liberalization in the light of concerns about the losses suffered by owners of factors

located in the protected industry could be analyzed in at least two ways. Ignoring
for simplicity the consumption distortion loss of protection, the objective of
the problem could be stated as the maximization of the present discounted value
of the economy's final output, as in section I, but subject to some constraint
on the maximim permissible reduction in either income earned by a unit of capital
in the protected industry or in the private value of a unit of capital located
in that industry.

Alternatively, the objective function could be modified by

substracting from the value of output at each date some measure of the political
and social cost of losses sustained by owners of capital in the protected industry.

In the first approach, the trade off between efficiency in the adjustment process
and limiting the losses suffered by those injured by trade liberalization is
exhibited by considering tighter or looser constraints on the maximum permissible

loss of owners of capital located in the protected industry. In the second
approach, the appropriate trade off is determined endogenously as part of the
solution of the maximization problem (given the function that describes the
social and political cost of losses suffered by owners of capital located in
the protected industry).

Without going into the details of the formal analysis of either of these
formulations of the optimization problem, it is useful to state the following

general conclusions that may be derived from such an analysis. First, when
the protected industry is labor intensive, there are circumstances (which I
believe to be of limited practical relevance) in which there is no conflict
between the goal of economic efficiency and the desirability of limiting
losses sustained by owners of capital located in the protected industries.
In these circumstances, the optimal path for commercial policy is to move

48

immediately to the long run optimal commercial policy of free trade. Second,
when the protected industry is capital intensive, there are circumstances in
which concern with the losses suffered by owners of capital in the protected
industry can be sufficiently important that it is not optimal to move all of
the way to the commercial policy of free trade that is optimal on grounds of
economic efficiency.

This result might be taken as representative of the

situation in which some protection is justified on the grounds of raising the

incomes of the poorest in society.1 Third, in the "normal case" where a
greater reduction in the tariff rate implies a greater reduction in the income

of capital in the protected industry and in the present discounted value of
that income, a tighter constraint on the maximum permissible loss of owners

of capital in the protected industry or a greater political and social cost
assigned to such losses implies a slower optimal rate of reduction of the
level of protection.

This result provides a valid argument for gradualism

in trade liberalization under "normal" circumstances when a government is

concerned, for political or economic reasons, with limiting the losses of
income and wealth sustained by owners of factors of production that are
initially located in the protected scetor of the economy.

1. The analogy here is very weak, reflecting the fundamental weakness of the
model of section I in dealing with the issue of the distribution of income
among individuals in society, as opposed to the distribution of income among
classes of factors. In this model, all capital earns the same income in long
run equilibrium. Hence, removal of a tariff that protects the capital intensive
industry could reduce the income of capital below some arbitrarily prescribed
minimum. It is doubtful, however, that this is what is at issue when one
discusses the income of the poorest members of society. To get at this issue,
we would need a model in which different individuals own different amounts of
human and physical capital perhaps with varying efficiency in different industries.
Then we might consider how removal of protection might injure those who own
only small amounts of this capital.

49

C. Factors Affecting the Trade Off between Efficiency and Redistribution
Economic analysis can contribute to an understanding of the path of trade
liberalization that balances appropriately the social and political costs of
loses imposed on owners of factors located in protected industries against the
efficiency gained by rapid reductions in the level of protection by indicating
the circumstances In which reducing the loses of these factor owners by slow
liberalization will, or will not, have a high cost in terms of the efficiency

of the adlustment process. Among the factors

that should be considered are

the following: (1) the ease with which factors located in protected industries
can be moved to alternative activities that should expand as a consequence of
trade lIberaliZatiofl

(2) the extent to which factors used in protected indus-

tries are specific to those industries and must be worn out (in the case of

physical capital) or retire (in the case of human capital) and be replaced by
new factors in order to be moved to alternative activities;
productive life span of the factors in the previous category:
distribution of factors used in protected industries

(3) the likely

(4) the geographic

relative to the likely

geographic distribution of factors that would be employed in industries stimulated
by a reduction in protection.

First, consider the circumstances In which factors used in protected industries
could move relatively easily to activities

that should expand as a consequence

of trade liberalization. This would be a likely circumstance if the workers
employed in protected industries were largely

unskilled, had a high level of

general skill rather than specific skill (to the extent that this is possible)

or had skills that would likely be useful in the industries that would expand
as a consequence of trade liberalization.

likely if levels of protection differed

This last circumstance would be more

widely within a sector of the economy

such as manufacturing rather than between sectors such as manufacturing and

50

agricultural. If some manufacturing industries were heavily protected while
other manufacturing industries using similar types of labor and capital received
negative protection, then factors employed in protected industries probably
could move into alternative uses with comparative ease)- This would not be
likely,.however, if all manufacturing industries are heavily protected at the

expense of agriculture and mining. With respect to physical capital, movement
to alternative uses is likely to be comparatively easy when capital consists
largely of office and plant space rather than highly specialized equipment.
When circumstances are such that it appears that most factors employed in
protected industries could move relatively easily into alternative activities,
then incomes and wealth losses that are likely to be sustained by a rapid
reduction in levels of protection should not be enormous and the efficiency
gain from stimulating rapid adjustment should be substantial.
Second, the circumstances in which factors used in protected industries

must be allowed to wear out or retire and be replaced by new capital or new
workers are essentially the reverse of the circumstances described in the

preceding paragraph. When these circumstances are descriptive of the factors
employed in protected industries, then it is likely that these factors will

sustain substantial and prolonged income loses as a consequence of a rapid

reduction in the level of protection. Aside from reducing the consumption
distortion cost of protection, however, little efficiency may be gained by

reducing the level of protectionmore rapidlythan is necessary to discourage
new workers from acquiring skills specific to the protected industries or

new capital from being invested in the protected industries. Hence, in these

1. The activities that will expand due to a reduction in protection will depend
to some extent on the factors that are available in the economy and on the prices
at which these factors make themselves available.

51

circumstances, a gradual rate of reduction of the level of protection at near
the rate that discourages new factors from moving in to the protected industries
may be the best policy.

Third, when labor and capital cannot move easily out of protected industries,
the expected productive lifespan of these factors may be an important guide for

the pace of liberalization. If many of the workers with specific skills in
protected industries have only relatively short periods remaining in their
likely working lives, they are unlikely to pay the costs and suffer the dislocations associated with moving to other lobs, even if they suffer substantial
reductions in income (including reductions due to unemployment) as a consequence

of a rapid decline in the level of protection. Hence, little efficiency can be
ained by a rapid reduction in the level of protection that imposes substantial
loses on these workers. En contrast, if most workers in protected industries
have many years remaining in their productive lives, the prospect of many years
of lower income if they remain in their present jobs (or unemployed waiting for
work in the previously protected industry) may induce them to incur the costs
of retraining and relocation in order to find new jobs in expanding industries.
In this case a more rapid reduction in the level of protection at least serves

some purpose in increasing economic efficiency. The same principles apply to
physical capital, though policy makers may be less concerned with losses sustained
by capital owners than by workers.
Fourth, the geographic location of protected industries may sometimes be
an important factor influencing the appropriate pace of trade liberalization.
If these industries are located in larger metropolitan centers where workers
employed in them have reasonable prospects for finding re—employment in other
expanding industries, then the losses they will suffer due to liberalization
should not be too large, and efficiency is likely to be promoted by a relatively

52

rapid pace of liberalization. On the other hand, if the protected industries
are dominant employers in smaller centers that are isolated from the areas
where workers might reasonably expect to find re—emnloyment in expanding
industries, then a rapid pace of liberalization is likely to generate very
substantial losses for these workers and for the owners of capital in the

protected industries. In this circumstance, it may be appropriate to reduce
the level of protection more gradually in order to limit income losses for
workers and capital owners in the protected industries and to allow adjustment
to take place through attrition and depreciation.

Finally, it should be emphasized that the general state of economic condi-

tions in a country influences the appropriate pace of trade liberalization. In
a rapidly growing, vibrant economy, labor and capital released from protected
industries can much more easily be absorbed in other industries than is likely

to be the case in a slowly growing or stagnant economy. The implication is
that trade liberalization can probably proceed more rapidly and with smaller
losses to factors employed in protected industries when liberalization is

undertaken in a vibrant and rapidly growing economy. It should be recognized,
however, that in an expanding world economy, a policy of trade liberalization
(combined with appropriate monetary, fiscal and exchange rate policies) may have
some capacity to transform a stagnant of slowly growing national economy into
one with a healthier rate of economic progress.

53

IV. Unemployment and the Path of Trade Liberalization
It is widely believed that the process of adjustment subsequent to a
sudden reduction in the level of protection will involve not only a gradual
movement of resources out of previously protected activities and into other
activities with a higher product value, but also substantial unemployment of

some of these resources, perhaps for an extented period of time. Concern
with the social cost and political consequences of such unemployment, especially
unemployment of labor, is probably an important reason for resistance to the

implementation of programs of trade liberalization. Concern with these costs
also seemingly provides a rationale for gradual implementation of more liberal
trade policies in order to reduce the amount of unemployment they generate,
or at least to spread the cost of such unemployment over time.
The purpose of this section is to investigate the influence of unemploy—
ment resulting from trade liberalization on the optimal path of liberalization.
In this investigation, it is assumed that some amount of unemployment, specifically unemployment of labor, is an inevitable concomitant of any reduction
in the level of protection, and that a larger reduction in the level of pro-

tection generates both a larger immediate increase in unemployment and a
more rapid movement of workers out of the previously protected activity.
These assumptions imply that there can be no liberalization without enduring
some cost of unemployment and that more rapid liberalization has both a cost,
in the form of higher short term unemployment, and a benefit, in the form of

more rapid adjustment. The problem, therefore, is to choose the path of
liberalization that appropriately balances this cost and benefit.

This investigation is subject to three important limitations that cast
some doubt on the validity or generality of its conclusions and that should be

54

noted at the outset. First, there is no attempt to model or to analyze the
details of the economic and institutional arrangements that lead to the assumed
reduced form relationship between the level of unemployment of workers in a
previously protected industry and the rate at which these workers move to

other industries Presumably this has something to do with arrangements
governing the determination of wage rates, but no mention is made of the

wage determination process In the discussion that follows. It is certainly
possible that conclusions of the subsequent analysis, particularly the conclusions relating to social welfare, might depend in a critical way on the details
of the structure that underlies the reduced form relationship between the level

of unemployment and the rate of adjustment of the labor force. Second, the
only policy tool that is considered in the subsequent analysis is the level
of protection, specifically the ad valorem tariff rate applied to Imports.
It is possible that through the use of other policy tools, such as wage

subsidies, retraining programs, or relocation assistance, that the government
could reduce the unemployment cost of trade liberalization while facilitating

the adjustment process. This possibility, however, is not considered. Third,
the subsequent analysis focuses on the effects of unemployment in the previously

protected industry on the optimal path of commercial policy. It does not consider
the effect of the overall unemployment rate on the path of commercial policy.

Rather, the implicit assumption underlying the analysis is that an excess
supply of labor In the previously protected industry is always matched by an

excess demand for labor in the rest of the economy. In many situations, this
assumption may not be valid, and in others its validity may be contingent on
pursuit of appropriate monetary, fiscal, and exchange rate policies, in
concert with the policy of trade liberalization.

1. This relationship might depend on expectations concerning the future course
of economic variables including the government's commercial policy. Hence, it
might not remain stable in the face of changes in policy.

55

To clarify further the nature and scope of the present Investigation,
it is useful to emphasize that "the level of unemployment" that will be referred
to in subsequent discussion is always to be interpreted as the level of unemployment in the previously protected industry, in excess of the level of unemployment that would normally prevail In that industry and that is assumed to

prevail in the rest of the economy. It is assumed that an increase in the
level of unemployment, so defined, Increases the rate at which workers move

out of the previously protected industry and into other industrIes. This
assumption would probably not be appropriate if "the level of unemployment"
were understood to mean the general level of unemployment in the economy as

a whole. M increase In the general level of unemployment would presumably
have a negative effect, or no effect, on the rate at which workers move out
of the previously protected Industry, since an increase in the general rate
of unemployment (holding the structure of unemployment constant) would presumably decrease, or at best not change, the perceived probability of finding
a new job for a worker who decides to shift out of the previously protected

industry. For this reason, it would be desirable to keep the general level
of unemployment low (by whatever means are available and appropriate) during
a period of trade liberalization, while simultaneously raising the level of
uemploynient in the previously protected Industry In order to stimulate a

redistribution of workers Out of this industry.

56

A. The Social Cost of Unemployment
Before beginning the formal analysis of the influence of unemployment on
the optimal path of commercial policy, it is useful to consider briefly the

nature of the social cost of unemployment. By definition, an unemployed worker
does not produce anything that is included in the standard measure of the

value of national output. The social loss from unemployment of this worker,
however, may be less than, equal to, or greaterthatt the value of the output

he would produce if employed. Discussion of a few specific cases will serve
to illustrate this point.

First, consider a worker formerly employed at a very high wage in a
heavily protected industry.who would like to continue to work in his old
job at his old wage, but who is not willing to accept available work in

another job at a much lower wage rate. This worker has suffered an individual
economic loss from the removal of protection for the industry that previously

employed him. There is not, however, any social loss that is necessarily
associated with his unemployment. Certainly the amount he would have earned
in his job is not a valid measure of the social loss from the disappearance

of that job since the value of the output of that job was raised artificially

above Its true social value by the previous grant of protection. Moreover,
if this worker chooses to remain unemployed and use

his

time in non—market

activities, rather than accept work at a wage that reflects the social value
of the marginal product of his labor, then it might be concluded that there

is no social loss from his unemployment. If this worker chooses to remain
unemployed only because he receives a subsidy (such as unemployment compensation) that is contingent on his unemployment, then the social loss should
be measured as the difference between the value of what he would produce

57

when employed (in a new industry) and the value he assigns to non—market
uses of his time.
Second, consider a worker who remains unemployed so that he can search
more efficiently for a higher paying job than he could find without search.

This is a common assumption is search theory models of unemployment. For
this worker, unemployment is a productive activity, even though its output
(finding a better job) is not included in the usual measure of the value

of the economy's output. If there are no externalities in the search process
arising from one worker's search interfering with the search of others when
there are a fixed number of jobs, then the private benefits of search should
correspond to the social benefits (ignoring some complications arising from

taxation). In this case, the technology of the adjustment process for moving
workers between industries has the same essential properties as the technology
of the adjustment process for moving capital in the model presented in

section I. As in that model, the privately perceived cost of adjustment
(including the cost of being unemployed) will correspond to the true social
cost, and so too will the privately perceived benefit correspond to the

true social benefit. Thus, while there is a social cost of unemployment, this
cost is appropriately taken into account by the agents responsible for deter-

mining the extent of unemployment——leaving no rationale for government inter-

vention. Of course, if there are distortions affecting either the privately
perceived cost or benefit of unemployment, then there is a rationale for
government intervention along the lines discussed in section II.

Third, the costs of unemployment are not evenly spread across members
of society, but tend to be heavily concentrated on the particular individuals
who become unemployed and on their families.

This concentration is diminished

58

somewhat by unemployment compensation, provision of public services, and

social welfare programs. But, even in societies with extensive social welfare
programs (and more so in societies without such programs), there may be legit—
mate concern that losses that are heavily concentrated on a small part of

society have a greater social cost than losses that are evenly spread. This
would make the social cost of unemployment exceed the value of lost output.
Fourth, in some cases, heavily protected industries that will be the
principal victims of trade liberalization may be geograhically concentrated
and may be dominant or very Important employers in their locales of operation.
In such cases, substantial declines in employment in previously protected
industries may have important, concentrated, and negative spillover effects

for other enterprises and workers in their locales of operation. Even when
macroeconomic and exchange rate policies are successful in maintaining a
level of aggregate demand adequate to absorb resources released from previously
protected industries, these local economic difficulties are unlikely to be

overcome completely. This may add to the social cost of unemployment
associated with the removal of protection in these cases.

Fifth, it has been observed that workers who suffer prolonged periods
of unemployment also suffer substantial declines in their human capital, at

least as measured by the wages they are subsequently able to obtain. To the
extent that this phenomenon reflects a loss in the private return to human
capital that Is socially less valuable, there is no additional social cost

of unemployment. However, to the extent that this phenomenon reflects an
actual deterioration in general human capital due to unemployment, the social
cost of such unemployment may well exceed the value of the output lost during
the actual period of unemployment.

59

B.

A Formal Analysis of the Optimal Path of Unemployment

In order to provide a formal basis for analysis of the influence of
unemployment on the optimal timing of trade liberalization, it is useful to
consider a simple model of the interaction between adjustment to changes in
commercial policy and the level of unemployment (especially in the industries
directly affected by the commercial policy change) .

Since the model used

earlier in this paper to analyze the optimal timing of trade liberalization
treats labor as a perfectly mobile factor, this model cannot be used without
modification to analyze the effects and implications of unemployment of labor.
Rather than modifying this model to allow for a sensible analysis of unemployment,
it is easier to consider a model with a somewhat simpler basic structure.
Suppose that the small economy under investigation has two industries:
the X industry that has previously been granted protection be means of a
tariff from imports of similar foreign goods; and the Z industry which produces

every other good in the economy, including goods for export. Each industry uses
only a single factor of production, labor, and the output of each industy is

a concave function of the amount of labor employed in that industry;

X =
Z =

F(Lx)

G(L)•

The amount of labor employed in each industry is always less than or equal to
the number of workers who seek work in that industry, and the number of workers
who seek work in each industry is assumed to be a slowly adjusting variable.
The number of workers who seek work in X is denoted by N, and the number of
workers who seek work in Z is the total work force, N, less those who seek

work in X. Given the world relative price of X in terms of Z, denoted by P,
the demand for labor In the two industries i8 assumed to depend on the ad

60

valorern tariff rate, T, that Is charged on imported units of X. Specifically,
the demand for labor in X, denoted by L(T), is assumed to correspond to the
equilibrium level of employment in the X industry with free movement of labor
when the tariff rate is T; and the demand for labor in the Z industry is, by
the same assumption, given by N —

L(t).

When the demand for labor in an

industry is greater than the number of workers in that industry (as will
typically be the case for the Z industry in subsequent discussion), there is

an unsatisfied excess demand for labor in that industry. When the demand
for labor in an industry is less than the number of workers in that industry,

the excess supply of labor in that industry is unemployed. Since this situation
will generally apply to labor in the X industry In subsequent discussion, it
is convenient to denote the level of unemployment in this industry (and in
the economy) by
U = N -

L(T).

Unemployment of workers who seek to work in an industry is assumed to provide
the incentive, directly or indirectly, for some of these workers to move out

of this industry and seek work in the other industry. Since subsequent analysis
will be concerned with unemployment in the X industry (resulting from the removal
of tariff protection), this assumption can conveniently be embodied In the
specification that
(1)

where

> 0 measures the speed at which workers move out of the X industry in

response to unemployment in that industry.

The initial condition of the economy is assumed to correspond to the
equilibrium position of the economy'with a positive level of protection,

granted to domestic producers of X, with the number of workers in X equal
to L(t0) and the number of workers in Z equal to N(i0). The problem for

61

the social planner who controls commercial policy is to chose the path of
the tariff rate that maximizes the present discounted value of the

economy's

final output, V, as given by
V =

f0 [PF(L(T))

+ G(N —

N)J.exp(—r.t)

dt

subject to the transition law
N =

— •[N

-

L(T)].

In this specification of the objective function of the social planner, it
should be noted that the cost of unemployment is reflected, one—for—one, In
the value of output of X (measured as world market prices) that is lost due
to unemployment of labor In that industry.

so L7 is set equal to N —

N.)

(No unemployment occurs In Z

Thus, no allowance is made either for the

excess social cost of unemployment above the value of output lost, or for
the value that unemployed workers may derive from alternative uses of their

time. Also, In the specification of the objective function, no allowance is
made for the consumption distortion loss that results from a non—zero tariff

rate on imports of X. The specification of the objective function could be
modified to take account of these factors with the cost of increased analytical
complexity, but without altering the basic conclusions of the present discussion.
Since the number of workers in the X industry, N, Is a state variable of
the dynamic optimization problem confronting the social planner, It is possible,
using the relationship that U = N —

L(T),

to view the planner's control variable

as the level of unemployment, U, rather than the tariff rate, T. Adopting this

view (which no policy maker would publicly admit), the problem for the planner
Is to maximize
(2)

V =

f0 [P•F(N

— U)

+ G(N— N)]exp(—r•t) dt

subject to the transition law

62

N =

—

by choice of the time path of U.
To determine the solution of this problem, we form the current value
Hamiltonian,
(3)

H =

PF(N

—

U) + G(N — N) + A•u,

where A represents the shadow price of being a worker seeking work In Z

rather than a worker seeking work in X. (A is defined this way so that
A will positive along the adjustment path associated with trade liberali-

zation.) The first order condition for optimal behavior requires that
U be chosen so that
(4)

H/U — — P•F' (N

— U)

+ A < 0

with equality holding whenever U is > 0.

This condition says that whenever

U is > 0, the level of unemployment must be such that marginal benefit of
unemployment arising from a more rapid movement of workers from seeking
work in X to seeking work in Z, as measured by A3, must equal the marginal
cost of unemployment arising from the value of lost output of X, as measured

by PF'(N — U).

When the marginal benefit of unemployment is so low that

this condition cannot be satisfied (i.e., A <

P•F'(N)/I3),

then the level

of unemployment is zero. When A is greater than this minimum value, the
level of unemployment is given by
(5)

U = N -

F'1(A/P).

From this result, it is apparent that the level of unemployment is an increasing
function of A when A >

PF'(N)/.

Substituting the solution for the level of unemployment into the transition
law governing the evolution of N, it follows that

63

0

N=

(6)

—l

fF' (Xe/P) —

N) < 0

when

A < P

F'(N)/

when

A > P

F'(N)/

This result is represented in the phase diagram shown in figure 1.
negatively sloped line along which A =

P.F'(N)/

The

is the upper boundary of

the region in which the level of unemployment is zero and accordingly there
is no movement of workers from seeking work in X to seeking work in Z; i.e.,
in this region N =

0.

Above this region, the level of unemployment is positive

and N is negative, indicating that workers are shifting from seeking work in X
to seeking work in Z.

The transition law for the shadow price A is given by
A =

(7)

r.A

—

H/E(—N) =

r-A

+ P'F'(N — U) —

G'(i —

Taking account of the solution for U implied by (4 ),
).

<

P.F'(N)/
A =

(8)

(and hence U =

r'A

+ P.F'(N) —

0),

it

N).
follows that when

the rate of change of A is given by

G'(i — N).

Thus, in the region of the phase diagram where U = 0 and N =

0, the combinations

of N and A for which A = 0 are those for which

A =

(9)

[G'(—

N) —

PF'(N)]/r.

These combinations of A and N are indicated by the section of the A =
0 locus
in figure 1 that lies in the region below the line along which A =

When A >

P.F'(N)/ (and

hence U = N —

F'1(A/p)),

P.F'(N)/.

the rate of change of A is

given by
(10)

Thus,

A =

(r

+ 6)A — G'(N — N)

in the region of the phase diagram where U > 0 and N >

of N and A for which A = 0 are those for which
(11)

A = G'(N —

N)/(r

+ ).

0, the combinations

64

x

J
xc
N =

0

F'1(X/P)

N
N

N - N =

N
Fig.——l. The Optimal Adjustment Path for the Distribution
of Workers between Industries.

65

These combinations of N and A are indicated by the section of the
that lies in the region above the line where A =
the region above the A = 0 locus A is > 0
locus, A is <

P•F'(N)/.

= 0 locus

In general, in

and in the region below the A

0

0.

The distribution of workers that corresponds to the free trade equilibrium
of the economy, indicated by N =

N*, occurs where the value of the marginal

product of labor in X, P.F'(N*), is equal to the value of the marginal product
of labor in Z, G'(N —

N*).

If the social planner inherited this distribution of

workers as the initial distribution at the start of the policy of trade liberalization (which is not possible If the economy was at equilibrium position corresponding to a positive tariff rate), the optimal policy for the social planner

would clearly be to set A = 0 and have the economy sit at its free trade equl—
librlutn position. In the phase diagram, this policy is indicated by the point

where N = N* along the N axis. Starting with N =

N*, any choice of A(O), other

than zero, would clearly not be optimal since it would place the economy on
a dynamic path that would ultimately lead away from the free trade equilibrium
and toward an equilibrium where either N = N (if A(0) < 0) or N = 0 (if X(0) >

0).

It must be recognized, however, that the point where N = N* and A = 0 is

not the only optimal steady state for the economy. In fact, any point on the
A = 0 locus in the region of the phase diagram where N = 0
is an optimal steady

state position. In other words, if the economy inherits a distribution of
workers with N between the levels NA and NB illustrated in figure 1, the optimal
policy is to set A(0) =

[G'(N

— N) —

P.F'(N)J/r

(which makesX —0) and to hold

the distribution of workers at the inherited distribution. This is the optimal
policy because the benefit of shifting a worker from one industry to another,

as measured by X(O) which is the present discounted value of the difference

66

between the value of the marginal product of labor in the two industries, is
smaller than the cost of the unemployment that must be created (or tolerated)
in order to induce a worker to shift industries.

The largest number of workers in the X industry consistent with an optimal
steady state, NB, and the associated value of XB for this optimal steady state
satisfy the condition that

PF'(NB)/ =

(12)

= [C'(N

—

NB)

—

P.F'(NB)]/r.

If the level of protection previously granted to the X industry was substantial,
it is likely that the inherited number of workers in the X industry, N0, will

exceed NB. In this case, the optimal policy for the social planner is to choose
X(O) =

in

order to place the economy at the point C that lies along the

stable branch of the dynamic system illustrated in figure 1. With this choice
of X(0), the economy moves gradually along the stable branch of that dynamic
system until it arrives at the optimal steady state position indicated by

the point B. At this point, no further movement is desirable because the
social value of shifting additional workers out of X and into Z does not

repay the social cost of inducing such movement. Any other choice of X(O)
would not be optimal since it would lead to a situation either where N
converged to N (if X(0) were <
>

Xe,).

X)

or where N converged to 0 (if X(O) were

In either case, the transversality conditions of the planner's

optimization problem would be violated.
To move the economy along its optimal path, the social planner does not

directly set the unemployment rate. Rather, he sets the path of the tariff
rate applied to imports of X.

to the X industry was so low

If the level of protection previously granted

that

the planner inherits a number of workers

in the X industry that is within the range of optimal steady state levels of N

67

(i.e., 1.etween NA and NB), the planner simply holds the tariff rate cOnstant

in order to hold the demand for labor in X, L(t), at the inherited level of N.
(This requires a positive tariff rate if N is between N* and NB and a negative
tariff rate if N is between NA and N*.) If the level of protection previously
granted to the X industry maintained a level of employment N0 =

L(r0)

that

was greater than NB, as illustrated in figure 1, then the planner must immediately cut the tariff rate to below its previous level, T0, in order to
reduce the demand for labor in X to below N0 and stimulate the optimal rate
of movement of workers from seeking work in X to seeking work in Z.

Subse-

quently, the planner must manipulate the tariff rate in order to move the
economy along the stable branch In figure 1 until the steady state point B

is reached. The path of the tariff rate that moves the economy along the
stable branch is determined by the requirement that the demand for labor at
each level of N must be consistent with the required level of unemployment
at that level of N along the stable branch; formally this requires that
(13)

L(T) =

F'1(X(N).6/p)

where A(N) is the value of A that is associated with N along the stable

branch in figure 1. The tariff rate at the optimal steady state position B
Is the tariff rate TB that is determined by this requirement when N is set
equal to NB and A(N) =

X(NB)

XB

To move the economy along its optimal path from C to B, the tariff rate

set by the social planner must be declining. This is implied by the fact
that A(N) is declining as we move along the stable branch in figure 1 from

the point C to the point B. Thus, the optimal path for commercial policy
during the period of trade liberalization requires "overshooting" in the
sense that the tariff rate is initially cut below its inherited level

68

to a level

(associated with the point C in figure 1) that is below its new

steady state value TB• Subsequently, the tariff rate is raised in order to
move the economy along its optimal path from the point C to the point B.
Indeed, if the inherited level of

was sufficiently high, it is even possible

that the optimal policy will be to cut the tariff rate initially to a level
that is below the free trade level——that is, the optimal path for commercial
policy would involve an initial period during which imports of X would be

subsidized in order to stimulate a rapid rate of movement of workers Out of
the X industry and into the Z industry.

69

C. Extensions and Modifications
It would be misleading to suggest than any of the specific implications
of the model discussed in the preceding subsection have any substantial claim

to generality. In particular, the conclusion that the optimal path of corn—
mercial policy in a trade liberalization involves "overshooting" in which the

level of protection is initially reduced below its optimal steady state level
(and perhaps made negative) is a specific implication of that model, and not
a general property of reasonably specified models of the influence of unemployment on the optimal timing of trade liberalization.

To obtain a better notion

of the range of conclusions that are consistent with models th.3t might have some
claim to economic sensibility, it is useful to consider variations of the
model of the preceding subsection which preserve Its simple two—industry, one—
factor structure, but allow for modifications in the objective function of the
social planner or in the specification of the transition law that relates
the rate of redistribution of workers to the level of unemployment.
With respect to the planner's objective function, one important modification would be to take account of the consumption distortion loss resulting
from a tariff.

Assuming for simplicity that the consumption distortion loss

is a function D(T) of the tariff rate, the objective of the social planner
would become the maximization of

(14)

V =

f [P.F(L())
0

+ G(N — N) —

D(i)].exp(—

r.t) dt

by choice of the time path of T, subject to the transition law
N = — S•(N —

L(T)).

Without going through the details of the formal analysis of this problem, the
following modifications of the results of the preceding subsection should be

70

noted. Since the consumption distortion loss of the tariff is second order
of smalls for small values of T (assuming no other distortions), we retain
the earlier result that there is a region of optimal steady positions for

the economy surrounding the free trade equilibrium point. The size of this
region of optimal steady states, however, is reduced because taking account
of the consumption distortion loss of a tariff implies a greater shadow
value for shifting workers out of X and into Z at any level of N >
specifically, at any steady state position (where U = 0 and N =

N*;

0),

A is

now given by
(15)

A =

[G'(N - N) - P•F'(N) +

Comparing this result with (9), the additional term D'(L1(N))L1'(N)/r
that appears in (15) represents the present discounted value of the gain
from reducing the consumption distortion loss of the tariff by the amount
permitted by reducing the number of workers seeking work in the X industry

by one unit. More generally, along the stable branch of the dynamic system
governing the evolution of N and A (which corresponds to the optimal path
for the economy), the value of A will now be the present discounted value of
G'(N — N) —

P•F'(N

— U) + D'(L1(N —

discounted value of G'(N — N) —

U))L1'(N

PF'(N

—

U).

—

U),

rather than the present

For this reason, for N >

N*,

the value of A along the optimal path will be greater than it was when no
account was taken of the consumption distortion loss of the tariff.

This,

in turn, implies that for any value of N above the optima1—steady state region
the optimum level of unemployment will be higher and the optimum level of

the tariff rate will be lower than it was when no account was taken of the
consumption distortion loss of the tariff.

71

Modification of the planner's objective function to allow for social
costs of unemployment other than the value of lost output can be dealt with
in much the same way as the modification allowing for the consumption distor-

tion loss of the tariff. If the social loss from unemployment is assumed to
be less than the value of lost output because unemployed workers derive
benefit from alternative uses of their time, to the extent measured by the
function W(U) (with W(U) >

0, W'(U) > 0, and W"(U) < 0), then the marginal

social cost of unemployment is reduced from P.F'(N — U) to P•F'(N — U) —

W'(U).

The first order condition determining the optimal level of U, for given values
of N and A becomes
(16)

P.F'(N — U) — W'(U) <

with

equality holding whenever U > 0.

It Is apparent that the maximum value

of A consistent with zero unemployment is now smaller than it was when unemployed

workers were assumed to derive no benefit from alternative uses of their time.

For A above this maximum, the level of U determined by (16), say U(A, N, P),
is reater than the corresponding level of U, given by N —

F'1(X/P),

deter-

mined in the preceding subsection. Since the transition laws determining the
evolution of N and A are still given by ( 1

)

and

(

7),

It is relatively easy

to establish that the optimal path of trade liberalization is modified in the

following ways. The range of optimal steady values of N around N* is reduced
because the marginal social cost of unemployment is reduced. For any N above
this range, the optimal level of unemployment is Increased and the optimal

level of the tariff rate is reduced. The long run steady state level of the
tariff that is reached starting from such an N is lover and the rate of conver-

gence of the tariff to its steady state level is greater, implying a greater
Initial reduction in the tariff below the previously granted level of protection.

72

On the other hand, if the social cost of unemployment is assumed to be
greater than the value of output lost, for any of the reasons previously

discussed, then theconclusions of the preceding paragraph are reversed. The
range of optimal steady state value of N around N* is expanded. For any
N above this range, the optimal level of unemployment is reduced and the

optimal level of the tariff rate is increased. The long run steady state
level of the tariff that is reached starting from such an N is higher and
the rate of convergence of the tariff rate to this long run steady state
level is slower, implying a smaller initial reduction in the tariff but not
an elimination of the "overshooting" of the initial reduction in the tariff
to a level below its new steady state level.

Another area in which it is important to consider modifications of the
model analyzed in the preceding subsection is in the specification of the
transition law that governs the rate at which workers move from seeking

work in the X industry to seeking work in the Z industry. This transition
law is important because It controls the marginal benefit associated with

unemployment by specifying the relationship between the level of unemployment

and the rate of redistribution of the work force. In a more complete analysis
than will be attempted here, it would be appropriate to consider how this
critical transition law arises out of the economic and institutional arrange-

ments that govern wage rates, employment levels, labor migration, and educa-

tion and training of the work force. For the present, it is desirable at
least to consider alternative specifications of the transition law (

1),

which

should be thought of as a reduced form relationship that might be derived
from a more detailed investigation.

73

A more general formulation of the transition law (1 ) would allow the
rate at which workers move from seeking work in X to seeking work in Z to
depend upon both the level of unemployment experienced by workers in X and
on the number of such workers; say
N =

(17)

=

with
is that

- 4,(U,

/U

(O, N) = 0 for all N,

N),

> 0 and N =

/N

> 0. An additional attractive assumption

is a linear homogeneous, quasi—concave function, implying that

equal proportionate increases In U and N (which would hold the unemployment
rate for workers in X Constant) would result in a proportionate increase in

the rate of movement of workers Out of the X industry. A specific form of
that has this property is the Cobb—Douglas form,
(18)

=

.Ua.N a

0 < a < 1.

The original form of the transition law (
case of this Cobb—Douglas form with a =

1)

may be thought of as the limiting

1.

Given the more general form of the transition law (17), the Hamiltonian
for the social planner's optimization problem becomes
(19)

H = P•F(N — U) + G(N — N) —

X•(U,

N).

The first order condition that determines the optimal value of U, for given
values of N and A becomes
(20)

H/U = — P.F'(N

— U) +

N) < 0

with equality whenever U > 0. The value of U that satisfies this condition
(and maximizes the value of H) may be written as a iinction of A and N, say

U = T(X, N).

When U(A, N) is > 0, its partial derivatives are given by
(21)

U/A =

— /(P

F" +

(22)

U/N =

(P •F" —

A.q)/(p •F" + A.u)

74

The second order condition for maximization of H with respect to U,
2H/aU2 = P.F" +

(23)

<

0,

implies that the denomintors in the expressions for U/X and U/N must be

negative. Since

must be negative at the value of U that satisfies (20)

(with equality), it follows that U/X >

0.

In other words, an increase in

the shadow value of moving workers out of X and into Z always justifies an

increase in the level of unemployment. In the case where

is a linear

homogeneous, quasi—concave function, we also know that

4•U + JN•N = 0.

(24)

Since U must be < N, it follows that in the linear homogeneous, quasi—concave
case, 0 <

U/N <

1, with 1J/3N =

=

0 only if

(which is true for the

transition law (1 )), and with 3U/3N = 1 only if. U = N (which is true only if
all workers in X are unemployed).

The determination of the optimum level of unemployment as a funttlon of

and N is illustrated in figure 2. In this figure, the number of workers
seeking work in X, N, and the number of workers actually employed in X, N - U,
are measured positively along the horizontal axis, starting from the origin 0.

Relative to the origin 0, the curve labeled P.F'(N—U) shows the value of the
marginal product of labor in X as a function of the number of workers employed

in that industry. For a given number of workers seeking work in X, N0, this
same curve, viewed from the perspective of an origin at N0, shows the trarginal

cost of unemployment, with the level of unemployment measured negatively along
the horizontal axis starting at N0. When N =

N0

and A =

benefit of unemployment is indicated by the curve labeled

the marginal
Ao•u(TJ, N0) which

is also plotted relative to the origin at N0. The shape of this curve

75

Value of Marginal
Pro
of Labor

Marginal Cost and
Marginal Benefit
of Unemployment

Xiu(u,No

P.F' (N-U)

N, N-U
—

U(X1, N0)

N

0

76

<

reflects the assumption that

0; that is, the marginal response of the

rate of redistribution of workers to an increase in the level of unemployment

is assumed to decline as the level of unemployment rises. The intersection
of the marginal cost and marginal benefit curves at the point A determines

the optimum level of unemployment U(A0, N0). An increase in A to A1 shifts
this intersection point to B and increases the optimum level of unemployment
to U(A1, N0).

With the modification of Hamiltonian for the social planner's optimization
problem, the rule governing the evolution of the shadow price A becomes

A =

(25)

rA

—

H/(—N)

=

rA

+ PF'(N—U) — G'(N—N) +

XN(U,N).

Setting U = U(A, N) in this differential equation and in the transition law

N

—

(U,

N) that determines the evolution of N, we obtain the differential

equation system that governs the joint behavior of N and A.

One important issue concerning the nature of this differential equation
system concerns the circumstance under which it will have a range of optimal
steady state values of N and A, where N = 0 and A =

0, as was illustrated in

figure 1. This situation arises when the "marginal product" of unemployment
in increasing the rate of redistribution of workers,
the level of unemployment approaches zero.

N), is bounded as

The reason is that with an

upper

bound on the limiting value u(U, N) as U approaches 0, the limiting

value

of the marginal benefit of unemployment,

of

N), for

small values

A is less than the marginal cost of unemployment, P.F'(N — U).

This

means that in the neighborhood of the distribution of the work force N* that
corresponds to the free trade equilibrium, where the value of A associated
with the stable branch of the dynamic system governing N and A must be small,
we cannot satisfy the first order condition (20) with a positive level of U.

77

Hence, within a region around N*, N will be zero, implying that once we reach this
region it is not optimal to incur the costs associated with any positive level
of unemployment in order to enjoy the benefits of moving closer to free trade.

In contrast, when the limit of u(U, N) as U approaches zero is unbounded, the
only optimal steady state position will be the free trade equilibrium position.
Another important issue concering this differential equation system is
the path of the tariff rate along the path of convergence to an optimal steady
state position, starting from a level of N that is above the range of optimal

steady state levels of N. In this regard, it should be recalled that for the
transition law N =

— .U

examined in the preceding subsection, the optimal path

of the tariff rate Involved "overshooting" in the sense that the tariff rate
was initially reduced to below its new steady state level (which was below its

inherited level) and then gradually raised to this steady state level. Since
the tariff rate is directly related to the actual level of employment in X,
through the function L(T) described In preceding subsection, the path of the
tariff can be inferred from the path of L = N — U.

Whenever the initial N

is above the range of optimal steady state values of N, it follows that the
tariff rate must initially be cut to below its inherited level in order to

start the economy moving toward its optimal steady state. If L = N — U is
rising along the subsequent path of convergence to this steady state, it
follows that the tariff rate must be rising along this path, and hence that
tariff rate must initially be cut to below its new steady state level-—that
is, there must be "overshooting" in the optimal behavior of the tariff rate.
On, the other hand, if L declines along the path of convergence to the optimal

steady state, the tariff rate must be declining along this path and, hence

must initially be reduced by only a fraction of its ultimate reduction. This
might be described as the case of "gradual adjustment" of the tariff rate.

78

After some rather tedious manipulations (the details of which are omitted),
it is possible to show that the rate of change of employment in X along the
path of convergence to the steady state is given by
(26)

+

L =

+

where
=

(27)

l/(PF"

+ x.utj)

<0

Along this path of convergence, starting from an N above the steady state region,
= — N will be positive and X will be negative. Hence, the prospects for

avoiding "overshooting" of the tariff rate as a optimal policy depend on
having

+

negative and sufficiently large that L is positive. For

the transition law t(U, N) =

U

examined in the preceding subsection, this

condition cannot possibly be met since

and

are both zero.

Iti the

case wFre (U, N) is a linear homogeneous, quasi—concave function, we may

use the fact that UU + UN =
< 0 to conclude that term

(h/N).[(N_T)
+

+ U•UU + NNJ =

contributes

((N—u)/N)•

to the possibility that

the initial reduction in the tariff rate will not overshoot the ultimate steady

state reduction in the tariff rate. More specifically, in the Cobb—Douglas
case where 4(TJ, N)

.Ua.Nla, it can be shown that starting from an N > N*,

the tariff rate will ultimately be reduced to a steady state value of zero
(free trade equilibrium will be reached) and that the tariff rate will be

declining along the optimal path of convergence to free trade at least in the
region where
(28)

G'(N — N) < (l/a).P.F'(N).

Since G'(N*) =

P.F'(N*),

it is apparent that this region necessarily includes

a range of values of N immediately above N*. When a is small and when the
marginal product of labor in the two industries is not very sensitive to changes

79

in the levels of employment in the respective industries, the region where
gradual convergence of the tariff rate is assured tends to be quite large.
Mt

explanation

of the result of gradual convergence to free trade in

the Cobb—Douglas case may be given as follows. With the Cobb—Douglas

specification of the U, N) function, the marginal product of unemployment
in stimulating workers to move from X to Z,

=

a(N/U)a,

becomes indefi-

nitely large as the level of unemployment is reduced toward zero. This
implies that even with a low shadow value for shifting a worker when we are
near the free trade distribution of the work force, the value of the marginal
product of unemployment, A.41, will be able to equal the marginal cost of

unemployment at some positive level of U. Hence, it always pays to tolerate
at least a small amount of unemployment to move the economy in the direction

of its free trade equilibrium. The marginal product of unemployment in
stimulating redistribution of the labor force, however, is a sharply declining
function of the level of unemployment, especially at relatively low levels
of unemployment (i.e.,

= — ct.(l—a).N 1-cL•Ua—2

is large and negative

for small values of U). This means that there is an incentive to provide
the stimulus reguired to induce workers to move to the free trade distribution

of the labor force by having very low levels of unemployment spread over long

periods rather than higher levels of unemployment for shorter periods. Hence,
the optimal path for the tariff rate does not involve a large Initial cut that

would generate a high initial level of unemployment and stimulate a rapid

initial rate of convergence of N toward N*. Rather, the optimal policy calls
for a small initial cut in the tariff rate to stimulate a small amount of

unemployment, and then a gradual reduction in the tariff rate to maintain
a small but decreasing level of unemployment along the adjustment path to
the free trade equilibrium.

80

D. Suggested Conclusions
As previously noted, concern about the economic and institutional arrange—
merits that underlie the assumed reduced form relationship between the level of

unemployment in the previously protected industry and the rate at which workers
shift out of this industry casts some doubt on the validity and generality of

the analysis based on this reduced form relationship. If, however, we accept
the hypothesis that there is such a reduced form relationship that remains
stable for variations in the commercial policy regime (and for variations in

other related policies), then some general conclusions may be seen to follow
from the preceding analysis concerning the influence of unemployment on the
appropriate path of commercial policy in a program of trade liberalization.
First, there are circumstances in which it is not optimal, because of

the social cost of unemployment, to push trade liberalization all of the way

to what would be the first best optimum in the absence of these costs. These
circumstances arise when the marginal social cost of unemployment in the
previously protected industry is positive and bounded away from zero at low
levels of unemployment in that industry and when the "marginal product" of
unemployment in stimulating a more rapid movement of workers out of the
previously protected industry does not become very large as the level of
unemployment becomes small.

When these conditions are met, it is not

optimal to reduce the level protection below a certain finite level because
the social cost of the unemployment generated by further reductions is greater

than the present discounted value of the gain in allocative efficiency from
inducing workers to shift out of the previously protected industry.
Second, the circumstances under which a finite, permanent level of protection would be justified by the social costs of temporary unemployment resulting

from reductions in the level of protection would not arise if it were possible

81

to maintain a finite rate of redistribution of the work force with a very

low level of unemployment in the previously protected industry. In particular,
adapting the model of capital redistribution used in section 2 to the present
discussion of labor force redistribution, new workers entering the labor force
might be assumed to locate outside of the previously protected industry in
response to the incentives associated with even a very low level of unemployment
in this industry; whereas workers already employed in the protected industry
would move (prior to retirement) only in response to a much higher level of

unemployment. In this situation, it would be optimal to generate, through
reductions in the level of protection, at least the very low level of unemployment necessary to induce new workers not to locate in the protected industry.
until the first best equilibrium is achieved.
Third, the behavior of commercial policy along the path of convergence
to the optimal steady state depends critically on the shape of the reduced
form relationship between the level of unemployment in the protected industry

and the rate at which workers are shifting out of this industry. In the case
analyzed in subsection B, where we have a proportional response of N to U, we
find that it is optimal for the initial reduction in the tariff rate to overshoot the long—run steady state and for the tariff rate to rise (subsequent to
this initial reduction) along the optimal path of convergence to its (positive)

steady state level. However, in the case of the Cobb—Douglas response function
discussed in subsection C, the optimal initial reduction in the tariff rate
is smaller than the optimal steady state reduction (to zero), and the tariff
rate declines along the optimal path of convergence to its steady state value.
Fourth, it is possible to argue, at least heuristically, that the properties

exhibited by the Cobb—Douglas response function t(U, N) = U

c Nl-c

are probably

82

more reasonable than the properties exhibited by the proportional response

function U, N) = f3U.

The argument is that even with a low level of unemploy—

rnent in the protected industry (when the level of protection in this industry

is not too high), most new workers will see the advantage of seeking jobs
outside of this industry, especially if the prospect is for further reductions

in the level of protection. Hence, even with a low level of unemployment in
the protected Industry (relative to the average in the economy), there will be
a fairly high net rate of movement of workers out of this industry as older

workers retire and few new workers enter this industry. At higher levels of
unemployment in the protected industry, even fewer new workers will decide to
enter, and some older workers will decide to shift industries before retirement.

However, the rate of worker redistribution will rise far less than proportionately with increases in the level of unemployment in the protected industry
because most new workers will be affected even at low levels of unemployment
and because the number of older workers who decide to shift in response to
an increase in unemployment tends to decline as the level of unemployment
rises.

Finally, if this heuristic argument about the form of the (U, N) function
governing the response of the rate of worker movement to the level of unemployment
in the protected industry is accepted, then it follows that concern with controlling the social costs of unemployment arising from reductions in the level
of protection provides a valid rationale for a gradual policy of trade
liberalization.

83

APPENDIX

This appendix presents some of the formal

details

of the analysis

of the dynamic process governing the adjustment of the economy for the model

described in Section II. We consider an economy that produces two goods, X
and Z, in accord with standard, neoclassical, linear homogeneous production
functions, using two inputs, capital and labor:
(Al)

X =

F(Lx, Kx)

(A2)

Z =

G(Lz,

Kz).

be

Labor is assumed to

mobile between X and Z production, but capital is

specific, at least at a moment of time, to producing output in the industry
where it is located.

There is an adjustment process through which capital can be moved

from one industry to another over the course of time. Such capital movement
is "costly" in the sense that it requires use of some of the economy's
supply of mobile labor, in accord with the labor requirements function for
capital movement;
(A3)

LM =

lp(fMI),

p(O) = 0

p'(0) =

0, p" > 0

where M denotes the rate at which existing capital is being moved out of Z

and into X. The specification of i as a function of the absolute value of
M implies that the cost of moving existing capital is independent of the
direction of movement.

In addition to movement of existing capital, adjustment occurs

through depreciation of existing capital, at an exponential rate 5 common
to capital located in both industries, and through investment in new capital

84

that may be located (initially) in either industry. Investment requires
use of some of the economy's supply of mobile labor in accord with the
investment labor requirements function;
(A4)

L1 =

4(I), O) =

0,

4'(I) >

0,

4"(I) >

0,

where I is the rate of production of new capital.
Taking account of investment in new capital, depreciation of
existing capital, and movement of existing capital, the rates of change

of the capital stocks in the two industries are given by
(A5)

(A6)

Kz=Iz_6Kz_M;
> 0 are, respectively, the amounts of investment allocated

where Lx >Oand a

to X and Z, which add up to total investment in new capital; i.e.,
(A7)

1x+

=

I.

The total amount of mobile labor available to produce final goods,
to produce new capital, and to produce the service of movement of existing

capital is the economy's endowment of labor, L. Assuming that labor is
fully employed, the constraint on the total use of labor is expressed by
the requirement
CAB)

LX+LZ+LI+LM=L.

It

is assumed that the behavior of the economy is governed by a

social planner whose objective is to maximize the present discounted value
of the economy's output of final goods, V, where V is defined by

A9)

V=

(P.X + Z) exp(—r.t) dt.

85

It is assumed that the relative price of X in terms of X, denoted by P,
and real interest rate measured in terms of units of Z per year, denoted
by r, are fixed exogenously (by conditions in world goods and capital

markets). This assumption of exogeneously determined values of P and r
could be relaxed with some increase in the complexity of the analysis,

but without altering any of its basic conclusions. The social planner's
behavior Is constrained by the relationships expressed in (Al) through (A8).

To determine the solution or the social planner's optimization
problem it is convenient to define the current value Hamiltonian
(AlO)

H =

+

In

+ G(Lz,Kz) + 11.(I —

P.F•(Lx,Kx)
—

—

S.KZ

M)

represents

this Hamiltonian,

+ w(L

—

Lx

—

+ H)

I5.KX

Lz

+

—

—

the shadow price of a unit of capital

located in X, i represents the shadow price of a unit of capital located
in Z, and w represents the shadow wage rate, all measured in terms of

units of Z at time t. The first order conditions for optimal behavior at
time t require maximization of H by choice of the current control variables

Assuming an interior solution, the associated

.

Lx, Lx, 1x' I H, and

first order conditions are for the maximization of H are given by
(Alla)

=

(Alib)

H/Lz =

— w = 0

P•FL

=0

—
GL

(Allc)

Ix,#'x) =

(Aild)

=

(Alle)

H/M =

(Alif) HI

=L

I.(

w•c')

— sign(M).t'
Lx

= 0

w•') = 0

—

—

—

—

Lz

—

+

=

0.
—

p(MI)

=

0.

86

The condition (Alla) determines the amount of labor employed in X
through the requirement that the value of the marginal product of labor in

X must equal the shadow wage rate. It follows that
(A12a)

Lx =

K•Q(w/P), /(w/P)

<

0

where £x(w/P) is the labor demand function (the inverse of the marginal
product of labor schedule) for a firm with one unit of capital located in X.

Similarly, the condition (llb) determines the amount of labor employed in
Z through the relationship
(A12b)

Lz = Kz•.Zz(w),

z" <

o

where .(w) is the labor demand function (the inverse of the marginal
product of labor schedule) for a firm with one unit of capital located in Z.

The conditions (Alic) and (Alid) jointly determine the level of

investment in new capital and its distribution between X and Z. Except in

satisfaction

=

the special case where

of these two conditions

requires that all newly produced capital be allocated to the industry
which has the higher shadow price of capital, and that no new capital be
allocated to the industry with the lower shadow price of capital; that is

1w)

=

(Al2c)

if

0
0

(Al2d)

ifj.i

I=

t1(/) f
In the special case whereU
determined by I =

X

>j.i

Z

px >

the aggregate level of investment is

''() = 1(1),

and the distribution of investment

87

between X and Z is determined by conditions other than the first order
conditions for maximization of the current value Hamiltonian.

The rate and direction of movement of existing capital between
industries is determined by the condition (Alle) which says that the

marginal cost of moving capital from Z into X, w.sign(M)i'(N), should
equal the marginal benefit of such movement, as measured by the difference

between the shadow price of a unit of capital located in X and the shadow

price of a unit of capital located in Z. Solving this condition to determine
M, we find that

(A12e)

N =

Thus,

—

sign( -

)I_1(J

-

determinesthe rate at which existing capital is moved

between industries, and the sign of

—

determines the direction of

that movement.

The appropriate value of the shadow wage rate is determined by
the condition (A12f) which is imply the labor market clearing condition.

Using (A12a) through (A12e) to substitute into (Alif), it follows that
this value of the shadow wage rate must satisfy

(Al2f)

Kx.Lx(w/P) + KzLz(u)) +

+ P(*''(Ix —

p/w))

=

L.

This condition can be solved for the optimum value of w as a function of
the State variables

and

and the co—state variables

the aggregate labor supply suppressed as a argument); viz

and

(with

88

(Al3)

w(K., Kz, 11x'

z'

where the partial derivatives of w with respect to each of its arguments
is positive. Using the function w(Kx, Kz, 'x' liz)

to

substitute for the

variable w that appears in (A12a) through (A12e), we may determine the
values of the other current control variables, Lx, Lx, 1x'
functions of the state variables

and .

and M, as

and Kz and the co—state variables

These functional relationships, which are implied by the first

order conditions for maximization of the current value Hamiltonian, are
indicated by a "tilda" appearing above the respective variable; e.g.

denotes the level of labor employed in X as a function

Lx(Kx Kz, x'

of the state and co—state variables of the social planner's maximization
problem.

Optimal behavior by the social planner also requires that the
state variables

evolve

and Kz and the co—state variables

accord with the appropriate transition laws. Specifically, for

in

and Kz,

we require that
(A.14a)

=

(A14b)

1z =

H/iix =
3H/ali

=

IX(KX, Kx, lir) —

=

(A14d)

=

r.M

ri

3H/Kz

Kz, lix liz).

and p2, we require that

= (r

—

—

M(Kx, Kz, lix U)

—
IZ(KX, Kz, Mx ) — 6.Kz M(Kx,

For the co—state variables,

(A14c)

+

=

+

—

(r +

)•M —

P•FK(Lx(Kx, Kz, Mx

K)

GK(LZ(KX, Kz, Mx liz), Kz)

89

In addition, for the social planner to have chosen the optimal path for
the economy, Kx and Kz must have the initial values determined by the
initial levels of capital in the two industries, and the paths of the
state and co—state variables must satisfy the non—negativity constraints
and the relevant transversality conditions.
Since the dynamic system that characterizes the evolution of the
state and co—state variables is a (nonlinear) fourth order system, the
usual graphical techniques (phase diagrams) that are applied for systems

with one state variable and one co—state variable cannot be applied in the

present case. There are, however, three important features of the present
system that can be described relatively easily.

First, taking the forward looking solutions of the differential
equations (A14c) and (A14d) that characterize the evolution of the shadow
prices of capital in the two industries, we find that

(A15c)

Mx(t) =

ft P.FK(s).exp(_(r+S).(s_t))ds + B.eXp((r+S).t)

(A15d)

Mz(t) =

f

GK(s).exp(_(r+5)(s_t))ds. + B.exp((r+c5).t)

The transversality conditions for the social planner's optimization imply

that the constants Bx and Bz in (A15c) and (A15d) must both be zero. Thus,
the shadow price of capital located in each industry at time t is equal to
the present discounted value of the future return to a unit of capital in
that industry, as determined by the value of the marginal product of capital
in that industry, discounted at a rate equal to the market interest rate

pius the depreciation rate. When the economy is controlled by private
agents, these shadow prices calculated by the social planner are replaced

90

by the prices of units of capital located in the two industries which are
calculated by private agents.

Second, at the steady state position of the economy for a given
(constant) relative price of X in terms of Z, the value of the marginal

product of capital must be the same in the two industries. Assuming that
production is non—specialized, It follows that steady state wage rate,

w*(p), and the steady state rental rate on capital, R*(P), (both measured
in terms of the numeraire Z) correspond to the equilibrium wage rate and
rental rate determined in the standard two—sector (Heckscher—Ohlin—

Samuelson) model in which labor and capital are assumed to be perfectly mobile

between industries. The steady state wage rate and rental rate, therefore,
depend only on the relative commodity price, P.

In the present model, how-

ever, the size of the capital stock is not fixed, and its steady state

level depends on the relative commodity price. Specifically, the steady
state size of the capital stock, K*,Is determined by the requirement that

w*(P)I(K*) = R*(P)/(r

(A16)

+5) =

where R*/(r + ô) corresponds to the common steady state value of
denoted by

and

From the properties of the standard two—sector model, it is

known that if X production is relatively capital intensive, R*(P)/*(P) is

an increasing function of P. It follows that in the present model if X
production is relatively capital intensive, then the steady state capital

stock will be an increasing function of P. The converse obviously holds if
X is relatively labor intensive. The steady state distribution of the

capital stock also depends on P: specifically, it can be shown that 4(P)
is an increasing function of P and K(P) is a decreasing function of P.

91

Third, with respect to the adjustment process, it is important to
note the difference between the factors that determine the rate of investment
in new capital (and the distribution of that investment between industries)
and the factors that determine the rate of movement of existing capital

between industries. For the rate of investment, what matters is the
maximum of

and

and any small difference between

and

leads all

new capital to be located in the industry with the higher shadow price of

capital. Changes in the shadow price of capital for capital with the lower
shadow price have no effect on the rate of investment in new capital or on
its distribution between industries, so long as this shadow price remains the

lower of the two shadow prices of capital. In contrast, the rate of movement of existing capital depends on the difference between the shadow prices
and

of capital in the two industries. Common changes in the levels of
therefore, have no effect on the rate of movement of existing capital.

The nature of the adjustment process subsequent to a permanent
reduction in the level of protection (which reduces the relative price of
X in terms of Z seen by domestic producers and consumers) may be understood

with the aid for figure Al. This figure is constructed for the case where
the protected industry, X, is relatively capital intensive. Since only
relative commodity prices matter, it is clear that this analysis applies

equally well to a permanent increase in the level of protection of the Z
industry which is assumed to be relatively labor intensive.
In figure Al, the line labeled L*L* shows the combinations of

K and

for which the long run level of labor demand is equal to the

available labor supply, as expressed by the requirement that

92

Kz

0

1

L*

Fig.——Al: The paths of adjustment of capital in the two final goods
industries.

93

+L

+

(A17)

L

where £ *(p)/p), £ £z(w*(1)) and

=

•(1'(*/*(p))).

The

nature of the solution of the social planner's optimization problem is
such that the economy reaches this line precisely when
to each other and equal to i*.
equal to

( and

and

are equal

Once this line is reached, ii and

remain

1Z are both equal to zero), the amount of labor devoted

to investment remains constant at L, the shadow wage rate remains constant
at w*(P), and aggregate investment remains constant at 1* =

4(L).

The

distribution of aggregate investment changes in order to keep (A17) satisfied;
that is,

and

jointly satisfy the conditions

t + k. s = o

(A18a)

Kx.

(A18b)

Kx + Kz = 1* —

+

Kz)•

From these conditions, it follows that when the economy is at a point along
the L*L* line above and to the left of the optimum steady state point

(K, K), K is rising, Kz is falling, and the aggregate capital stock
Kx + Kz is rising (since the rate of increase of

is greater than the

rate of decrease of Kz). This process continues until the economy reaches

the optimum steady state position (K, K) which depends on the given value
of the domestic relative price of X in terms of Z. At this optimum steady
state position, aggregate investment is just sufficient to cover aggregate
capital depreciation and the distribution of investment is such as to keep

the capital stock in each industry constant. Conversely, if the economy
starts at a point on the L*L* line that is below and to the right of the

optimum steady state point, then K will be falling and

will be rising,

94

and the aggregate capital stock will be falling (since rate of decrease
of

exceeds the rate of increase of Kz) This process also continues

until the optimum steady state point (K, K) is reached.
If the initial levels of capital in the two final goods industries
place the economy at a point off of the L*L* line defined by (A17), the

will necessarily differ from the optimum

optimum initial value of
initial value of

determined by the solutions to the social planner's

optimization problem. In particular, if the point corresponding to the
initial levels of capital in the two industries lies above the L*L* line,
like the point A =

(14,

4), the optimum initial values of

and p, denoted

by 4(0) and 4(0), must be less than *

with 4(0) > i4(o).

initial point, Kz will be falling and

will be rising because all new

At this

investment will be devoted to the X industry and some existing capital
will be moving from z to X.--" The point describing the position of the
economy in figure Al, therefore, will be moving downward and to the right
along a path leading to point on the L*L* line (or on the
the economy moves along this path, both jj. and

rising more rapidly than
and both will equal

axis). As

will be rising, and

When the L*L* line is reached, i7

Henceforth,

will

equal

the economy will move along the

L*L* line in the manner previously described.

If the initial levels of capital in the two industries place the
economy at a point such as B =

(4

4) that is below the L*L* line, the

1/ If the capital stock in both industries is large, the initial level of
aggregate investment together with the rate of capital movement may not
be sufficient to compensate for depreciation of capital in X. In this
will be declining at the economy's initial point.
case, both K and

95

optimum initial values of

and

denoted by 4(0) and i4(O), will be

greater than i*, with 4(0) < 4(0). At this initial point,
falling and

will be

will be rising because all new investment will be devoted

to the Z industry and some existing capital will be moving out of X and

into Z. The point describing the position of the economy, therefore, will
be moving upward and to the left along a path leading to the L*L* line (or

to the Kz axis). As the economy moves along this path, both
be falling, with
reached,

falling more rapidly than

and

will.

When the L*L* is

will equal i7 and both will equal ji*. Henceforth, the economy

will move along the L*L* line in the manner previously described.
If the initial position of the economy is the steady state

equilibrium position corresponding to a higher relative price of X (sustained
by the previous tariff protection granted to the X industry), then this
position must be at a point like C =

(4.

4) that lies below the L*L* line

and below and to the right of the new steady state equilibrium point (,

At

this initial point C, the total capital stock,

=

4 + 4, must be

greater than the new steady state equilibrium capital stock, K* =

This

+

9.

is indicated in figure Al by the position of the point C above the K*K*

line which shows the combinations of

and Kz for which the total capital

stock is equal to K*. Starting at C, the rules governing the adjustment of
the economy are those described in the preceding paragraph: Kx falls and
rises, and both

and

fall until L*L* line is reached at which time

1/ The old steady state equilibrium position must lie along the line
described by (A17) for a higher value of P. Using the properties of
the standard two—sector model, it may be shown that this old L*L* line
must lie below the L*L* line in figure Al which is drawn for a lower
value of P.

96

—

— A*. The

point D at which the L*L* line is reached (starting

from C) must lie below and to the right of the new steady state equilibrium

point (K. K). Subsequent adjustment along the L*L* line, therefore,
involves a positive K and a negative Kx, with these levels of net investment
converging to zero as the steady state equilibrium position is reached.

The path of adjustment from the point C to the new steady state equilibrium

position at (K, K) is the path of adjustment in response to an immediate
trade liberalization that is discussed in the main text.

97

References

Jones, R. W., 1971, "A Three Factor Model in Theory, Trade, and History," in
Bhagwati, J. N. and Jones, R. W. (eds.), Trade, the Balance of Payments,

and Growth. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Lapan, H. E., 1976, "International Trade, Factor Market Distortions, and the
Optimal Dynamic Subsidy," American Economic Review, 66, no. 3., (June),
pp. 335—46.

Learner, E. E., 1980, "Welfare Computations and the Optimal Staging of Tariff

Reductions in Models with Adjustment Costs," Journal of International Economics,
10, no. 1., (February), pp. 21—36.
Martin, R. and Selowsky, {., 1982, "On the Optimal Phasing of Consumer Price
Subsidies," unpublished manuscript, June.

Mayer, W., 1974, "Short—run and Long—run Equilibrium for a Small Open Economy,"
Journal of Political Economy, 82, no. 5., (September), pp. 955—67.

Mussa, M. L., 1974, "Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of
Factor Specificity, Substitutability, and Intensity in the Short and Long
Run," Journal of Political Economy, 82, no. 6., (!Tovember), pp. 1191—1203.

Mussa, M. L., 1978, "Dynamic Adjustment in the Heckscher—Ohlin-Samuelson Model,"
Journal of Political Economy, 86, no. 5., (September), pp. 775—91.
Mussa, M. L., 1982a, "Imperfect Factor Mobility and the T)istribution of Income,"

Journal of International Economics, 12, no. 1., (February).
Mussa, M. L., l982b, "Government Policy and the Adjustment Process," in Bhagwati,

J. N. (ed.), Import Competition and Response. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago
Press.

Neary, J. P., 1982, "Intersectoral Capital Mobility, Wage Stickiness, and the
Case for Adjustment Assistance," in Bhagwati, J. N. (ed.), Import Competition

and Response. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.

98

van Wijnbergen, S., 1983, "Tariffs, Employment and the Current Account: The
Role of Real Wage Resistance." unpublished manuscript, July.

