                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE VALUE OF MAKING COMMITMENTS EXTERNALLY:
                        EVIDENCE FROM WTO ACCESSIONS

                                         Man-Keung Tang
                                          Shang-Jin Wei

                                       Working Paper 14582
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14582


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2008




A shortened version of this paper is forthcoming in the Journal of International Economics. We would
like to thank Yuanyuan Chen, Tubagus Feridhanusetyawan, Will Martin, Phil McCalman, Sara Maioli,
Ilia Rainer, Arvind Subramanian, Zhiwei Zhang, seminar and conference participants at the IMF, WTO,
UNCTAD, ERWIT and EIIE, and especially Zdenek Drabek, Nuno Limao, Anna Maria Mayda, Andy
Rose, and two referees for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the IMF, nor IMF policy, nor the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Man-Keung Tang and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Making Commitments Externally: Evidence from WTO Accessions
Man-Keung Tang and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 14582
December 2008
JEL No. F1,F5,O4

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies the value of external commitment to policy reforms in the case of WTO/GATT
accessions. The accessions often entail reforms that go beyond narrowly defined trade liberalization,
and have to overcome fierce resistance in the acceding countries, as reflected in protracted negotiations.
We study the growth and investment consequences of WTO/GATT accessions, with attention to a
possible selection bias. We find that the accessions tend to raise income , but only for those countries
that were subject to rigorous accession procedures. Policy commitments associated with the accessions
were helpful, especially for countries with poor governance.


Man-Keung Tang
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
mtang@imf.org

Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall, Room 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
                                           -2-




“… It is surprisingly hard to demonstrate convincingly that the GATT and the WTO have encouraged
trade.”
                                                                                    Andrew Rose
                                                                  American Economic Review, 2004

“WTO accession provides a predictable business environment and gives a powerful guarantee to
investors that there will be no policy reversals.”

                           Mamo Mihretu, advisor to the Ethiopian government on WTO accession
                                              International Development Research Center, 2005

1. INTRODUCTION

       One way a country can acquire strong commitment to pro-growth policy reforms and
convince investors that it has done so is by making the commitment a part of its international
obligations. Examples of such external commitment include tariff reductions in a treaty that
governs the terms of a country’s accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO),
foregoing the right to impose capital controls in the future in a free trade agreement (FTA), a
privatization scheme made as a part of the conditionality in a World Bank loan, or a tax
reform plan made as a part of the conditionality in an International Monetary Fund (IMF)
supported program. The value of such an external commitment is intuitive. While a
government’s unilateral announcement or implementation of a policy reform can be reversed
or undone unilaterally, a policy reform embedded in an international treaty would involve a
much higher cost of reversal. Non-fulfillment of an external commitment could trigger
termination of loan disbursement from the World Bank or the IMF, or sanctions from the
dispute settlement mechanism at the WTO or the FTA. In political economy terms, the
benefits conferred by the multilateral organization (e.g., more secured access to foreign
markets through the WTO, or loans from the IMF) can be used by the reform-minded
government to buy political support from the originally anti-reform interest groups.
       However, it is not a foregone conclusion that the value of such external commitment
is positive. For example, some have accused IMF supported programs of having made some
countries economically worse off, as they might advocate a rigid recipe of policy changes
that may not be suitable for the countries (see, for example, views by Feldstein, 1999, and
Stiglitz, 2002). A rigorous analysis by Barro and Lee (2005) that incorporates a clever
strategy to model which countries receive IMF supported programs suggests that
                                            -3-




participation in IMF programs does not generally enhance a country’s growth prospect and
may have reduced it. So there is certainly room for the possibility of making external
commitment to a wrong set of policies. This can be the case when the negotiating partners of
the treaties do not necessarily have the country’s best interest as their objective or simply
misunderstand what is good for the country. Moreover, even if the commitments are good,
there is a separate question of whether they can be enforced or sustained in the long run. In
the case of IMF programs, the countries might reverse the prescribed reforms once the
programs expire.
       In this paper, we study the case of accessions to the WTO (or its predecessor, the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, GATT). Unlike policy commitments made in an
IMF program, policy reforms mandated in an WTO accession agreement are legally binding
as long as the country remains a member of the WTO. The accessions are sometimes
reported with fanfare, as was the case for China in 2001. In recent years, the applicant
countries are typically required by existing members to undertake a wide range of policy
changes before membership can be granted and to promise to do more within a certain
timeframe after the start of membership. The required policy changes typically go beyond a
reduction in tariff rates, and can encompass termination of state monopoly, greater
transparency in policy making process generally, reduction in restrictions on payment and
foreign exchange arrangement, and better protection of intellectual property rights2. As the
second quote at the beginning of the paper indicates, WTO accession is thought to make it
less likely for governments to reverse market-oriented reforms. Many of these policy changes
would have to overcome fierce resistance from anti-reform interest groups within the
acceding countries. This is reflected in lengthy and often contentious negotiations between
the acceding countries and the existing members. For example, for countries that acceded to
the WTO during 1995-2001, the median time it took between the initial application and the
final accession was 71 months. The view that WTO accession brings about pro-growth


2
 More examples of reform conditions in recent accession cases that have implications
outside trade are given in Table 10.
                                                -4-




reforms even if they may be politically difficult can be summarized by a Chinese adage:
beneficial medicine may be bitter in one’s mouth.
       This view, however, is not universally shared. Some think that the membership is
completely irrelevant. For example, Rose (2004) reports that WTO/GATT member countries
do not appear to trade any more than non-members do. As Subramanian and Wei (2007)
point out, since most developing-country members of the GATT/WTO acceded to the trade
body at a time when very few reforms were required of them, it is not difficult to understand
the irrelevance results. If WTO membership does not even lead to a more open trade regime,
then it is hard to see how it could deliver beneficial reforms in other ways. So, in this case,
the medicine is neither bitter nor effective.

       According to some, accession to the WTO may even mean making counterproductive
external commitments. The policy changes demanded by existing members of the
WTO/GATT might narrow the “policy space,” and force the acceding countries to choose
inferior policies that they otherwise would not have chosen. In a book entitled, “Behind the
Scenes at the WTO: the Real World of International Trade Negotiations,” the authors
Fatoumata Jawara and Aileen Kwa suggested that WTO negotiations place the interests of
powerful developed countries ahead of everyone else and often coerce developing countries
into signing something that they profoundly disagree with. By this view, the medicine is not
only bitter but also poisonous.

       In the first four decades of the GATT, developing countries were not asked to do
much reform if they wanted to join the club. Indeed, many of them retained very high bound
tariff rates even after becoming GATT members. However, the Uruguay Round of the GATT
negotiations signifies a drastic change. One objective of the Uruguay Round was to bridge
the gap between the developed and developing countries in terms of their degree of
liberalization and obligations. New acceding countries are subject to much more stringent
accession requirements. For instance, under the old GATT rules, an existing member might
be able to invoke nonapplication only on the condition that it had never entered bilateral
negotiations with the acceding country; however, under the new WTO regime, an existing
member could opt to not extend its WTO-related benefits to the new member even after they
                                            -5-




had held bilateral negotiations. For example, the United States had invoked the
nonapplication clause against the Kyrgyz Republic, Mongolia, and Georgia, even after it had
held bilateral negotiations with them. The United States would not have been allowed to
exercise nonapplication in such a situation in the GATT era (Drabek and Bacchetta, 2004).
Such threat of ex-post nonapplication potentially strengthens the leverage of existing
members over an acceding country during the bilateral negotiations, and thus enable them to
extract more concessions from the new member.
       Subramanian and Wei (2007) document that these new (i.e., post-Uruguay) members
tend to be systematically more open than old developing country members of the GATT. On
average, new developing country members of the WTO/GATT trade about 30 percent more
than the old developing members. Thus, accessions to the WTO/GATT after the Uruguay
Round offer an opportunity to empirically study the value to a country of making policy
commitments externally.
       Specifically, in this paper we investigate whether and how WTO/GATT accession
between 1990 and 2001 alters a country’s growth trajectories. The empirical method we
employ is in spirit a difference-in-differences strategy: comparing the change in the growth
rate of the acceding countries before and after accessions with the change in the growth rate
of nonacceding developing countries. Our results show that, relative to other developing
countries, countries that became WTO members did generally grow faster than before, and
the increments in their ratios of investment to GDP were greater as well3.
       Any good economist would instinctively ask whether there is any endogeneity bias in
this result. Specifically, is it possible that only countries that would pursue pro-growth, open-

3
  We choose to leave developed countries out of our analysis. About half of the developed
countries were cofounders of the GATT. A majority of the remaining ones joined the GATT
by mid-1950s. We do not want to make developed countries to be part of the control group
(when the treatment group consists of developing countries) as we wish to compare the like
with the like. We do not want to make the developed countries to be the treatment group
since it is not possible to construct a meaningful control group that consists of other
developed countries. An interesting paper by Staiger and Tabellini (1999) shows that
developed countries did gain policy commitment by embedding policy reforms as part of the
“concessions” made in the Tokyo Round of the GATT negotiation.
                                            -6-




trade policies anyway would apply for GATT/WTO membership? Researchers might find a
positive association between accession and an increase in the growth rate even though the
former may not cause the latter. In some sense, we are just as happy with the possible result
that reforms designed to promote trade openness rather than WTO accession per se have
increased growth. In this scenario, application for GATT/WTO membership is simply a
demonstration of a government’s resolve to switch to a more open trade regime. Our exercise
can be seen simply as a new angle to check the consequence of trade reforms for growth.
       We, however, document a number of patterns in the data that enhance our confidence
that the WTO commitments may causally improve investment climate and help to raise the
growth rate. Besides implementing a Heckman procedure that explicitly models the selection
issue, we also make use of a number of economic and institutional features of the WTO
accession process that turn out to be informative. We summarize these features below.
       1. Accessions with and without extensive reforms. If accession involves no binding
commitments, then the endogeneity bias is highly plausible. However, plenty of evidence
shows that the accession negotiations can be very demanding on the acceding countries, often
with anti-reform interest groups resisting strenuously the reform requirements from the
existing members. The long accession negotiations (with an average of about five years)
indicate the immense political difficulty many acceding countries have in implementing
various reforms required of them. In fact, an interesting difference among the accession
countries is informative about whether accession-related reforms have helped to change the
domestic investment climate. Up to the end of 1994, a subset of developing countries were
eligible to join the GATT under Article XXVI 5(c) by essentially sending a notification to
the GATT without having to promise reforms. Existing members could not block the
accession and therefore could not impose demands that the acceding countries would feel
reluctant to fulfill. In contrast, the rest of the developing countries would have to undergo
rigorous negotiations with existing members because any of the latter countries could block
the accession. Almost all Article XXVI 5(c)-eligible countries joined the GATT by 1994
without making extensive reform commitments. We will show that the positive impact of
WTO/GATT accession comes entirely from countries that were required to undergo more
rigorous accession negotiations.
                                            -7-




       2. Application vs. actual accession. It is possible that an application for membership
may signal that the government has become reform-minded and may pursue pro-growth
reforms regardless of the membership. Because a long and variable lag typically exists
between the date of application and that of the eventual accession, we can exploit this gap to
isolate the effect of accession-induced reforms from the effect of reforms that a government
wants to implement anyway. We find that there is a (temporary) pickup in the growth rate
subsequent to the initial application. However, even after accounting for this pattern, we
continue to find a distinct growth spurt after the actual accession.
       3. Modeling the selection effect. We also explicitly test for and quantify the effects of
self-selection on economic performance by employing a two-stage procedure a la Heckman
(1979). We do not find evidence of a strong selection bias that drives our result.
       4. Effects of reform commitments on countries of different governance quality. If
accession has no additional economic impact beyond signaling a government’s resolve to
pursue reforms unilaterally, then the association of accession with growth does not have to
vary with the quality of public governance. We look at whether and how accession-induced
policy reforms have differential impacts on countries of different governance quality. We
find that the policy commitments through WTO accession appear to be more beneficial in
countries with weak governance. This suggests that the external policy commitments may
serve as a (partial) substitute for governance in promoting economic development.
       These four features are based on economic as well as statistical arguments. Taken
together, they suggest that WTO/GATT accessions, when rigorous reforms are required of,
have led countries to engage in a wide range of reforms, improve the general investment
climate beyond narrowly defined trade areas, resulting in an acceleration of their growth rates
around the time of the accession.
       Note that the accession may lead only to a one-off increase in the income level
(though with a transition period of several years), not necessarily to a permanent increase in
the growth rate. Of course, a temporary increase in growth rates for a few years implies a
permanently larger economy and a permanently higher living standard in the end. So it is still
economically significant. In any case, given that WTO accession cases are relatively recent,
                                            -8-




available data would not allow us to discriminate between a growth effect and a level effect
that spreads over several years.
       Besides studying the value of commitments, this paper contributes to the literature on
the effects of the WTO/GATT. Rose (2004), Subramanian and Wei (2007), and Goldstein,
Rivers and Tomz (2007), among others, study the trade volume effects of the WTO (with
different conclusions). Li and Wu (2004) explore the average effects of WTO/GATT
accessions on growth during 1960 and 1998, but do not take into account the qualitative
change in the nature of the accession process since the Uruguay Round, the role of Article
XXVI 5(c), and the difference between applications and actual accessions. Ferrantino (2006)
examine association between the accessions (and free trade agreements) and governance.
       In the following section, we briefly describe the data and our empirical methodology
before presenting our results. We discuss the selection issue in greater detail in section 3.
Section 4 explores the role of policy commitments as a substitute for good governance. We
conclude in Section 5.


2. EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE

2.A. Data and Empirical Specifications

       The main variables employed in our regressions include per capita GDP, private
investment, total investment, exports and imports of all the developing countries between 1981
and 2003. All these data, at annual frequency, are obtained from the IMF’s World Economic
Outlook. The panels are not always balanced, since some smaller countries might not have data
for earlier years. The years the countries formally acceded to WTO/GATT are taken from
WTO’s website. We exclude all OPEC and industrial countries. Table 1 lists all the countries in
our treatment and control groups.4 In most regressions, we also exclude ten outliers from the
control group, five from either end of the spectrum (however, as we will report later, our results

4
 Note that although we exclude all OPEC countries, 8 out of the 28 nonmember countries
have a large share of output attributed to oil production (Azerbaijan, Equatorial Guinea,
Kazakhstan, Russia, Sudan, Syria, Turkmenistan, and Yemen).
                                                       -9-




are robust to not excluding the outliers). In later subsections, we will use additional variables
such as governance indices and a measure of the extent of policy commitments. The sources and
construction of those variables will be discussed in due course.
        The two principal sets of regressions we use look at the effects on growth and
investment at annual frequency. They take the following forms.


        Gi ,t , s = β 0 log(GDP per capita )t −1 + ∑ s β s + βi + βt + ε i ,t , s , and

        log( Inv / GDP)i ,t , s = ∑ s β s + βi + βt + ε i ,t , s .

Gi ,t , s and log( Inv / GDP) i ,t , s are, respectively, annual growth of per capita GDP and the log

of the investment/GDP ratio of country i, in year t, and s years away from accession. We
refer to the set of s’s as the time profile of accession. In most of our specifications, s belongs
to {null, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, beyond}; s is null if either the country is not in our treatment
group or it would not accede until more than two years later. Correspondingly, β s is set at

zero when s is null; β i and β t are country and year fixed effects, respectively. The log of
lagged per capita GDP is included in the growth regressions to take into account the long-
term converging and short-term mean-reverting effects.5


2.B. Benchmark Result (GATT/WTO Accessions During 1990-2001)

        One of the objectives of the Uruguay Round was to raise the developing countries’
obligations to adopt more open trade regimes. Even for countries that joined the GATT after
the commencement but before the conclusion of the Uruguay Round, Subramanian and Wei
(2007) show evidence that accessions have led them to become more liberalized relative to
both preexisting members as well as nonmembers. Guided by Subramanian and Wei’s

5
 For data with short time series, the panel fixed-effect coefficient estimates of lagged
dependent variables (i.e., the log of lagged GDP per capita in our growth regression) might
not be consistent. But as we will later report, our estimates of β s ’s with panel fixed effects
are very similar to those with β 0 specifically estimated by GMM.
                                              - 10 -




results, we focus on countries that acceded between 1990 and 2001. The summary statistics
on growth, trade and investment for this group of countries before and after accession are
reported in the first column of Table 2.
        We perform our growth and investment regressions as specified earlier. Figures 1 and
2 plot, respectively, the trajectories of the changes in growth and investment for the accession
countries relative to the control group after taking into account of other control variables in
our regressions. The 90% confidence intervals are derived from robust standard errors
clustered by country. As Figure 1 shows, in the year before accession countries are growing
about 2.4 percentage points faster than before, relative to other countries. The growth rates
stay high in the four subsequent years. These increases in growth are statistically significant.
In comparison, as Figure 2 shows, while accessions are associated with an increase in the
investment ratio, the effect is not statistically significant.
        The regression details are reported in Table 3A. Ten outlying control-group countries
are excluded from the first two columns of the table, while the last two columns report results
without such exclusion. Both the coefficient estimates and their significance levels are
essentially the same across the two sets of results. Following Wooldridge (2002) and Drukker
(2003), we also perform a F-test for first-order serial correlation in the error term in our
linear panel-data model, and find no evidence of first-order serial correlation at the 10% level
(with F(1, 104)=2.31 and a p-value of 0.13).
        One may wonder whether the growth effect of GATT accessions prior to the Uruguay
Round is statistically and economically significant. Table 3B reports the growth and
investment regressions for these earlier accessions (compared with non-accession countries
during the same period). In the growth regression, the point estimates are all positive, but
much smaller than the estimates for the more recent accessions. Moreover, the growth effect
of the earlier accessions is not statistically significant at the 10% level. Similarly, the effect
of the earlier accessions on private investment is not statistically significant either. This
contrast between the early and the more recent accessions is not surprising, echoing the
observation that developing countries in the early episodes were typically exempted from
undertaking comprehensive economic reforms under the principle of a special and
differential treatment. In fact, the early accessions did not even significantly make these
                                            - 11 -




developing countries more open in the trade area, as documented by Subramanian and Wei
(2007).In the rest of the paper, we will focus on accessions that take place since 1990.


Article XXVI 5(c) vs. Non-Article XXVI 5(c) Countries
       The results shown in Figures 1 and 2 mask a substantial degree of heterogeneity
among the countries in terms of their accession procedures. Before the WTO replaced the
GATT in 1995, former colonies of the GATT members could, upon becoming independent,
invoke GATT Article XXVI 5(c). The article had allowed them to be converted to full
members (“contracting parties”) without having to undergo the kind of lengthy negotiations
that often characterize the accession processes of other countries.6
       Although once they had become full members they were required to fulfill more
obligations (e.g., notifying GATT/WTO about any alteration of their trade policies to deal
with balance of payments problems), policies of the countries acceding by Article XXVI 5(c)
were not rigorously reviewed before the countries were granted accession. As a result, the
extent of policy reforms those countries are required to commit to is substantially less. It is
arguably a main reason why a host of countries that were eligible for Article XXVI 5 (c)
flocked to accede to the GATT immediately before the WTO was established.
       Between 1990 and 1994, 18 countries invoked Article XXVI 5(c) and acceded to the
GATT7. Table 4 lists the countries acceding by Article XXVI 5(c) and those by normal
procedures. In terms of changes in economic performance before and after accessions, the
two groups differ considerably. As shown below, accessions seem to have much stronger


6
  The full text of Article XXVI 5 (c) is as follows: “If any of the customs territories, in
respect of which a contracting party has accepted this Agreement, possesses or acquires full
autonomy in the conduct of its external commercial relations and of the other matters
provided for in this Agreement, such territory shall, upon sponsorship through a declaration
by the responsible contracting party establishing the above-mentioned fact, be deemed to be a
contracting party.”
7
  Cambodia and Algeria were the only two countries that were eligible for Article XXVI 5(c)
but did not use it. Both were reluctant to ask France to sponsor their accessions – a
requirement for invoking Article XXVI.
                                            - 12 -




impacts on the non-Article XXVI 5(c) countries than on the others. The comparison is
between annual growth (or private investment/GDP) averaging over zero to two years after
accession and annual growth averaging over eight years before accession, after controlling
for year fixed effects.


Share of acceding countries growing faster after the accession than before:
                                                   Grew Faster than Before
                Non-Article XXVI5c Countries              72% (18/25)
                  Article XXVI5c Countries                47% (8/17)

Share of acceding countries investing more output after accession than before:
                                                  Invested More than Before
                Non-Article XXVI5c Countries             59% (13/22)
                  Article XXVI5c Countries                38% (6/16)

        Further summary statistics of ArticleXXVI5(c) and non-ArticleXXVI5(c) countries
before and after accession are reported in the second and third columns of Table 2. In
particular, notice that the pre-accession growth behaviors between the two groups of
countries are quite similar (the difference in the mean of their pre-accession growth is not
statistically significant at 5 percent level); but the average post-accession growth of the non-
Article XXVI 5(c) countries is significantly faster than that of the Article XXVI 5(c)
countries. In view of the heterogeneity, we perform the same regressions as are reported in
Figures 1 and 2 and Table 3, except that we now use dummies to separate the set of countries
acceded to the world trade body through Article XXVI 5(c) from the rest. The results on
growth and investment are plotted in Figures 3 and 4, respectively. In contrast with the
results for the whole sample, non-Article XXVI 5(c) countries grow significantly faster than
before ever since one year before accession. The growth performance of non-Article XXVI
5(c) countries is generally stronger than that of the Article XXVI 5(c) countries. Moreover,
the accession effect on growth seems longer-lasting. Its economic and statistical significance
persists even beyond the fifth year after accession.8 On the other hand, accessions have only


8
 Countries that were not eligible for Article XXVI 5(c) acceded by either GATT Article
XXXIII (mostly before 1995) or Marrakesh Article XII (mostly after 1995). In a regression
                                                                             (continued…)
                                             - 13 -




very weak effects, if at all, on the Article XXVI 5(c) countries. For instance, in the second
year after accession, the Article XXVI 5(c) countries grew only 0.8 percentage points faster
than before, and it is not statistically different from zero.9
        Distinction between the two groups is also apparent in Figure 4. Compared with
before, non-Article XXVI 5(c) countries invested more of their output than before, relative to
other countries. For example, in the third year after accession, this group of countries on
average increased their investment/GDP ratio by about 18 percent from before. In contrast,
Article XXVI 5(c) countries on average increased their investment/GDP ratio by only 3
percent from before in year 3 post-accession, and this increase is not statistically
significant.10 The results suggest that the extensive policy commitments a government has to
make before accession appear to play an important role in raising output and investment. The
regressions are also reported in details in Table 5. Ten outlying control-group countries are
excluded from the first two columns, while no outlying countries are excluded in the last two
columns. The two sets of results are basically identical.
        As shown by Sala-i-Martin and others (2004), some variables are robustly correlated
with growth. These variables include investment price, fraction of GDP in mining,
government consumption share and real exchange rate.11 In columns 3 and 4 of Table 6, we
re-run our growth regression but with these variables added in as control variables. Although
not shown to be robustly related to growth in Sala-i-Martin and others (2004), we also


not reported here, we find that there is no statistically significant difference in post-accession
performance between these two groups of non-Article XXVI 5(c) countries.
9
  The robust variances of the corresponding coefficient estimates are 0.000077 and 0.000170,
respectively, and their robust covariance is –0.000076. The robust t-statistic of the sum is
0.82 (i.e., 0.008/(0.000077+0.000170-2*0.000076)^0.5).
10
   The robust variances of the corresponding coefficient estimates are 0.006 and 0.021,
respectively, and their robust covariance is –0.006. The robust t-statistic of the sum is 0.23
(i.e., 0.028/(0.006+0.021-2*0.006)^0.5).
11
  While there are other variables that are shown to be robustly correlated with growth in
Sala-i-Martin and others (2004), they vary little over time, and their effects are already
mostly captured by the country fixed effects, which are included in our regressions.
                                            - 14 -




include revolution dummies, coup dummies and cabinet change dummies on the right hand
side to capture social and political spillovers to the economy.12 The first column of Table 6
restates the results from the first column of Table 5 for ease of comparison. As shown in
column 2 of Table 6, our results—both the coefficient estimates and their significance
level—are basically unchanged with the inclusion of the revolution, coup, and cabinet change
dummies, although each of these additional control variables is statistically significant. Next,
in column 3, we include also the four variables motivated by Sala-i-Martin and others (2004).
While the coefficient estimates are somewhat lowered, in a sense it is not surprising since
these four additional control variables are each likely to be affected by WTO/GATT
accessions. We should also note that most of the coefficient estimates on the accession time
profile still remain statistically significant at the 10 percent level. Lastly, in column 4, we
also control for changes in the total trade to GDP ratio. Although the coefficient estimates are
reduced further, the statistical significance of most of them still remain above 10 percent
level. The result suggests that WTO/GATT accessions might affect a country’s growth
through affecting its trade volume, but this is not the only channel.


3. THE SELECTION ISSUE AND OTHER ROBUSTNESS CHECKS

       One might cast doubt on the exogeneity of accessions. In particular, do our results for
the non-Article XXVI 5(c) countries simply reflect the possibility that countries more likely
to experience stronger future growth anyway self-select to accede to WTO/GATT? In this
section, we tackle this issue with economic as well as statistical arguments.


3.A.   The Gap between Applications and Accessions
We exploit the long and variable lag between the dates of application and the dates of actual
accession. Suppose the concern is that only pro-growth governments would apply for WTO


12
   Revolution, coup, and cabinet change dummies denote, respectively, whether there are
revolutions, coups, and change in premier or 50 percent of the government cabinet happening
in the country in a particular year. Source: Banks Cross-National Time-Series Archive.
                                            - 15 -




membership, then the change in the growth rate associated with the event of application
would capture this “observed government type” effect. We can then investigate if there is any
additional increment in the growth rate around the time of actual accession after taking into
account whatever happens around the time of application. The results on growth and
investment are reported in Figures 5 and 6, respectively. As the figures show, there is indeed
an increase in growth and the investment/GDP ratio in the two to four years after application,
and this might be associated with the government’s pursuit of various reforms that might or
might not be related to WTO/GATT accession. However, from that point on the
improvement dies down as time progresses. Most interestingly, the positive effects pick up
again as the country approaches the time of accession. The coefficient estimates are also
reported in Table 7. These results strongly suggest that accessions make independent
contributions in encouraging investment and raising output.
       Alternatively, one might proxy for the political difficulty the government faces in
carrying out unilateral reforms (and thus its likelihood of carrying out pro-growth reforms
independent of the accession) by the time length of negotiations with the Working Party.
Presumably, the stronger the resistance the interest groups put up against reforms, the less
likely the government has enough support to accept the Working Party’s terms, thus the
lengthier the negotiations would become. However, we do not find any significant
relationship between length of negotiations and growth. In any case, inclusion of this variable
does not alter the qualitative aspect of our results (not reported to save space). This seems to
validate the independent effects of accession.
     Separating the timing of application and that of actual accession also helps address
another endogeneity concern: a government might choose to join the WTO/GATT only
when it is more politically expedient to do so (e.g., during an economic upturn). Anecdotal
observations suggest, however, that there is generally a long and uncertain gap between the
date of WTO membership application and the date of actual accession. Although a
government might well strategically time its application to the WTO, the actual accession
date is often driven mostly by the politics and economics of the Working Party members
instead. Take the Chinese WTO application as an example. While the timing of the initial
application might reflect domestic politics in China, the timing of the eventual accession was
                                            - 16 -




largely driven by Mexico, the last Working Party member to sign a bilateral agreement with
China. Similarly, for the Russian WTO application, while the timing of the initial application
has to do with politics in Russia, the date of final accession is mostly controlled by the
United States, the last country in the Working Party to sign a bilateral agreement. In other
words, the timing of the actual accession is less likely to be driven by the business cycle and
politics of the applicant country. For the purpose of dealing with the interpretation of
strategic timing of joining the WTO/GATT, we can make the extreme assumption that all the
positive growth effect at the time of initial application reflects the endogenous nature of the
application (which is likely to be an overkill). Conditional on the effect of application, we
would argue that the positive growth effect of the eventual accession is less likely a result of
domestic politics and business cycle features of the accession country.
     The Heckman approach discussed below is another attempt to net out the effects of
strategic timing by the accession countries. As panel (and not only cross-country) data are
utilized, the strategic timing factors can be captured in our econometric setup.


3.B. Testing for Selection Bias with Heckman Procedure
       To the extent that WTO/GATT membership status might not be strictly exogenous, it
is possible that our results are biased by some unobserved or omitted variables that affect
both the membership status and changes in the countries’ economic performance. To see
whether this is the case, we employ a two-step procedure pioneered by Heckman (1979) with
modifications tailored for panel data as suggested by Wooldridge (1995). Specifically, we
first carry out a probit regression estimating the WTO/GATT membership status of a country
(member or nonmember) as a function of observable country features (the country’s lagged
log per capita GDP and lagged log trade to GDP ratio). The choice of the independent
variables is guided by the theoretical literature on the benefits of WTO/GATT membership
(as commitment to trade liberalization: e.g., Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare, 1998 and 2007; as
neutralization of terms-of-trade effects: e.g., Bagwell and Staiger, 1999)—please see the
appendix for more discussion. Then for each country-year observation we compute the
inverse Mills ratio, which contains information about the unobserved factors that also affect
the country’s membership status in that particular year. In the second stage, we add in the
                                            - 17 -




inverse Mills ratio as an independent variable in our estimation of growth or investment
regressions. The inclusion of the ratio is supposed to control for the effects of the unobserved
factors from the first stage on the dependent variable in the second stage, thus ensuring that
the coefficient estimates in the second stage are purged of biases resulting from the
endogenous nature of membership status. On the other hand, if selection bias is absent – i.e.,
the dependent variable in the second stage is not affected by the unobserved factors affecting
the membership status – the coefficient estimate of the inverse Mills ratio would not be
statistically significantly different from zero. In such a case, our original specification would
have little bias, and our benchmark results would be valid.
       The tests of the selection bias are presented in Table 8. In the growth and investment
regressions in columns 1 and 2 (for which lagged GDP, lagged trade/GDP, lagged, and
lagged proxies for constraint on government executive power and for political tie with the US
are included as the first-stage independent variables) and in columns 3 and 4 (for which
lagged average statutory tariff imposed on imports is included as an additional first-stage
independent variable), the coefficient estimates of the inverse Mills ratio are all statistically
insignificant (the p-values are 0.18, 0.30, 0.46, and 0.53, respectively). Therefore, there is no
evidence of a quantitatively significant amount of selection bias present. This is perhaps not
surprising because all recent accession cases (except those that were able to invoke Article
XXVI 5(c)) involve substantial policy changes that the countries would not have embarked
on if they had been left alone. In any case, as Table 8 shows, when we include the inverse
Mills ratio from the selection equation, accessions still appear to have significant positive
impacts on growth and investment.

Subsample for which the error term in the selection equation is normally distributed.

       In usual instrumental variable regressions, it is absolutely necessary for instruments to
satisfy relevant exclusion restrictions. While one or more of our first-stage independent
variables (e.g., degree of checks and balance in the government, UN voting record) might
qualify as an excluded variable, one useful statistical property associated with the Heckman
selection procedure—different from instrumental variable regressions—is that identification
can also be achieved through the non-linearity of the inverse Mills ratio in the second stage if
                                             - 18 -




the error term in the first stage probit regression follows a normal distribution.13 We now
seek to take advantage of this property.

        We perform a Lagrange multiplier test proposed by Bera, Jarque, and Lee (1984) to
our first-stage probit. The null of this test is that the error term is normally distributed, and
the test statistics follow chi-squared distribution with two degrees of freedom (for which the
critical value at the 10 percent rejection level is 4.61). For regressions 2-4, the null is not
rejected, thus supporting the assumption that the error terms in the first-stage probit
regressions are normally distributed. While the normality assumption is rejected for the full
sample (2,166 observations used in regression 1,), it is not rejected for the sub-sample (1,832
observations) for which we have private investment data (i.e., the sample for regression 2).
Specifically, the p-value of the Bera-Jarque-Lee test statistics is 0.64 for the subsample. We
rerun our selection-test procedures for growth, but now based on the subsample for which the
first-stage error term can be argued to be normally distributed. The results are reported in
column 5 of Table 8. The coefficient estimates on the accession time profile and the Article
XXVI 5(c) interaction terms in column 5 are similar to those in columns 1. Equally
interesting, in neither of the two columns is the coefficient estimate on the inverse Mills ratio
statistically significant.14

3.C. Comparability of Treatment and Control Groups

      One might think that prior to accessions there is maybe intrinsic difference between the
structures of growth paths followed by the treatment group (i.e., the acceding countries) and
the control group (i.e., the nonacceding countries), thus rendering the comparison of growth
performance between the two groups inappropriate. To assess this concern, we test whether


13
  The procedure, however, makes no assumption about the distribution of the error term in
the second stage (see Wooldridge, 1995).
14
 For all the specifications in columns 1-5 of Table 8, essentially the same results obtain if
we instead jointly estimate the selection and main regressions with the maximum likelihood
method (results not reported to save space).
                                             - 19 -




the residuals of the growth regression (controlling for log of lagged GDP per capita, year
fixed effects, and country fixed effects) for the treatment-group countries at least 3 years
prior to their accessions and those for the control-group countries appear to be similarly
distributed. There are 152 and 1,272 observations from which the residuals for the treatment
group and control group are computed, respectively. We find that the means of residuals for
the two groups are both essentially zero. The standard deviation of the treatment-group
residuals is 0.07 while that of the control-group residuals is 0.06. We also perform a
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test on the distributions of the residuals. The p-vale of the test is 0.14,
and thus one cannot reject the null that the two sets of residuals are drawn from the same
distribution. In other words, after taking account of the control in our growth-regression
specification, the growth behaviors of the acceding countries prior to their accessions appear
to be similar to those of the non-acceding countries. Therefore, our results are unlikely to be
attributed to the accession countries’ ex ante difference from the control-group countries.



3.D. Transition Economies
      There are 14 transition economies in our sample of 25 non-Article XXVI 5(c)
countries.15 There is a possibility that the transition economies are different from other
developing countries. We separately track the effects of WTO accessions for transition and
non-transition economies in Table 9, Panel A, by adding a dummy, TE, and its interactions
with a sequence of time dummies. In this specification, the first half of the coefficients
describes the growth trajectory after WTO membership for non-transition economies. It can
be seen that there is a statistically significant increase in growth rates in the first two years
following accession. Therefore, at least some of the positive growth effects of WTO
membership are independent from the transition economies. The results on private
investment (column 3) are somewhat weaker -- the coefficient estimates are positive and
statistically significant only in year 4 (and “beyond”).

15
  The 14 transition economies are Albania, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, China, Croatia,
Estonia, Georgia, Kyrgyz, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Mongolia, Slovak and Slovenia.
                                            - 20 -




     The second part of the coefficients tracks the growth effects of WTO membership for
the transition economies. Judged by both the point estimates and the t-statistics, these effects
tend to be larger and more significant than their counterparts for non-transition economies.
We do not think these positive growth effects simply reflect an economic rebound in the
early stage of the transition. After the collapse of communist regime in 1990-91, most
transition countries applied for GATT membership in 1993-94. However, they did not
become members until an average of 5.6 years after their applications (see Table 1 for more
information), or 8.7 years after their political regime change. Such a long interval renders it
unlikely that the direct effects of regime change account for the increases in their growth and
investment around the time of WTO accessions. Moreover, while the political regime change
in these countries happened around the same time, their dates of WTO/GATT accession vary
widely between 1994 and 2001. Note also Hungary, Poland, and Romania acquired their
GATT membership before 1990, and therefore are part of the control group.
     On the other hand, the growth effects of the transition economies could partly reflect
the consequence of a large number of economic agreements between these economies and
the European Union (e.g., Europe Agreements, Partnership and Cooperation Agreements,
TCECA, Stabilization and Association Agreements, EU application) (mostly signed between
1993 and 1996). While it is difficult to isolate the effect of WTO accessions from that of the
EU agreements for these countries, the general idea that external treaties could enhance the
commitment ability of these governments is still valid.
     In Part B of Table 9, we focus only on non-transition economies and compare their
average economic performance 8 years before accession relative to that 3 years after
accession (the sample becomes too short if we go beyond three years). Although the results
on investment are weaker, we find significant improvement in the countries’ growth rates
after accession. This again confirms the conclusion that the positive growth effects of WTO
membership is not unique to transition economies.


3.E. Consistency of Estimates
       Since our data do not have long time series, our panel fixed-effect estimates are
potentially inconsistent. In particular, in the growth regression, the log of lagged per capita
                                                  - 21 -




GDP regressor might be endogenous. To check if this could bias our result, we adopt a two-
step procedure. In step one, we use Blundell and Bond’s system generalized method of
moments (GMM) to estimate the following relationship16


                       Gi ,t , s = β 0 log(GDP per capita )t −1 + β i + β t + ε i ,t , s ,


                                                                                   ^
based on a sub-sample of non-acceding countries. The estimated β 0 is consistent and equal
to -0.21 for our sample. In step two, we impose the estimate on our original growth
regression to estimate β s -- the coefficients on the time-profile of accession. The results are
                                                                            ^
reported in the column 2 of part A of Table 9. Although the β 0 based on Arellano-Bond
GMM estimation is different from that in the panel fixed-effect estimation, the coefficient
estimates on the time-profile of accession and its interaction with the transition-economy
dummy are virtually unaffected. There continue to be positive and significant pickups in
growth even for non-transition economies during the first two years after accession.
Moreover, the residuals from step two (with the Blundell-Bond system GMM estimate of β 0
imposed on the growth regression) for the control group and the treatment group for the pre-
accession years continue to appear to be similarly distributed. The p-value of the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is 0.32, indicating little evidence that the two sets of residuals are
differently distributed.
        As a final thought for this section, commitments made under accession negotiations
should in any case be recognized as important and critical elements of any possible wider
reforms an acceding country is undertaking. The protracted and complex accession process is
often a result of certain interest groups’ unwillingness to concede to the Working Party’s
original policy demands and the subsequent lengthy negotiations between the two parties that
involve substantial give-and-take. In other words, if left to its own devices, it is not likely that

16
  We thank a referee for pointing out that Blundell and Bond’s GMM method is more
appropriate than Arellano and Bond (1991) for samples that have small time dimension.
                                           - 22 -




the government can overcome the anti-reform resistance to engage in those policy changes
prescribed in the WTO/GATT agreement. Besides, other elements of reforms the acceding
government may like to pursue on its own but are not required by the accession may hinge on
the success of accession negotiations. For instance, the government may use as currency the
increased export opportunities conferred by the WTO/GATT membership to buy political
support from interest groups that would otherwise resist those elements of reforms. Therefore,
WTO/GATT accession should be viewed as at least an enabler, if not the fundamental cause, of
the pro-growth reforms carried out by the acceding governments.


4. IS EXTERNAL COMMITMENT A PARTIAL SUBSTITUTE FOR BETTER GOVERNANCE?

       Poor public governance including corruption and deviation from rule of law appears
to inhibit economic development in many countries. We now examine the interactions
between policy commitments made under WTO accessions and the quality of a country’s
public governance. Ex ante, there are two opposing possibilities. The first hypothesis posits
that poor-governance countries benefit more from the external commitment. These countries
are least likely to enact and carry through reforms unilaterally. So the external commitment
can induce them to do more than they otherwise would have. On the opposite side, a second
possibility is that the countries with weak governance may have lower capacity to carry out
any given reform commitments in the accession agreement. Which of the two possibilities
dominates is an interesting empirical question.
       We focus on the 15 countries that have joined the WTO since 1995 in order to take
advantage of the standardized format of the Working Party reports that list the reform
commitments of these countries.17 The summary statistics on growth, investment and trade
before and after accession for this group of countries are shown in the last column of Table 2.



17
  When we redo the earlier regressions with only the treatment group restricted to these 15
countries, we find that the results are broadly similar to our earlier findings for the non-
Article XXVI5c countries.
                                           - 23 -




       Upon receiving an application for the WTO membership, a Working Party composed
of any interested existing members is formed to negotiate with the government a series of
commitments, which broadly fall into two categories. One is market-access commitments
that dictate the extent to which the domestic markets for goods and services are open to other
WTO members. The other type of commitments concerns the government’s other internal
policies that may be trade-related but may also have considerable impacts on many other
economic fronts. These commitments cover a wide range of topics. For instance, a country
might be required to commit to 1) not restrict any private firms’ ability to import or export, 2)
make transparent its future privatization plans, 3) refrain from providing certain subsidies, 4)
abort state trading, 5) eliminate price controls, etc. A recent report by the U.S. Government
Accountability Office commented that “China also has made a substantial number of
important, specific commitments [in WTO accession negotiations] in the rule of law-related
areas of transparency, judicial review, uniform enforcement of legal measures, and
nondiscrimination in its commercial policy” (GAO-05-53, 2004). Drabek (1996) discusses
how the commitments required for accessions might improve productivity and efficiency
generally, rather than just in the trade area, in transition economies. Table 10 lists examples
of policy commitments that likely have important implications for investment and growth.
       These commitments are explicitly incorporated in the Protocol as an integral part of
the formal accession agreement enforceable through WTO’s dispute settlement mechanism –
unlike other statements made in a Working Party Report not reproduced in the Protocol, the
stated commitments are legally binding. For example, in 2004 the United States filed a
complaint with the WTO’s dispute settlement body against China, arguing that its differential
value-added tax treatment of integrated-circuits manufacturers violated the terms of its
accession Protocol (WT/DS309). China in the end had to agree to stop providing VAT
rebates to the domestic producers.


Policy commitments and governance quality
       The standardized format of the Working Party Reports in the WTO era ensures that
every commitment item is clearly stated in the documents across the various acceding
countries. Each single commitment pinpoints one particular area of policy. We adopt a
                                            - 24 -




simple and transparent approach by counting the total number of commitments mentioned in
the Working Party Report as our proxy for the degree of a country’s external commitment.
Although it is by no means ideal, this measure is likely to embed a considerable amount of
information about the order of the countries in terms of how stringent the policy
requirements they were subject to.18 By this metric, there is substantial variability in the
degree of commitment among the accession countries. There is not a single, one-size-fits-all
set of commitments applied to every country seeking accession. The first column of Table 11
presents the number of commitments made by the 15 countries in our treatment sample.
       We proxy for a country’s governance quality with the earliest edition (1996-97
edition) of World Bank’s Governance Matters indices (Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi,
2005), which are based on 32 data sources compiled by 30 different organizations. For our
purpose, we pick two of the indices’ six dimensions that appear to be the most relevant to
investment decisions and most likely to be areas that the accession negotiations focus on.
They are “Regulatory Burden”—measuring incidence of market-unfriendly policies, and
“Rule of Law”— measuring the quality of contract enforcement.19 We will refer to 3 plus the
sum of a country’s indices in the two dimensions as the country’s governance index. The
higher the score, the better the governance quality is. The second column of Table 11 lists the
governance index for our treatment sample.
       Average effects of commitments are shown in Table 12.20 China is an outlier with
147 commitments compared with a median of 27. The results on growth from the sample

18
  Ex post evaluation of how closely each country observes its accession commitments would
have provided another relevant measure. However, no appropriate data source exists. The
documents that resemble the most such evaluation – Trade Policy Reviews published by the
WTO Secretariat – primarily focus on clarifying rather than evaluating the countries’ trade
policies. Our discussion with WTO staff convinced us that these documents do not serve the
purpose as a check list on which commitments are met and which are not.
19
   The other dimensions are: “Voice and Accountability,” “Political Instability and
Violence,” “Government Effectiveness,” and “Control of Corruption.”
20
   Data on private investment is available for fewer countries than total investment is. Given
our relatively small treatment sample, we use total investment as our investment measure.
Generally, however, the coefficient estimates of the regressions with private investment and
those with total investment are remarkably similar.
                                                                                 (continued…)
                                             - 25 -




excluding China are in the first column. The coefficient estimates on our policy commitment
variable are all positive, and those on years -2, -1, 2, and 3 are statistically significant at the
10 percent level (or better). In the second column of the table, we convert our commitment
variable into a binary variable, and continue to find positive effects of commitments on
growth. Also, commitments seem to have broadly positive effect on the acceding country’s
investment to GDP ratio (the last two columns of Table 12), although the estimates are not
statistically significant.


Differential effects of policy commitments
        To test the idea that external commitments may be a partial substitute for quality of
governance, we check how the effects of policy commitments on a country’s growth vary
with the country’s governance quality. We multiply the time profiles of accessions with the
interaction terms of our measure of policy commitments and the governance index. The
results, presented in the first and second columns of Tables 13, give support to the
“substitute” hypothesis. The coefficient estimates on the interaction terms are significantly
negative in both regressions, suggesting the positive effects of policy commitments are
stronger among poor-governance countries.21
        For further robustness check, we impose a binary structure on our commitment and
governance variables. The small sample renders complete (2-by-2) categorization by these
two variables infeasible; instead we separate the countries into three different groups.
Countries with governance index above 3, which corresponds to the mean of all countries,
are called “Good Governance” and the rest are called “Poor Governance” countries. Within
the “Poor Governance” group, any countries that have more than 27 commitments (median of
the sample) are called “Many Commitments,” and the rest “Few Commitments.” By this




21
  Our results also hold when we use other measures of governance, namely Doing Business
index of legal rights and Heritage Foundation index of overall economic freedom.
                                           - 26 -




categorization, we have five countries in the (Poor Governance, Many Commitments), four
in the (Poor Governance, Few Commitments) and six in the (Good Governance) groups.
       The last two columns of Table 13 report the results. The (Poor Governance, Many
Commitments) group is the benchmark group. Collaborating with the previous results, those
with fewer commitments generally did not have as strong a pickup in economic performance
as those with more commitments. Confirming the differential impacts of policy
commitments, we find (though do not report) that among the good-governance countries,
those with most commitments (Jordan and Lithuania) showed smaller improvement in
growth and investment to GDP ratio than those with fewest commitments (Latvia, Panama
and Estonia).22
       Overall, these results on the differential effects of policy commitments not only
suggest their positive causal consequences, but also lend support to the view that the policy
changes imposed by a third party particularly benefit countries with poor governance – they
appear to be partial substitute for good governance.


5. CONCLUSIONS

       Using WTO accessions as a case study, this paper investigates the value of making
policy reform commitments externally. Some developing countries were eligible to obtain
membership without serious reforms; most others would have to undertake wide-ranging
policy changes that go beyond narrowly defined trade areas, including competition policy,
price controls, investment policy, privatization plans, and transparency requirement.
       Our empirical results show that WTO/GATT accessions are often associated with
significant increases in growth and investment that last for about five years, but the effects
work only for those countries that have to undertake substantial reforms (i.e., not eligible for
Article XXVI 5(c). While the pickup in the growth rates is only temporary (five years after
accession), the economy is permanently larger (by 20%) as a result. We also find that the

22
 Similar results obtain when we alternatively use the number of words contained in the
Working Party Reports as the proxy for the degree of policy commitment.
                                            - 27 -




beneficial effects of policy commitments seem more pronounced among countries with
poorer governance. This suggests that binding policy changes enforced by a credible third
party (WTO) serve as a (partial) substitute for good governance in promoting economic
development. By utilizing the gap between the dates of application and actual accession as
well as implementing a statistical procedure to correct for a selection bias, we conclude that
the WTO/GATT benefits are unlikely to be caused by an endogenous selection bias.
       In contrast to Barro and Lee (2005), who find no pro-growth effect of IMF supported
programs, we have identified beneficial effects of reforms induced by WTO accessions. One
conjecture is that policy commitments under WTO accessions are longer-lasting. Future
research could examine this formally in order to understand why external commitment works
in some context but not in others..
       For lack of good measures of individual reforms, this paper focuses on the overall
effects of the package of policy changes, instead of attempting to isolate individual reforms
that seem most important. Also, due to time-series limitation on the data, our analyses can
only focus on a timeframe around the accessions in recent years. We are not able to
distinguish a level effect from a growth effect. It would be interesting for future research to
measure the longer-term effects of policy commitments on economic development for a
larger sample of countries.
                                           - 28 -




Appendix
The choice of independent variables for first-stage regressions in the Heckman procedure is
guided by the theoretical literature on the benefits of WTO/GATT membership. We identify
the following variables/proxies that, according to the literature, should affect the likelihood
of a country being committed to trade liberalization via WTO/GATT membership.

a) Government’s bargaining power vis-à-vis protected industries (Maggi and Rodriguez-
   Clare, 1998).

    We proxy it with the “checks” variable from the World Bank’s Database of Political
Institutions. It measures the concentration of executive power. Presumably, the less
concentrated the power, the less able the government can extract rent from protected
industries.

b) Mobility of resources across sectors (Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare, 1998).

    Existing data on the direct measures of the flexibility of factor markets within a country
(e.g., World Bank’s Doing Business), unfortunately, neither go as far back as the beginning
year of our sample period nor able to capture much time variation necessary for our panel-
data setting. We therefore use an “outcome” measure—the country’s ex-ante trade
openness—to proxy this. To the extent that the government is more willing to open to trade if
resources in the economy can more flexibly move across sectors in response to external
shocks, the degree of the country’s ex-ante trade openness contains information about the
mobility of its resources. We also note that being relatively open to trade does not necessarily
imply little need for commitment through WTO to trade liberalization. Even if a country is
relatively open to trade ex ante, it is still very well possible that the government is unable to
commit to trade liberalization for certain industries. WTO membership, on the other hand,
typically entails sweeping trade reforms across almost all industries, hence committing the
government to trade liberalization for even the industries that it would not have opened up to
trade has it not joined the WTO.

c) Room for the government to grant protection ex post (Maggi and Rodriguez-Clare, 2007).

    We do not have a satisfactory measure for this. We proxy it with the country’s apparent
political tie with the US reflected in the UN voting records. The idea is the more closely tied
the country is with the US (the biggest importer and arguably the most powerful member of
WTO) in the political domain, the less likely that WTO’s dispute settlement mechanism
would be invoked against it if it does not perfectly follow WTO’s rules, and thus the more
room it has to grant protection even after joining WTO.

d) Size of the potential negative terms-of-trade effects of unilateral liberalization (Bagwell
   and Staiger, 1999).
                                           - 29 -




    As the literature suggests (e.g., Broda, Limao and Weinstein, 2007), observed tariffs
imposed by countries that are unconstrained by WTO are in line with “optimal” tariffs, which
reflect the size of the potential terms-of-trade effects that the country face. We proxy it with
the country’s ex-ante average statutory tariff imposed on imports.


REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron., Simon Johnson and James Robinson, 2001, “The Colonial Origins of
     Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic
     Review, Vol. 91, No. 5, pp. 1369–1401.

Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen R. Bond, 1991, “Some Specification Tests for Panel Data:
       Monte Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of
       Economic Studies, Vol. 58, No. 2, pp. 277-98.

Bagwell, Kyle and Robert Staiger, 1999, “An Economic Theory of GATT,” American
      Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 1, pp. 215-48.

Barro, Robert, and Jong-Wha Lee, 2005, “IMF Programs: Who is Chosen and What are the
       Effects?” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol.52, No.7, pp. 1245-69.

Banks, A.S., 1979 updated, “Cross-National Time Series Data Archive,” Center for Social
       Analysis, State University of New York.

Bera, Anil K., Carlos M. Jarque, and Lung-Fei Lee, 1984, “Testing the Normality
       Assumption in Limited Dependent Variable Models,” International Economic
       Review, Vol. 25, No. 3, pp. 563–78.

Broda, Christian, Nuno Limao, and David Weinstein, 2008, “Optimal Tariffs and Market
       Power: the Evidence,” American Economic Review.

Bolaky, Bineswaree, and Caroline Freund, 2005, “Trade, Regulations, and Growth,” World
      Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3255 (Washington, World Bank).

Drabek, Zdenek, 1996, “The Stability of Trade Policy in the Countries in Transition and
      Their Integration in the Multilateral Trading System,” World Economy, Vol. 19,
      No. 6.

———, and Marc Bacchetta, 2004, “Tracing the Effects of WTO Accession on Policy-
   making in Sovereign States: Preliminary Lessons from the Recent Experience of
   Transition Countries,” World Economy, Vol. 27, No. 7, pp. 1083–1125.

Feldstein, Martin, 1999, “A Self-Help Guide for Emerging Markets,” Foreign Affairs, Vol.
       78, No. 2.
                                         - 30 -




Ferrantino, Michael, 2006, “Policy Anchors: Do Free Trade Agreements Serve as Vehicles
       for Developing Country Policy Reform?” (unpublished; US International Trade
       Commission).

Glaeser, Edward, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2004,
       “Do Institutions Cause Growth?” NBER Working Paper No. 10568 (Cambridge,
       Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research). Available at
       http://www.nber.org/papers/w10568.

Goldstein, Judith, Douglas Rivers, and Michael Tomz, 2007, Do We Really Know That the
       WTO Increases Trade? Comment, American Economic Review 97, no. 5 (December
       2007): 2005-18.

Government Accountability Office (U.S.), 2004, “US-China Trade Opportunities to Improve
      US Government Efforts to Ensure China’s Compliance with World Trade
      Organization Commitments,” GAO Publication GAO-05-53. Available at
      http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0553.pdf.

Hall, Robert and Charles Jones, 1999, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
       Output Per Worker Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114, No.1,
       pp. 83–116.

Heckman, James, 1979, “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica,
     Vol. 47, No.1, pp. 153–61.

Heritage Foundation, 1996, “Index of Economic Freedom,” available at
       http://www.heritage.org/research/features/index/scores.cfm.

International Development Research Center, 2005, “WTO Accession: Tough Love or a
        Heavy Hand?” available at http://www.idrc.ca/en/ev-91906-201-1-DO_TOPIC.html.

International Herald Tribune, 2006, “Investing: Vietnam on the Brink of Measured Success,”
        available at http://www.iht.com/articles/2006/03/22/bloomberg/bxinvest.php.

Jawara, Fatoumata, and Aileen Kwa, 2003, “Behind the Scenes at the WTO: the Real World
       of International Trade Negotiations,” Zed Books, London.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Mastruzzi Massimo, 2005, “Governance Matters IV:
      Governance Indicators for 1996-2004,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
      No. 3630 (Washington: World Bank).

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997,
       “Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 52, No. 3,
       pp. 1131–1150.
                                         - 31 -




———, 1998, “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106, No. 6, pp. 1113–
   1155.

———, 1999, “The Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization,
   Vol. 15, No. 1, pp. 222–79.

Li, David and Changqi Wu, 2004, “GATT/WTO Accession and Productivity,” in Growth
       and Productivity in East Asia, ed. by Takatoshi Ito and Andrew Rose, NBER-East
       Asia Seminar on Economics 2002: Melbourne (Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press).

Maggi, Giovanni and Andres Rodriguez-Clare, 1998, “The Value of Trade Agreements in the
       Presence of Political Pressures,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106, No. 3, pp.
       574-601.

_____, 2007, “A Political-Economy Theory of Trade Agreements,” American Economic
       Review, Vol. 97, No. 4, pp. 1374-1406.

Naray, Peter, 2001, “Russia and the World Trade Organization” (Basingstoke, UK:
       Palgrave).

Rose, Andrew K., 2004, “Do We Really Know that the WTO Increases Trade?” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 1, pp. 98–114.

Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, Gernot Doppelhofer and Ronald I. Miller, 2004, “Determinants of
       Long-Term Growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE)
       Approach,” American Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 4, pp. 813–35.

Staiger, Robert, and Guido Tabellini, 1999, “Do GATT Rules Help Governments make
        Domestic Commitments?” Economics and Politics, July.

Stiglitz, Joseph, 2002, Globalization and Its Discontents, WW Norton & Company, New
        York.

Subramanian, Arvind and Shang-Jin Wei, 2007, “The WTO Promotes Trade, Strongly but
      Unevenly,” Journal of International Economics, 72(1): 151-175, May.

United Nation National Accounts Main Aggregates Database, available at
       http://unstats.un.org/unsd/snaama/Introduction.asp.

Wacziarg, Romain and Karen Horn Welch, 2003, “Trade Liberalization and Growth: New
      Evidence,” NBER Working Paper No. 10152 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National
      Bureau of Economic Research). Available at papers.nber.org/papers/w10152.pdf.
                                        - 32 -




Wooldridge, Jeffrey, 1995, “Selection Corrections for Panel Data Models Under Conditional
      Mean Independence Assumptions,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 68, pp. 115–32.

World Bank, 2005, Doing Business, World Bank and Oxford University Press.

World Trade Organization, Working Party Reports, available at http://www.wto.org.
                                                                                     - 33 -




                                                                    Figure 1. Change in Growth Around Accession

                                            0.05

                                            0.04
Change in Growth in Percentage Points




                                            0.03

                                            0.02
                                                      90% CI

                                            0.01

                                               0

                                            -0.01

                                            -0.02

                                            -0.03
                                                     -2           -1          0          1          2           3             4   5
                                                                                     Years since accession




                                                          Figure 2. Change Private Investment-to-GDP Ratio Around Accession

                                            0.250
   Percentage Change in Pri Inv/GDP Ratio




                                            0.200

                                            0.150

                                            0.100

                                            0.050
                                                      90% CI

                                            0.000

                                            -0.050

                                            -0.100

                                            -0.150
                                                      -2            -1         0          1          2            3           4   5
                                                                                     Years since accession
                                                                                       - 34 -




                                                              Figure 3. Change in Growth: Article XXVI5c vs. Other Countries

                                          0.08
                                                                                                              Non-AXXVI5c countries
                                          0.06
  Change in Growth in Percentage Points




                                          0.04
                                                                                                                         90% CI
                                          0.02

                                             0

                                          -0.02                                                                                           90% CI

                                                                                      AXXVI5c countries
                                          -0.04

                                          -0.06

                                          -0.08
                                                       -2           -1          0           1             2             3             4            5
                                                                                       Years since accession




                                                   Figure 4. Change in Pri Investment-to-GDP Ratio: Article XXVI5c vs. Other Countries

                                          0.400
                                                                                                                       Non-AXXVI5c countries
Percentage Change in Pri Inv/GDP Ratio




                                          0.300

                                          0.200

                                          0.100                                                                                           90% CI
                                                                 90% CI

                                          0.000

                                          -0.100

                                          -0.200

                                          -0.300                                                 AXXVI5c countries


                                          -0.400
                                                         -2          -1          0           1            2              3            4            5
                                                                                       Years since accession
                                                                                                                             - 35 -




                                                                                           Figure 5. Change in Growth Following Application and Around Accession

                                                                                 0.080
                                                                                 0.070
Change in Growth in Percentage Points




                                                                                 0.060
                                                                                 0.050
                                                                                 0.040
                                                                                 0.030
                                                                                 0.020
                                                                                             90% CI
                                                                                 0.010
                                                                                 0.000
                                                                                 -0.010
                                                                                 -0.020
                                                                                 -0.030
                                                                                            0       1     2   3     4    5       6      -2   -1     0    1    2        3   4   5
                                                                                                   Years since application                         Years since accession




                                                                                          Figure 6. Change in Pri Inv/GDP Following Application and Around Accession

                                                                                  0.400
                                        Percentage Change in Pri Inv/GDP Ratio




                                                                                  0.300


                                                                                  0.200

                                                                                  0.100

                                                                                                 90% CI
                                                                                  0.000


                                                                                 -0.100

                                                                                 -0.200

                                                                                 -0.300
                                                                                             0      1     2    3    4        5   6      -2    -1    0    1     2       3   4   5
                                                                                                   Years since application                         Years since accession
                                                    - 36 -




                             Table 1. List of Countries in the Samples and Their Accession Years

   2000   Albania                                 1965   Gambia, The                           1997   Panama
  #1994   Angola                                  2000   Georgia                              #1994   Papua New Guinea
   1987   Antigua and Barbuda                     1957   Ghana                                 1994   Paraguay
   1967   Argentina                              #1994   Grenada                               1951   Peru
     @    Azerbaijan, Rep. of                     1991   Guatemala                             1979   Philippines
     @    Bahamas, The                           #1994   Guinea                                1967   Poland
  #1993   Bahrain, Kingdom of                    #1994   Guinea-Bissau                         1971   Romania
   1972   Bangladesh                              1966   Guyana                                  @    Russia
   1967   Barbados                                1950   Haiti                                 1966   Rwanda
     @    Belarus                                 1994   Honduras                                @    Samoa
   1983   Belize                                  1973   Hungary                                 @    São Tomé & Príncipe
     @    Bhutan                                  1948   India                                 1963   Senegal
   1990   Bolivia                                 1962   Israel                                  @    Seychelles
   1987   Botswana                                1963   Jamaica                               1961   Sierra Leone
   1948   Brazil                                  2000   Jordan                                1973   Singapore
   1996   Bulgaria                                  @    Kazakhstan                            1993   Slovak Republic
   1965   Burundi                                 1964   Kenya                                 1994   Slovenia
     @    Cambodia                                  @    Kiribati                             #1994   Solomon Islands
   1963   Cameroon                                1967   Korea                                 1948   South Africa
     @    Cape Verde                              1998   Kyrgyz Republic                       1948   Sri Lanka
   1963   Central African Rep.                      @    Lao People's Dem.Rep                 #1994   St. Kitts and Nevis
   1963   Chad                                    1999   Latvia                               #1993   St. Lucia
   1949   Chile                                   1988   Lesotho                              #1993   St. Vincent & Grens.
   2001   China,P.R.: Mainland                      @    Liberia                                 @    Sudan
   1986   China,P.R.:Hong Kong                    2001   Lithuania                             1978   Suriname
   1981   Colombia                                  @    Macedonia, FYR                       #1993   Swaziland
   1971   Congo, Dem. Rep. of                     1963   Madagascar                              @    Syrian Arab Republic
   1963   Congo, Republic of                      1964   Malawi                                  @    Tajikistan
   1990   Costa Rica                              1957   Malaysia                              1961   Tanzania
   1963   Côte d'Ivoire                           1983   Maldives                              1982   Thailand
   2000   Croatia                                #1993   Mali                                  1964   Togo
   1948   Cuba                                    1964   Malta                                   @    Tonga
   1963   Cyprus                                  1963   Mauritania                            1962   Trinidad and Tobago
   1993   Czech Republic                          1970   Mauritius                             1990   Tunisia
  #1994   Djibouti                                1986   Mexico                                1951   Turkey
  #1993   Dominica                                2001   Moldova                                 @    Turkmenistan
   1950   Dominican Republic                      1997   Mongolia                              1962   Uganda
   1996   Ecuador                                 1987   Morocco                                 @    Ukraine
   1970   Egypt                                  #1992   Mozambique                            1953   Uruguay
   1991   El Salvador                            #1992   Namibia                                 @    Uzbekistan
     @    Equatorial Guinea                         @    Nepal                                   @    Vanuatu
   1999   Estonia                                 1950   Nicaragua                               @    Vietnam
     @    Ethiopia                                1963   Niger                                   @    Yemen Arab Rep.
  #1993   Fiji                                    2000   Oman                                  1982   Zambia
   1963   Gabon                                   1948   Pakistan                              1948   Zimbabwe

Note:
        # Denotes countries acceding to the GATT by Article XXVI 5(c) between 1990 and 1994
        @ Denotes countries which never joined GATT/WTO before 2001
                                                                    Table 2. Summary Statistics of Accession Countries

                                                    I                                  II                              III                                               IV
                                        All Accession Countries               Article XXVI 5(c)              Non-Article XXVI 5(c)      (T-stat. of Difference   Accession Countries
                                               1990-2001                          Countries                       Countries                  b/w II and III)          1995-2001
Growth
Pre-accession: avg over 8 yrs a/                  -0.2%                              1.5%                            -0.7%                      -1.84                   -0.4%
Post-accession: avg over 3 yrs                     2.5%                              1.3%                             3.4%                      2.46*                    4.1%
Average change in growth                          2.7%                              -0.2%                             4.1%                      3.08*                    4.4%
# Countries in sample                               42                                17                               25                                                 15

Private investment/GDP
Pre-accession: avg over 8 yrs a/                  14.4%                             14.5%                            14.4%                      -0.06                   13.7%
Post-accession: avg over 3 yrs                    15.1%                             14.0%                            16.0%                       0.87                   15.9%
Average %change in ratio                          14.5%                             6.7%                             20.0%                       0.83                   22.0%
# Countries in sample                               38                                16                               22                                                 13
                                                                                                                                                                                       - 37 -




Total investment/GDP
Pre-accession: avg over 8 yrs a/                  21.5%                             23.7%                            20.0%                      -1.66                   19.5%
Post-accession: avg over 3 yrs                    22.0%                             22.5%                            21.6%                      -0.38                   21.8%
Average %change in ratio                          6.0%                              -3.7%                            12.1%                      2.03*                   14.1%
# Countries in sample                               42                                17                               25                                                 15

Total trade/GDP
Pre-accession: avg over 8 yrs a/                  94.7%                            108.9%                            85.0%                      -1.77                   86.0%
Post-accession: avg over 3 yrs                    98.2%                            110.2%                            90.0%                      -1.83                   95.7%
Average %change in ratio                          11.1%                             8.6%                             12.9%                       0.42                   17.0%
# Countries in sample                               42                               17                                25                                                 15
                                                                                                                                          * 5% significance

Note: a/ For countries whose data are not available for earlier years, the average is over a smaller number of years before accession
                                                       - 38 -



                               Table 3A. Changes in Growth and Investment Around Accessions:
                                              Post-Uruguay Round Accessions
                                     1                           2                        3                         4
                           Annual Growth Rate           Log(Pri Inv/GDP)        Annual Growth Rate         Log(Pri Inv/GDP)
                           Coef est.   t-stat.         Coef est.   t-stat.      Coef est.   t-stat.       Coef est.    t-stat.
Lagged log(GDP per capita) -0.111       -4.58                                    -0.082      -4.70
s=              -2          0.009       0.90            0.046           0.66     0.011        0.91           0.031           0.33
                -1          0.025       2.51            0.044           0.69     0.022        2.53           0.034           0.56
                 0          0.019        2.59            0.026          0.39     0.024        2.66           0.012           0.16
                 1          0.025        3.66            0.051          0.81     0.025        3.79           0.031           0.48
                 2          0.031        4.79            0.075          1.12     0.033        4.55           0.057           0.91
                 3          0.016        1.96            0.107          1.40     0.014        1.64           0.096           1.21
                 4          -0.001      -0.14            0.058          0.75     -0.005      -0.34           0.044           0.55
                 5          0.014        1.85           -0.011         -0.18     0.012        1.62          -0.018          -0.25
            beyond          -0.002      -0.35           -0.077         -1.11     -0.005      -0.86          -0.076          -1.10

Country fixed effects                  Y                         Y                       Y                            Y
Year fixed effects                     Y                         Y                       Y                            Y

# Observations                       2375                       1930                    2552                         2101
Adjusted R-sq.                       0.19                       0.54                    0.19                         0.54

"Treatment" group:         Countries acceding between 1990 and 2001
"Control" group:           All developing countries
Beginning period:          8 years before accessions
t -statistcs are based on robust standard errors clustered by country

Note: Regressions 1 and 2 exclude 10 outliers from the control group;
    regressions 3 and 4 do not exclude any outliers from the control group.


     Table 3B. Changes in Growth and Investment Around Accesions:
                    Pre-Uruguay Round Accessions
                                     1                           2
                           Annual Growth Rate           Log(Pri Inv/GDP)
                           Coef est.   t-stat.         Coef est.   t-stat.
Lagged log(GDP per capita) -0.031       -5.42
s=              -2          0.022       1.55            0.048           0.46
                -1          0.016        1.61           -0.045         -0.41
                 0          0.013        1.18           -0.163         -1.35
                 1          0.026        1.57           -0.034         -0.33
                 2          0.023        1.59            0.045          0.47
                 3          0.010        1.23            0.103          1.08
                 4          0.002        0.24            0.151          1.57
                 5          0.007        0.72            0.079          0.81
            beyond          0.008        1.10           0.016           0.31

Country fixed effects                  Y                         Y
Year fixed effects                     Y                         Y

# Observations                       3665                       2385
Adjusted R-sq.                       0.12                       0.56

"Treatment" group:         Countries acceding between 1955 and 1989 (44 countries acceded during the period);
"Control" group:           All other developing countries
Beginning period:          8 years before accessions
t -statistcs are based on robust standard errors clustered by country

Note: Regressions exclude 10 outliers from the control group
                              Table 4. Article XXVI 5(c) and Non-Article XXVI 5(c) Countries With Their Accession Years

Article XXVI 5(c) Countries                      Non-Article XXVI 5(c) Countries
                          Accession Date                                  Application Date       Working Party   Accession Date   Interval b/w Application
                                                                                                 Report Date                      and Accession (months)
Angola                       1994 Apr            Albania                       1992 Nov            2000 Jul        2000 Sep                   94
Bahrain                      1993 Dec            Bolivia                       1987 Oct            1989 Jul        1990 Aug                   34
Djibouti                     1994 Dec            Bulgaria                      1990 Feb           1996 Sep         1996 Dec                   82
Dominica                     1993 Apr            Czech Republic*               1992 Dec           1993 Mar         1993 Apr                    4
Fiji                         1993 Nov            China                         1987 Mar           2001 Oct         2001 Dec                  177
Grenada                      1994 Feb            Costa Rica                    1987 Jun           1989 Oct         1990 Oct                   40
Guinea                       1994 Dec            Croatia                       1993 Sep           2000 Jun         2000 Nov                   86
Guinea-Bissau                1994 Mar            Ecuador                       1992 Sep            1995 Jul        1996 Jan                   40
Mali                         1993 Jan            El Salvador                   1988 Dec           1990 Nov         1991 Jan                   13
Mozambique                   1992 Aug            Estonia                       1994 Mar           1999 Apr         1999 Nov                   68
Namibia                      1992 Sep            Georgia                       1996 Jun           1999 Aug         2000 Jun                   48
Papua New Guinea             1994 Dec            Guatemala                     1990 Apr           1990 Nov         1991 Apr                   12
Solomon Islands              1994 Dec            Honduras                      1990 Oct           1993 Oct         1994 Apr                   42
                                                                                                                                                             - 39 -




St. Kitts                    1994 Mar            Jordan                        1994 Jan           1999 Dec         2000 Apr                   75
St. Lucia                    1993 Apr            Kyrgyz                        1996 Feb            1998 Jul        1998 Dec                   34
St. Vincent                  1993 May            Latvia                        1993 Nov           1998 Sep         1999 Feb                   63
Swaziland                    1993 Feb            Lithuania                     1994 Jan           2000 Nov         2001 May                   88
United Arab Emirates#        1994 Mar            Moldova                       1993 Nov           2001 Jan         2001 July                  92
                                                 Mongolia                      1991 Oct           1996 Jun         1997 Jan                   63
                                                 Oman                          1996 Apr           2000 Sep         2000 Nov                   55
                                                 Panama                        1991 Oct           1996 Sep         1997 Sep                   71
                                                 Paraguay                      1989 Mar           1993 Apr         1994 Jan                   58
                                                 Slovak Republic*              1992 Dec           1993 Mar         1993 Apr                    4
                                                 Slovenia                      1992 Jul            1994 Jul        1994 Oct                   27
                                                 Tunisia                       1981 Nov           1987 Dec          1990 Jul                 104
                                                 Venezuela#                    1989 Jun           1990 Jun         1990 Aug                   14


Note: * Czech Republic and Slovak Republic acceded to the GATT following the breakup of Czechoslovakia;
    # United Arab Emirates and Venezuela are not in our samples (all OPEC countries are excluded).
                                                                        - 40 -



               Table 5. Changes in Growth, Investment and Trade: Article XXVI 5(c) vs. Non-Article XXVI 5(c) Countries

                                                          1                           2                     3                     4
                                                Annual Growth Rate           Log(Pri Inv/GDP)     Annual Growth Rate     Log(Pri Inv/GDP)
                                                Coef est.   t-stat.         Coef est.   t-stat.   Coef est.   t-stat.   Coef est.    t-stat.
Lagged log(GDP per capita)                       -0.104      -4.31                                 -0.088      -4.44
s=                      -2                        0.007       0.54            0.011        0.17     0.008       0.59      0.009           0.14
                        -1                        0.022       3.14            0.062        1.02     0.026       3.23      0.071           1.12
                         0                        0.024       2.81            0.085        1.45     0.029       2.72      0.090           1.51
                         1                        0.039       4.54            0.094        1.46     0.049       4.95      0.091           1.41
                         2                        0.042       5.31            0.132        1.98     0.051       5.42      0.131           1.92
                         3                        0.033       3.35            0.184        2.35     0.035       3.31      0.179           2.26
                         4                        0.026       3.13            0.161        2.49     0.028       3.13      0.160           2.41
                         5                        0.022       2.49            0.102        1.50     0.020       2.23      0.103           1.46
                  beyond                          0.017       3.06            0.152        2.70     0.017       2.92      0.161           2.83
s*AXXVI5c Dummy:        -2   *   AXXVI5c          0.006       0.31            0.083        0.62     0.007       0.37      0.053           0.44
                        -1   *   AXXVI5c         -0.008      -0.32           -0.035       -0.26    -0.007      -0.32     -0.070          -0.54
                        -0   *   AXXVI5c         -0.010      -0.81           -0.157       -1.11    -0.015      -0.87     -0.192          -1.39
                         1   *   AXXVI5c         -0.045      -3.31           -0.113       -0.93    -0.046      -3.39     -0.132          -1.08
                         2   *   AXXVI5c         -0.034      -3.11           -0.151       -1.14    -0.036      -3.07     -0.175          -1.41
                         3   *   AXXVI5c         -0.047      -3.57           -0.158       -1.21    -0.053      -3.78     -0.188          -1.41
                         4   *   AXXVI5c         -0.059      -3.24           -0.204       -1.52    -0.066      -3.35     -0.220          -1.66
                         5   *   AXXVI5c         -0.022      -1.72           -0.228       -1.81    -0.021      -1.70     -0.231          -1.83
                  beyond     *   AXXVI5c         -0.044      -4.62           -0.419       -3.51    -0.040      -4.49     -0.417          -3.40

Country fixed effects                                     Y                           Y                   Y                        Y
Year fixed effects                                        Y                           Y                   Y                        Y

# Observations                                          2375                       1930                  2552                     2101
Ajusted R-sq.                                           0.21                       0.54                  0.20                     0.54

"Treatment" group:      Countries acceding between 1990 and 2001
"Control" group:        All developing countries
Beginning period:       8 years before accessions
t -statistcs are based on robust standard errors clustered by country

Note: Regressions 3 and 4 do not exlcude 10 outliers from the control group.
                                                                 - 41 -




        Table 6. Change in Growth, Controlling for Additional Control Variabes: Article XXVI 5(c) vs. Non-Article XXVI 5(c) Countries

                                                          1                         2                     3                      4
                                                Annual Growth Rate         Annual Growth Rate   Annual Growth Rate      Annual Growth Rate
                                                Coef est.   t-stat.       Coef est.   t-stat.   Coef est.   t-stat.    Coef est.   t-stat.
Lagged log(GDP per capita)                       -0.104      -4.31          -0.122     -8.21     -0.117      -7.77       -0.121     -8.09
s=                      -2                        0.007       0.54           0.012      1.01      0.008       0.51        0.004      0.21
                        -1                        0.022       3.14           0.029      3.22      0.024       2.72        0.017      2.05
                         0                        0.024       2.81           0.028      2.53      0.017       1.99        0.015      1.32
                         1                        0.039       4.54           0.040      4.13      0.032       3.52        0.027      2.68
                         2                        0.042       5.31           0.040      4.71      0.033       4.13        0.029      3.31
                         3                        0.033       3.35           0.035      2.77      0.026       2.43        0.018      1.73
                         4                        0.026       3.13           0.025      3.30      0.026       3.16        0.017      1.94
                         5                        0.022       2.49           0.018      1.70      0.015       1.43        0.008      0.77
                   beyond                         0.017       3.06           0.014      1.22      0.013       0.91        0.008      0.41
s*AXXVI5c Dummy:        -2 * AXXVI5c              0.006       0.31           0.002      0.12      0.017       0.78        0.031      1.45
                        -1 * AXXVI5c             -0.008      -0.32          -0.015     -0.59     -0.005      -0.23        0.006      0.19
                        -0 * AXXVI5c             -0.010      -0.81          -0.018     -1.12     -0.008      -0.44        0.000     -0.01
                         1 * AXXVI5c             -0.045      -3.31          -0.051     -3.38     -0.034      -1.97       -0.019     -1.15
                         2 * AXXVI5c             -0.034      -3.11          -0.037     -2.77     -0.018      -1.03        0.003      0.23
                         3 * AXXVI5c             -0.047      -3.57          -0.054     -3.44     -0.038      -2.55       -0.022     -1.31
                         4 * AXXVI5c             -0.059      -3.24          -0.067     -3.31     -0.050      -2.09       -0.034     -1.28
                         5 * AXXVI5c             -0.022      -1.72          -0.017     -0.81      0.030       0.12        0.009      1.20
                   beyond * AXXVI5c              -0.044      -4.62          -0.035     -2.23     -0.018      -0.79       -0.003     -0.09
Revolution Dummies                                                          -0.021     -3.71     -0.019      -3.33       -0.017     -3.55
Coup Dummies                                                                -0.024     -2.23     -0.024      -1.77       -0.024     -1.61
Cabinet Change Dummies                                                      -0.008     -3.75     -0.009      -3.37       -0.009     -3.28
Share of GDP in Mining                                                                            0.140       2.12        0.133      1.97
Investment Price                                                                                 -0.015      -1.41       -0.014     -1.53
Government Consumption as GDP Share                                                               0.040       0.66        0.019      0.30
Real Exchange Rate                                                                                0.026       2.00        0.039      2.90
Total Trade as GDP Share                                                                                                  0.039      2.17

Country fixed effects                                     Y                        Y                     Y                       Y
Year fixed effects                                        Y                        Y                     Y                       Y

# Observations                                          2375                     2107                  1678                     1660
Ajusted R-sq.                                           0.21                     0.31                  0.29                     0.30

"Treatment" group:      Countries acceding between 1990 and 2001
"Control" group:        All developing countries
Beginning period:       8 years before accessions
t -statistcs are based on robust standard errors clustered by country
                                                  - 42 -



     Table 7. Changes in Growth and Investment for Non-AXXVI 5(c) Countries Around Application and Accession

                                                                 1                           2
                                                       Annual Growth Rate           Log(Pri inv/GDP)
                                                       Coef est.   t-stat.         Coef est.   t-stat.
           Lagged log(GDP per capita)                   -0.100      -3.78
           Year from application              0          0.014       0.95           -0.004        -0.04
                                              1          0.024       1.45           -0.003        -0.03
                                              2          0.027       2.57            0.017        0.12
                                              3          0.025       2.29            0.109        1.40
                                              4          0.009       0.63            0.131        2.09
                                              5          0.005       0.53            0.074        1.26
                                              6         -0.001      -0.05            0.005        0.12
           s=                                -2          0.014       1.12           -0.030        -0.37
                                             -1          0.030       3.52            0.006         0.09
                                              0          0.032       3.07            0.034        0.53
                                              1          0.051       4.51            0.057        0.78
                                              2          0.053       5.34            0.122        1.53
                                              3          0.044       3.50            0.154        1.69
                                              4          0.043       3.59            0.169        1.99
                                              5          0.035       2.82            0.108        1.21
                                         beyond          0.028       2.85            0.168         2.13

           Country fixed effects                                 Y                           Y
           Year fixed effects                                    Y                           Y

           # Observations                                      2009                        1578
           Ajusted R-sq.                                       0.20                        0.56

"Treatment" group:                       Countries acceding by normal procedures between 1990 and 2001
"Control" group:                         All developing countries
Beginning period:                        4 years before application
t -statistcs are based on robust standard errors clustered by country

Note: For countries that acceded to the WTO/GATT in fewer than 9 years since application,
       for some years both application and accession time-profiles would simultaneously have non-zero dummies.
                                                                                    - 43 -




                                                                          Table 8. Testing for Selection Bias a/

                                                             1                            2                          3                        4                       5 b/
                                                   Annual Growth Rate            Log(Pri Inv/GDP)          Annual Growth Rate        Log(Pri Inv/GDP)         Annual Growth Rate
                                                   Coef est.   t-stat.          Coef est.   t-stat.        Coef est.   t-stat.      Coef est.    t-stat.      Coef est.    t-stat.


Inverse Mills ratio                                 -0.004        -1.33           -0.046          -1.04     -0.005          -0.74    -0.014          -0.63     -0.004          -1.43

s=                  -2                              -0.010        -0.61            0.166           0.66      0.014           0.77     0.004           0.12     -0.006          -0.35
                    -1                               0.006         0.84            0.167           0.67      0.028          1.69     -0.075          -0.78      0.006           0.85
                     0                               0.007         0.79            0.157           1.49      0.034           1.91     0.009           0.20      0.009           0.83
                     1                               0.023         3.41            0.155           1.99      0.037           2.43     0.081           1.65      0.024           3.35
                     2                               0.023         3.56            0.141           1.96      0.026           2.29     0.050           1.54      0.022           3.45
                     3                               0.011         1.58            0.149           2.08      0.001           0.04     0.084           1.59      0.008           1.47
                     4                               0.005         0.71            0.109           1.85      0.012           0.70     0.104           1.20      0.004           0.64
                     5                              -0.003        -0.44            0.073           0.42     -0.003          -0.32    -0.079          -1.09     -0.008          -0.47
                beyond                              -0.001        -0.28            0.100           0.84     -0.003          -0.69    0.009            0.32      0.000          -0.38
s*AXXVI5c Dummy     -2       *   AXXVI5c             0.023         1.10            0.050           0.26     -0.042          -1.77     0.043           0.67      0.018           0.86
                    -1       *   AXXVI5c             0.016         0.87           -0.167          -1.20      0.015           0.73    -0.031          -0.59      0.015           0.81
                     0       *   AXXVI5c            -0.015        -0.92           -0.145          -0.77     -0.020          -0.38    -0.097          -0.95     -0.016          -0.96
                     1       *   AXXVI5c            -0.034        -2.30           -0.140          -0.39     -0.020          -0.46    -0.096          -0.83     -0.034          -2.22
                     2       *   AXXVI5c            -0.008        -0.75           -0.112          -1.85     -0.014          -0.29    -0.096          -1.54     -0.006          -0.61
                     3       *   AXXVI5c            -0.024        -1.91           -0.080          -0.74      0.003           0.03    -0.068          -0.69     -0.022          -1.81
                     4       *   AXXVI5c            -0.038        -1.51           -0.112          -0.98     -0.013          -0.11     0.005           0.14     -0.037          -1.47
                     5       *   AXXVI5c             0.014         1.23           -0.067          -0.53      0.003           0.02     0.052           0.77      0.015           1.31
                beyond       *   AXXVI5c            -0.016        -2.05            0.001          0.01      0.026           0.22     0.075           1.08      -0.012          -1.91

Country fixed effects                                        N                              N                         N                        N                         N
Year fixed effects                                           Y                              Y                         Y                        Y                         Y

Bera-Jarque-Lee LM test statistics                        15.52                            0.87                      0.96                     0.94                      0.87

# Observations                                             2166                         1832                         326                      291                    1832

"Treatment" group:      Countries acceding between 1990 and 2001
"Control" group:        All developing countries
Beginning period:       8 years before accessions
t -statistcs are based on robust standard errors clustered by country

Note: Regressions exclude 10 outliers from the control group;

Heckman 1st-stage independent variables:
                    Regressions 1, 2 and 5: lagged GDP, lagged trade/GDP, lagged check and balance, lagged UN voting
                    Regressions 3-4: lagged GDP, lagged trade/GDP, lagged check and balance, lagged UN voting, lagged average tariff

Check and balance: constraint on executive power, from World Bank's Database of Political Institutions
UN voting: percentage of times the country voted the same way as the US in UN General Assembly in a particular year, from UN records
Average tariff: average statutory tariffs imposed on imports, from WITS

Note: a/ Following Wooldridge's (1995) suggestion for selection bias test for panel data, the second stage regressions are essentially pooled OLS.
     b/ Regression 5 replicates regression 1, but is based on a restricted sample so that error terms from first-stage probit satisfy normality assumption.
                                                                 Table 9. Change in Growth and Investment for Non-Transition Economies

A. Time-profile of Economic Performance                                                                                                  B. Average Economic Performance of Non-Transition
                                                                1                          2 b/                      3                     Economies Before and After Accession
                                                       Annual Growth Rate         Annual Growth Rate         Log(Pri Inv/GDP)
                                                      Coef est.   t-stat.        Coef est.      t-stat.    Coef est.     t-stat.         Growth
Lagged log(GDP per capita)                              -0.109     -4.02            -0.21                                                Pre-accession: avg over 8 years                0.0%
s=                                    -2                 0.000     -0.03           -0.001        -0.05        0.018          0.18        Post-accession: avg over 3 years               2.0%
                                      -1                 0.006      0.85            0.006        0.60         0.013          0.18        Average change in growth                       2.0%
                                       0                 0.011      1.47            0.010         1.36        0.038          0.57        T-stat. of difference in growth                3.53*
                                       1                 0.028      3.11            0.027         2.98        0.049          0.69        #Co's in sample                                 11
                                       2                 0.022      2.02            0.024         2.33        0.103          1.41
                                       3                 0.006      0.41            0.011         0.82        0.089          1.54        Private investment/GDP
                                       4                 0.008      0.89            0.014         1.32        0.147          2.11        Pre-accession: avg over 8 years                11.9%
                                       5                -0.004     -0.55            0.001        0.17         0.076          0.81        Post-accession: avg over 3 years               12.1%
                                  beyond                 0.002      0.33            0.007        1.13         0.164          2.81        Average %change in ratio                        8.9%
s*Transition Economies a/             -2   *   T.E.     0.035       1.37            0.022        0.91         0.057          0.37        T-stat. of %change in ratio                     0.92
                                      -1   *   T.E.      0.051      3.04            0.038         2.37        0.148          1.17        #Co's in sample                                  10
                                      -0   *   T.E.      0.035      1.93            0.025         1.50        0.134          1.09
                                       1   *   T.E.      0.036      1.90            0.028        1.47         0.137          0.89        Total investment/GDP
                                       2   *   T.E.      0.056      3.35            0.047         2.77        0.138          0.89        Pre-accession: avg over 8 years                19.3%
                                       3   *   T.E.      0.070      3.15            0.062         2.44        0.240          1.42        Post-accession: avg over 3 years               19.9%
                                       4   *   T.E.      0.056      2.87            0.040         1.64        0.088          0.49        Average %change in ratio                        6.7%
                                       5   *   T.E.      0.080      4.68            0.055         2.70        0.156          0.80        T-stat. of %change in ratio                     0.91
                                  beyond   *   T.E.      0.058      4.88            0.057         3.25        0.008          0.04        #Co's in sample                                  11
                                                                                                                                                                                                - 44 -




Country fixed effects                                           Y                          Y                           Y                 Total trade/GDP
Year fixed effects                                              Y                          Y                           Y                 Pre-accession: avg over 8 years                65.6%
                                                                                                                                         Post-accession: avg over 3 years               65.1%
# Observations                                                2020                       2020                         1589               Average %change in ratio                        0.5%
Ajusted R-sq.                                                 0.21                       0.96                         0.58               T-stat. of %change in ratio                     0.09
                                                                                                                                         #Co's in sample                                  11
"Treatment" group:                Non-ArticleXXVI5(c) Countries acceding between 1990 and 2001
"Control" group:                  All developing countries
Beginning period:                 8 years before accessions                                                                              * indicates t-stat at 5% significance
t -statistcs are based on robust standard errors clustered by country

Note:
 a/ Transition Economies: Albania, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, China, Croatia, Estonia, Georgia, Kyrgyz, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Mongolia, Slovak Republic, and Slovenia.
 b/ 1st step: Blundell-Bond GMM to estimate the coefficient on lagged log(GDP per capita) based on the sub-sample of non-acceding countries, with lagged values as intruments;
    [GMM coef. est. of lagged log(GDP per capita) = -.21]
    2nd step: Impose the estimate from the 1st step and estimate coefficients on s 's by panel fixed-effect estimator.
                                       Table 10. Examples of Policy Commitments in Areas that Might Have Important Implications for Domestic Investment

                                                    Albania       Bulgaria       Croatia       Ecuador        Estonia        Georgia        Jordan       Kyrgyz   Latvia   Luthuthania   Moldova
Nondiscriminate Taxation                               x                            x             x              x
Export Taxes                                                         x              x                                           x
Non-Tax Export Controls                                x                            x                            x              x              x                    x          x            x
Export Subsidy                                         x                            x              x             x                             x           x                   x            x
Other Internal Subsidy                                 x             x              x                            x              x              x           x        x          x            x
Transparency of Privatization Plans                    x             x              x                            x              x                          x        x          x            x
Transparency of Trade-related Laws                                   x                                                          x                          x                                x
Price Controls                                         x             x              x              x             x              x              x           x        x          x            x
Nondiscriminate Trading Rights                         x             x              x              x             x                             x           x        x          x            x
State Trading Restriction                              x             x              x              x             x              x              x           x        x          x            x
Govt Procurement Practices                             x             x              x                            x              x              x           x        x          x            x
Independent Tribunal for Trade-Related Disputes                                     x                                           x                          x
Centralized Policy Decisions                           x                            x                            x              x              x           x        x          x            x
Compliance of Special Economic Zones                   x                            x                                           x              x           x        x                       x
Exchange Rate Modality                                                                             x
Property Rights Pertaining to Foreigners                                            x
TRIPS                                                  x             x              x              x             x              x              x           x        x          x            x
                                                                                                                                                                                                   - 45 -




TRIMs                                                  x             x              x              x             x              x              x           x        x          x            x

Notes:
1 Mark "x" indicates that the country made some policy commitments related to that particular area.
2 Other areas of commitments which might have less important implications for domestic investment include pre-shipment insepection, customs fees,
  national treatment principle applied to taxation (Article III GATT 1994), anti-dumping and safeguards measures, non-tariff barriers to imports, etc.
3 China made commitments in all the areas listed above, but with considerable qualifications in most.
                                                 - 46 -




                 Table 11. Extent of Commitments and Governance Quality of Acceding Countries

                     # Commitments in WPRs             Governance Index               # Words in WPRs
Bulgaria                       27                            2.83                          24542
Albania                        29                            2.84                          38829
China                         147                            2.49                          78641
Croatia                        27                            2.39                          38479
Ecuador                        21                            2.56                          25835
Estonia                        24                            4.76                          22920
Georgia                        29                            1.32                          27139
Jordan                         29                            3.26                          36608
Kyrgyz                         29                            2.15                          32149
Latvia                         22                            3.72                          25717
Lithuthania                    28                            3.23                          43029
Moldova                        28                            2.87                          43859
Mongolia                       17                            2.91                          12055
Oman                           26                            4.73                          24695
Panama                         24                            3.91                          19558
Mean
   Incl. China                 33.8                           3.06                          32937
   Excl. China                 25.7                                                         29672
Median                          27                            2.87                          27139
Standard dev.
  Incl. China                  31.5                           0.92                          15537
  Excl. China                   3.7                                                          9370
                                                                      - 47 -




                                Table 12. Average Effects of Policy Commitments on Changes in Growth and Investment

                                                                   1                         2                         3                         4
                                                         Annual Growth Rate        Annual Growth Rate          Log(Inv/GDP)              Log(Inv/GDP)
                                                         Coef est.   t-stat.       Coef est.   t-stat.       Coef est.   t-stat.       Coef est.   t-stat.
Lagged log(GDP per capita)                                -0.131      -9.51         -0.134      -9.74
s=                             -3                          0.082       0.36
                               -2                         -1.142      -2.15         -0.262         -0.88      -1.060       -0.92           -0.534         -0.73
                               -1                         -0.182      -0.80          0.117         0.99       -0.121       -0.13           -0.012         -0.08
                                0                         -0.225      -1.07         -0.090         -0.71      -0.560       -0.48           -0.051         -0.08
                                1                         -0.203      -0.92         -0.067         -0.62       0.830        0.60            0.457          0.74
                                2                         -0.178      -0.72          0.071         -0.57      1.140         0.88            0.880          1.36
                                3                         -0.436      -1.57          0.085         0.49       -0.192       -0.17           0.670           0.73
                                4                         -0.400      -1.87         -0.140         -0.77       0.317        0.27            0.115          0.17
                                5                         -0.240      -1.26                                   -1.780       -1.55
                           beyond                         -0.284      -1.53         0.073          0.65       -3.890       -3.17           -1.917         -1.94
s*log(# Commitments):          -3   *   log(# Com.)       -0.022      -0.24
                               -2   *   log(# Com.)        0.318       2.27                                   0.220        0.57
                               -1   *   log(# Com.)        0.129       1.88                                   0.020        0.05
                               -0   *   log(# Com.)        0.107       1.65                                   0.225        0.50
                                1   *   log(# Com.)        0.105       1.56                                   -0.074       -0.18
                                2   *   log(# Com.)        0.122       1.66                                   -0.135       -0.31
                                3   *   log(# Com.)        0.220       2.17                                   0.307        0.64
                                4   *   log(# Com.)        0.115       1.73                                   0.097        0.26
                                5   *   log(# Com.)        0.122       2.18                                   0.680        1.97
                           beyond   *   log(# Com.)        0.215       2.55                                   0.534         1.07
s*Com. Dummy:                  -3   *   # Com. >27
                               -2   *   # Com. >27                                  0.076          1.10                                     0.043          0.28
                               -1   *   # Com. >27                                  0.032          1.12                                    -0.021         -0.14
                               -0   *   # Com. >27                                  0.071          2.05                                     0.104          0.60
                                1   *   # Com. >27                                  0.057          1.77                                     0.047          0.22
                                2   *   # Com. >27                                  0.037          1.25                                    -0.040         -0.22
                                3   *   # Com. >27                                  0.047          1.03                                     0.073          0.27
                                4   *   # Com. >27                                  0.023          0.59                                     0.198          1.24
                                5   *   # Com. >27
                           beyond   *   # Com. >27                                  0.034          1.07                                    0.627          2.58

Country fixed effects                                             Y                          Y                         Y                            Y
Year fixed effects                                                Y                          Y                         Y                            Y

# Observations                                                  1769                        1780                    1655                           1572
Adjusted R-sq.                                                  0.29                        0.28                    0.48                           0.48

"Treatment" group:
    For regressions 1 and 3, countries acceding between 1995 and 2001 excluding China
    For regressions 2 and 4, all countries acceding between 1995 and 2001
"Control" group:          All developing countries
Beginning period:         8 years before accessions
t -statistcs are based on robust standard errors clustered by country

Note: All regressions include the interaction of accession time-profile and log(1995 per capita GDP in USD) as regressors (not reported)
                                                                       - 48 -



                                                       Table 13. Differential Effects of Policy Commitments

                                                                         1 a/                   2 a/                      3                         4
                                                                 Annual Growth Rate       Log(Inv/GDP)          Annual Growth Rate           Log(Inv/GDP)
                                                                 Coef est.    t-stat.   Coef est.    t-stat.    Coef est.   t-stat.       Coef est.   t-stat.
Lagged log(GDP per capita)                                        -0.137       -8.51                             -0.142      -8.63
s*log(# Com.)*Gov Quality:          -2   *   log(#Com.) * gov.    -1.552       -2.09     -4.920        -2.65
                                    -1   *   log(#Com.) * gov.    -1.340       -2.85     -7.972        -5.60
                                    -0   *   log(#Com.) * gov.    -0.971       -2.07     -6.821        -3.86
                                     1   *   log(#Com.) * gov.    -1.504       -3.47     -8.375        -4.25
                                     2   *   log(#Com.) * gov.    -1.479       -3.22     -8.440        -4.58
                                     3   *   log(#Com.) * gov.    -2.674       -5.95     -9.659        -5.27
                                     4   *   log(#Com.) * gov.    -1.488       -1.90     -9.357        -3.99
                                     5   *   log(#Com.) * gov.    -0.861       -1.50     -1.962        -0.88
                                beyond   *   log(#Com.) * gov.    -3.871       -4.09     16.750         3.82
s=                                  -2                                                                            0.049         2.16       0.211           1.49
                                    -1                                                                            0.046         3.00       0.220           1.69
                                     0                                                                            0.054         3.04       0.298           1.98
                                     1                                                                            0.085         4.07       0.385           2.50
                                     2                                                                            0.085         3.97       0.455           3.20
                                     3                                                                            0.111         2.99       0.655           3.75
                                     4                                                                            0.032         1.50       0.469           3.92
                                beyond                                                                            0.082         3.48       0.470           3.65
s*Good Gov:                         -2   *   Good Gov.                                                            -0.026       -0.80       -0.034          -0.19
                                    -1   *   Good Gov.                                                            -0.041       -1.63       -0.091          -0.58
                                    -0   *   Good Gov.                                                            -0.030       -1.22       -0.210          -1.22
                                     1   *   Good Gov.                                                            -0.028       -0.89       -0.251          -1.34
                                     2   *   Good Gov.                                                            -0.033       -1.06       -0.280          -1.58
                                     3   *   Good Gov.                                                            -0.054       -1.20       -0.402          -2.01
                                     4   *   Good Gov.                                                             0.028        0.59       -0.233          -1.45
                                beyond   *   Good Gov.                                                            -0.074       -2.65       -0.287          -1.53
s*(Poor Gov, Few Com.):             -2   *   (Poor, Few)                                                          -0.089       -1.61       -0.258          -1.39
                                    -1   *   (Poor, Few)                                                          -0.081       -2.95       -0.241          -1.40
                                    -0   *   (Poor, Few)                                                          -0.082       -2.44       -0.367          -1.98
                                     1   *   (Poor, Few)                                                          -0.113       -3.15       -0.463          -2.24
                                     2   *   (Poor, Few)                                                          -0.080       -2.82       -0.391          -2.08
                                     3   *   (Poor, Few)                                                          -0.131       -2.88       -0.521          -2.56
                                     4   *   (Poor, Few)                                                          -0.035       -1.16       -0.400          -2.70
                                beyond   *   (Poor, Few)                                                          -0.065       -2.51       -0.388          -2.54

Country fixed effects                                                     Y                       Y                        Y                          Y
Year fixed effects                                                        Y                       Y                        Y                          Y

# Observations                                                          1769                    1655                    1780                        1572
Adjusted R-sq.                                                          0.30                    0.48                    0.29                        0.49

"Treatment" group:            Countries acceding between 1995 and 2001, China excluded from regressions 1 and 2
"Control" group:              All developing countries
Beginning period:             8 years before accessions
t -statistcs are based on robust standard errors clustered by country

Note a/:                     Other regressors included (but not reported) in regressions 1 and 2: s's, s*Governance Qality, and s*log(#Commitments)
