                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 WHAT CAN SURVEY FORECASTS TELL US ABOUT INFORMATIONAL RIGIDITIES?

                                          Olivier Coibion
                                        Yuriy Gorodnichenko

                                        Working Paper 14586
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14586


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008




We are grateful to Alex Cukierman, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Ed Knotek, Oleg Korenok, Maxym
Kryshko, Peter Morrow, Ricardo Reis, David Romer, Mirko Wiederholt, and Justin Wolfers as well
as seminar participants at the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank, NBER and UC Berkeley for comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Olivier Coibion and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
What Can Survey Forecasts Tell Us About Informational Rigidities?
Olivier Coibion and Yuriy Gorodnichenko
NBER Working Paper No. 14586
December 2008
JEL No. D84,E3,E4,E5

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper uses three different surveys of economic forecasts to assess both the support for and the
properties of informational rigidities faced by agents. Specifically, we track the impulse responses
of mean forecast errors and disagreement among agents after exogenous structural shocks. Our key
contribution is to document that in response to structural shocks, mean forecasts fail to completely
adjust on impact, leading to statistically and economically significant deviations from the null of full
information: the half life of forecast errors is roughly between 6 months and a year. Importantly, the
dynamic process followed by forecast errors following structural shocks is consistent with the predictions
of models of informational rigidities. We interpret this finding as providing support for the recent expansion
of research into models of informational rigidities. In addition, we document several stylized facts
about the conditional responses of forecast errors and disagreement among agents that can be used
to differentiate between some of the models of informational rigidities recently proposed.


Olivier Coibion
Department of Economics
College of William and Mary
115 Morton Hall
Williamsburg, VA 23188
ocoibion@wm.edu

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
1    Introduction
How economic agents form their expectations has long been one of the most fundamental, and
most debated, questions in macroeconomics. Indeed, the abandonment of adaptive expectations in
favor of rational expectations was one of the defining features in the rebuilding of
macroeconomics starting in the 1970s. Yet, even with the advent of rational expectations, research
continued to emphasize the fact that, in forming their expectations, agents typically face
constraints. For example, Lucas (1972) assumed agents could not observe all prices in the
economy. Likewise, Kydland and Prescott (1982) assumed that agents could not differentiate in
real time between transitory and permanent productivity shocks. Despite this early interest in the
information problems faced by economic agents and their implications for aggregate dynamics,
most modern macroeconomic models assume full-information rational expectations on the part of
all agents. Yet recent work such as Mankiw and Reis (2002), Woodford (2003) and Sims (2002),
has once more revived interest in better understanding the frictions and limitations faced by agents
in the acquisition and processing of information.
       This renewed interest in the expectations formation process has been spurred by several
failures of full information models. For example, Mankiw and Reis (2002) argue that the observed
delayed response of inflation to monetary policy shocks is not readily matched by New Keynesian
models without the addition of informational rigidities or the counterfactual assumption of price
indexation. Similarly, Dupor et al (2007b) show that the differential response of inflation to
monetary policy and technology shocks is difficult to reconcile without informational rigidities. In
addition, departing from the assumption of full-information can also account for some empirical
puzzles. For example, Roberts (1997, 1998) and Adam and Padula (2003) demonstrate that
empirical estimates of the slope of the New Keynesian Phillips Curve have the correct sign when
conditioning on survey measures of inflation expectations while this is typically not the case under
the assumption of full-information rational expectations. Similarly, Romer and Romer (2004)
show that monetary policy shocks drawn from the Fed’s Taylor rule conditional on its historical
forecasts eliminate the price puzzle identified in previous work. Piazzesi and Schneider (2008),
Gourinchas and Tornell (2004) and Bachetta et al (2008) all identify links between systematic
forecast errors in survey forecasts and puzzles in various financial markets.
       Despite this resurgent focus on the nature of the expectations formation process, little
consensus exists on how best to model the acquisition and processing of information by agents. In
                                                                                                  1
large part, this reflects a lack of convincing empirical evidence on the matter. First, the evidence
against the assumption of full-information rational expectations is sparse, often fragile, and most
importantly of unclear economic significance. Second, there is even less empirical evidence
available to distinguish among competing models of informational rigidities, so macroeconomists
seeking to include informational frictions in their models have a multitude of options to consider
but little basis upon which to choose a particular specification.
         The most traditional approach to testing expectations data relies on testing the null of full
information using survey forecasts, typically of inflation, by regressing ex-post inflation on mean
inflation forecasts. As documented in Pesaran and Weale (2006), this literature has yielded only
mixed results, typically finding departures from full information over short time samples but not
over longer periods. In addition, this approach has little insight to offer about the dynamic
properties of the expectations formation process beyond a test of the null of full information and
reveals little about the economic significance of identified departures from full information.1 A
second strand of empirical evidence has focused on evaluating the implications of models with
informational rigidities relative to those without.2 These results have also been mixed and are in
any case difficult to rely on for making general conclusions about the expectations formation
process since this type of evidence is sensitive to the estimation approach as well as to auxiliary
modeling assumptions. A third approach documents the costs of collecting and processing
information (e.g. Zbaracki et al (2004)). This approach is instrumental in establishing the fact that
economic agents face significant informational constraints but cannot address how these
constraints affect agents’ choices and aggregate dynamics. Finally, the fourth approach studies the
properties of disagreement among agents to make inferences about their underlying approaches to
expectations formation. For example, Mankiw Reis and Wolfers (2004) note that disagreement
among agents is inconsistent with full information but not with models in which agents face
informational frictions.3 They argue that a sticky-information model can reproduce many of the


1
  See Pesaran and Weale (2006) and Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers (2003) for surveys of this literature.
2
  See Korenok (2005), Andres et al (2005), Kiley (2007), Coibion (2007), and Dupor et al (2007a).
3
  It is possible to have forecast dispersion when fully rational agents share the same information set but use different
forecasting models or have different objective functions. However, Jonung (1981) and others find that agents disagree
about current and past inflation and perceptions of past inflation are a strong predictor of inflationary expectations so
that heterogeneity in expectations is driven to a significant extent by perceptions about current and past conditions.
Hence, a bulk of disagreement seems to arise from differential information sets. Probably more importantly, there is
potentially no discipline on what rules agents could use and consequently models with heterogeneous forecasting rules
                                                                                                                       2
features of expectations data they consider. Branch (2007) similarly makes use of data on
disagreement to compare the fit of the sticky information model and a model in which agents may
endogenously use heterogeneous forecasting rules.
         This paper lays out a new set of stylized facts about the expectations formation process to
address the two key issues: do agents have full information, and if not, how do we model their
information problem? We make use of three data sets containing survey measures of inflation
forecasts: the Michigan Survey of Consumers, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the
Blue Chip Economic Indicators. Each survey provides mean forecasts of inflation over the next
year, as well as measures of the cross-sectional dispersion of agents’ forecasts of future inflation.
Unlike the previous literature, we study the conditional responses of forecast errors and forecast
dispersion to identified structural shocks. With this novel approach we can hope to have more
power and robustness in distinguishing hypotheses of how expectations are formed. As we discuss
later, different models of expectation formation deliver sign restrictions on first and second
moments of impulse response functions that can be used to assess the validity of these models. In
contrast, these models tend to agree on implications for unconditional moments of expectations
(e.g., positive dispersion of forecasts). In this respect, our approach is similar to standard methods
of applied macroeconomics that utilize conditional responses of variables to shocks (i.e., impulse
response functions) to study and estimate the behavior of empirical models.
         Our first stylized fact is that forecasts fail to adjust one-for-one with the variable being
forecasted after structural shocks. Instead, we find systematic patterns of serially correlated
conditional forecast errors, particularly after technology and oil price shocks.4 Thus, after
inflationary (deflationary) shocks, one observes a predictable sequence of serially correlated
positive (negative) inflation forecast errors.5 Over time, forecast errors monotonically converge to
zero. This result not only contradicts the null of full-information but does so in exactly the manner
predicted by standard models of informational rigidities. In addition, we find that these deviations

can rationalize any outcome. Thus, we do not formally try to isolate the contribution of heterogeneous forecasting
rules to disagreement because we could not formulate a set of falsifiable hypotheses to rule out this theory.
4
  Our baseline structural shocks are monetary policy, technology, and oil price shocks. These are the shocks that
explain the largest component of the variance of inflation out of the ones we consider, between thirty and fifty percent
jointly depending on the time horizon, which is important for our ability to distinguish models of expectation
formation in the data. We also consider other exogenous shock measures, such as fiscal shocks, information shocks,
and alternative measures of monetary policy shocks.
5
  We show that similar results hold for forecasts of unemployment after the information shocks of Beaudry and Portier
(2006).
                                                                                                                      3
from full-information are not only statistically significant but also of economically significant
magnitudes. For example, the half-lives of conditional forecast errors are between six months and
a year. Such a delayed adjustment of average expectations in response to structural shocks is large
enough to have important repercussions for macroeconomic dynamics. We interpret these results
as demonstrating that informational rigidities are an important component of the expectations
formation process for both consumers and professional forecasters. Given the crucial role played
by forward-looking behavior in macroeconomics, this has broad implications for understanding
and modeling business cycles.
        Having documented this novel evidence for informational rigidities in the data, we then
turn to the question of how to differentiate between competing models of expectations formation.
To do so, we first present contrasting implications of two general types of informational rigidities.
The first is the sticky information model of Mankiw and Reis (2002). In this model, agents can
update their information only infrequently, but when they do so they acquire complete information
about the current and past states.6 Thus, at any moment in time, this model implies that a fraction
of agents will be relying on outdated information. This generates a distribution of information sets
across agents based on the last date at which agents acquired new information. An appealing
feature of this form of rigidity is that a single form of rigidity can help explain inertia in different
macroeconomic variables. These sticky-information models are also able to deliver inertial
inflation in response to monetary policy shocks and rapid adjustment of inflation to technology
shocks (Mankiw and Reis (2007) and Reis (2008)).
        In the second class of models of informational rigidities, which we group under the
heading of imperfect information, agents cannot observe the current state perfectly and must thus
form a belief about the current state based on the variables that they observe.7 For example,
Woodford (2001) considers a model in which agents observe a noisy signal about the current state.
These agents use a Kalman filter to continuously update their beliefs about the current state in the




6
  The microfoundations of sticky information are developed in Reis (2006a) for firms and Reis (2006b) for consumers.
He shows that when agents face fixed costs to acquiring information, they will update their information sets
infrequently and, under certain conditions, exactly in the way proposed in Mankiw and Reis (2002).
7
  Loosely speaking, if one thinks of sticky information as resulting from fixed costs to acquiring information,
imperfect information models can be thought of as resulting from convex costs to acquiring information, leading to
continuous but incremental information acquisition.
                                                                                                                  4
face of new signals.8 Sims (2003) argues that agents face limited information processing
capacities, and must thus endogenously allocate their attention to different variables.9 Applying
Sims’ approach to price-setting decisions, Paciello (2007) and Mackoviak and Wiederholt (2008a)
show that under rational inattention, firms will pay more attention to technology shocks than
monetary policy shocks because the former are more volatile and have greater effect on profits. As
a result, firms change prices more rapidly after a technology shock than a monetary policy shock.
        These two classes of models share certain important characteristics. First, both models
consist of rational expectations agents subject to a specific source of informational rigidity, unlike
earlier ad hoc models with adaptive expectations. Second, each model implies that after a shock
the average forecast across agents will trail in terms of magnitudes and timing the variable being
forecasted, but in each case forecast errors will converge to zero over time. Third, both approaches
are consistent with disagreement among agents, i.e. agents have different beliefs about the current
and future states. Finally, both are consistent with the differential response of inflation to
technology and monetary policy shocks, making them particularly appealing approaches to
consider.
        Despite these similarities, the two models also make conflicting predictions. For example,
in sticky information models, agents update their information sets infrequently and independently
of the type of shock hitting the economy. Thus, the convergence rate of forecast errors should be
identical across shocks after controlling for the persistence of the inflation rate.10 In imperfect
information models, on the other hand, the convergence rate of forecast errors will depend on the
quantitative importance of different shocks. For example, firms should devote more attention to
gathering information about shocks that affect profits more. Thus, in general, shocks that play an
important role in affecting business cycles should have a faster convergence rate of forecast errors
than quantitatively unimportant shocks since agents should pay more attention to more important
shocks. Secondly, in the sticky-information model, disagreement, as measured by the cross-
sectional variance of forecasts, is predicted to increase after a shock. In the linear imperfect
information model that we consider, there should be no increase in disagreement across agents

8
   This strand of literature goes back to Lucas (1972) which has an early version of a macroeconomic model with
imperfect information.
9
   Sims (2003) illustrates how rationally inattentive agents behave much like imperfect agents but differ in that the
signal to noise ratio is endogenous.
10
   More precisely, the percentage forecast errors should converge at a common rate determined entirely by the rate of
information updating.
                                                                                                                   5
after macroeconomic shocks. In summary, these models offer crisp differential predictions that can
be used to assess their empirical validity.
       Consequently, we study the differences in the conditional responses of percentage forecast
errors across agents and shocks and uncover two new findings. Our second stylized fact is that
conditional forecast errors converge at similar rates across different shocks. In other words, we
find little evidence that forecasts adjust more or less rapidly to different shocks. In particular,
mean inflation forecasts converge to actual inflation just as rapidly after monetary policy shocks as
after technology shocks. While consistent with sticky information models, this result is harder to
reconcile with imperfect information models, in which one would typically expect agents to pay
more attention to quantitatively important shocks than others. Our third stylized fact is that
conditional forecast errors converge at similar rates across agents. Thus, we find no evidence
that professional forecasters’ mean forecasts converge more rapidly to actual inflation than
consumers’ forecasts. This result is not necessarily inconsistent with either imperfect or sticky
information models, but it is challenging for epidemiological models of information diffusion, as
in Carroll (2003). This approach assumes that information spreads gradually from professional
forecasters to consumers, a proposition that is inconsistent with our finding that mean professional
forecasts converge no quicker to true values than consumer forecasts.
       Finally, following Mankiw, Reis and Wolfers (2004) and Branch (2007), we study the
cross-sectional dispersion of forecasts across agents. But unlike these authors, we focus on the
conditional response of disagreement among agents to structural shocks. This delivers our fourth
stylized fact: structural shocks do not appear to lead to any discernible increase in disagreement.
This result is remarkably consistent with simple linear imperfect information models but not sticky
information models. The one exception that we identify is that oil price shocks tend to raise
disagreement among consumers.
       The structure of the paper is as follows. In section 2, we present two models of
informational rigidity and compare their predictions about conditional forecast errors and the
response of the cross-sectional dispersion of beliefs after a shock. In section 3, we present the
survey measures that form the backbone of our empirical analysis as well as the shocks measures
we utilize. Section 4 presents the baseline empirical results. Section 5 includes robustness checks
of our results and an extension to unemployment forecasts. Section 6 concludes.


                                                                                                   6
2     Two Models of Information Rigidity
2.1 Sticky Information
Reis (2006a) considers the problem of a firm facing a fixed cost to acquiring and processing new
information. In the presence of fixed costs, it becomes optimal for firms to update their
information infrequently. Under certain conditions, Reis shows that the acquisition of information
follows a Poisson process in which, each period, agents face a constant probability λ of not being
able to update their information. We refer to λ as the degree of informational rigidity for the sticky
information model. Following Mankiw and Reis (2002), we assume that when agents update their
information sets, they acquire complete information and form expectations rationally. In periods in
which agents do not update their information sets, their expectations and actions continue to be
based on their old information. Thus, agents who update their information sets in the same period
have the same beliefs and forecasts about macroeconomic variables.
        Denoting the mean forecast across agents at time t of a variable π t + j j periods ahead as

Ftπ t + j , we have

        Ftπ t + j = (1 − λ ) ∑ k = 0 λ k E t − kπ t + j
                                   ∞
                                                                                                  (1)

The mean forecast is a weighted average of past (rational) expectations of the variable at time t+j.
Now suppose that the economy is initially in a steady-state, so that all expectations of π are equal
to the steady-state value, normalized to zero for simplicity. At time t = 0 , a shock occurs and
affects π in a deterministic way (i.e. yields a sequence of inflation rates {π t + j } ). There are no other

shocks. The impulse response of the average forecast across agents follows
        ∂Ftπ t + j
                     = (1 − λ t +1 )π t + j ∀t ≥ 0                                                (2)
        ∂shock
The mean forecast depends on the ex-post value of inflation, since when agents update their
information sets, they acquire full information. Thus, after an inflationary shock, mean forecasts
rise along with inflation. Note that the coefficient is converging to one over time, so mean
forecasts converge to the true value. But because the coefficient is less than one, forecast errors
will be non-zero and persistent. Defining the forecast error j periods ahead as
FEt ,t + j ≡ π t + j − Ftπ t + j , its impulse response is given by

          ∂FEt ,t + j
                        = λ t +1π t + j ∀ t ≥ 0                                                   (3)
          ∂shock
                                                                                                          7
Forecast errors depend both on the inflation process after the shock, as well as the degree of
informational rigidity. Note that when λ = 0 , firms always update their information sets and the
forecast error is always zero. As the degree of informational rigidity rises, conditional forecast
errors will become increasingly persistent.
       The impulse response for forecast errors above also makes clear that the convergence of
the forecast error to the true value is independent of the volatility of the shock. Specifically, the
percentage deviation of the mean forecast from the true value ( FEt ,t + j / π t + j ) is monotonically

decreasing over time at a rate governed the degree of informational rigidity. Because agents must
choose a certain average duration between information updates, this convergence rate is
independent of the properties of the shock. In other words, two different shocks must yield the
same convergence rate for mean forecasts.
       The sticky information model also makes predictions about the cross-sectional dispersion
of beliefs across agents. Define Vtπ t + j to be the cross-sectional variance of forecasts at time t of π

in j periods. Then,
        Vtπ t + j = (1 − λ ) ∑ k = 0 λ k [ E t − kπ t + j − Ftπ t + j ]2
                                   ∞
                                                                                                (4)
In response to a shock at time t = 0 out of the steady-state, the impulse response of the cross-
sectional variance of forecasts is given by
        ∂Vtπ t + j
                     = (1 − λ t +1 )λ t +1π t2+ j ∀t ≥ 0                                        (5)
        ∂shock
As long as λ > 0 and π t + j > 0 , the dispersion, or degree of disagreement across agents, will rise in

response to a shock. Over time (assuming inflation converges), the dispersion will return to its
steady-state level.
       We can summarize the predictions of the sticky-information model as follows:
        1.     Conditional forecast errors respond to shocks with the same sign as the predicted
               variable and converge to zero over time.
        2.     The convergence rate of percentage forecast errors is common across shocks.
        3.     The dispersion of forecasts should increase after a shock.

2.2 Imperfect Information
Lucas (1972), Cukierman and Wachtel (1979), Woodford (2001) and Sims (2003) develop models
where economic agents filter the state of economic fundamentals from a series of signals
                                                                                                       8
contaminated with idiosyncratic, agent-specific noise. In contrast to Mankiw and Reis (2002),
agents continuously track variables and incorporate the most recent information into their decision
making. The striking feature of this class of models is that the dispersion of forecasts does not
vary in response to a shock in fundamentals. In this section, we present a simple model to illustrate
the intuition behind this result.
       Suppose that economic agents observe signals about inflation ωit = π t + vit where π t is the

aggregate level of inflation and vit ~ iid N (0, Σ v ) is an agent specific shock. Also without loss of

generality, suppose                  that       inflation evolves           as     a    random walk        π t = π t −1 + wt     where

wt ~ iid N (0, Σ w ). 11 Denote the optimal forecast for inflation at time t given agent i’s information

at time s with π i ,t|s . Using properties of the Kalman filter, one can show that

         π i ,t|t = π i ,t|t −1 + G (ωit − π i ,t|t −1 ) ,                                                                 (6)

where G ∈ (0,1) is the gain of the Kalman filter. Note that the gain of the filter does not vary

across agents because all agents solve the same Ricatti equation P = [ P − P ( P + Σ w ) −1 P ] + Σ v ,

where P is the variance of the one-step ahead forecast π i ,t|t −1 , and thus obtain the same gain

G = P ( P + Σ v ) −1 .

       Note that the average forecast for the current state of inflation given current information is
equal to
          Ftπ i ,t|t ≡ Eiπ i ,t|t = (1 − G ) Eiπ i ,t|t −1 + GEiωit = (1 − G ) Eiπ i ,t|t −1 + G ( Eiπ t + Ei vit )

                                      = (1 − G ) Eiπ i ,t|t −1 + Gπ t = (1 − G ) Eiπ i ,t −1|t −1 + Gπ t                   (7)

where Ei (⋅) indicates that expectation is taken over agents rather than time and the last equality

follows from π i ,t + j|t = π i ,t|t . Then the impulse of the average forecast of inflation to a shock in

inflation is π t + j|t + j = G ∑ k = 0 (1 − G ) k π t = [1 − (1 − G ) j ]π t ∀ j ≥ 0 where we omit (1 − G ) j +1 Eiπ i ,t|t −1
                                         j



by conditioning on the initial state of beliefs. Since for each agent the forecast for inflation is
π i ,t + j|t = π i ,t|t , the impulse of the average j-step ahead forecast has the same properties as the
average forecast for the current state.


11
    This can readily be extended to non-random walk behavior. Our conclusions also do not change if we allow shocks
vi,t to be correlated across agents.
                                                                                                                                     9
      Similar to the sticky information model, this model predict that the average forecast will
have serially correlated ex-post error equal to (1 − G )π t . Because G < 1 , the forecast error moves
in the same direction as the mean forecast does. Note that the forecast error converges to zero with
time as π t + j|t + j − π t = (1 − G ) j π t → 0 with j → ∞ .

      Using equation (6), we can derive the law of motion for the dispersion of forecasts across
agents:    Vtπ i ,t|t = (1 − G ) 2V π i ,t|t −1 + G 2V (π t + vit ) = (1 − G ) 2V π i ,t|t −1 + G 2Σ v = (1 − G ) 2V π i ,t −1|t −1 + G 2Σ v .

Note that V π i ,t|t does not depend on π t . This means that the motion of forecast dispersion does not

vary with π t . Again using the fact that j-step ahead forecast is based only on the forecast for the

current state (here, π i ,t + j|t = π i ,t|t ), we conclude that the dispersion of the j-step ahead forecasts does

not vary with π t . Intuitively, because agents continuously update their information sets, the

disagreement in their forecasts arises only due to idiosyncratic differences in information sets
induced by shocks vit . Since the dispersion of vit does not vary in response to shocks to

fundamentals such as π t , the forecast dispersion does not respond to π t .12

      Note that the speed of reacting to signals ωit increases in the volatility of fundamentals and

decreases in the volatility of the idiosyncratic shock vit . Likewise, one can show that if the agent’s

objective function (e.g., profit or utility) is more sensitive to certain types of fundamental shocks
(e.g. technology) than to other types of fundamental shocks (e.g., monetary policy), then the
reaction to sensitive shocks is stronger (see e.g. Mackoviak and Wiederholt (2008a)). Thus, unlike
the sticky information model, the imperfect information model allows for a differential response of
information acquisition to fundamental shocks. For example, agents may learn slowly the true
state of monetary policy but may react quickly to shocks in technology.
      We can summarize the predictions of the imperfect information model as follows:
          1.   Conditional forecast errors respond to shocks with the same sign as the predicted
               variable and converge to zero over time.
          2.   The convergence rate of percentage forecast errors can be different across shocks.


12
  Dispersion of forecasts can respond to shocks in the imperfect information model if shocks induce conditional
heteroskedasticity Σv,t=Σv(πt), which is similar in spirit to heteroskedasticity analyzed in GARCH models. Cukierman
and Wachtel (1979) present such a model. We focus on the model without heteroskedastic effects because it offers
sharper predictions.
                                                                                                                                          10
        3.   The dispersion of forecasts should not increase after a shock.
Observe that the imperfect information model makes the same qualitative predictions about
forecast errors and mean forecasts as the sticky information model. In contrast to the sticky
information model, the imperfect information model implies that dispersion of forecasts does not
respond to fundamental shocks and the speed of response to shocks can vary across shocks.

3    Data Description
We have described three predictions of each model of informational rigidities. We will test these
predictions using three data sets of inflation surveys. The first is the Michigan Survey of
Consumers (MSC). The MSC is a nationally representative monthly survey of 500 to 1,300
consumers. Respondents are asked to report their expected inflation rate for the next twelve
months. The MSC is collected over the corresponding month. The survey question on inflation
forecasts begins in January 1978. The second source is the Survey of Professional Forecasters
(SPF). This is a quarterly survey of 9 to 40 professional forecasters. The SPF collects quarterly
forecasts (for the current quarter and the next four quarters) for a number of macroeconomic
variables. We focus on forecasts of average GDP Deflator inflation over the next year for
consistency with the MSC forecasts. SPF forecasts are collected in the middle of the quarter. The
third (proprietary) dataset is the Blue Chip Economic Indicators (BCEI). This is a collection of
forecasts from professional forecasters for similar set of macroeconomic variables as the SPF. The
consensus BCEI forecasts are available monthly starting in April 1980 but dispersion measures
can only be constructed starting in July 1984. For the BCEI, we focus on forecasts of the CPI. For
each dataset, we extract a mean forecast of average inflation over the next year and a measure of
the cross-sectional dispersion of those forecasts. We discuss the construction of our data in more
detail in Appendix A.
       Figure 1 plots the mean forecasts and forecast dispersion series from each survey in Panels
A and B respectively. The mean forecasts are highly correlated with each other. We measure
dispersion as the log of the cross-sectional standard deviation of inflation forecasts. The standard
deviation of MSC is much higher than for professional forecasters. All three measures point to
decreasing levels of disagreement since the early 1980s. Table 1 presents correlations of these
measures with macroeconomic variables. All three mean inflation forecast measures are highly
correlated with inflation and with each other, and, to a lesser extent, with the unemployment rate.

                                                                                                 11
They are also slightly negatively correlated with the growth rate of real GDP. The cross-
correlation among dispersion measures is lower than for mean forecasts. Nonetheless, these
unconditional correlations indicate an apparently strong link between the degree of disagreement
among agents and macroeconomic conditions, a point emphasized by Mankiw, Reis and Wolfers
(2003).13 Interestingly, since the mid-1980s, the correlation between disagreement about inflation
and the unemployment rate exceeds the correlation of disagreement with the inflation rate for all
three survey measures.
         Because the predictions made by the two models are all conditional on a macroeconomic
shock, a key element of our analysis is the selection and identification of shocks. There is a long
literature on identifying exogenous structural shocks to the economy, giving us a wide range of
measures to consider.14 We considered the following shocks from the literature:

     a) Monetary policy shocks, identified from a VAR or a la Romer and Romer (2004).
     b) Technology shocks, identified using long-run restrictions as in Gali (1999).
     c) Oil shocks, identified as in Hamilton (1996).
     d) Information shocks, identified as in Beaudry and Portier (2006).
     e) Confidence shocks, identified as in Barsky and Sims (2008).
     f) Fiscal shocks, from Romer and Romer (2007).

Appendix B discusses the details of each approach.15 Table 2 presents the cross-correlation matrix
for these shocks. Most shock measures are largely uncorrelated with one another, consistent with
their interpretations as exogenous structural shocks to the economy. The highest correlations are
between the confidence shock of Barsky and Sims and the information shock of Beaudry and



13
   The strong unconditional correlation, however, should not be interpreted in favor or against models of informational
rigidities because there could be forces other than informational imperfections that may lead to comovement of
macroeconomic variables and the level of uncertainty (e.g., uncertainty shocks as in Bloom (2008)).
14
   The main advantage of studying responses to structural shocks rather than reduced-form shocks is that by
comparing responses across shocks we have additional tests of models with information frictions. For example, we
can test whether forecast errors converge at the same rate across shocks. However, as we demonstrate in Monte Carlo
simulations (Appendix C), composite and unidentified shocks may be attractive because they explain a large fraction
of variation in inflation and hence can provide more precise estimates and more power tests. In sections 5.2-5.3, we
consider responses to a composite shock as well as to unidentified inflation innovations.
15
   All of our structural shocks are constructed using final data. While this data is unavailable to agents in real time, this
is not an issue for our analysis. If it is difficult for agents to perceive shocks using real-time data, this is a form of
imperfect information and will be revealed in our empirical results.
                                                                                                                          12
Portier, which indicates that there is some overlap between the two shock series, as well as
between the confidence shock and the oil price shock.
         Our selection criterion for shocks is to focus primarily on the three shocks which account
for the largest component of the variance of inflation. Table 3 presents a variance decomposition
of inflation into the orthogonalized components of these shocks.16 The most important shock in
terms of explaining the volatility of inflation appears to be technology shocks, as identified using
long-run restrictions by Gali (1999), accounting for approximately twenty-five to thirty-five
percent of the variance of inflation. The next two most quantitatively important shocks are
monetary policy and oil price shocks. Monetary policy shocks account for up to five percent of the
variance of inflation, while oil price shocks account for up to twenty percent. Each of the
remaining three shocks, information, confidence, and fiscal, accounts for less than five percent of
the variance of inflation. It is worth noting that despite our inclusion of six shock measures, these
jointly account for only about half of the variance of inflation, leaving much of the volatility
unexplained by these structural shocks.
         Given these shocks, we can consider the impulse response of inflation to each shock as
well as the predicted response of forecast errors and dispersion measures from the models.17 For
our three baseline shocks, monetary policy, technology and oil shocks, we plot the impulse
response of annual inflation based on the whole sample, as well as predicted responses from the
sticky information model in Figure 2. In response to monetary policy shocks, inflation follows the
well-known delayed response, reaching its minimum approximately two years after the interest
rate increase. In response to such a shock, the sticky information model predicts a negative
forecast error, as mean forecasts should decline more slowly than actual inflation. Forecast
dispersion, on the other hand, should rise as disagreement increases between those who have
observed the shock and those who have not. Disagreement disappears as more and more agents
learn about the shock. In response to a positive technology shocks, the response of inflation is
much more rapid and more precisely estimated. Forecast errors are predicted to decline by the

16
  The ordering has no qualitative effect on the results since the shocks are already largely orthogonal to one another.
17
   Impulse responses of inflation to monetary policy and technology shocks come from including inflation in each
VAR, while the response to oil shocks (following Kilian (2007)) comes from estimating an AR(2) process for
inflation augmented with current oil shocks plus 6 lags of the oil shock. All standard errors are bootstrapped. Inflation
measures used are the PCE price index for monetary shocks, GDP deflator for technology shocks, and CPI for oil
shocks. The distribution of predicted forecast errors and dispersion responses are based on the bootstrapped
distribution of inflation responses. We set λ=0.75 to generate predictions under sticky-information.
                                                                                                                      13
sticky information model while dispersion should rise. Finally, oil price shocks lead to an increase
in inflation. With informational rigidities, this yields a prediction of positive forecast errors after
the shock. The prediction of imperfect information models would be a qualitatively similar path of
forecast errors, but no response of dispersion after each shock.

4     Empirical Analysis
We begin the empirical analysis with a preliminary check on the response of mean forecasts to the
exogenous shocks. The question here is whether forecasts move in a manner which is generally
consistent with the ex-post path of inflation. We estimate the following equation for each type of
shock k and for each measure of mean year-ahead (h = 4 or 12) inflation forecasts:

         Ftπ t + h = c + ∑ i =1 β i Ft −iπ t −i + h + ∑ j =0 γ jε tk− j + vt
                               I                         J
                                                                                                             (8)
This equation is similar to the specification estimated in Romer and Romer (2004).18,19 We then
plot the impulse responses to a one standard-deviation increase in the exogenous shock, along with
95% confidence intervals in Figure 3.20 Lag lengths (I and J) are selected based on the BIC
allowing for a maximum lag length of a year and a half for each specification.
         In response to monetary policy shocks, the MSC, SPF and BCEI have responses of mean
forecasts which are very imprecisely estimated.21 In response to technology shocks, we see a much
more pronounced response of inflation forecasts: for all three survey measures, forecasts of future
inflation fall and the decline is statistically significant. In response to oil shocks, we also see
statistically significant increases in inflation forecasts, consistent with the inflation process after


18
   Note that our procedure has two steps (estimate shocks and then regress the variable of interest on these estimated
shocks) and one generally has to appropriately adjust standard errors in the second step, which corresponds to our
equation (8) and similar specifications considered later in the text. This adjustment, however, is not necessary in our
analysis. Our null hypothesis is that the shocks have no effect on the mean forecast, forecast error, and forecast
dispersion, i.e. γj = 0 for all j. Pagan (1984) shows that under this null it is not necessary to adjust standard errors.
19
   In this and subsequent specifications, we include one structural shock at a time and do not take into account
potential feedback from the dependent variable to the structural shock and possible serial correlation in the shocks.
We experimented with VAR specifications which include all shocks as well as allow for serial correlation in structural
shock and feedback from the dependent variable so that we can study responses to orthogonalized innovations to the
shock measures. Although the standard errors were slightly larger because we estimated more parameters, the results
from VAR-type exercises were remarkably consistent with the single equation estimates and hence are not reported.
20
   Confidence intervals for impulse responses are generated based on 1,000 draws from the asymptotic distribution of
parameter estimates of equation (8), from which we extract our distribution of impulse responses.
21
   Note that the fact that the mean forecasts do not significantly respond to monetary policy shocks does not
necessarily mean that economic agents ignore these shocks. The response of actual inflation to monetary policy
shocks is fairly weak, especially in the short rime samples available here, and thus one may expect that mean forecasts
should have a weak response too. It is likely that with these weak responses we cannot clearly discern the effect of
monetary policy shocks, a point we demonstrate in Appendix C.
                                                                                                                      14
such shocks. Importantly, agents do adjust their forecasts in response to shocks and thus we may
be confident that the shocks, particularly technology and oil price shocks, contain genuinely new
information and that they create meaningful variation in information sets suitable for our analysis.

4.1 Response of Forecast Errors to Shocks
The responses of mean forecasts tell us little about informational rigidities but simply indicate that
mean forecasts go in the same direction as actual inflation. This result would be expected to hold
under full information as well as the models with informational rigidities considered here. A more
relevant test for the importance of informational rigidities is looking at the response of forecast
errors conditional on an exogenous shock. The presence of informational rigidities, be they sticky
information or imperfect information, implies that we should observe persistent conditional
forecast errors whereas full information implies that forecast errors will be zero after the time of
the shock. Forecast errors are generated using real-time data of inflation measures.22 To estimate
the response of forecast errors, we run the following regression:

         π t − Ft −hπ t = c + ∑ i =1 βi (π t −i − Ft −i −hπ t −i ) + ∑ j =0 γ jε tk− j + vt
                                    I                                    J
                                                                                                               (9)
where h = 4 for quarterly data and h = 12 for monthly data. We plot the impulse responses and
associated standard errors for forecast errors starting a year after the shock.23 The results are
presented in Figure 4.
         For monetary policy shocks, there is only limited evidence of serially correlated forecast
errors. MSC and BCEI forecast errors are negative, as would be expected under informational
rigidities, but these are (marginally for MSC) insignificant at the 5% level. SPF forecast errors are
positive, but these are statistically insignificant as well. For technology shocks, on the other hand,
forecast errors are persistently negative and statistically significant for all 3 survey measures. This
indicates significant departures from full information, since inflation forecasts are responding
more slowly than actual inflation. With oil shocks, the evidence equally strongly points to
informational rigidities: forecast errors are all positive and statistically significant. Finally, all
forecast errors converge to zero, so agents’ forecasts correctly converge to true values over time.

22
   For both the MSC and the BCEI, we use the CPI as the measure of inflation. For SPF, we use the GNP deflator
prior to 1992, the implicit GDP price deflator from 1992 to 1995, and the chained GDP price index starting in 1996.
This reflects the different measures forecasted by SPF over time. Each inflation series is real-time data. Specifically,
we use the level of inflation that was available six months after the inflation date. This is to avoid identifying revisions
in price indexes as forecast errors.
23
   The response of forecast errors in the first year reflects only variation in inflation, since the date of the forecasts
precedes that of the shock. Thus, we do not include these in the impulse responses.
                                                                                                                         15
        These results point to the potential importance of informational rigidities on the part of
both consumers and professional forecasters. In response to technology and oil price shocks, we
find clear evidence that forecasts fail to adjust one-for-one with ex-post inflation. This is
particularly important since these two shocks appear to play such an important role in explaining
inflation volatility. On the other hand, the results for monetary policy shocks are mixed. This
could be interpreted in one of at least three ways. One may take this as evidence suggesting that
monetary policy shocks are observed (and fully processed) by all and are thus not subject to
informational rigidities. A second interpretation would simply question whether monetary policy
shocks are shocks at all, as done in Cochrane (1994). A third interpretation is that because
monetary policy shocks play such a small role in explaining the volatility of inflation (and hence
inflation expectations) and because the contemporaneous and short-run responses of actual
inflation to monetary policy shocks are weak, there is little hope of being able to clearly discern
the response of forecast errors to this shock.
       To assess the validity of the latter, we ran Monte Carlo experiments in which inflation is
driven by two shocks, with details in Appendix C. We constructed measures of forecast errors and
dispersion under the null of sticky-information and applied our empirical approach to estimating
the impulse response of forecast errors and dispersion to one of the shocks. We found that when
the shock accounts for less than five percent of the inflation variance, we are unable to precisely
estimate the response of forecast errors to this shock in similar time samples as those available
from survey measures. Similar results held with disagreement responses. Thus, the fact that
monetary policy shocks account for such a small fraction of the inflation variance (less than five
percent) is a likely source of the difference in the estimated response of forecast errors relative to
oil price and technology shocks, which each account for a substantial component of the volatility
in inflation.

4.2 Persistence of Conditional Percentage Forecast Errors
In this section, we consider another set of predictions of the two models. Sticky information
implies that for a common set of agents, percentage forecast errors after a shock will decline
monotonically at the same rate for all shocks. The persistence of conditional percentage forecast
errors in this model hinges only on the degree of informational rigidity (λ). For imperfect
information agents, on the other hand, the weight placed on a signal correlated with a shock

                                                                                                   16
depends positively on the variance of the shock (or more generally on the benefit of paying
attention to the shock, as in rational inattention models). Thus, one would expect according to this
model to find more persistence in the conditional forecast errors for shocks which have little effect
on inflation than on technology shocks which account for the largest component of inflation
volatility. In this section, we estimate the persistence of conditional percentage forecast errors in
response to different shocks and ask whether this persistence is common across shocks and agents.
         To do so, we first run the following regression:

          (π t − Ft − hπ t )                      (π t −i − Ft −i − hπ t −i )
                               = c + ∑ i =1 β i                                 + ∑ j =0 γ j ε tk− j + vt
                                         I                                             J
                                                                                                                            (10)
                 πt                                         π t −i
again selecting I and J using the BIC criterion, using one-year ahead forecasts, and individually
for each shock and survey measure. Using the coefficients estimated from equation 10, we extract
the impulse response of the percentage forecast error to the shock. The persistence of the
conditional percentage forecast error is measured using the parameter θ which minimizes the
squared distance between the estimated impulse response and the geometrically declining process
governed by θ (i.e. θ j for j ≥ 0 ).24 Results are presented in Table 4.25 In addition to the three
structural shocks, we also present results in response to the unexplained inflation innovations, as
defined in section 5.4.
         First, we find little evidence that the persistence of conditional forecast errors differs
across shocks for each survey measure. For consumers, the persistence of forecast errors after
monetary policy shocks is somewhat lower than that after technology and oil price shocks. For
SPF, the persistence is almost identical across shocks while for BCEI forecasts, the persistence of
forecast errors is somewhat lower after oil price shocks than after monetary and technology
shocks. Overall, the persistence of conditional forecast errors across shocks is quite similar for
each survey measure. We cannot reject equality of estimated                                            across shocks and agents in all
cases except two.26 The half-life of the forecast error responses is about two-four quarters.


24
   We normalize the initial value of the impulse response of conditional forecast errors to be one. Standard errors are
extracted by drawing from the empirical distribution of parameter estimates of (10), calculating impulse responses and
solving for θ for each impulse response. As with forecast errors, we only include the responses starting a year after the
shock. We use the impulse responses over the subsequent two years to generate estimates of θ.
25
   Note that although impulse responses may be imprecisely estimated, we estimate the parameter θ quite precisely
because we utilize the information contained in the full path of the response.
26
   We reject equality for the response to monetary policy shocks in MSC vs. SPF (p-value is 0.001) and the response
to unidentified shock against other shocks in MSC (p-values are 0.093,0.094,0.093 in the order presented in the table).
                                                                                                                                   17
Strikingly, forecast errors do not converge to zero any more gradually for monetary policy shocks
than for other shocks. This result is surprising because monetary policy shocks account for a much
smaller fraction of inflation volatility than technology and oil price shocks. One would expect
imperfect information agents to pay more attention to technology and oil prices and therefore to
update their forecasts more rapidly after these types of shocks. This is exactly the intuition
underlying the rational inattention models of Paciello (2007) and Mackowiak and Wiederholt
(2008) which seek to explain why inflation responds more rapidly to technology shocks than
monetary policy shocks. Our results are inconsistent with a slower rate of information acquisition
after monetary policy shocks than for other shocks. These results are broadly consistent with the
sticky information model of Mankiw and Reis which imposes a common rate of information
updating which is independent of the type of shock.
       Secondly, we find no evidence that consumers acquire information in a less efficient
manner than professional forecasters. Our estimates indicate that forecast errors by consumers are
actually less persistent than those of SPF forecasters (though mostly not statistically significantly
so) and approximately as persistent as those of BCEI forecasters. Carroll (2003) proposed and
found empirical evidence in the U.S. for an epidemiological model of gradual information
diffusion from professional forecasters to consumers which implied that mean forecasts of
consumers would respond more slowly than those of professional forecasters. Dopke et al (2008)
provide similar evidence for selected European countries. Our estimates indicate, on the other
hand, that the persistence of consumers’ conditional forecast errors is no higher than that of
professional forecasters in response to the monetary, technology, and oil price shocks.
Furthermore, we find the same pattern for unidentified shocks. Hence, consumers’ forecasts, on
average, respond to all shocks at least as rapidly as professional forecasters.

4.3 Response of Forecast Dispersion to Shocks
Now we turn to the response of the dispersion of inflation forecasts to the same shocks. The
following estimation equation is used:

        ln σ ( Ftπ t + h ) = c + ∑ i =1 β i ln σ ( Ft −iπ t −i + h ) + ∑ j =0 γ j | ε tk−k | + vt
                                       I                                   J
                                                                                                    (11)




                                                                                                           18
where ln σ ( Ftπ t + h ) is the logarithm of the cross-sectional standard deviation of inflation forecasts
over the next year.27 We include the absolute value of the shock because the predicted response of
forecast dispersion in the sticky information model is invariant to whether the shock is positive or
negative.
       Figure 5 plots the impulse responses of the forecast dispersion measures for each survey in
response to the exogenous shocks, along with 95% confidence intervals. In addition, we plot the
predicted response of dispersion from the sticky information model.28 In response to monetary
policy and technology shocks, we find no evidence that forecast dispersion rises after these shocks
for any of the survey measures. 29 In response to oil price shocks, the dispersion of forecasts of
consumers displays a statistically significant and highly persistent increase after the shock. No
such response is apparent for the SPF or the BCEI. Thus, for professional forecasters, our results
are consistent with imperfect information: professional forecasters can adequately be modeled as
continuously tracking economic indicators without observing the underlying state perfectly. For
consumers, the results are somewhat mixed. While monetary and technology shocks do not lead to
significant changes in forecast dispersion, oil price shocks seem to lead to highly persistent
increases in disagreement. Thus, although we cannot unanimously favor either representation of
the informational rigidities facing consumers, the preponderance of evidence suggests that
disagreement in forecasts does not respond to structural shocks. Furthermore, not only are our
point estimates close to zero but we can also reject the null of sticky-information in five out of the


27
   Taking the logarithm serves two purposes. First, the distribution of forecast dispersion is highly skewed and rare
observations in the right tail of the distribution can greatly distort the estimates. The logarithmic transformation makes
the dispersion bell-shaped, attenuates the adverse effects of episodes with extreme variability in forecasts, and hence
improves the finite sample properties of our estimates. Second, we can interpret impulse responses as percent
deviations from steady state forecast dispersion.
28
   The predicted response of dispersion under the null of sticky-information is constructed as follows: i) estimate the
response of inflation to each shock using univariate regressions using the same inflation measure and time sample as
in the corresponding regression for dispersion, ii) using the inflation response, compute the predicted path of the
cross-sectional standard deviation of forecasts according to sticky information following equation (5) and the
corresponding estimated degrees of informational rigidity from Table 4, iii) normalize the response of the cross-
sectional standard deviation of forecasts by the mean of the cross-sectional standard deviation of forecasts over the
relevant time period to convert the response to percentage changes comparable to the impulse responses of the log of
the cross-sectional standard deviation of forecasts.
29
   It must be noted that this result is sensitive to the time period for monetary policy shocks. If one uses data starting in
the late 1970s, monetary policy shocks (in absolute value) lead to a permanent increase in dispersion of SPF forecasts.
We choose to focus on the post 1984 period for monetary policy shocks because FFR shocks are extremely noisy
between 1979 and 1982, reflecting the fact that the Fed abandoned targeting the federal funds rate over this period.
Thus, we are concerned that the identified FFR shocks prior to 1984 are not adequate measures of monetary policy
innovations. None of the other results are sensitive to the time period.
                                                                                                                          19
nine impulse responses (and in five out of six cases when shocks have the strongest effect on
inflation).

5     Robustness Analysis
In this section, we investigate the robustness of our results to several issues. First, we allow for an
alternative set of shocks. Second, we generate a composite shock that aggregates our three
baseline structural shocks and study the response of forecast errors and forecast dispersion to this
composite shock. Third, we present the response of forecast errors and dispersion to the
unidentified component of inflation innovations. Finally, we reproduce our baseline estimates for
forecasts of the unemployment rate rather than inflation.

5.1 Alternative Shock Measures
In this section, we reproduce the forecast error and forecast dispersion tests for three alternative
shocks. First, we use the Romer and Romer (2004) measures of innovations to the FFR. These are
available monthly from April 1970 until December 1996. Second, we use the information shocks
of Beaudry and Portier (2006), which capture changes in stock prices that have no
contemporaneous effect on TFP. These are designed to represent expected changes in TFP and
cause temporary decreases in inflation. Third, we use the fiscal shocks of Romer and Romer
(2007) which provide a sequence of exogenous tax changes and have temporary deflationary
effects.30 All three shocks are deflationary, so both models of informational rigidities would
predict a sequence of negative forecast errors after the shock.
         The results for the forecast errors are provided in Figure 6. While most of the forecast
errors go in the expected direction, almost none of the responses are statistically significantly
different from zero. Given the strong evidence for informational rigidities found for the more
quantitatively important (for inflation) technology and oil price shocks, it is unclear whether one
should interpret this lack of a response of forecast errors as being consistent with full information
or as reflecting the fact that, because these shocks account for such a small component of the
variance of inflation, it is unlikely that one will be able to precisely estimate the response of
forecast errors in small samples (as shown in Appendix C). The results for the response of

30
   We do not present results for confidence shocks because these seem to have no discernible effects on inflation.
Thus, one could not tell whether informational rigidities would imply positive or negative conditional responses of
forecast errors. We find these shocks lead to positive responses of forecast errors for MSC, (marginally) negative for
BCEI, and insignificant for SPF. There is no statistically significant response of dispersion for any of the surveys to
the absolute value of the shocks.
                                                                                                                    20
dispersion in forecasts to the absolute value of each exogenous shock are provided in Figure 7.
Overall, there is little evidence of changes in disagreement after these structural shocks and, in
four of nine impulse responses, we reject the null of the predicted path from the sticky information
model.

5.2   Composite Shock
The Monte Carlo exercise in Appendix C illustrates that when shocks explain only a small fraction
of the variance of inflation, the conditional response of forecast errors and forecast dispersion will
tend to be imprecisely estimated. Indeed, this seemed to be the case for forecast errors after
monetary policy shocks in the baseline estimation. As an alternative approach designed to
minimize this issue, we develop a composite shock which is an aggregate of the individual
identified shocks and present responses of forecast errors and dispersion to this shock.
         To do so, we first run an AR(4) on real-time CPI inflation, the residuals of which we
interpret as inflation innovations. We then regress these innovations on the monetary policy
shocks, the technology shocks and the oil price shocks. The predictable component of the inflation
innovation we define as the composite shock. By construction, these innovations are inflationary.
Figure 8 presents the conditional response of forecast errors and forecast dispersion to the
composite shock, estimated as in sections 4.1 and 4.3, for all three survey measures. For every
survey measure, the response of forecast errors is positive and highly significant. Each survey
delivers a positive sequence of monotonically declining forecast errors, as predicted by models of
informational rigidities. As found in the baseline results, the response of consumers to shocks is at
least as quick as that of professional forecasters. The response of dispersion to the (absolute value
of) composite shock is also largely consistent with our baseline results. For MSC and SPF, we
cannot reject the null of no response in dispersion to the composite shock. For BCEI, there is a
small statistically significant response of dispersion, but we can also strongly reject the null of the
sticky-information model.

5.3 Unidentified Inflationary Innovations
While all of our analysis has focused on the conditional response of forecast measures to identified
shocks, Table 3 indicates that only half of the inflation volatility is accounted for by these shocks.
One could, of course, consider additional shock measures (markup shocks, preference shocks, etc)
from the literature. Instead, we now consider the impulse response of forecast errors and forecast
                                                                                                    21
dispersion to unidentified inflation innovations. Specifically, we estimate an AR(4) process for
real-time inflation, then regress the residuals on the monetary policy shocks, technology shocks,
and oil price shocks. The residuals from this second regression we call the unidentified
innovations to inflation.31 By construction, these innovations are inflationary, and should thus lead
to positive forecast errors if informational rigidities are present. Importantly, these shocks have a
large quantitative effect on inflation and since neither imperfect information nor sticky
information models restrict us to using only structural shocks, we can have an additional powerful
test for these two models.
         Figure 9 presents the conditional response of forecast errors and forecast dispersion to
these unidentified inflation innovations, using the same approach as in sections 4.1 and 4.3. For all
three survey measures, the response of forecast errors is positive and statistically significant,
although less precisely estimated than in the case of the composite shock. All of the impulse
responses also monotonically decline to zero. We interpret this as indicating that the evidence for
informational rigidities is not limited to the structural innovations considered before but extends
more generally to all innovations to inflation, as long as these account for a large enough fraction
of the inflation variance. The response of dispersion to these unidentified innovations is consistent
across survey measures: we find no evidence that dispersion changes after these shocks and we
reject the null of sticky information in each case.

5.4 Unemployment Forecasts
While almost all of the literature on survey expectations has focused on forecasts of inflation, one
can also test for informational rigidities using real variables. In this section, we focus on year-
ahead forecasts of the unemployment rate (UE) which are available from the SPF (starting in
1974Q4) and the BCEI forecasts (starting in June 1981). As with inflation, we choose to focus on
the shocks which are most important in explaining fluctuations in the unemployment rate. Table 5
presents a variance decomposition of the unemployment rate based on running a VAR(4) of all the
shocks followed by the unemployment rate over the period of 1980Q1 until 2006Q4. At horizons
of two years and up, the most important shocks appear to be the information shocks of Beaudry
and Portier (40-50%), followed by the confidence shocks of Barsky and Sims (3-6%) and the oil
price shocks of Hamilton (3-6%).

31
  Note that these innovations include the alternative shocks from section 5.1. Controlling for these shocks as well has
no effect on the results.
                                                                                                                    22
        The impulse responses of UE forecast errors and forecast dispersion from the SPF and
BCEI surveys to these three shocks are presented in Figure 10.32 It is important to note that oil
price shocks lead to temporary increases in the unemployment rate while information and
confidence shocks lead to decreases in the unemployment rate.33 Thus, models of informational
rigidities predict that conditional forecast errors should be positive after oil price shocks and
negative after information and confidence shocks. As can be seen in Figure 10, the evidence for
informational rigidities based on forecasts of the UE rate is more mixed than for inflation
forecasts. After oil price shocks, forecast errors are not statistically different from zero. After
information shocks, we find much clearer evidence for informational rigidities for both survey
measures, as the conditional response of the forecast errors is negative and statistically significant.
With confidence shocks, there is no discernible response of forecast errors for SPF forecasters, and
the response of the forecast error for BCEI forecasters is actually of the wrong sign. This would
imply that BCEI forecasters overreact in lowering their forecasts of the unemployment rate after a
confidence shock.
        Following the results of the Monte Carlo in Appendix C, we interpret these results as
saying that for the one shock that explains a significant fraction of the volatility in the
unemployment rate (information shocks), there is clear evidence of informational rigidities since
forecast errors decrease on impact before converging back to zero. Because the other shocks
explain such a small component of the unemployment volatility, we are hesitant to place much
weight on the absence of a response of the forecast errors to these shocks.
        Finally, turning to the response of forecast dispersion to the absolute value of the structural
shocks, we find no evidence that these shocks lead to increases in disagreement among forecasters.
We can also reject the null of the predicted path of disagreement under sticky information in three
out of six responses. This is consistent with imperfect information models but inconsistent with
the sticky information model.




32
   Forecast errors are computed using real-time data for unemployment rates. Specifically, we use the unemployment
rate that was available six months following the date of the variable. This real-time data comes from the Philadelphia
Federal Reserve Bank.
33
   This is based on impulse responses of the unemployment rate to each of the shocks. We do not present these
responses in the interest of space, but all are statistically significant.
                                                                                                                   23
6     Conclusion
Recent work utilizing informational rigidities offers potential explanations for some important
macroeconomic puzzles. Yet direct empirical evidence for informational rigidities has been
limited, thereby raising fundamental questions about the validity of these models. Previous
research on survey measures has focused on testing the null of full information by regressing
forecast errors on lagged variables. While these tests are informative, they have yielded mixed
results and do not address the issue of the dynamic behavior of forecast errors after shocks. Our
results instead paint a clear picture: after structural shocks, agents fail to adjust their forecasts by a
sufficient amount, inducing a non-zero response of forecast errors. As time goes by, forecast errors
converge monotonically to the full information outcome. This evidence is particularly strong for
structural shocks which have a significant quantitative effect on the variable being forecasted,
whether it be inflation or unemployment. We interpret these results as providing a robust empirical
basis for models of informational rigidities that has previously been sorely lacking.
        The conditional response of forecast errors to structural shocks also uncovers some
stylized facts about informational rigidities across shocks and agent types. First, we find no
evidence that consumers’ forecasts adjust more gradually than professional forecasts after a shock.
This fact is inconsistent with epidemiological models of information diffusion from professional
forecasters to consumers (as in Carroll (2004)). Second, the convergence rate of forecast errors is
just as rapid for monetary policy shocks as it is for technology shocks. This fact is consistent with
sticky information models in which agents acquire full information about the state on an
infrequent basis. Third, our results on the conditional response of the dispersion of forecasts across
agents to shocks point primarily to imperfect information as the most adequate representation of
informational rigidities. For professional forecasters, with only one exception, there is no evidence
that disagreement among agents increases after structural shocks, as predicted by the sticky
information model. On the other hand, consumer disagreement appears sensitive to oil prices,
which is inconsistent with simple linear imperfect information models.
       Understanding the formation of expectations is central in many fields of economics.
However the dearth of direct evidence on how economic agents form expectations as well as the
role of informational frictions in this process does not allow the profession to advance further in
this fundamental question. We provide a set of stylized facts about responses of expectations to
shocks and shed new light on the mechanisms and types of informational rigidities faced by
                                                                                                       24
economic agents. Our evidence calls for deeper theoretical analysis of informational frictions to
reconcile the theory with the data. Further study of the behavior of disagreement among agents is
likely to be fruitful for better understanding the nature of informational rigidities affecting agents.



References
Adam, Klaus and Mario Padula, 2003. “Inflation Dynamics and Subjective Expectations in the
       United States,” European Central Bank Working Paper 222.
Andres, Javier, David Lopez-Salido, and Edward Nelson, 2005. “Sticky-Price Models and the
       Natural Rate Hypothesis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52(5), 1025-1053.
Barsky, Robert B. and Eric R. Sims, 2008. “Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of
       Innovations in Consumer Confidence.” Manucript.
Bacchetta, Philippe, Elmar Mertens, and Eric van Wincoop. 2008. “Predictability in Financial
       Markets: What Do Survey Expectations Tell Us?” Forthcoming in Journal of International
       Money and Finance.
Bernanke, Ben S. and Alan S. Blinder, 1992. "The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of
       Monetary Transmission,” American Economic Review 82(4), 901-921.
Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier, 2006. "News, Stock Prices and Economic Fluctuations,”
       American Economic Review 96(4), 1293-1307.
Bloom, Nicholas, 2008. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” forthcoming in Econometrica.
Branch, William A., 2007. “Sticky information and model uncertainty in survey data on inflation
       expectations,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 31, 245-276.
Carroll, Christopher D. 2003. “Macroeconomic Expectations of Households and Professional
       Forecasters,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1), 269-298.
Cochrane, John H., 1994. "Shocks," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 41,
       295-364.
Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2007. “Strategic Interaction among Heterogeneous
       Price-Setters in an Estimated DSGE Model,” Manuscript.
Coibion, Olivier, 2007. “Testing the Sticky Information Phillips Curve,” forthcoming in Review of
       Economics and Statistics.


                                                                                                     25
Cukierman, Alex, and Paul Wachtel, 1979. “Differential Inflationary Expectations and the
      Variability of the Rate of Inflation: Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review
      69(4), 595-609.
Döpke, Jörg, Jonas Dovern, Ulrich Fritsche, and Jirka Slacalek, 2008. “Sticky Information Phillips
      Curves: European Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.
Dupor, Bill, Tomiyuki Kitamura, and Takayuki Tsuruga, 2007a. “Integrating Sticky Information
      and Sticky Prices,” forthcoming in Review of Economics and Statistics.
Dupor, Bill, Jing Han, and Yi Chan Tsai, 2007b. “What Do Technology Shocks Tell Us about the
      New Keynesian Paradigm?” Manuscript.
Erceg Christopher J. and Andrew T. Levin, 2003. "Imperfect credibility and inflation persistence,"
       Journal of Monetary Economics 50(4), 915-944.
Gali, Jordi, 1999. “Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology Shocks
      Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?” American Economic Review 89(1), 249-271.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, 2006. “Endogenous Information, Menu Costs, and Inflation Persistence,”
      Manuscript.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Aaron Tornell, 2004. “Exchange-Rate Puzzles and Distorted
      Beliefs” Journal of International Economics 64, 303-333.
Hamilton, James D., 1996. “This is what happened to the oil price-macroeconomy relationship,”
      Journal of Monetary Economics 38, 215-220.
Jonung, Lars, 1981. “Are Perceptions of Inflation Rational? Some Evidence for Sweden,”
      American Economic Review 78(5), 1080-1087.
Khan, Hashmat and Zhenhua Zhu. 2006. “Estimates of the Sticky-Information Phillips Curve for
      the United States,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38(1), 195-207.
Kiley, Michael T., 2007. “A Quantitative Comparison of Sticky Price and Sticky Information
      Models of Price Setting,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39(1), 101-125.
Kilian, Lutz., 2007. “Exogenous Oil Supply Shocks: How Big Are They and How Much Do They
      Matter for the U.S. Economy?” Forthcoming: Review of Economics and Statistics.
Knotek, Edward S., 2007. “A Tale of Two Rigidities: Sticky Prices in a Sticky Information
      Environment,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Working Paper No. 06-015.
Korenok, Oleg, 2005. “Empirical Comparison of Sticky Price and Sticky Information Models.”
      Working Paper 0501, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Business.
                                                                                                26
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, 1982. “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,”
      Econometrica 50(6), 1345-1370.
Lucas, Robert E., 1972. “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic Theory
      4(2), 103-124.
Mackowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt, 2008a. “Business Cycle Dynamics under Rational
      Inattention,” Manuscript.
Mackowiak, Bartosz and Mirko Wiederholt, 2008b. “Optimal Sticky Prices under Rational
      Inattention,” forthcoming in American Economic Review.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis, 2002. “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices: A
      Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
      117(4), 1295-1328.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis. 2007. “Sticky Information in General Equilibrium,”
      Journal of the European Economic Association, 5 (2-3).
Mankiw, N. Gregory, Ricardo Reis, and Justin Wolfers, 2003. “Disagreement about Inflation
      Expectations,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003, Cambridge, MIT Press, 18, 209-248,
      2004.
Paciello, Luigi, 2007. “The Response of Prices to Technology and Monetary Policy Shocks under
      Rational Inattention,” Manuscript.
Pagan, Adrian, 1984. “Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with Generated
      Regressors,” International Economic Review 25(1), 221-247.
Pesaran, M. Hashem and Martin Weale. 2006. “Survey Expectations,” in Handbook of Economic
      Forecasting, G. Elliott, C.W.J. Granger, and A. Timmermann (eds.), North-Holland Press.
Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider, 2008. “Bond Positions, Expectations, and the Yield
      Curve,” Working Paper 2008-02, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
Reis, Ricardo, 2006a. “Inattentive Producers,” Review of Economic Studies 73(3), 793-821.
Reis, Ricardo, 2006b. “Inattentive Consumers,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (8), 1761-
      1800
Reis, Ricardo, 2008. “A Few Model-Based Answers to Monetary Policy Questions in the United
      States and the Euro-Area,” Manuscript.
Roberts, John M., 1997. “Is Inflation Sticky?” Journal of Monetary Economics 39(1), 173-96.


                                                                                              27
Roberts, John M., 1998. “Inflation Expectations and the Transmission of Monetary Policy,”
      Finance and Economics Discussion Series 1998-43, Board of Governors of the Federal
      Reserve System.
Romer, Christina and David H. Romer, 2004. “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation
      and Implications,” American Economic Review 94(4), 1055-1084.
Romer, Christina and David H. Romer, 2007. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
      Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” forthcoming in American Economic
      Review.
Sims, Christopher A., 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention,” Journal of Monetary
      Economics, 50(3), 665-690.
Woodford, Michael, 2001. “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy,”
      published in P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, eds., Knowledge,
      Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S.
      Phelps, Princeton Univ. Press, 2002.
Woodford, Michael, 2008. “Information-Constrained State-Dependent Pricing,” Manuscript.
Zbaracki, Mark J., M. Bergen, S. Dutta, M.J., D. Levy, and M. Ritson, 2004. "Managerial and
      Customer Dimensions of the Costs of Price Adjustment: Direct Evidence from Industrial
      Markets," Review of Economic and Statistics 86(2), 514-533 .




                                                                                          28
                 Table 1: Correlations of Survey Measures with Macroeconomic Variables
          Panel A: Mean Forecasts of Inflation               Panel B: Dispersion of Inflation Forecasts
                      MSC         SPF         BCEI                           MSC          SPF        BCEI
MSC                   1.00                            MSC                    1.00
SPF                   0.89        1.00                SPF                    0.45         1.00
BCEI                  0.89        0.98         1.00   BCEI                    0.47        0.58       1.00
Unemployment          0.37        0.63        0.60    Unemployment            0.68        0.51       0.42
RGDP Growth          ‐0.24       ‐0.10        ‐0.18   RGDP Growth            ‐0.21        0.04      ‐0.04
Inflation             0.87        0.86         0.85   Inflation              0.31         0.24       0.26
  Note: Correlations are over common samples. For Panel A, data is from 1980Q2-2007Q1. For Panel B,
  data is from 1984Q3-2007Q1. Inflation is measured using log-difference of GDP Deflator.


                        Table 2: Correlation of exogenous macroeconomic shocks
                        VAR           Gali         Beaudry        Barsky        Romers        Hamilton
                        FFR       Technology     Information    Confidence       Fiscal          Oil
   FFR                    1           0.01           ‐0.07          0.01         ‐0.11         ‐0.03
   Tech                 0.01            1            ‐0.10          0.17         ‐0.05         ‐0.19
   Information         ‐0.07         ‐0.10              1          0.30          0.09          ‐0.16
   Confidence          0.01          0.17             0.30            1          ‐0.02         ‐0.29
   Fiscal              ‐0.11         ‐0.05            0.09         ‐0.02            1           0.03
   Oil                 ‐0.03         ‐0.19           ‐0.16         ‐0.29          0.03            1

  Note: The sample runs from 1979Q1 until 2004Q3.

                               Table 3: Variance Decomposition of Inflation
          Quarters     FFR       Tech        Info    Confidence    Fiscal         Oil      Inflation
             1         0.3        27.6         0.3        0.8          2.4        1.6        67.0
             2         4.4        34.6         0.6        1.9          1.8        1.4        55.2
             3         5.0        34.9         2.4        1.7          1.8        2.1        52.1
             4         4.6        33.0         2.3        2.9          1.7        2.3        53.3
             8         3.3        27.3         2.1        2.5          1.2       15.3        48.3
             12        3.0        25.1         2.2        2.4          1.3       18.7        47.2
             16        2.9        24.3         2.3        2.3          1.3       19.7        47.3
             20        2.8        24.0         2.2        2.3          1.3       20.0        47.3


  Note: Data is from 1980Q1 until 2006Q2. 4 lags in VAR, Cholesky decomposition as ordered in table.
  Variables are: 1) FFR: monetary policy shocks, 2) Tech: technology shocks identified a la Gali (1999), 3)
  Info: information shocks a la Beaudry and Portier (2006), 4) Confidence: Confidence shocks a la Barsky
  and Sims (2008), 5) Fiscal: fiscal shocks from Romer and Romer (2007), 6) Oil: oil price shocks from
  Hamilton (1996), 7) Inflation: annualized quarterly log change in the implicit GDP deflator.

                                                                                                         29
                     Table 4: Persistence of Conditional Percentage Forecast Errors
                                                  MSC        SPF      BCEI

                             FFR Shock                 0.48           0.78       0.59
                                                       (0.10)         (0.11)     (0.21)
                             Technology Shock          0.65           0.75       0.62
                                                       (0.07)         (0.09)     (0.21)
                             Oil Price Shock           0.65           0.79       0.49
                                                       (0.09)         (0.09)     (0.27)
                             Unidentified Shock        0.76           0.79       0.82
                                                       (0.09)         (0.08)     (0.14)


Note: These are estimates of θ, the persistence of conditional forecast errors, as described in section 4.2. All
estimates correspond to quarterly frequency. Standard errors are in parentheses. Standard errors are
computed using 1,000 Monte Carlo simulations of the impulse responses based on draws from the
estimated asymptotic distribution of parameters in equation (10). The unidentified shock is described in
section 5.3.



                      Table 5: Variance Decomposition of the Unemployment Rate
        Quarters      FFR        Tech      Info    Confidence    Fiscal    Oil                    UE
            1          0.1          2.5         0.0             3.2            3.8        1.5    88.9
            2          0.0          4.2         2.7             6.5            2.4        1.7    82.5
            3          0.6          3.9         9.3             7.2            1.8        1.9    75.4
            4          0.7          3.7         17.9            5.7            1.2        2.5    68.2
            8          1.2          1.4         38.9            3.2            1.4        2.6    51.3
           12          0.8          1.2         45.2            4.7            1.5        3.3    43.3
           16          0.7          1.3         47.1            5.7            1.3        4.1    39.8
           20          0.6          1.3         47.4            6.4            1.2        4.5    38.6


Note: Data is from 1980Q1 until 2006Q2. 4 lags in VAR, Cholesky decomposition as ordered in
table. Variables are: 1) FFR: monetary policy shocks, 2) Tech: technology shocks identified a la
Gali (1999), 3) Info: information shocks a la Beaudry and Portier (2006), 4) Confidence: Confidence
shocks a la Barsky and Sims (2008), 5) Fiscal: fiscal shocks from Romer and Romer (2007), 6) Oil:
oil price shocks from Hamilton (1996), 7) UE is the unemployment rate. See Appendix B for details
on construction of shock measures.




                                                                                                             30
                Figure 1: Plots of Survey Measures of Inflation Forecasts

                   Panel A: Mean Forecasts of Inflation over Next Year


          12


          10


           8


           6                       BCEI

                       SPF                                               MSC
           4


           2


           0
                1975     1980     1985      1990        1995     2000    2005



Panel B: (Log) Cross-sectional Standard Deviation of Inflation Forecasts over Next Year


          2.5

          2.0                          MSC

          1.5

          1.0

          0.5                              SPF

          0.0

         -0.5

         -1.0
                                                    BCEI
         -1.5
            1970        1975    1980     1985    1990     1995    2000    2005




                                                                                          31
Figure 2: Impulse Response of Inflation to Shocks and Predicted Responses of Conditional Forecast Errors and Forecast Dispersion to Shocks

                                                                                                                            -3
                            Annual Inflation Response                   Predicted Mean Forecast Error                   x 10     Predicted Forecast Dispersion
                 0.2                                        0.05                                                    8

                 0.1                                           0                                                    6
    FFR Shock




                   0                                        -0.05                                                   4

                 -0.1                                        -0.1                                                   2

                 -0.2                                       -0.15                                                   0
                        0   1          2           3    4           0     1          2           3      4               0          1           2          3      4


                   0                                           0                                                  0.2

                                                                                                                 0.15
    Tech Shock




                 -0.5
                                                             -0.5                                                 0.1
                  -1
                                                                                                                 0.05

                 -1.5                                          -1                                                   0
                        0   1          2           3    4           0     1          2           3      4               0          1           2          3      4


                   1                                           1                                                 0.08

                                                                                                                 0.06
                 0.5                                         0.5
    Oil Shock




                                                                                                                 0.04
                   0                                           0
                                                                                                                 0.02

                 -0.5                                        -0.5                                                   0
                        0   1          2           3    4           0     1          2           3      4               0          1           2          3      4


 Note: Horizontal axis shows time in years. Inflation responses to one standard deviation oil and technology shocks are based on quarterly data. Inflation response
 to a one standard deviation FFR shock is based on monthly data. Technology shocks are identified using Gali (1999) long run restrictions. FFR shocks are
 identified recursively from a five variable VAR with inflation, unemployment rate, inflation in the commodity price index, index of industrial production and fed
 funds rate. Oil price shocks are taken from Hamilton (1996). Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals based on 10,000 bootstrap replications. Predicted
 responses are from a sticky information model. We assume that agents update their information once a year on average, following Mankiw and Reis (2002),
 which implies λ=0.75. See section 4 for details.
                                                                                                                                                                     32
                                               Figure 3: Response of Mean Forecasts to Baseline Shocks
                                    MSC                                           SPF                                                   BCEI
                      0.1                                  0.05                                                  0.02

                     0.05                                                                                        0.01
 FFR shock




                       0                                     0                                                      0

                   -0.05                                                                                        -0.01

                     -0.1                                 -0.05                                                 -0.02
                            0   1    2    3      4                0      1         2         3          4               0      1         2          3         4


                       0                                    0.1                                                     0

                     -0.1                                    0
      Tech shock




                     -0.2                                  -0.1                                                 -0.05

                     -0.3                                  -0.2

                     -0.4                                  -0.3                                                  -0.1
                            0   1    2    3      4                0      1         2         3          4               0      1         2          3         4


                      0.4                                   0.2                                                   0.1

                      0.3                                  0.15
         Oil shock




                      0.2                                   0.1                                                  0.05

                      0.1                                  0.05

                       0                                     0                                                      0
                            0   1    2    3      4                0      1         2         3          4               0      1         2          3         4
Note: Horizontal axis shows time in years. Technology shocks are identified using Gali (1999) long run restrictions. FFR shocks are identified recursively from a
five variable VAR with inflation, unemployment rate, inflation in the commodity price index, index of industrial production and fed funds rate (monthly data).
Oil price shocks are taken from Hamilton (1996). Responses of MSC and BCEI forecasts to FFR shocks are based on monthly data. Responses in all other panels
are based on quarterly data. All responses are to one standard deviation shocks. Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals based on 10,000 bootstrap
replications. See section 4 for details.



                                                                                                                                                              33
                                                      Figure 4: Response of Forecast Errors to Baseline Shocks
                                   -3
                            x 10            MSC                                    SPF                                                   BCEI
                       5                                        0.06                                              0.01

                       0                                        0.04
                                                                                                                    0
         FFR shock




                      -5                                        0.02
                                                                                                                 -0.01
                     -10                                          0
                                                                                                                 -0.02
                     -15                                       -0.02

                     -20                                       -0.04                                             -0.03
                            0           1    2    3     4              0    1       2         3         4                0      1         2          3         4


                       0                                          0                                                 0

                -0.05
                                                               -0.05                                              -0.1
 Tech shock




                     -0.1
                                                                -0.1                                              -0.2
                -0.15
                                                               -0.15                                              -0.3
                     -0.2

                -0.25                                           -0.2                                              -0.4
                            0           1    2    3     4              0    1       2         3         4                0      1         2          3         4


                     0.2                                        0.06                                               0.2

                                                                0.04                                              0.15
                 0.15
    Oil shock




                                                                0.02                                               0.1
                     0.1
                                                                  0                                               0.05
                 0.05
                                                               -0.02                                                0

                       0                                       -0.04                                             -0.05
                            0           1    2    3     4              0    1       2         3         4                0      1         2          3         4
Note: Horizontal axis shows time in years. Technology shocks are identified using Gali (1999) long run restrictions. FFR shocks are identified recursively from a
five variable VAR with inflation, unemployment rate, inflation in the commodity price index, index of industrial production and fed funds rate (monthly data).
Oil price shocks are taken from Hamilton (1996). Responses of MSC and BCEI forecasts to FFR shocks are based on monthly data. Responses in all other panels
are based on quarterly data. All responses are to one standard deviation shocks. Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals based on 10,000 bootstrap
replications. Responses of forecast errors begin one year after innovation. See section 4.1 for details.

                                                                                                                                                              34
                                             Figure 5: Response of Forecast Dispersion to Baseline Shocks
                                 MSC                                              SPF                                                  BCEI
                 0.02                                      0.08                                                  0.02

                                                           0.06
                 0.01                                                                                            0.01
  FFR shock




                                                           0.04
                    0                                                                                               0
                                                           0.02
                 -0.01                                                                                          -0.01
                                                              0

                 -0.02                                     -0.02                                                -0.02
                         0   1    2     3         4                0     1         2          3         4               0      1         2         3          4


                 0.04                                      0.15                                                   0.2

                                                            0.1                                                  0.15
                 0.02
  Tech shock




                                                           0.05                                                   0.1
                    0
                                                              0                                                  0.05
                 -0.02
                                                           -0.05                                                    0

                 -0.04                                      -0.1                                                -0.05
                         0   1    2     3         4                0     1         2          3         4               0      1         2         3          4


                 0.05                                      0.02                                                   0.2

                 0.04                                         0                                                  0.15
     Oil shock




                 0.03                                      -0.02                                                  0.1

                 0.02                                      -0.04                                                 0.05

                 0.01                                      -0.06                                                    0

                    0                                      -0.08                                                -0.05
                         0   1    2     3         4                0     1         2          3         4               0      1         2         3          4
Note: Horizontal axis shows time in years. Technology shocks are identified using Gali (1999) long run restrictions. FFR shocks are identified recursively from a
five variable VAR with inflation, unemployment rate, inflation in the commodity price index, index of industrial production and fed funds rate (monthly data).
Oil price shocks are taken from Hamilton (1996). Responses of MSC and BCEI forecasts to FFR shocks are based on monthly data. All responses are to one
standard deviation shocks. Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals based on 10,000 bootstrap replications. Thin red lines with circles are the predicted
response of cross-sectional forecast dispersion under the sticky information model. Responses in all other panels are based on quarterly data. See section 4.3 for
details.
                                                                                                                                                                  35
                                                       Figure 6: Response of Forecast Errors to Alternative Shocks
                                                                                                                                -3
                                             MSC                                     SPF                                 x 10            BCEI
                              0.02                                0.08                                           20

                                                                  0.06                                           15
 R&R FFR shock




                              0.01
                                                                  0.04                                           10
                                0
                                                                  0.02                                               5
                         -0.01
                                                                     0                                               0

                         -0.02                                    -0.02                                           -5
                                     0   1    2    3      4               0   1       2        3        4                0           1    2       3         4


                               0.1                                0.02                                          0.05
          Information shock




                                                                     0                                               0
                                0
                                                                  -0.02                                        -0.05
                              -0.1
                                                                  -0.04                                         -0.1

                              -0.2                                -0.06                                        -0.15
                                     0   1    2    3      4               0   1       2        3        4                0           1    2       3         4


                              0.05                                 0.1                                          0.05
 R&R Fiscal shock




                                0
                                                                  0.05                                               0
                         -0.05
                                                                     0                                         -0.05
                              -0.1
                                                                  -0.05                                         -0.1
                         -0.15

                              -0.2                                 -0.1                                        -0.15
                                     0   1    2    3      4               0   1       2        3        4                0           1    2       3         4


Note: Horizontal axis shows time in years. Information shocks are identified using Beaudry and Portier (2006) short-run restrictions. FFR shocks are taken from
Romer and Romer (2004). Fiscal shocks are taken from Romer and Romer (2007). Responses of MSC and BCEI forecasts to FFR shocks are based on monthly
data. All responses are to one standard deviation shocks. Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals based on 10,000 bootstrap replications. Responses in all
other panels are based on quarterly data. See section 5.1 for details.


                                                                                                                                                            36
                                               Figure 7: Response of Forecast Dispersion to Alternative Shocks
                                     MSC                                          SPF                                                    BCEI
                     0.03                                   0.05                                                  0.04
 R&R FFR shock




                     0.02                                      0                                                  0.02

                     0.01                                   -0.05                                                   0

                        0                                    -0.1                                                -0.02

                     -0.01                                  -0.15                                                -0.04
                             0   1    2    3        4               0    1          2         3         4                0      1         2          3         4


                     0.03                                   0.15                                                  0.06
 Information shock




                     0.02                                    0.1                                                  0.04

                     0.01                                   0.05                                                  0.02

                        0                                      0                                                    0

                     -0.01                                  -0.05                                                -0.02
                             0   1    2    3        4               0    1          2         3         4                0      1         2          3         4


                     0.02                                   0.15                                                  0.15
 R&R Fiscal shock




                     0.01
                                                             0.1                                                   0.1
                        0
                                                            0.05                                                  0.05
                     -0.01
                                                               0                                                    0
                     -0.02

                     -0.03                                  -0.05                                                -0.05
                             0   1    2    3        4               0    1          2         3         4                0      1         2          3         4
Note: Horizontal axis shows time in years. Information shocks are identified using Beaudry and Portier (2006) short-run restrictions. FFR shocks are taken from
Romer and Romer (2004). Fiscal shocks are taken from Romer and Romer (2007). Responses of MSC forecasts to FFR shocks are based on monthly data. All
responses are to one standard deviation shocks. Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals based on 10,000 bootstrap replications. Thin red lines with circles are
the predicted response of cross-sectional forecast dispersion under the sticky information model. Responses in all other panels are based on quarterly data. See
section 5.1 for details.


                                                                                                                                                              37
                                             Figure 8: Response of forecast errors and forecast dispersion to composite shock
                                       MSC                                             SPF                                              BCEI
                        0.1                                         0.2                                           0.25


                       0.08                                                                                        0.2
                                                                   0.15
     Forecast Errors




                       0.06                                                                                       0.15
                                                                    0.1
                       0.04                                                                                        0.1

                                                                   0.05
                       0.02                                                                                       0.05


                          0                                           0                                             0
                               0   1    2         3        4               0   1        2        3       4               0      1         2         3          4




                       0.04                                        0.15                                            0.2

                       0.03
                                                                                                                  0.15
                                                                    0.1
                       0.02
  Dispersion




                                                                                                                   0.1
                       0.01                                        0.05
                                                                                                                  0.05
                          0
                                                                      0
                                                                                                                    0
                       -0.01

                       -0.02                                       -0.05                                         -0.05
                               0   1    2         3        4               0   1        2        3       4               0      1         2         3          4

Note: Horizontal axis shows time in years. The composite shock is the predictable component of inflation residuals from AR(4) when regressed on monetary
policy, technology, and oil price shocks. Response of forecast errors begins one year after the shock. All responses are to one standard deviation shocks. Dashed
lines are 95% confidence intervals based on 10,000 bootstrap replications. Thin red lines with circles are the predicted response of cross-sectional forecast
dispersion under the sticky information model. Responses in all panels are based on quarterly data. See section 5.2 for details.




                                                                                                                                                              38
                                            Figure 9: Response of forecast errors and forecast dispersion to unidentified inflation innovations
                                               MSC                                            SPF                                            BCEI
                               1                                            0.1                                           0.8


                              0.8                                          0.08                                           0.6
           Forecast Errors




                              0.6                                          0.06                                           0.4


                              0.4                                          0.04                                           0.2


                              0.2                                          0.02                                             0


                               0                                             0                                            -0.2
                                    0   1        2        3        4              0    1        2        3        4              0    1           2   3        4




                             0.06                                           0.1
                                                                                                                          0.7

                             0.04                                                                                         0.6
                                                                           0.05
                                                                                                                          0.5
  Dispersion




                             0.02
                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                             0
                                                                                                                          0.3
                               0
                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                                          -0.05
                      -0.02                                                                                               0.1

                                                                                                                            0
                      -0.04                                                -0.1
                                    0   1        2        3        4              0    1        2        3        4              0    1           2   3        4

Note: Horizontal axis shows time in years. Unidentified inflation innovations are the unpredictable component of inflation residuals from AR(4) when regressed
on monetary policy, technology, and oil price shocks. Response of forecast errors begins one year after the shock. All responses are to one standard deviation
shocks. Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals based on 10,000 bootstrap replications. In figures with dispersion responses, thin red lines with circles are the
predicted response of cross-sectional forecast dispersion under the sticky information model. Responses in all panels are based on quarterly data. See section 5.3
for details.



                                                                                                                                                                39
                                            Figure 10: Response of UE Forecast Errors and UE Forecast Dispersion to Shocks
                                                Forecast Errors                                                      Dispersion
                                      SPF                               BCEI                           SPF                                    BCEI
                      0.04                               0.04                                                                0.04

                                                                                       0.04
                      0.02                               0.02                                                                0.02
  Oil Shock




                                                                                       0.02
                         0                                  0                                                                     0
                                                                                          0
                      -0.02                             -0.02                                                               -0.02
                                                                                       -0.02

                      -0.04                             -0.04                          -0.04                                -0.04
                              0   1    2    3     4             0   1    2     3   4           0   1    2      3       4              0   1    2       3       4


                       0.1                                0.1                          0.15                                  0.06
  Information shock




                         0                                  0
                                                                                        0.1                                  0.04
                       -0.1                              -0.1
                                                                                       0.05                                  0.02
                       -0.2                              -0.2
                                                                                          0                                       0
                       -0.3                              -0.3

                       -0.4                              -0.4                          -0.05                                -0.02
                              0   1    2    3     4             0   1    2     3   4           0   1    2      3       4              0   1    2       3       4


                       0.1                                0.3
  Confidence Shock




                                                                                        0.1                                  0.15
                      0.05                                0.2
                                                                                       0.05                                   0.1
                         0                                0.1
                                                                                          0                                  0.05
                      -0.05                                 0
                                                                                       -0.05                                      0

                       -0.1                              -0.1                           -0.1                                -0.05
                              0   1    2    3     4             0   1    2     3   4           0   1    2      3       4              0   1    2       3       4

Note: Horizontal axis shows time in years. Oil price shocks are from Hamilton (1996), Information shocks are identified using Beaudry and Portier (2006) short-
run restrictions and confidence shocks follow Barsky and Sims (2008). Response of forecast errors begins one year after the innovation. All responses are to one
standard deviation shocks. Dashed lines are 95% confidence intervals. In figures with dispersion responses, thin red lines with circles are the predicted response
of cross-sectional forecast dispersion under the sticky information model. See section 5.4 for details.


                                                                                                                                                               40
Appendix A: Description of survey measures and construction of data series.
Michigan Survey of Consumers

The samples for the Surveys of Consumers are statistically designed to be representative of all American
households, excluding those in Alaska and Hawaii. Each month, a minimum of 500 interviews are
conducted by telephone. After a series of questions, consumers are asked, “During the next 12 months, do
you think that prices in general will go up, or go down, or stay where they are now?” If consumers answer
that prices go up or down, the surveyor asks the follow-up question “By about what percent do you expect
prices to go (up/down) on the average, during the next 12 months?” The follow-up question first appeared
in the questionnaire in January 1978. The data were taken from http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/main.php.
In our calculations of the mean forecast and the standard deviation of forecasts, we excluded responses
suggesting that inflation or deflation can be above 49%. This truncation eliminates extreme implausible
responses.          See         “Procedure           to        Estimate         Price         Expectations”
(http://www.sca.isr.umich.edu/documents.php?c=i) for more details on the sensitivity of mean and
variance to different truncation thresholds. No answers are imputed to respondents who had difficulties
predicting inflation. We drop all survey responses suggesting that inflation or deflation may exceed 49%.

Survey of Professional Forecasters

The forecasts for the Survey of Professional Forecasters are provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia. The survey began in 1968:Q4. The data set contains the 31 economic variables currently
included in the survey. Some variables were added in 1981:Q3 and later in 2003:Q4 and in 2007:Q1.
Quarterly forecasts of CPI are annualized quarter-over-quarter percent changes. Forecasts for the
quarterly and annual level of the GDP price index are seasonally adjusted. The base year varies. Prior to
1996, GDP implicit deflator. Prior to 1992, GNP deflator. Annual forecasts are for the annual average.
For every survey period, we compute forecast dispersion as the log of the standard deviation of the
individual forecasts. See http://www.philadelphiafed.org/econ/spf/ for mode details.

Blue Chip Economic Indicators

Blue Chip Economic Indicators surveys economic forecasters at approximately 50 banks, corporations,
and consulting firms. Blue Chip Economic Indicators started to collect inflation forecasts in the second
quarter of 1980 and reported consensus (median) forecast for next four to seven quarters. We use the
consensus forecast in our estimations. Blue Chip Economic Indicators also reported individual forecasts
for the current and the next year. We constructed the standard deviation of one-year-ahead forecasts by
taking a weighted average of the cross-sectional standard deviation of current-year forecast and the
standard deviation of next-year forecasts. The weights correspond to the next 12 months (i.e. for January
survey, we use weight of 11/12 on this year and 1/12 on next year, for February survey, we use weight of
10/12 on this year and 2/12 on next year). Because the number of forecasters included in monthly surveys
has a strong seasonal pattern, we seasonally adjust the standard deviation measure. The dispersion
measure runs from July 1984 to November 2007.




                                                                                                        41
Appendix B: Description of Identified Shocks

R&R FFR shocks are shocks to monetary policy identified in Romer and Romer (2004). These shocks are
identified as deviations of fed funds rate from its target rate, conditional on Greenbook forecasts. Data is
available at http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~cromer/index.shtml from Jan. 1966 to Dec. 1996.

R&R fiscal shocks are exogenous tax changes as a share of GDP, from Romer and Romer (2007) who use
narrative approach to identify exogenous changes in taxes. Data is quarterly from 1947Q1 to 2006Q2.

Oil price shocks are taken from Hamilton (1996) who identifies (WTI) oil price shocks as episodes when
oil price exceeds the maximum oil price over the last twelve months. When this is the case, the shock is
the difference between the current price and the maximum over the last twelve months, and zero
otherwise. We take logs of all prices. Data is quarterly from 1950 until the end of 2007.

Monetary policy shocks identified from a VAR are based on a five variable vector autoregression with
twelve lags estimated on the data running from January 1957 to November 2007. Variables included in
the VAR are personal consumption expenditures deflator, index of industrial production, change in the
index of commodity prices, unemployment rate and Fed Funds rate. Following Bernanke and Blinder
(1992), monetary policy shock is identified recursively using Cholesky decomposition and ordering the
fed funds rate last. This restriction amounts to assuming that monetary policy shocks do not affect
contemporaneously the variables ordered before the Fed Funds rate.

Technology shocks are identified as in Gali (1999) who uses long-run restrictions. The estimation sample
covers 1952Q2 through 2007Q3. Labor productivity and hours are defined as in Gali (1999). Technology
shocks are identified from the restriction that only technology shocks have long run effect on
productivity. To estimate the impulse response of inflation to a technology shock, we estimate a trivariate
VAR(4) on quarterly data for the change in labor productivity, change in hours, and inflation rate of the
GDP deflator.

Information shocks are identified as in Beaudry and Portier (2006). We use the short-run restrictions
imposed on the residuals of a bivariate VAR(4) which includes total factor productivity (TFP) and the
S&P500 price index. As discussed in Beaudry and Portier (2006), the short run restriction imposes that
TFP does not respond to an information shock contemporaneously while the stock market does. The
estimation sample covers 1951Q1 through 2006Q4.

Confidence shocks are identified as in Barsky and Sims (2008). We use a trivariate VAR(4) with the
relative forecast for economic conditions for next five years reported in the Michigan Survey of
Consumers (Table 16), log of real consumption of nondurables and services, and the log of real GDP. The
confidence shock is identified using recursive ordering of the variables where expectations about
economic conditions are ordered first. The survey measure begins in January 1978 and ends in August
2007. We use the quarterly average in the VAR.




                                                                                                         42
Appendix C: Monte Carlo Experiments

While the conditional responses of forecast errors to technology and oil price shocks are remarkably
consistent with the presence of informational rigidities, the evidence of serial correlation in forecast errors
after monetary policy shocks is much weaker. One reason why this could occur is that monetary policy
shocks account for a very small fraction of the inflation volatility, making it difficult to precisely estimate
the response of forecast errors in short time sample. We also want to examine the ability of our empirical
strategy to recover the sticky-information data generating process. In this appendix, we develop a Monte
Carlo simulation which replicates our two primary tests—the conditional responses of forecast errors and
forecast dispersions—in response to shocks which differ in their quantitative magnitudes.
         In each simulation, we let inflation follow an AR(1) process                      1         where the
shock is the sum of two independent innovations:                        . Agents form expectations rationally
but update them infrequently following a Poisson process in which 1            is the probability of updating
their information set each period, as in the sticky information model of Mankiw and Reis (2002). Thus,
the mean forecast and the forecast dispersion of next-period inflation at time t follow equations (1) and
(4).
         We simulate this model 10,000 times, with each simulation having 1,150 times periods. We set
     0.85 and the variance of the total shock to inflation to be       1.005 to match estimates of an AR(1)
process for GDP deflator inflation from 1979Q1 to 2007Q3.34 Following Mankiw and Reis (2002), we set
the degree of informational rigidity λ to 0.75, implying that agents update their information once a year on
average. In each simulation, we estimate the response of forecast errors to innovations            , as done in
sections 4.1 and 4.3, using the final T=150 periods of the simulation. The key parameter that varies across
simulations is the fraction of the inflation variance accounted for by the innovation used to derive impulse
responses (     ). We consider five values: S =1%, 5%, 10%, 20% and 50%. For each vase, we perform
10,000 Monte Carlo simulations.
         Results of the Monte Carlo exercise are presented in Figure A1. We find that the mean estimated
response for forecast errors is close to the response predicted by the model for all choices of S. For the
response of forecast dispersion, small values of S (S < 5%) tend to yield a fairly poor match of the
theoretical response. When we increase the sample size T, the discrepancy between the mean estimated
and model-predicted responses for forecast dispersion vanish. Hence, our approach can asymptotically
recover the true responses of the data generating process. However, if structural innovations account for a
small fraction of the inflation variance (below 10%), precisely estimating the conditional response of
forecast dispersion could be too demanding on the data in short samples. We view this as a being a
plausible interpretation for why our estimation fails to uncover a significant response of forecast errors to
monetary policy shocks. Hence, we put more weight on oil and technology shocks and also investigate the
behavior of expectations in response to composite and unidentified shocks. We also find that the coverage
rates for confidence intervals are close to nominal sizes when S > 5%.
         The key message of these Monte Carlo experiments is that in small samples our approach can
consistently and precisely estimate the responses of forecast errors and forecast dispersion to
quantitatively important shocks and it is less successful when shocks explain only a small fraction (below
5-10%) of variation.




34
     Results are similar when we use alternative ARMA models for the inflation.
                                                                                                            43
  Figure A1. Monte Carlo Simulations of Conditional Forecast Error and Conditional Forecast
  Dispersion Responses to Innovations.
                   Forecast errors                             Forecast dispersion
                                                  0.2
    0.8
    0.6
S=1%




                                                  0.1
    0.4
    0.2
                                                    0
      0
              2       4        6        8        10                2         4        6        8        10
                                                           0.2
        0.8
        0.6
S=5%




                                                           0.1
        0.4
        0.2
                                                             0
          0
              2       4        6        8        10                2         4        6        8        10
                                                           0.2
        0.8
        0.6
S=10%




                                                           0.1
        0.4
        0.2
                                                             0
          0
              2       4        6        8        10                2         4        6        8        10
                                                           0.2
        0.8
        0.6
S=20%




                                                           0.1
        0.4
        0.2
                                                             0
          0
              2       4        6        8        10                2         4        6        8        10
                                                           0.2
        0.8
        0.6
S=50%




                                                           0.1
        0.4
        0.2
                                                             0
          0
              2       4        6        8        10                2         4        6        8        10

  Notes: Thin solid red line with circles is the theoretically predicted response in the sticky information
  model. Thick solid blue line is the mean estimated response in the Monte Carlo simulations. Shaded
  region is the 90% distribution of the simulated responses. S is the fraction of the inflation variance
  accounted for by the innovation used in the estimation. Each experiment has 10,000 simulations.




                                                                                                        44
