NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEDIA COVERAGE OF POLITICAL SCANDALS
Riccardo Puglisi
James M. Snyder, Jr.
Working Paper 14598
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14598

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

We thank John Lovett and Mike Naber for their valuable research assistance at different stages of
the project. We also thank Gabe Lenz, Maria Petrova and Glenn Richardson for their helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Riccardo Puglisi and James M. Snyder, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Media Coverage of Political Scandals
Riccardo Puglisi and James M. Snyder, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 14598
December 2008
JEL No. D72,L82
ABSTRACT
We analyze the coverage of U.S. political scandals by U.S. newspapers during the past decade. Using
automatic keyword-based searches we collected data on 35 scandals and approximately 200 newspapers.
We ˝nd that Democratic-leaning newspapers -- i.e., those with a higher propensity to endorse Democratic
candidates in elections -- give relatively more coverage to scandals involving Republican politicians
than scandals involving Democratic politicians, while Republican-leaning newspapers tend to do the
opposite. This is true even when controlling for the average partisan leanings of readers. In contrast,
newspapers appear to cater to the partisan tastes of readers only for local scandals.

Riccardo Puglisi
ECARES
Université Libre de Bruxelles
Avenue Adolphe Buyl 87
1050 Ixelles, Belgium
rpuglisi@mit.edu
James M. Snyder, Jr.
MIT Department of Economics
E53-457
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
millett@mit.edu

1

Introduction

In modern societies the mass media are citizens’ most important source of information about
public affairs. On some issues, such as crime or the state of the economy, citizens can compare
the news provided by the media with their personal experience. On other issues, such as
foreign affairs, the media are the only source of information available to most of the public.
Events concerning the malfeasance of public officials typically fall into the second category. Politicians may wish to communicate directly with voters about certain matters, such
as popular policy decisions, but they clearly have no incentive to advertise their wrongdoings. As a result, the mass media have the potential to play a crucial role as watchdogs,
informing citizens about any improper conduct by those in power.
Of course, in practice the media might or might not serve as faithful watchdogs. In
particular, according to the “agenda-setting” theory of mass media, editors and journalists
enjoy considerable freedom in deciding what is newsworthy and what is not, and these
choices affect the perception of citizens about which issues are relevant and to what extent.
As pointed out by Lippmann [1922], events regarding public affairs would be “out of reach,
out of sight, out of mind” for citizens if the media happen not to cover them.
In this paper we investigate the coverage of political scandals by approximatively 200
U.S. newspapers during the last decade. We collect data on media coverage through automated keyword-based searches of the NewsLibrary electronic archive, and focus on scandals
involving senators, members of congress, and state governors. Exploiting the newspapers’
own archives and the Factiva electronic archive we integrate our dataset with similar information on the New York Times, the Los Angeles Times and the Chicago Tribune. We use
this data to test several hypothesis regarding the political behavior of mass media. We match
this data with a measure of the explicit partisan position of each newspaper, and a measure
of the partisanship of each newspaper’s readers. The former is the average propensity to
endorse Democratic versus Republican candidates in congressional and statewide races, and

3

the latter is the propensity to vote for Democratic versus Republican candidates in the areas
in which each newspaper is sold, weighted by circulation. We also use the circulation data
to construct measures of the competitiveness of each newspaper market.
The main finding of our analysis is that the ideological position on the “supply side”
is strongly correlated with the partisan coverage of scandals, and with the expected sign.
Democratic-leaning newspapers – i.e., those with a higher propensity to endorse Democratic
candidates in elections – give significantly more coverage to scandals involving Republican
politicians than scandals involving Democratic politicians, while Republican-leaning newspapers do the opposite. This bias in coverage of scandals is not confined to the editorial
page, but also affects the news section.1
On the other hand, we find that “demand side” factors play a significant role only for local
scandals. Newspapers mainly read in Democratic (Republican) areas give significantly more
coverage to Republican (Democratic) scandals, but only when the politicians involved in the
scandal are from the same state or congressional district where the newspaper is sold. This
difference in coverage does not hold for “distant” scandals. In contrast, the supply side effect
described in the previous paragraph – that Republican-endorsing newspapers systematically
give more coverage to Democratic scandals, and Democratic-endorsing newspapers do the
opposite – holds irrespective of the geographical location of the politicians involved.
The relative frequency of stories about political scandals is on average quite small. Thus,
in absolute terms the effects we measure are also small. In relative terms, however, the biases
are large. Consider a newspaper with a propensity to endorse Democratic candidates that
is one standard deviation higher than average. On average, this newspaper would devote 26
percent more coverage to Republican scandals over Democratic scandals. To have a rough
idea of the relative positions, a standard deviation in the endorsement score is what separates
1

Although the relationship between endorsement behavior and readers’ partisanship is positive and statistically significant, the correlation is rather low, only about .28. Thus, there is evidently a lot of “slack”
between the partisan positions of readers and the editorial stances of newspapers. This suggests that the
endorsement behavior of a given newspaper is a reasonable indicator of “supply side” forces pinning down
its editorial position. We discuss this in more detail in section 3 below.

4

the Chicago Tribune from the Denver Post, and in turn the Denver Post from the New York
Times.
Finally, there is some evidence that newspapers with larger circulation systematically
give more space to scandals, irrespective of the political affiliation of those involved. As
discussed below, there are both demand-driven and supply-led accounts consistent with this
relationship.
The paper is organised as follows: in the next section we survey the theoretical and
empirical literature on the determinants and measurement of mass media bias. In section 3
we describe the data and in section 4 we give a preliminary look at them through a two-stage
analysis. Section 5 presents the results obtained from a one-stage procedure with interaction
terms, together with some robustness checks, while section 6 concludes.

2

Related Literature

2.1

Theory

What determines the amount of media coverage devoted to political scandals? On the supply side, stakeholders such as owners, editors and journalists might pursue partisan agendas.
In this case, Democratic-leaning newspapers would extensively cover scandals involving Republican politicians, and devote less coverage to those involving Democratic politicians.
Republican-leaning newspapers would do the opposite. Gentzkow et al. [2006] develop a
simple model of ideological newspapers. A newspaper can pay a cost to investigate and
acquire a newsworthy “story”, but it will not publish the story if it conflicts with the newspaper’s political leaning. The incentives to pay the costs of investigation depend on the
incentives to suppress unfavorable stories, which depend in turn on how much advertising
and circulation revenue would be lost by not publishing them.
The role played by the demand side depends on whether readers consume news in order
to acquire information or to confirm their prior beliefs. Confirmation-seeking readers might
enjoy reading about scandals involving politicians on the opposite side of the political spec5

trum, and dislike reading about scandals involving politicians from their preferred side. In
this case, to the extent there is a partisan or ideological match between the consumers and
suppliers of news, the supply side and demand side forces both push news coverage in the
same direction.2
Media outlets may have an incentive to slant coverage even if consumers are purely
information-seeking. Gentzkow and Shapiro [2006] show that media outlets will tend to
report news in a manner consistent with their readers’ prior beliefs in order to build and
maintain a reputation for high-quality journalism.3
On the other hand, if the demand for information drives news consumption and the decisions made by consumers are discrete choices (e.g., casting a vote for one of two parties), then
only individuals that can be induced to change their course of action should be interested in
acquiring the information. Ideologically moderate and independent citizens should therefore
have stronger incentives to obtain information than ideological extremists and loyal partisans. While each new piece of news is potentially useful to moderates, almost no amount
of news could change an extremist’s behavior.4 This suggests that newspapers that appeal
to moderates or independents should tend to cover all political scandals, irrespective of the
political affiliation of the politicians involved.
Another issue is newspaper size. It is unclear a priori whether newspapers circulating
in a large city should devote more overall coverage to political scandals than newspapers
in smaller cities. Suppose that (i) readers are confirmation seekers who like to read about
scandals involving politicians from the opposition party, and (ii) larger audiences tend to be
more ideologically heterogeneous or more diverse in terms of partisanship. Then, as long as
2

Mullainathan and Shleifer [2005] build a game-theoretical model of news consumption in which readers
are willing to pay for ideologically consonant coverage. In our context, readers would be willing to pay for
the omission of facts that conflict with their priors.
3
In the Gentzkow and Shapiro [2006] model newspapers sometimes make mistakes, and some newspapers
are more likely to make mistakes than others. Readers have prior beliefs about what is more likely to be true
and what is not, and are also uncertain about the quality of their newspaper. They then update their beliefs
in a Bayesian fashion based on what they read. The results are similar in spirit to those on “pandering” in
Canes-Wrone et al. [2001].
4
See Larcinese [2006] for a model yielding this type of prediction.

6

readers can simply skip over the articles covering scandals involving politicians from their
preferred ideology or party (or do not dislike reading these articles too much), a newspaper
catering to the larger audience is likely to find it profitable to cover scandals involving both
parties’ politicians, and hence will devote more coverage overall to scandals. That is, a
newspaper that initially covered only Republican scandals would increase its profits if it
decided to cover Democratic scandals as well, because it would gain more readers among
Republicans than it would lose among Democrats. There is also an obvious supply side
factor – newspapers with larger circulation also have more resources, and might choose to
assign more staff to investigative reporting and coverage of scandals.
A final issue is competition. There are several reasons why the amount of competition
faced by media outlets could affect the level and bias in the coverage of scandals. If media
bias is driven mainly by the ideological leaning of journalists and editors, then a more
competitive media market is likely to mitigate the degree of bias. A partisan newspaper
enjoying a local monopoly can unabashedly disregard those scandals involving politicians
from its preferred party. On the other hand, in the presence of competitors, each newspaper
might be induced to devote some attention to scandals on both sides, in order not to lose
readers, and revenue, to other newspapers that do. Competition might also interact with
demand-side factors. The Mullainathan and Shleifer [2005] model predicts that competition
may increase the amount of “bias” (ideological differentiation) in media coverage.5 On the
other hand, the Gentzkow and Shapiro [2006] model predicts the opposite.6
5
In their model a monopolistic newspaper will position itself in the middle of the ideological spectrum of
its market area, while in a duopoly situation the newspapers would locate on opposite sides of the middle,
each carving out a part of the readership for itself.
6
In their model, increased competition tends to reduce the bias (increase the accuracy) of each newspaper.
The reason is that with a larger number of media outlets readers will typically have access to follow-up stories
that investigate the accuracy of prior stories (“scoops”). So newspapers ex ante face stronger incentives to
report in an unbiased fashion.

7

2.2

Previous empirical studies

There is a growing empirical literature which attempts at finding replicable and intuitive
measures of the ideological position of media outlets.
One straightforward way to do this is to investigate the explicit political behavior of
media outlets, e.g. their endorsements in races for political offices.7 Ansolabehere et al.
[2006] analyze the political orientation of endorsements by U.S. newspapers in statewide and
congressional races, using a panel data design. They find an upward trend in the average
propensity to endorse one or the other major-party candidate. They also find a particularly
large increase in the propensity to endorse incumbents. Finally, they find a clear change in
the average partisan slant of endorsements. In the 1940s and 1950s Republican candidates
enjoyed a strong advantage in newspaper endorsements. This advantage gradually eroded
in subsequent decades, so that by the 1990s there was a slight tendency for newspapers to
endorse Democrats (even controlling for incumbency).
One might instead be concerned about the implicit political behavior of media outlets.
Potentially, this is a more insidious way for media outlets to act politically, since readers and
viewers might not be entirely aware of the bias to which they are being exposed.
There are two broad approaches used to estimate this implicit ideological stance. In the
first approach, mass media outlets are classified on the basis of the resemblance between
what they report and what political actors of a known ideological position do.
Groseclose and Milyo [2005] classify U.S. media outlets by tracing out which think tanks
are quoted by each of them. The political leaning of each think tank is recovered by looking
at the political position (ADA score) of members of the U.S. Congress who quote the same
think-tank in a non-negative way. In a nutshell, the political leaning of each outlet can then
be calculated as the average ideology of quoted think-tanks. They find that all the outlets
in their sample – except Fox News Special Report and the Washington Times – are located
7

This is of course feasible only in a context where media outlets routinely endorse candidates in electoral
races.

8

to the left of the average Congress member. At the same time, all outlets but one (the
Wall Street Journal) are located between the average Democrat and the average Republican
Congressmen, hence displaying a high degree of centrism.8
Gentzkow and Shapiro [2007] provide another measure of media bias based on similarities
between the language used by media outlets and congressmen. Exploiting the Congressional
Record, they identify “partisan” words and phrases – i.e., those expressions that show the
largest difference in the frequency of use between Democratic and Republican representatives.
They then measure how frequently these expressions appear in a very large sample of newspapers. They conclude that the partisan bias of newspapers depends mainly on consumers’
ideological leaning and far less on the identity of owners. Newspapers adopting a liberal
(conservative) language sell more copies in ZIP codes that are more liberal (conservative),
as proxied by the propensity of their inhabitants to donate to Republican or Democratic
candidates. On the other hand, once geographical factors are accounted for, the ideological
slant of a given newspaper is not significantly correlated with the average ideological slant
of those belonging to the same chain.
The second approach to measuring the implicit political positions of media outlets is
based on studying variation in the intensity with which they cover different topics, or by
studying variation in the tone of this coverage.
Puglisi [2006] provides an account of the agenda setting behavior of the New York Times
in the period 1946-1997. He finds that the Times displays pro-Democratic partisanship, with
some watchdog aspects, in that, during presidential campaigns, it systematically gives more
coverage to Democratic topics (civil rights, health care, labor and social welfare) when the
incumbent president is a Republican.9 The New York Times displays a more symmetric type
8
Gasper [2007] explores the robustness of the Groseclose and Milyo findings. He argues that their conclusions are robust to different measures of the ideological positions of senators and congressmen, but not
to the time window being considered. In particular, the average estimated ideological position of the media
shifts to the right if one uses more recent time windows.
9
In accord with the theory of issue ownership, as pioneered by Petrocik [1996], an issue is said to be
“Democratic” (or owned by the Democratic party) if the majority of citizens stably believes that Democratic
politicians would be better than Republican ones at handling problems related to it.

9

of watchdog behavior after 1960: over the last four decades, during presidential campaigns
the Times also gives more coverage to the typically Republican issue of Defense when the
incumbent president is a Democrat, and less so when the incumbent is a Republican.
Larcinese et al. [2007] analyse the coverage of economic issues by a large sample of U.S.
newspapers during the last decade. They study whether there is any significant correlation
between the endorsement policy of newspapers, and the differential coverage of bad/good
economic news as a function of the political affiliation of the incumbent president. They
find evidence that newspapers with pro-Democratic endorsement pattern systematically give
more coverage to high unemployment when the incumbent president is a Republican than
when the president is Democratic, compared to newspapers with pro-Republican endorsement pattern. Once controlling for the endorsement behavior of newspapers, the partisan
coverage of unemployment is not driven by the partisanship of readers. On the other hand,
there is no evidence of a partisan bias that is correlated with the endorsement policy for
stories on inflation, budget deficit or trade deficit.
The papers by Puglisi [2006] and Larcinese et al. [2007] investigate the agenda-setting
behavior of media outlets, i.e. the amount of coverage devoted to different issues.10 Other
papers examine bias in the “tone” of coverage. For example, Lott and Hassett [2004] analyze newspaper coverage when official data about various economic indicators are released.
They code the tone – positive or negative – of newspaper headlines, and relate this to the
partisanship of the sitting president. Controlling for the economic data being released, they
find that there are between 9.6 and 14.7 percent fewer positive stories when the incumbent
president is a Republican.
10

The theory of agenda-setting effects, as pioneered by the study by McCombs and Shaw [1972] on Chapel
Hill voters during the 1968 presidential campaign, posits that the amount of coverage devoted to an issue by
the media can influence the importance readers and viewers attach to that issue. See Iyengar et al. [1982]
for some experimental evidence on this. As noted by McCombs [2002], not only can mass media coverage
highlight some topic as an object of attention, but the coverage can also emphasize particular attributes
of the topic, making these attributes more salient. The theory of issue priming describes how readers and
viewers, when assessing a given situation or individual, are pushed towards giving a higher weight to the
aspect emphasized by the mass media. See Krosnick and Miller [1996] for a review of this literature.

10

Finally, a few studies attempt to determine whether media bias affects political attitudes
and decisions. In addition to the literature in communications studies on agenda-setting
and framing effects, there are some recent papers examining the effects of variation in the
diffusion of given media outlets, whose political position is assumed to be known. Gerber,
Karlan and Bergan [2006] conducted a randomized field experiment just before the November
2005 gubernatorial election in Virginia. In the experiment, some households received a free
subscription to the Washington Post, others received a free subscription to the Washington
Times, and others received no free newpaper. DellaVigna and Kaplan [2007] use instead
a quasi-experimental approach, and exploit the gradual introduction of Fox News in cable
markets, in order to estimate its impact on the vote share in presidential elections between
1996 and 2000.
With respect to research on media coverage of political scandals, the Watergate affair
looms large. Watergate stimulated considerable interest in how scandals are covered – and
sometimes even uncovered – by the mass media. The causes and consequences of Watergate
have been widely investigated (e.g., Bernstein [1976], Chomsky [1973], Lang and Lang [1980],
Lipset and Raab [1973], Schrag [1974] and Zimmer [1979]), and in some cases Watergate
is used as a benchmark against which other scandals are to be compared (Szasz [1986]).
One issue debated in the political science and communications literatures is whether the
mass media act as efficient watchdogs in their coverage of political scandals, or whether they
instead inject an excessive dose of sensationalism, making the public skeptical and ultimately
cynical and unresponsive (Francke [1995], Balkin [1999], Bennett and Serrin [2005]).
A related issue, which is the explicit focus of our empirical analysis, is whether the
coverage of scandals is partisan or balanced. Regarding this question, the closest contribution
to ours is the historical analysis by Gentzkow et al. [2006] on how U.S. newspapers covered
the Crédit Mobilier scandal in the early 1870s and the Teapot Dome scandal in the 1920s.
The authors note that in the period between these scandals technological progress in the
printing industry, coupled with the contemporaneous increase in the population and income

11

of U.S. cities, induced an enormous growth in the size of the newspapers’ market, with
subscriptions climbing from 2.6 millions in 1870 to 33 millions in 1920. In the competition
for market shares and advertising revenue, newspapers faced strong incentives to cut the
ties with political parties and become (at least formally) independent.11 The authors find
that the coverage of the Crédit Mobilier scandal – which occured in a period dominated by
partisan newspapers – was more biased than the coverage of Teapot Dome – which occured
at a time when fewer dailies were directly linked to political parties. They also find some
evidence that the coverage of the Crédit Mobilier scandal was less biased for newspapers
with higher circulation.12
Our contribution to this literature is to analyse the coverage devoted to a large number
of recent political scandals by a large set of newspapers. By using automatic keyword-based
searches, we are thus able to offer a replicable and more precise estimation of the agendasetting bias on an extremely contentious, salient, and important topic. In addition, we
match the data on coverage with measures of endorsement and reader partisanship, allowing
us to investigate the comparative impact of demand and supply factors in explaining slanted
coverage.
Our paper also makes a methodological contribution. Antweiler and Frank [2005] argue
that automated text-classification procedures allow researchers to investigate a comprehensive dataset of news items, possibly the entire population of interest. Because of its cost,
studies employing human-based content analysis must instead focus on a small subset of the
relevant population – in our case, this would likely mean limiting attention to a few scandals
by a small number of media outlets. This may increase the risk of various biases, including
publication bias – i.e., the tendency to over-publish significant and seemingly interesting
results. As Antweiler and Frank point out, researchers and scientific journal editors enjoy
considerable freedom to engage in cherry-picking, because the universe of studies employ11

See Petrova [2007] for an explicit empirical analysis of the link between potential advertising revenue
across U.S. cities and entry/exit of partisan and independent newspapers during the 19th century.
12
The relationship was not statistically significant except when they excluded the New York Herald.

12

ing human-based content analysis is so large. The comprehensive data treatment allowed
by automated procedures reduces this type of bias, by sharply restricting the “degrees of
freedom” available to the researcher. In our case, for example, we simply choose to focus
on recent and salient political scandals in the U.S. involving a particular class of politicians
(members of congress and top statewide officials). Once we have made this choice, we measure the coverage of all scandals satisfying the selected criteria on all newspapers that are
available in the NewsLibrary archive (plus the New York Times, the Chicago Tribune and
Los Angeles Times, which we add because they are the largest newspapers in the U.S. that
endorse candidates but are not searchable through NewsLibrary).

3

Data and Measures

In the analysis that follows we focus on recent political scandals involving U.S. senators, congressmen, governors and high-ranking members of the administration (plus one especially
prominent lobbyist, Jack Abramoff). Table 1 presents an overview of those scandals, giving
the position, state of origin, political affiliation of the persons involved, and a brief description of each scandal. Our sample comprises 14 scandals involving Democratic politicians,
and 21 involving Republicans. All scandals in the sample involved a prominent federal or
state investigation, and many resulted in indictments and felony convictions. On the Democratic scandals we see Robert Torricelli (Sen-NJ) and William Jefferson (Rep-LA) accused of
accepting bribes, and Don Siegelman (Gov-AL) convicted of racketeering and extortion. On
the Republican side, we see Bill Frist (Sen-TN, Majority Leader) accused of insider trading,
Tom DeLay (Rep-TX, Majority Leader) charged with accepting illegal corporate donations
and money laundering, and Randy “Duke” Cunningham (Rep-CA) convicted of soliciting
and accepting bribes.
For each of these 35 scandals, we collected data from the NewsLibrary electronic archive,
recording the total number of articles mentioning the person involved in each available news-

13

paper during a fixed time window.13 The time window for each scandal begins on the first
day of the month prior to an announced investigation by a federal agency, a congressional
ethics committee, or a state attorney general, and ends at the end of the month in which the
person involved was convicted or acquitted (if this occured), or at the end of the month in
which the investigation formally ended (if this occurred), or at the end of the month when
the member lost reelection or resigned (if this occured), or on June 30, 2007 if the investigation was still ongoing at that date.14 The politicians in our sample have prominent public
roles which make them newsworthy for a variety of reasons. In order to restrict attention to
articles covering the scandals themselves, we code an article as being about the scandal if the
name of the person involved appears together with the one or more of the following words
(*’s are wildcards): investigat*, indict*, convict*, guilty, resign*, brib*, ethic*, corrupt*,
conspir*, prison, scandal*. To find opinion articles we added the following qualifiers to the
“Topic” and “Section” fields in the search: opinion, editorial, comment, commentary, perspective, viewpoint, forum, ideas, citizen voices, sunday punch.15 We define “news” articles
all non-opinion articles.16
Since newspapers vary greatly in size cross-sectionally (total number of pages, stories,
and words), and can also vary in size over time, we focus on the relative frequency of articles
about a scandal in each newspaper during the relevant time window. In order to do so, we
proxy the total number of articles in each newspaper in each time period by running a search
on the word “and”. We do the same for opinion pieces, by adding the qualifiers listed above
to the “Topic” and “Section” fields when searching for the word “and”.
The first half of Table 2 displays summary statistics on scandal coverage for those newspapers that we were able to match with endorsement data. We express relative frequencies
13
As mentioned above, we use the newspapers’ own archives to add data on the Los Angeles Times and
the Chicago Tribune, and the Factiva archive for the New York Times.
14
Most federal investigations are by the FBI, but the SEC and IRS are also involved in some cases.
15
This failed to find the editorial page for a few newspapers, so we dropped these from the analysis.
16
Regarding the New York Times, the Los Angeles Times and the Chicago Tribune, the online archives
allow to explicitly restrict the searches to the editorial page: we directly follow this simpler route to retrieve
opinion pieces.

14

of stories in percentage points, and distinguish between total hits, articles and editorials.
Overall, scandal stories make up a very small fraction of the total: on average there are
around two and a half hits every 10,000 stories. This figure is much higher for editorials
(something more than one editorial every 1,000). For all three categories of hits, the distribution is strongly skewed to the right, as witnessed by large difference between mean and
median.
In order to control for the relative localness of a scandal, we construct the dummy variable
Instate, which equals one when the politician involved in scandal i is from the state where
newspaper j is located. In a similar fashion Local is a dummy which equals one when the
politician involved in scandal i is from a congressional district that overlaps heavily with
the market area of newspaper j (for congressional scandals). Summary statistics on these
variables are again reported in the first half of Table 2.
As mentioned, we match data on the coverage of scandals with information on the endorsement propensity of each newspaper. The main source of endorsement data is Ansolabehere et al. [2006], which we supplement with additional information obtained via
searches on the NewsLibrary archive.17
We define the “partisan bias” of a newspaper as the propensity for the newspaper to
endorse one of the parties during electoral campaigns, controlling for the quality of candidates
and their incumbency status. We used a linear regression model to estimate these biases.
Let i index offices, let j index newspapers and let t index years. Let

 1 if newspaper j endorses Democrat for office i in year t
−1 if newspaper j endorses Republican for office i in year t
Eijt =

0 if newspaper j explicitly makes no endorsement for office i in year t
measure the endorsement behavior by each newspaper endorsing a candidate in a race (ex17

A few newspapers have an explicit policy not to endorse candidates for political offices – e.g. the Deseret
News in Salt Lake City, the Orange County Register, and the Colorado Springs Gazette. In addition, many
smaller dailies do not bother to make political endorsements.

15

plicitly refusing to do so).18 Also, let

Iijt

1 if Democrat for office i in year t is only incumbent
−1 if Republican for office i in year t is only incumbent
=

0 if otherwise



measure the incumbency status of the candidates in each race.19 Finally, we use previous
electoral experience to measure the quality of non-incumbents. To be more specific, define a
“high-quality” candidate as a candidate who currently holds a U.S. House seat or an elected
statewide office

 1
−1
Qijt =

0

other than the office sought. Let
if Democrat for office i in year t is only high quality non-incumbent
if Republican for office i in year t is only high quality non-incumbent
otherwise

We estimated the following linear model for the period 1992-2006, exploiting the panel nature
of the data:
Eijt = N Ej + θt + β1 Iijt + β2 Qijt + ijt

(1)

The newspaper-specific fixed effects, N Ej , capture newspapers’ partisanship.20
Overall, we have sufficient data on both endorsements and scandal coverage for 213
newspapers.21
We measure of the average partisanship of each newspapers’ readers as follows. First,
for each county c we compute Dc as the average Democratic vote share in the presidential,
senatorial and gubernatorial elections between 1990 and 2000. Then, for each newspaper j
we compute N Rj as a weighted average of the Dc ’s, weighting each county by the relative
sales of newspaper j in that county. We call this variable N Rj . Figure 1 displays a scatter
18

Our sample contains a few cases where a newspaper endorsed both candidates in a race. We drop these
from our analysis.
19
After redistricting there are some U.S. House races with two incumbents running. In these cases we set
Iijt = 0. There are a few such cases in our sample, and if we drop them the results are unchanged.
20
The panel is unbalanced, since in the earlier years some newspapers lack endorsement data. The model
also includes year fixed-effects, θt , which are meant to capture partisan tides.
21
When matching coverage and endorsement data, newspapers under a joint operating agreement are
tricky cases. These agreements typically imply that the news section is common among participants, while
the editorial sections are separate. However, in four such instances the NewsLibrary archive reports data for
only one outlet. We dropped those cases (i.e. eight outlets).

16

plot of the endorsement partisanship N Ej against readers’ ideology N Rj , together with the
estimated regression line. As one might expect, there is a statistically significant correlation
between the ideological stance of the demand and the supply side. But the correlation is
only .28, which is not overwhelming. Evidently, there is a lot of “slack” between the partisan
positions of news consumers and news providers.
We measure the relative percentage of moderates (or partisan independents) among each
newspapers’ readers in a similar fashion. First, for each county c we compute sdc as the
standard deviation of the Democratic vote share in the presidential, senatorial and gubernatorial elections between 1990 and 2000.22 Then, for each newspaper j we compute N R sdj
as a weighted average of the sdc ’s, again weighting each county by j’s relative sales in the
county.
We measure newspaper size as the average annual circulation during the period 19962002.
Finally, to measure the competitive pressure facing each newspaper in its relevant markets, we again use data from 1996 to 2002 and proceed as follows. Let sjct be the share of
copies sold by newspaper j in county c during year t. Our index is based on the probability
of a random meeting between an individual living in county j who reads newspaper j with
another individual living in the county who reads a different newspaper. This probability
is sjct × (1 − sjct ). We average this across years and weight it by the relative sales of each
newspaper in each county. Call this measure Competj .
Summary statistics for all independent variables are reported in Table 2.
22

The standard deviation is widely used as a proxy for the relative share of independents or moderates
in states, districts, and counties. This measure was introduced by Wright [1974]. See also Wallis [1984].
An area where the vote exhibits large fluctuations between the two parties presumably has a large share
of independents or moderates, since loyal partisans and ideological extremists will rarely change their vote
between elections.

17

4

Two-Stage Analysis

We begin with a simple and intuitive two-stage analysis. First we separately estimate
newspaper-specific propensities to cover Democratic and Republican scandals, controlling
for factors such as whether the scandal involves a politician from the same state or city as
the newspaper. Then we regress the difference in these estimated propensities against our
measures of endorsement partisanship and reader partisanship.
More precisely, for each Democratic scandal i = 1, ..., 14, let nD
ij be the relative frequency
of articles published by newspaper j about scandal i during the relevant time window.
Define nR
ij similarly, for each Republican scandal i = 1, ..., 21. We run the following two
panel regressions:
D
D
D
D
D
nD
ij = αi + βj + δ1 Instateij + δ2 Localij + ij

(2)

R
R
R
R
R
nR
ij = αi + βj + δ1 Instateij + δ2 Localij + ij

(3)

where αiD and αiR are scandal-specific fixed effects; βjD and βjR are newspaper-specific fixed
effects; the Instate and the Local dummy variables are described above. Since we have data
not only on the overall coverage of scandals on the newspaper, but separate information on
the coverage devoted on the editorial page and on the news section, we can perform these
regressions on three different items: relative frequencies of total hits, relative frequencies of
news hits, and relative frequencies of opinion hits.
Our focus is on the differential coverage of Republican and Democratic scandals by the
different newspapers, which we can compute from the newspaper-specific fixed effects. Let
ŝj ≡ β̂jR − β̂jD measure the degree to which newspaper j exhibits a relatively pro-Democratic
bias in its scandal coverage.23
Once we obtain these newspaper-specific measures of slanted coverage, we check whether
and how they correlate with the explicit partisan position of each newspaper, as proxied by
23

Note that this is only a relative measure – we do not make any claims about the absolute ideological
position of media outlets.

18

its endorsement pattern, and with the political leaning of consumers. The results of this
exercise (with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors) are shown in Table 3. We present
results for three dependent variables: total hits, news hits and editorial hits. For each
dependent variable we present the results of four regressions: in the first we simply regress
ŝj against the endorsement partisanship N Ej and a constant, in the second we do the same
with reader partisanship N Rj , in the third we control for both N Ej and N Rj , and in the
fourth we add total average circulation as an additional control, expressed in thousands of
yearly copies.
The main finding is that pro-Democratic coverage of scandals is significantly and positively correlated with a pro-Democratic endorsement pattern: newspapers with a higher
propensity to endorse Democratic candidates give relatively more coverage to scandals involving Republican politicians than scandals involving Democratic politicians, while Republicanleaning newspapers do the opposite. This is robust across specifications, and is consistent
with supply-driven models of media bias.
Regarding the partisanship of demand, there is no statistically significant relationship
with the dependent variable. However, when controlling for endorsement partisanship the
point estimate suggests that the Democratic partisanship of readers is negatively correlated with pro-Democratic coverage of scandals.24 Thus, the results do not lend support
to demand-driven theories of media bias, which predict that slanted coverage should be in
tune with the a priori views of consumers.
As discussed at the end of section 2.1, competitive pressure in the media market should
compress the bias in coverage if the latter originates from the ideological position on the
supply side. The same is true if newspapers face Bayesian consumers who are uncertain
about the quality of news reporting, as in Gentzkow and Shapiro [2006]. On the other hand,
competition would exacerbate bias if newspapers cater to confirmation-seeking readers.
To shed some empirical light on these contrasting predictions, we checked whether the
24

This correlation is not far away from mild significance when controlling for total circulation.

19

partial correlation of ŝj with our measures of endorsement and reader partisanship is weaker
or stronger in more competitive media environments. We consistently find a negative relationship – implying that more competition reduces supply-led bias – but the coefficients are
rarely statistically significant (at the .05 level).25

4.1

Overall coverage of scandals

As discussed in section 2.1, if demand for information by consumers is what drives mass
media behavior, then newspapers appealing to moderate voters should devote more total
coverage to political scandals, irrespective of the political affiliation of the public officials
involved. Also, there are reasonable conditions under which newspapers that are read by
larger and ideologically more heterogeneous audiences would find it profitable to cover all
scandals, in order to satisfy (to some extent) all customers.
In this section we again adopt a two stage approach, but the focus of the analysis is
on overall coverage. Let nij be the relative frequency of articles about scandal i being
published by newspaper j during the relevant time period: differently from the previous
section, we jointly look at Democratic and Republican scandals and run the following panel
data regression:
nij = αi + βj + δ1 Instateij + δ2 Localij + ij

(4)

where αi and βj are scandal-specific and newspaper-specific fixed effects, respectively. As
before, we control for the geographical proximity of each scandal. In the second stage, the
estimated βj s are regressed against a set of newspaper-specific variables. Controlling for
endorsement and reader partisanship, our focus is on the partial correlation with average
yearly circulation (here expressed in thousand of copies) and N R sdj .
The results are presented in Table 4, where we again distinguish between total hits, news
articles, and editorials. For each category of news items, we first control for circulation only,
25

As often occurs with interacted variables, our data exhibit a substantial amount of multicollinearity,
making it difficult to disentangle the role played by competitive forces in determining slanted coverage.

20

then add the voter standard deviation variable.26
The patterns are consistent. Overall coverage of scandals is significantly higher for newspapers with higher circulation. This is also true for news articles, but not for editorials.27

5

One-Stage Analysis

In this section we pool all of the data and perform a one-stage analysis with interaction
terms. This is an alternative and more direct way to estimate whether the coverage of
Democratic and Republican scandals of the various newspapers differs as a function of the
endorsement score and the ideological leaning of readers. It also allows to delve further into
the data, and investigate whether demand-driven or supply-led coverage bias is a function
of specific features of the scandals themselves, such as their location.
Since we are exploiting the differential coverage of Republican and Democratic scandals
by each newspaper, it is possible to include newspaper-specific fixed effects. More specifically,
we run the following regression:
nij = αi + βj + γ(N Ej ×RSi ) + δ1 Instateij + δ2 Localij + ij

(5)

where RSi is a dummy which equals one when scandal i involves a Republican politician,
and minus one when it involves a Democrat. We also run a regression in which we instead
control for the interaction with the reader partisanship variable N Rj , and a third one where
both interactions are included. In a fourth specification we check whether the slant in the
coverage of scandals depends on the localness of the scandal itself. We do so by adding two
triple interactions between N Ej (N Rj ), RSi and a dummy which equals one if the politician
involved in scandal i is from the state where newspaper j is located or from a congressional
26

All of the specifications in Table 4 also include the endorsement and reader partisanship variables. We
also ran specifications omitting those variables and the results are quite similar to those reported in the
table.
27
We also examine the effect of competition on total scandal coverage. We consistently find a negative relationship between competitiveness and overall coverage, but the estimated coefficients are seldom statistically
significant (at the .05 level).

21

district that overlaps heavily with the market area of newspaper j.28
As in the previous section we separately consider total hits, news articles and editorials.
Also, to account for the possibility that the error terms across observations are correlated
within newspapers, we compute standard errors that are clustered by newspaper.
The results are shown in Table 5. The relative frequency of hits – for total hits, news
hits, and editorial hits – is always positively and significantly correlated with the interaction
between the endorsement score and the Republican scandal dummy. This corresponds to
what we found in the two stage analysis. Moreover, the interaction between the partisanship
of readers and the Republican dummy is negatively correlated with nij , although this coefficient is statistically insignificant. However, when allowing for a differential partisan behavior
for local and non local scandals, we find that newspapers mainly read in Democratic (Republican) areas devote significantly more coverage only to those Republican (Democratic)
scandals which involve local politicians. Interestingly, this demand-driven coverage bias does
not occur on the editorial page, but only in the news section (and with total hits, as the latter
effect dominates the former). On the other hand, supply-led coverage bias is not confined to
local scandals, as shown by the positive and statistically significant coefficient on the simple
interaction between N Ej and RSi . The triple interaction of N Ej with the localness dummy
is positive, but not significant.
A plausible interpretation of these results is that newspapers would pander to the ideological tastes of readers only by slanting news material which is already known to them.29
On the other hand, editors and journalists pursuing a partisan bias in their coverage appear
to be making use of any news material that is suitable to the purpose, whether local or not.
The coefficient on the interaction term between N Ej and RSi provides us with an estimate
28

In other terms, this dummy equals one when the Instate or the Local dummies are equal to one, and
zero otherwise.
29
These results are also consistent with the existence of “favorable relationships” between newspapers and
local politicians. On average, in a Democratic area the Democratic candidates may have well established
relationships with the local people, including local newspapers owners and editors. These owners and editors
might in turn show their friendship by suppressing coverage of scandals involving the local politicians. This
is of course a supply side factor.

22

of the differential coverage of Republican versus Democratic scandals by newspapers with
different endorsement scores. Since the Republican scandal dummy takes on the values 1
and −1, by multiplying the estimated coefficient by two and by the standard deviation of
N Ej (which equals 0.381), we obtain a measure of this differential coverage for newspapers
that are one standard deviation apart on this endorsement dimension. In turn, we can divide
this effect by the average fraction of hits, articles and editorials in our sample, in order to
compute a relative measure of coverage bias. Doing this implies that a newspaper with an
endorsement score which is one standard deviation more Democratic-leaning than another
would dedicate 26 percent more coverage to Republican than to Democratic scandals.30 This
effect is 30 percent for articles and 23 percent for editorials. A standard deviation in the
endorsement score is what roughly separates the Chicago Tribune (N Ej = −0.2498) from
the Denver Post (N Ej = 0.1373), and in turn the Denver Post from the New York Times
(N Ej = 0.4913).
In a parallel fashion, we can implement a one-stage analysis of the overall coverage
of scandals. Since our focus in this case is on newspaper-specific variables such as total
circulation and reader moderateness, we cannot use fixed effects at the newspaper level.
Instead, we run the following regression:
nij = αi + θ1 Circj + θ2 N R sdj + γ(N Ej ×RSi ) + φ(N Rj ×RSi )
+ δ1 Instateij + δ2 Localij + ij

(6)

Again, we estimate the partisan coverage of scandals by interacting the Republican scandal
dummy with N Rj and N Ej . Standard errors are again clustered at the newspaper level.
Table 6 displays the results. For each category of hits (total hits, articles and editorials)
in the first specification we include only the circulation measure; we then add voter standard
deviation. As in the two stage analysis, circulation is positively and significantly correlated
with overall coverage in the case of total hits and news hits, but it is not significant for
30

The calculation is

0.009×2×0.381
0.0264

≈ 0.259.

23

editorials. On the other hand, voter standard deviation is positively and insignificantly
correlated with coverage. The only exception is with editorials, where the relationship is
positive and statistically significant. Finally, it is still the case that the interaction between
endorsement partisanship and the Republican scandal dummy is positively and significantly
correlated with coverage, while the interaction with reader partisanship is negatively and
insignificantly correlated.

5.1

Robustness checks

In this section we explore the robustness of our findings, in particular of those regarding
coverage bias. The scandals we analyze are characterised by some degree of heterogeneity.
This is not altogether undesirable, since we are interested in a comprehensive investigation
of coverage bias, and thus we care about the average behavior of newspapers across scandals
of different types. On the other hand, one might be concerned that this average behavior is
in fact a combination of largely different “treatments” newspapers devote to different types
of scandals. Note, for example, that we have already found evidence that newspapers cater
to partisan tastes of readers only when scandals involve local politicians.
The time periods of the various scandals is a first source of heterogeneity. In our case, all
scandals except those involving Democratic politicians James Traficant (Rep-OH) and Edwin
Edwards (Gov-LA) began after George W. Bush became president in 2000. A potential
concern is that newspapers might be differentially covering political scandals as a function
of the match between their political affiliation (as proxied by the endorsement score) and
the overall partisan climate at the federal level, which is of course heavily influenced by
the political affiliation of the incumbent president. If, for example, newspapers are more
aggressive in the bias of their coverage of scandals when the president belongs to the least
favorite political party, then the average differential coverage of scandals might change when
the president changes. This would not affect our estimates of the relative partisan bias,
but one cannot exclude the further possibility that Democratic-endorsing and Republican-

24

endorsing outlets react to a change in the political affiliation of the president with a different
degree of aggressiveness, hence confounding our results.
Again separately displaying results for total hits, news articles and opinion pieces, Table
7 presents the outcome of this robustness check in the first column of each subgroup, whereas
we exclude the Traficant and Edwards scandals from the analysis. Throughout, we adopt the
more general specification where we jointly control for endorsement and reader partisanship.
The results are very close – in terms of magnitude and statistical significance – to those
reported in Table 5.
Scandals might also differ on the basis of whether they have been formally investigated
by a law-enforcement agency. In our sample there are three scandals which had not been
formally investigated (at the time of this writing) – i.e., those involving Katherine Harris
(Rep-R-FL), Dennis Hastert (Rep-R-IL) and Jim McGreevey (Gov-D-NJ). Similarly to the
argument stated above, one might be worried that newspapers systematically differ in the
amount of coverage they are willing to devote to scandals that are not formally investigated,
as a function of the match between their political affiliation and that of the person involved.
For example, newspapers could cover scandals that are not under formal investigation and
that involve politicians on the opposite political side as vehemently as those which are formally investigated, while they could be even more parsimonious in the coverage of “informal”
scandals, if they happen on their favorite political side. This would imply a more pronounced
coverage bias on informal scandals.
The second column in each subgroup in Table 7 displays the results of dropping these
cases. Again, the magnitude and statistical significance of the coefficients closely correspond
to the ones obtained with the baseline sample.
Up to now we have attached the same weight to all scandals within each party, irrespective
of the ideology of the politicians involved. However, it might be more rewarding for a
Democratic-leaning (Republican-leaning) newspaper to cover scandals involving staunchly
conservative Republicans (liberal Democrats) rather than moderate ones. This logic would

25

also apply to demand-side forces driving newspapers to cater to confirmation-seeking readers.
Poole and Rosenthal’s (1997) NOMINATE scores provide a widely used measure of the
ideological locations of all of the politicians who served in the U.S. Congress.31,32 For the 29
politicians to whom we can attach a NOMINATE common space score, we check whether
the amount of coverage devoted by a Democratic-endorsing newspaper to a given scandal
is increasing in the ideological conservativeness of the involved politician (as proxied by
the NOMINATE score), and vice versa for a Republican-endorsing newspaper. In order to
implement this type of analysis, we simply run a specification similar to (5), with the RSi
dummy replaced by the NOMINATE common space score.
The last column for each subgroup of news items in Table 7 reports the findings of this
last robustness check. The interaction between the endorsement score and the NOMINATE
common space score has a positive and statistically significant coefficient (mildly so for
news articles), while the interaction of the latter with the reader partisanship variable is
negatively and insignificantly correlated with coverage, similarly to what found with the
baseline specification.

6

Discussion and Conclusions

In this paper we have analysed the coverage of political scandals by a large number of U.S.
newspapers, focusing on supply and demand side determinants of any partisan bias in this
coverage. As more thoroughly discussed in section 2.2, the use of automated keyword-based
searches of the online news archives (in our case: the NewsLibrary archive, plus Factiva
and the newspaper’s own archive for the New York Times, the Los Angeles Times and the
31

The idea behind NOMINATE scores is to retrieve the ideological position of congressmen in a possibly
multidimensional policy space on the basis of roll call votes cast (Poole and Rosenthal [1985], Poole and
Rosenthal [1997]). Since we must compare politicians belonging to different chambers and at different points
in time, we use the Common Space Scores (Poole [1998]), which are exactly designed to allow this type of
comparison.
32
In addition to the politicians who were members of the U.S. Congress at the time of the scandal in
which they were involved, five of the governors served in the Congress before their election as governor and
also have NOMINATE scores. They are Rod Blagojevich (D-IL), Edwin Edwards (D-LA), John Rowland
(R-CT), Ernie Fletcher (R-KY) and Jim Gibbons (R-NV).

26

Chicago Tribune) allows us to systematically investigate how U.S. newspapers covered all
recent and salient political scandals, i.e. those involving senators, members of congress or
state governors (plus Jack Abramoff).
The main finding is that the partisan leaning of the supply side has a strong correlation
with the differential coverage of Democratic and Republican scandals: Democratic-leaning
newspapers – i.e., those with a higher propensity to endorse Democratic candidates in elections – give significantly more coverage to scandals involving Republican politicians than
scandals involving Democratic politicians, while Republican-leaning newspapers behave in
the opposite way. This bias in the coverage of scandals is not confined to the editorial page,
but also affects the news section. While the fraction of stories devoted to political scandals
is on average very small, the magnitude of the coverage bias effect is very large in relative
terms: the differential coverage of Republican versus Democratic scandals by a newspaper
with a propensity to endorse Democratic candidates which is one standard deviation higher
would be larger by around 26 percent.
On the other hand, we find that biased coverage of scandals “panders” to the partisan
leaning of readers (as demand-driven models of mass media behavior by Mullainathan and
Shleifer [2005] and Gentzkow and Shapiro [2006] would suggest) only for those scandals
which are local – i.e. scandals involving politicians that are based in the same area where
the newspaper is sold. From this point of view, while supply-led coverage bias would make
use of any news material which is suitable to the purpose (i.e., any scandal on the opposite
political side, irrespective of the geographical location of those involved), slanted coverage
which caters to confirmation-seeking readers appears to be constrained by their ex ante
preferences, in this case an interest for local people and events.
We also find some evidence regarding factors that are correlated with the overall coverage
of scandals. Newspapers with higher circulation systematically devote more coverage to
political scandals, at least in the news section. Further work is needed to distinguish between
demand-driven and supply-led accounts for this relationship.

27

Finally, regarding the issue of competition, we find no robust effects on bias or overall
coverage. This may be in due in part to the fact that in the period we study most U.S.
newspaper markets are relatively uncompetitive. Thus, it will be interesting to study earlier
time periods, when the number of newspapers was larger and there was probably more
variation in the degree of competition across cities. In addition, with historical data there
are potential quasi-experiments we can exploit to better identify the effects of competition
on media coverage. One is the demise of afternoon newspapers. Many scholars argue that
this was caused by the spread of television and/or lifestyle changes, and therefore the decline
can be treated as an exogenous shock to newspaper markets. If so, we can obtain a clean
estimate of the effects of competition by comparing changes in newspaper coverage across
cities with different initial numbers of afternoon newspapers.

References
[1] Anderson, S. P. and McLaren, J. [2005]. “Media Mergers and Media Bias with Rational
Consumers” . Mimeo, University of Virginia.
[2] Ansolabehere, S., Lessem, R. and Snyder, J. M., Jr. [2006]. “The Orientation of Newspaper Endorsements in U.S. Elections, 1940-2002.” Quarterly Journal of Political Science,
1(4): 393-404.
[3] Antweiler, W. and Frank, M. Z. [2005]. “Do US Stock Markets Typically Overreact
to Corporate News Stories?” Mimeo, Sauder School of Business, University of British
Columbia.
[4] Balkin, J. M. [1999]. “How Mass Media Simulate Political Transparency.” Cultural Values, 3(4): 393-413.
[5] Bennett, W. L. and Serrin, W. [2005]. “The Watchdog Role.” In G. Overholser and K.
H. Jamieson (eds.), The Press. New York: Oxford University Press: 169-188.

28

[6] Bernhardt, D., Krasa, S. and Polborn, M. K. [2006], “Political Polarization and the
Electoral Effects of Media Bias.” CESifo Working Paper Series No. 1798, available at
SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=892475.
[7] Bernstein, B. J. [1976]. “Road to Watergate and beyond: the growth and abuse of
executive authority since 1940.” Law and Contemporary Problems, 40: 58-86.
[8] Besley, T. and Prat, A. [2006]. “Handcuffs for the Grabbing Hand? Media Capture and
Government Accountability.” American Economic Review, 96(3): 720–736.
[9] Canes-Wrone, B., Herron, M. C. and Shotts, K. W. [2001]. “Leadership and Pandering:
A Theory of Executive Policymaking.” American Journal of Political Science, 45: 532550.
[10] Chomsky, N. [1973]. “Watergate: a skeptical view.” New York Review of Books, September 20: 3-8.
[11] DellaVigna, S. and Kaplan, E. [2007]. “The Fox News Effect: Media Bias and Voting”.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122: 1187-1234.
[12] Francke, W. [1995]. “The Evolving Watchdog: The Media’s Role in Government Ethics.”
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 537: 109-121.
[13] Gasper,
Media

J.

T.

Myth.”

[2007].
Mimeo,

“Ideological

Shift:

Carnegie

Mellon

Explaining
University.

the

Liberal

Available

at

http://www.andrew.cmu.edu/user/gasper/WorkingPapers/Rep.pdf.
[14] Gentzkow, M. A., Glaeser, E. L. and Goldin, C. [2006]. “The Rise of the Fourth Estate:
How Newspapers Became Informative and Why it Mattered.” In E. L. Glaeser and
C. Goldin (eds.), Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s History. National
Bureau of Economic Research.

29

[15] Gentzkow, M. A. and Shapiro, J. M. [2006] “Media Bias and Reputation.” Journal of
Political Economy, 114(2): 280-316.
[16] Gentzkow, M. A. and Shapiro, J. M. [2007]. “What Drives News Media Slant? Evidence from U.S. Daily Newspapers.” Mimeo, University of Chicago. Available at
http://faculty.chicagogsb.edu/matthew.gentzkow/biasmeas052507.pdf
[17] Gerber, A., Karlan, D. and Bergan, D. [2006]. “Does The Media Matter? A Field Experiment Measuring the Effect of Newspapers on Voting Behavior and Political Opinions.”
Mimeo, Yale University.
[18] Groseclose, T. and Milyo, J. [2005]. “A Measure of Media Bias” . Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 120(4): 1191-1237.
[19] Iyengar, S., Kinder, D. R., and Peters, M. D. [1982]. “Experimental Demonstrations
of the ‘Not-So-Minimal’ Consequences of Television News Programs.” The American
Political Science Review, 76(4): 848-858.
[20] Krosnick, J. A. and Miller, J. M. [1996]. “The Anatomy of News Media Priming.” In S.
Iyengar and R. Reeves (eds.), Do the Media Govern? Politicians, Voters, and Reporters
in America. Thousand Oaks, Sage.
[21] Lang, G. E. and Lang, K. [1980]. “Polling on Watergate: the battle for public opinion.”
Public Opinion Quarterly, 44: 530-47.
[22] Larcinese, V. [2006]. “Information Acquisition, Ideology and Turnout: Theory and Evidence from Britain.” Political Economy and Public Policy (PEPP) Working Paper n.
18, STICERD, London School of Economics.
[23] Larcinese, V., Puglisi R. and Snyder, J. M., Jr. [2007]. “Partisan Bias in Economic
News: Evidence on the Agenda-Setting Behavior of U.S. Newspapers”. NBER Working
Paper No. W13378.
30

[24] Lott, J. R., Jr. and Hassett, K. A. [2004]. “Is Newspaper Coverage of Economic Events
Politically Biased?” Working Paper, American Enterprise Institute, Washington, DC.
Available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=588453.
[25] Lippmann, W. [1922]. Public Opinion. New York, Harcourt, Brace.
[26] Lipset, S. M. and Rabb, E. [1973]. “An appointment with Watergate.” Commentary,
56: 35-43.
[27] McCombs, M. E. [2002]. “The Agenda-Setting Role of the Mass Media in the Shaping of
Public Opinion.” Paper presented at Mass Media Economics 2002 Conference, London
School of Economics: http://sticerd.lse.ac.uk/dps/extra/McCombs.pdf
[28] McCombs, M. E. and Shaw, D. L. [1972]. “The Agenda-Setting Function of Mass Media”. Public Opinion Quarterly, 36(2): 176-187.
[29] Mullainathan, S. and Shleifer, A. [2005]. “The Market for News”. American Economic
Review, 95(4): 1005-1030.
[30] Petrocik, J. R. [1996]. “Issue Ownership in Presidential Elections, with a 1980 Case
Study.” American Journal of Political Science, 40(3): 825-850.
[31] Petrova, M. [2007]. “Newspapers and Parties: How Advertising Revenues Created
an Independent Press.” Mimeo, Government Department, Harvard. Available at:
http://www.gov.harvard.edu/student/mpetrova/Newspapers Parties.pdf.
[32] Poole, K. T. [1998]. “Recovering a Basic Space From a Set of Issue Scales.” American
Journal of Political Science, 42: 954-993.
[33] Poole, K. T. and Rosenthal, H. [1985]. “A Spatial Model for Legislative Roll Call Analysis” American Journal of Political Science, 29(2): 357-384.

31

[34] Poole, K. T. and Rosenthal, H. [1997]. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll
Call Voting. New York: Oxford University Press.
[35] Puglisi, R. [2006]. “Being the New York Times: the Political Behaviour of a Newspaper.”
Political Economy and Public Policy (PEPP) Working Paper n. 20, STICERD, London
School of Economics.
[36] Schrag, P. [1974]. “Watergate as entertainment.” Social Policy, 5: 23-26.
[37] Szasz, A. [1986]. “The Process and Significance of Political Scandals: A Comparison
of Watergate and the ‘Sewergate’ Episode at the Environmental Protection Agency.”
Social Problems, 33(3): 202-217.
[38] Wallis, J. J. [1984]. “The Birth of the Old Federalism: Financing the New Deal.” Journal
of Economic History, 47: 97-102.
[39] Wright, G. [1974]. “The Political Economy of New Deal Spending: An Econometric
Analysis.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 56: 30-38.
[40] Zimmer, T. A. [1979]. “Impact of Watergate on the public’s trust in people and confidence in the mass media.” Social Science Quarterly, 59: 743-51.

32

1

Figure 1: correlation between reader and endorsement partisanship
LCJB
MB
LH
SB

endorsement partisanship
-1
-.5
0
.5

LDNB
LTJB

AS

LC

RO

RGJB
DNEB
RLOB
GFTBADSB
WB
NK TUCB

PBEB

MD
UN

CIZB

DN

DC
ANSB ME
STLB ALMRJB
MNSL
GB
AN
PBPBBG IGCL
SPTB
VTHB
BE
HC
SJ SA
TD
RDCB
TB
NWDB HHDB
EC
AJ
MH
NRBB
HN KC DMRB
PI
TLWB
CA
ZTRB
BD
FP
LSJB
NT
GPTB
ERGB
NHRB
JG
TNTB
BS
BCNB
SMCB
VC DP
MT
DLHB
BN
IN SCTBHTCS BI SRCTPB
PG
FL
OLPB
HNAB
WTHB
SF
SP
SE
IDSB
TP AT
AASB
ST CN
OR CSTB
AGNB
WJNB
AMCB MSBCEB
TVHB
SBCB
OMIB
ARPB
RS
MC
DH
LCSB
HCBF BKCPCBSIAB SSJB
TT
LTNB
SLJB
BCAB
AK GF
HCRB
SAEC
CC
HDTB ZMDJ
HUTB
ICPB
CPDB
DDNB
MV TCJB
HRNB
EPTB
AQTB
RM
LJSB
SY
BH
CR
ZMFB
AC
CEQB
NWRB
NWJB
JSVDBB
NADB DM
LB
IPTB
WE
KX
LBCB
CK
DTNB
ET
WTEB
JR
SNLB JG
LAJB
BNHB
DQ
WO
MSSB
SGVB
BI
RRSB
LVRB
OK
CLDB
LA BRZB
GJSB
BL
NDNB
HNAB
CCCB
ZMEW
SDUN
JGMB RSLB
SMNB
PSWB
CNGB AGCB
WDNB CDMB
WRAB
DSSB
MBRB
VCSB
ZOOB
GRPB
SHJB
BT
UL
RTDB FTUB
LODB
JCNB
BC
CK

MRTB

NTNB

CFAB
HDRB

CO

SFCB

ATSB
OKTB

NYDB

NY

-1.5

GRBB

.2

.3

.4
.5
reader partisanship

.6

.7

Table 1: Summary of covered political scandals
Name

Position

State

Party

James Traficant

House

Ohio

D

Scandal
Bribery, false tax returns, racketeering, forcing aides to clean up his farm

Under Investigation

Time Window

Frank Ballance

House

North Carolina

D

Money Laundering and other charges from funds as a State Senator

Justice, December 2003

Robert Torricelli

Senate

New Jersey

D

Bribery related to Chinese connections, acceptance of campaign gifts

William Jefferson

House

Louisiana

D

Bribery, fraud

Senate Ethics Committee, 4/1/2001 to 11/30/2002
2002
FBI, as of July, 2005
6/1/2005 to 6/30/2007

Jane Harman

House

California

D

Possible improper contact with AIPAC

FBI in 2005

10/1/2006 to 6/30/2007

Paul Kanjorski

House

Pennsylvania

D

Funnelling of money into family business

FBI, 2002

2/1/2002 to 6/30/2007

Robert Menendez

Senate

New Jersey

D

Alan Mollohan

House

West Virginia

D

Ed Mezvinsky

House

Iowa

D

Conflict of interest problems dealing with renting out property to a nonprofit, as well as an
8/1/2006 to 6/30/2007
associate pressuring a psychiatrist involving hiring someone and prison contracts
Misrepresentation of private assets, earmarking funds to an aide
FBI (possibly preliminary) 2/1/2006 to 6/30/2007
2006; Justice Department
Bank fraud, mail fraud, wire fraud
3/1/2001 to 1/31/2003

Jim McDermott

House

Washington

D

Eavesdropping on Gingrich/Boehner conversation

Don Siegelman

Governor

Alabama

D

Jim McGreevey

Governor

New Jersey

D

Rod Blagojevich

Governor

Illinois

D

Edwin Edwards

Governor

Louisiana

D

Racketeering and extortion dealing with HealthSouth and doctor's boards (as well as Since '05
trading favors for campaign contributions
Investigation of qualifications of staff, as well as pay to play and eventually revelations
about his relations with his national security advisor
Kickback connections, hiring irregularities
Justice
has
open
investigation (July 2006)
Racketeering, payoffs for casinos
1998 (Justice)

Randy "Duke" Cunningham

House

California

R

Bob Ney

House

Ohio

R

Rick Renzi

House

Arizona

R

John Doolittle

House

California

R

Conrad Burns

Senate

Montana

R

Accepted $2.4 million in bribes and underreported income from dealings with MZM inc., a giu-05
5/1/2005 to 3/31/2006
defense contractor.
Abramoff-related
May 2006 (House Ethics), 10/1/2005 to 4/1/2007
though investigation had
Bribery involving land swapping for copper mines, possible links to the US Attorneys probe, 2006-2007, Justice
10/1/2006 to 6/30/2007
also did not disclose $200k from business associate
Abramoff-related, dealing with money given to wife for undefined work and Doolittle's work FBI investigation, raid April 12/1/2004 to 6/30/2007
to get Indian casino for Iowa tribe
13
Pay for play, Abramoff connections on getting money for Michigan Indian tribe
Justice, November 2005
3/1/2005 to 11/31/2006

Mark Foley

House

Florida

R

Inappropriate emails to Congressional Pages

Tom DeLay

House

Texas

R

Bill Frist

Senate

Tennessee

R

FBI and House
Investigations
Illegal corporate donations through TRMPAC as part of redistricting plan, money mag-05
laundering, aides and personal connections to Jack Abramoff investigation
Insider trading
SEC, 2006

1/1/1997 to 9/30/2002

House Ethics

11/1/2003 to 1/31/2006

12/1/2004 to 12/31/2006
10/1/2005 to 6/30/2007
8/1/2004 to 12/31/2004
8/1/2005 to 6/30/2007
11/1/1998 to 1/31/2001

Ethics 9/1/2006 to 6/30/2007

4/1/2005 to 6/30/2007
9/1/2005 to 5/31/2007

Jim Kolbe

House

Arizona

R

Page-related trips

Curt Weldon

House

Pennsylvania

R

Influence trading/bribery

Preliminary investigation in 9/1/2006 to 6/30/2007
October 2006
FBI, October 2006
10/1/2006 to 6/30/2007

Jerry Lewis

House

California

R

Bribery dealing with ties to former Rep. Bill Lowery

FBI

12/1/2005 to 6/30/2007

Gary Miller

House

California

R

Failure to report land deals

FBI

12/1/2006 to 6/30/2007

Katherine Harris

House

Florida

R

Duke Cunningham-MZM related

Dennis Hastert

House

Illinois

R

Bribery, Abramoff-related

John Rowland

Governor

Connecticut

R

George Ryan

Governor

Illinois

R

Robert Taft

Governor

Ohio

R

Inquiries and interviews 6/1/2005 to 11/31/2006
about money received from
FBI (Reported May 2006, 5/1/2006 to 6/30/2007
though Justice have denied
Corruption and fraud stemming from work done on his weekend cottage, as well as 2003 (state and federal, with 11/1/2003 to 3/31/2005
dealings on a home in Washington
state investigation
Racketeering and corruption, illegal sales of government licenses, bribery to give truck
1/1/2000 to 9/30/2006
drivers jobs, payments to family and others for no work.
Failure to disclose gifts and trips given by lobbyists
2005
6/1/2005 to 8/31/2005

Ernie Fletcher

Governor

Kentucky

R

Merit system related corruption (hiring and firing based on political loyalty)

Jim Gibbons

House/Governor

Nevada

R

Bribery (Gifts given for votes on Armed Services and Intelligence Committee)

Jack Abramoff

Lobbyist

R

Defrauding of American Indian tribes and corruption of public officials

I. Lewis "Scooter" Libby

Chief of
President

R

Perjury and involvement in the Valerie Plame CIA Leak Investigation

Staff,

Vice -

State Attorney General (May 5/1/2005 to 8/31/2006
2005)
Justice
Opened
"a 11/1/2006 to 6/30/2007
preliminary corruption

3/1/2004 to 6/30/2007
October 21, 2003 (Justice)

10/1/2005 to 3/31/2007

Table 2: summary statistics on scandals coverage
Variable
Scandal-newspaper level
relative frequency of scandal stories (total)
relative frequency of scandal articles
relative frequency of scandal editorials
Instate
Local
Newspaper level
NE (newspaper endorsement score)
NR (newspaper readership score)
total circulation
NR_sd (standard deviation of Democratic vote)
Compet (competition index)

No of obs.

Mean

Median Std. Dev.

6881
6880
6879
6881
6881

0.0264
0.0203
0.1213
0.0429
0.0042

0.0026
0.0007
0
0
0

213
213
213
213
207

-0.0232
0.5007
150353
0.0936
0.1287

0.0287
0.4974
82004
0.0909
0.1202

Min

Max

0.1023
0.0843
0.4314
0.2026
0.0648

0
0
0
0
0

3.152
2.879
11.626
1
1

0.381
0.0821
167877
0.0273
0.0655

-1.332
0.2309
7293
0.0311
0.0124

0.914
0.708
1088391
0.1766
0.25

Notes: all relative frequencies of stories are expressed in percentage points. The Instate dummy equals one when the politician involved in a scandal is from the
state where a newspaper is located. The Local dummy equals one when the politician involved in a scandal is from a congressional district that overlaps heavily with
the market area of newspaper (for congressional scandals).

Table 3: agenda bias in the coverage of political scandals, two-stage analysis
total hits

endorsement partisanship
reader partisanship
total circulation (hundred of thousands
constant
Observations
R-squared

articles

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.015**
[2.40]
-

-

0.013**
[2.50]
-

0.004
[0.23]
-

0.014**
[2.53]
-0.017
[0.90]
-

0.010***
[4.90]
213
0.04

0.007
[0.72]
213
0

0.020*
[1.80]
213
0.04

0.008***
[4.88]
213
0.04

0.006
[0.71]
213
0

0.017*
[1.76]
213
0.04

0.0134**
[2.40]
-0.0295
[1.64]
0.0028***
[2.94]
0.0190**
[2.03]
213
0.07

0.060**
[2.52]
-

-

0.0159**
[2.33]
-0.0335
[1.58]
0.0030***
[2.70]
0.0223**
[2.04]
213
0.07

-

0.005
[0.24]
-

0.017**
[2.44]
-0.02
[0.90]
-

editorials
(10)
(11)
-

-

0.012
[0.14]
-

0.066***
[2.61]
-0.087
[0.99]
-

0.049***
[5.53]
213
0.03

0.041
[0.95]
213
0

0.092**
[1.99]
213
0.03

(12)
0.0642**
[2.51]
-0.1314
[1.49]
0.0097
[1.58]
0.0998**
[2.17]
213
0.05

In the first stage (not reported) the relative frequency of pieces, articles or editorials is regressed against newspaper-specific fixed effects, scandal-specific fixed effects and dummies for the localness of
the scandal. This is separately done for the coverage of Republican and Democratic scandals. In the regressions reported here, the dependent variable is the difference between the newspaper-specific
fixed effect in the coverage of Republican scandals minus the corresponding fixed effect in the coverage of Democratic ones. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust, with t-statistics in brackets. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table 4: overall coverage of political scandals, two-stage analysis
total hits

total circulation (hundreds of thousands)
standard deviation of Democratic vote
endorsement partisanship
reader partisanship
constant
Observations
R-squared

articles

editorials

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.003***
[3.67]
-

0.003***
[3.68]
0.012
[0.31]
0.006
[1.37]
-0.02
[1.31]
0.013
[1.39]
213
0.06

0.003***
[4.27]
-

0.003***
[4.30]
0.019
[0.53]
0.005
[1.39]
-0.017
[1.16]
0.009
[1.00]
213
0.07

0.007
[1.65]
-

0.008*
[1.71]
0.206
[1.14]
0.024
[1.30]
-0.083
[1.34]
0.052
[1.29]
213
0.03

0.006
[1.38]
-0.021
[1.34]
0.014*
[1.76]
213
0.06

0.005
[1.42]
-0.017
[1.22]
0.011
[1.47]
213
0.07

0.025
[1.37]
-0.092
[1.49]
0.075**
[2.34]
213
0.03

In the first stage (not reported) the relative frequency of pieces, articles or editorials is regressed against newspaper-specific fixed
effects, scandal-specific fixed effects and dummies for the localness of the scandal. This is jointly done for the coverage of
Republican and Democratic scandals. In the regressions reported here, the dependent variable is the newspaper-specific fixed
effect as estimated in the first stage. Standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust, with t-statistics in brackets. * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table 5: agenda bias in the coverage of political scandals, one-stage analysis
total hits

endorsement score * Republican scandal dummy
endorsement score * Republican scandal dummy *
dummy for local scandals
reader partisanship * Republican scandal dummy
reader partisanship * Republican scandal dummy *
dummy for local scandals
same state for involved politician and newspaper
same congressional district for involved politician and
newspaper
constant
newspaper fixed effects
scandal fixed effects
Observations
Number of newspapers
R-squared

articles

editorials
(10)
(11)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

0.009**
[2.40]
-

-

0.007**
[2.48]
-

0.033***
[2.69]
-

-

0.036***
[2.77]
-

-0.01
[0.82]
-

-

0.003
[0.34]
-

-0.008
[0.80]
-

-

-

0.004
[0.34]
-

-

0.013
[0.31]
-

-0.041
[0.92]
-

0.193***
[6.80]
0.143**
[2.42]
0.101***
[4.68]
yes
yes
6881
213
0.3

0.193***
[6.80]
0.144**
[2.43]
0.050***
[8.50]
yes
yes
6881
213
0.3

0.193***
[6.80]
0.143**
[2.41]
0.043***
[6.43]
yes
yes
6881
213
0.3

0.155***
[6.65]
0.114**
[2.32]
0.042***
[29.67]
yes
yes
6880
213
0.27

0.155***
[6.64]
0.115**
[2.34]
0.044***
[8.66]
yes
yes
6880
213
0.27

0.155***
[6.65]
0.114**
[2.32]
0.038***
[6.60]
yes
yes
6880
213
0.27

0.005***
[2.77]
0.099
[1.33]
-0.018
[1.58]
0.087***
[2.65]
0.144***
[6.64]
0.110**
[2.32]
0.032***
[4.86]
yes
yes
6880
213
0.29

-

-

0.008**
[2.50]
-

-

0.005***
[2.95]
0.118
[1.32]
-0.021
[1.55]
0.094**
[2.35]
0.181***
[6.69]
0.138**
[2.41]
0.036***
[4.73]
yes
yes
6881
213
0.31

-

-

0.009**
[2.42]
-

0.779***
[6.73]
0.629**
[2.55]
0.351***
[4.52]
yes
yes
6879
213
0.34

0.778***
[6.72]
0.631**
[2.56]
0.344***
[4.13]
yes
yes
6879
213
0.34

0.779***
[6.73]
0.627**
[2.54]
0.372***
[4.50]
yes
yes
6879
213
0.34

(12)
0.024***
[3.03]
0.399
[1.47]
-0.066
[1.37]
0.16
[0.97]
0.768***
[6.15]
0.600**
[2.50]
0.381***
[4.53]
yes
yes
6879
213
0.35

The relative frequency of pieces, articles or editorials is regressed against newspaper-specific fixed effects, scandal-specific fixed effects, dummies for the localness of the scandal and an interaction between the
endorsement score and a "Republican scandal" dummy. This dummy equals one when the scandal involves a Republican politician, and minus one when it involves a Democrat. The same interaction is computed for the
reader partisanship variable. These interaction terms are further interacted with a dummy which equals one when the scandal is a local one. Standard errors are clustered at the newspaper level, with t-statistics in brackets.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table 6: overall coverage of political scandals, one-stage analysis
total hits

total circulation (hundreds of thousands)
standard deviation of Democratic vote
endorsement score * Republican scandal dummy
reader partisanship * Republican scandal dummy
constant

state fixed effects
newspaper fixed effects
dummies for scandal "localness"
scandal fixed effects
Observations
Number of newspapers
R-squared

articles

editorials

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.002***
[3.31]
-

0.002***
[4.00]
0.008**
[2.30]
-0.013
[1.03]
-0.004
[0.67]

0.003***
[4.16]
0.057
[1.49]
0.008**
[2.29]
-0.013
[1.01]
-0.01
[1.22]

0.006
[1.32]
-

0.010**
[2.26]
-0.015
[1.05]
-0.005
[0.72]

0.002***
[3.44]
0.062
[1.42]
0.010**
[2.26]
-0.015
[1.03]
-0.011
[1.19]

0.042***
[2.84]
-0.056
[1.07]
0.230***
[2.73]

0.006
[1.46]
0.414**
[2.31]
0.041***
[2.82]
-0.054
[1.03]
0.188**
[2.37]

no
no
yes
yes
6881
213
0.26

no
no
yes
yes
6881
213
0.26

no
no
yes
yes
6880
213
0.23

no
no
yes
yes
6880
213
0.23

no
no
yes
yes
6879
213
0.30

no
no
yes
yes
6879
213
0.30

The relative frequency of pieces, articles or editorials is regressed against scandal-specific fixed effects, dummies for the localness of the
scandal and an interaction between the endorsement score and a "Republican scandal" dummy. This dummy equals one when the scandal
involves a Republican politician, and minus one when it involves a Democrat. The same interaction is computed for the reader partisanship
variable. The focus is on total circulation of each newspaper and the standard deviation of the Democratic vote in the area where the
newspaper is sold. Standard errors are clustered at the newspaper level, with t-statistics in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%.

Table 7: robustness checks on agenda bias, one-stage analysis
total hits

endorsement score * Republican scandal variable
reader partisanship * Republican scandal variable
same state for involved politician and newspaper
same congressional district for involved politician and
newspaper
constant

newspaper fixed effects
scandal fixed effects
Observations
Number of newspapers
Number of scandals
R-squared

articles

editorials

recent scandals

formally
investigated
scandals

0.010**
[2.53]
-0.009
[0.74]
0.198***
[6.63]
0.150**
[2.48]
0.057***
[8.74]

0.009**
[2.32]
-0.006
[0.50]
0.203***
[6.45]
0.129**
[1.98]
0.106***
[4.51]

0.023**
[2.03]
-0.003
[0.07]
0.142***
[5.72]
0.181***
[3.07]
0.064***
[12.57]

0.008**
[2.59]
-0.008
[0.72]
0.159***
[6.48]
0.119**
[2.38]
0.046***
[8.20]

0.008**
[2.31]
-0.004
[0.43]
0.164***
[6.35]
0.105*
[1.96]
0.089***
[4.44]

0.018*
[1.93]
0
[0.01]
0.113***
[5.61]
0.145***
[2.98]
0.052***
[12.21]

yes
yes
6542
213
33
0.3

yes
yes
6298
213
32
0.29

yes
yes
5694
213
29
0.32

yes
yes
6541
213
33
0.28

yes
yes
6297
213
32
0.27

yes
yes
5694
213
29
0.29

interaction with
recent scandals
Nominate score

formally
investigated
scandals

formally
investigated
scandals

interaction with
Nominate score

0.039***
[2.94]
-0.041
[0.91]
0.796***
[6.59]
0.641**
[2.55]
0.379***
[4.66]

0.039***
[2.92]
-0.033
[0.73]
0.805***
[6.36]
0.528**
[2.05]
0.370***
[4.49]

0.100**
[2.43]
-0.103
[0.77]
0.572***
[5.98]
0.787***
[3.19]
0.254***
[8.60]

yes
yes
6540
213
33
0.34

yes
yes
6296
213
32
0.34

yes
yes
5694
213
29
0.37

interaction with
recent scandals
Nominate score

The relative frequency of pieces, articles or editorials is regressed against newspaper-specific fixed effects, scandal-specific fixed effects, dummies for the localness of the scandal and an interaction
between the endorsement score and a "Republican scandal" dummy. This dummy equals one when the scandal involves a Republican politician, and minus one when it involves a Democrat. The
same interaction is computed for the reader partisanship variable. In the first column within each subgroup we restrict attention to recent scandals; in the second one we focus on formally investigated
scandals, while in the last one we interact the endorsement score (and the reader partisanship variable) with the NOMINATE common space score of the person involved, if available. Standard errors
are clustered at the newspaper level, with t-statistics in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

