NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RE-EXAMINING THE EFFECTS OF MEDICAID EXPANSIONS FOR PREGNANT
WOMEN
Dhaval M. Dave
Sandra Decker
Robert Kaestner
Kosali I. Simon
Working Paper 14591
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14591

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

The findings and conclusions in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent
the views of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The authors thank Anna Aizer and Joshua
Price for input that improved the paper significantly. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Dhaval M. Dave, Sandra Decker, Robert Kaestner, and Kosali I. Simon. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Re-examining the Effects of Medicaid Expansions for Pregnant Women
Dhaval M. Dave, Sandra Decker, Robert Kaestner, and Kosali I. Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 14591
December 2008
JEL No. I11,I12,I18,I28,I38
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the effect of Medicaid eligibility expansions on the health insurance coverage
of women giving birth and on the use of prenatal care and infant health, controlling for year and state
effects and state-specific trends that may be correlated with expansions in Medicaid eligibility. We
combine estimates from the two sets of analyses to construct estimates of the effect of health insurance
on use of prenatal care and infant health. We find that the eligibility expansions reduced the proportion
of pregnant women who were uninsured by approximately 10 percent, although this decrease in uninsured
came with the expense of a substantial reduction in private insurance coverage. Changes in Medicaid
eligibility were associated with very small and statistically insignificant changes in prenatal care use,
birth weight, and incidence of low-birth weight.

Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu

Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois at Chicago
815 West Van Buren Street, Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
kaestner@uic.edu

Sandra Decker
Senior Service Fellow
National Center for Health Statistics
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
3311 Toledo Road (Room 3316)
Hyattsville, MD 20782
and NBER
sdecker@cdc.gov

Kosali I. Simon
Associate Professor
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
103 MVR Hall
Ithaca, NY 14850
and NBER
kis6@cornell.edu

Introduction:
The Medicaid income eligibility expansions that began in the latter half of the 1980s were
initially focused on poor, pregnant women and were intended to improve and narrow socioeconomic
disparities in infant health (The National Commission to Prevent Infant Mortality, 1988). From this
somewhat modest beginning, Medicaid has expanded dramatically to the point where today Medicaid
pays for the cost of approximately 40 percent of all births and provides health insurance for nearly 30
percent of all children in the United States.1 Further expansion of Medicaid and its look-alike programs
(e.g., the State Children's Health Insurance Program) form the basis of several state and federal proposals
to expand health insurance coverage.
Surprisingly, there is little evidence that the expansion of Medicaid has improved infant health, or
narrowed socioeconomic disparities in infant health. For example, simple descriptive statistics on infant
mortality and low-birth weight provide little evidence that Medicaid expansions have coincided with an
improvement in infant health or decreased socioeconomic disparities in infant health. Figure 1 shows a
steady decline in infant mortality from 1980 to 2000 for both white and black infants and there is no
evidence of a narrowing of the racial gap or of changes in the rate of improvement that coincide with
expansions of Medicaid.2 Rates of low birth weight have increased between 1980 and 2000 and there is
no break in trend here either that coincides with the Medicaid expansions. Likewise, it is more the
exception than the rule that more sophisticated research has uncovered a beneficial effect of Medicaid
expansions on infant or child health (Howell 2001; Hadley 2003; Levy and Meltzer 2008).
The absence of more substantial and consistent evidence demonstrating the health benefits of
Medicaid is notable because an important part of the justification for expanding Medicaid is to improve
population health by preventing illness. Specifically, the initial expansions of Medicaid that were focused
on pregnant women were partly motivated by the 1985 Institute of Medicine Report (IOM 1985) entitled
Preventing Low Birthweight, which concluded that more, and more timely, prenatal care could reduce
1

These figures are derived from statehealthfacts.org of the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation
(http://www.statehealthfacts.org). Website accessed March 14, 2008.
2
These figures are from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2002).

2

infant mortality by preventing low birth weight. The Report of the National Commission to Prevent
Infant Mortality (1988) also linked universal access to prenatal care to the prevention of low birth weight
and infant mortality, and noted the cost-effectiveness of such spending relative to post-birth intervention
to prevent infant mortality.
The jury is still out on the efficacy of Medicaid in improving infant health because even after
more than 20 years of experience there is simply too little evidence on which to base a conclusion. Part
of the explanation for the absence of more definitive evidence is the absence of suitable data and the
difficulty of conducting non-experimental research. There is relatively little data available that has
information on both insurance coverage and infant health. For example, vital statistics has information on
birth weight and other measures of infant health, but no information on health insurance status. Similarly,
while the National Health Interview Survey has information on health insurance status, it has limited
information on infant health. The lack of information about infant health and insurance coverage in the
same survey makes it difficult to link Medicaid coverage directly to infant health. Because of this, all
previous studies that exploit the natural experiment afforded by the Medicaid expansions have examined
the relationship between Medicaid eligibility and infant health (i.e., reduced form model) and not the
relationship between Medicaid (insurance) participation and infant health (i.e., structural model). While
this approach is reasonable, and will be one of the multiple approaches we take, there may be a weak link
between Medicaid eligibility and the probability that a pregnant woman has health insurance. This is
because most women, even poor women, have private insurance and because of the potential for families
to substitute public for private insurance (i.e., crowd out). Indeed, several studies of children and families
have reported large crowd out effects (Cutler and Gruber 1996; Dubay and Kenney 1997; Lo Sasso and
Buchmueller 2004; Gruber and Simon 2008). However, insurance coverage during pregnancy is the most
relevant for infant health, and there is only one study that we are aware of that has examined the effect of
the Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage of women who are pregnant (Dubay and Kenney
1997). Thus, it is difficult to assess the credibility of previous studies of the relationship between
Medicaid eligibility and infant health because little is known about the relationship between Medicaid

3

eligibility and health insurance coverage of pregnant women, which is a critical link in the causal chain of
reasoning that connects Medicaid eligibility to health.
The second impediment to establishing a credible base of evidence regarding the effect of the
Medicaid expansions on infant health is the difficulty of conducting non-experimental research even in
the context of the natural experiment provided by the Medicaid expansions. Previous studies and the
ongoing debate related to insurance crowd out have demonstrated that there are state-specific trends
correlated with the timing and magnitude of the Medicaid expansions that can significantly affect
estimates (Card and Shore-Sheppard 2004; Gruber and Simon 2008; Shore-Sheppard 2008). In short,
Medicaid expansions are not randomly occurring natural experiments.
In this paper, we begin to address some of these issues. First, we provide an extensive analysis of
the effect of Medicaid expansions on the health insurance coverage of pregnant women (infants). As
noted, there is only one previous study on this topic even though knowledge of the effects of the Medicaid
expansions on health insurance coverage is essential to its evaluation. Second, we assess the effect of the
Medicaid expansions on infant health and use of medical services associated with deliveries (e.g., prenatal
care). While this is an area with a substantial amount of prior research, we use a new data source, the
National Hospital Discharge Survey, and examine some previously unstudied outcomes. We also pay
particular attention to research design issues and assessing the threats to validity such as the existence of
state-specific trends that may be correlated with expansions in Medicaid eligibility that may explain some
of the disparate findings of previous research. Third, we combine the two reduced form analyses to
construct implied estimates of the effect of health insurance on infant health and use of medical services
associated with deliveries. Here too, we will make a novel contribution as there is no reliable evidence of
the effect of insurance status itself on infant health.

The Effect of Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance Coverage of Pregnant Women:
In the sole previous study of the effect of Medicaid expansions on the health insurance coverage
of pregnant women, Dubay and Kenney (1997) provided a simple descriptive analysis of changes in

4

health insurance coverage of pregnant women using data from the Current Population Study (CPS) from
1989 to 1993 to study health insurance coverage between 1988 and 1992. The analysis consisted of
examining changes in health insurance coverage for pregnant women with incomes less than 185 percent
of the federal poverty level, which is approximately the maximum level of income to retain eligibility for
Medicaid in 1992. The results indicated that for women in this income group, there was an increase in
Medicaid coverage, a decrease in private health insurance coverage and a decrease in the proportion of
pregnant women who are uninsured. Results differed markedly by income. For poor women, defined as
those with incomes under 100 percent of federal poverty, there was a modest increase in both Medicaid
coverage and private insurance coverage and a seven percentage point decrease in the proportion of
women uninsured between 1988 and 1992. For near-poor women with incomes between 100 and 185
percent of federal poverty, there was virtually no change in the proportion uninsured during the same
period; the proportion with Medicaid increased by approximately 15 percentage points and the proportion
with private health insurance decreased by approximately 15 percentage points. Given that private health
insurance coverage was falling generally during this period (for example private insurance coverage for
men declined by seven percentage points) Dubay and Kenney (1997) concluded that the Medicaid
expansions resulted in a net increase in insurance coverage of approximately six percentage points among
near-poor women.
There are several limitations of this study. Pregnant women in the CPS are identified by women
who have children under the age of one at the time of the survey, and questions about insurance status
refer to the year prior to the survey year. Therefore, responses to health insurance coverage questions
may reflect coverage at the time of the survey, or coverage before or after the birth of the child during the
previous year. In addition, not all children and mothers can be linked in the CPS. Also, Dubay and
Kenney (1997) did not produce an estimate of the relationship between Medicaid eligibility and insurance
coverage. Finally, the use of men as a comparison group was not justified and there are good reasons to
believe that trends in their health insurance coverage would differ from trends in the health insurance
coverage of pregnant women given differences in employment, occupation and family structure.

5

Despite the problems with this study, a potentially important finding is that Medicaid expansions
during this period may have affected a relatively small part of the target population. Relatively few poor
women were uninsured prior to the Medicaid expansions; even though the expansions may have had
relatively large effects on the proportion uninsured, the share of the population that changed from
uninsured to insured represents only a small fraction of the total population. For example, if we assume
that the Dubay and Kenney (1997) estimates are accurate, only about six percent of the population of
pregnant women with incomes between 100 and 185 percent of poverty changed insurance status (from
not covered to covered) between 1988 and 1992 even though a substantial majority was made eligible for
Medicaid during this period. In addition, Ellwood and Kenney (1995) and Simon and Handler
(forthcoming) show that many pregnant women who enroll in Medicaid do so after the first trimester.
The small fraction of the population that changed insurance status and the timing of obtaining insurance
suggest that the effect of eligibility on health is likely to be small, and the statistical power to detect
reliably small effects may be limited.
To summarize, there is only one prior study of the effect of Medicaid expansions on pregnant
women’s health insurance coverage and it is limited in a number of ways. The likely explanation for this
paucity of research is the absence of data on insurance coverage of pregnant women. To address this
shortfall in research, we will use data from the National Hospital Discharge Survey (NHDS) from 1985 to
1996. This data source provides information on the health insurance coverage of a large, nationally
representative sample of pregnant women who deliver in US hospitals. Thus, we will produce the first
comprehensive analysis of the effects of Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage of pregnant
women.

The Effect of Medicaid Expansions on Infant Health
Howell (2001) provided an analysis of the effects of the Medicaid expansions on infant health
and concluded that there was little evidence that the Medicaid expansions had an effect on low birth
weight or infant mortality. She summarized the evidence as follows:

6

•

“Limited evidence that the rate of low birth weight or prematurity declined for some women
affected by the expansions. However, a majority of studies that addressed this issue found no
effect of the expansions.” (Howell 2001, p.20)

•

“A single study finds an impact of the expansions on infant mortality. Because this study did
not include controls for socioeconomic status and has findings that are inconsistent with statelevel studies, it is difficult to draw the conclusion that the Medicaid expansions affected
infant mortality rates from this single study.” (Howell 2001, pp.20-21)

Hadley (2003) and Levy and Meltzer (2004) provided similar reviews of the literature and concluded that
there is little evidence that Medicaid expansions improved infant health.3 The absence of an effect of
Medicaid on infant health is consistent with clinical evidence that there is a limited scope for medical care
to improve birth outcomes, such as premature births and low birth weight (Strong 2000; Lu et al. 2003;
Behrman and Butler 2006).
Despite limited evidence, many advocacy groups continue to argue that Medicaid has had a
positive effect on infant health. For example, a report by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities states
the following:
“Expansions of Medicaid coverage for low-income pregnant women led to an 8.5 percent
reduction in infant mortality and a 7.8 percent reduction in the incidence of low birth
weight.” (Ku 2005, p. 4)
The findings repeated in this passage are from Currie and Gruber (1996), which is arguably the most
influential study in this area. It was the first national study, it was comprehensive in terms of the
outcomes it studied, and it used an innovative research design that exploited the legislated changes in
Medicaid. Unfortunately, effect sizes obtained in this study seem implausible if considered in light of
estimates of the effect of Medicaid expansions on insurance status reported in Dubay and Kenney (1997)
and elsewhere (e.g., Cutler and Gruber 1996). According to Dubay and Kenney (1997), it is likely that
approximately 50% of the pregnant women who enrolled in Medicaid during this period were previously
insured. If we use the 34% rate of take-up for Medicaid reported in Currie and Gruber (1996) and assume
that 50% of those were previously uninsured, then a 100% increase in Medicaid eligibility (i.e. making
every pregnant woman eligible for Medicaid) would be associated with a decrease in uninsured pregnant
3

However, Hadley (2003) puts forth several potential explanations for this general finding that are consistent with a
true benefit of Medicaid on infant health.

7

women of 17% (i.e. for every 100 pregnant women, 17 would switch status from uninsured to insured).
Therefore, estimates of the effect of Medicaid eligibility on outcomes reported in Currie and Gruber
(1996) should be multiplied by approximately five to obtain estimates of the effects on those becoming
newly insured, as outcomes are averaged over the entire population while less than 20 percent
experienced a change in insurance status. Making this calculation yields estimates that imply that
switching a woman’s insurance status from uninsured to Medicaid will decrease the probability of infant
mortality by between 150% and 190%, which seem implausible.4 Even if we double the rate of take-up to
68% and reduce the rate of crowd out by half to 25%, estimates of the effects of becoming newly insured
on infant mortality would be between 60% and 75%, which still seem too large to be plausible.
The implausible magnitude of the estimates in Currie and Gruber (1996) is likely due to the
inadequacy of the underlying natural experiment. The fact that the Medicaid expansions were not a
particularly good “natural” experiment is revealed in the sensitivity analyses conducted by Currie and
Gruber (1996). When state maternal and child health spending are included in the model, the estimate of
the effect of Medicaid eligibility on low birth weight increases by 532%. Similarly, when the number of
neonatal intensive care beds are added to the regression the estimate of the effect of Medicaid eligibility
on low birth weight increases by 160%. Estimates of the effect of Medicaid eligibility on infant mortality
are somewhat less affected, but the addition of the abortion rate to this regression model increases the
estimate of the effect of Medicaid eligibility on infant mortality by 25%. The sensitivity of estimates to
inclusion of additional variables indicates that the timing and magnitude of the Medicaid expansions were
correlated with other changes in states that significantly affected birth weight and infant mortality. It is
likely that some of these factors are confounding estimates of the effect of Medicaid eligibility on infant
health outcomes.

4

These figures are calculated using estimates of the effects of targeted Medicaid expansions reported in Table 3 of
Currie and Gruber (1996). For example, Currie and Gruber (1996) reported that a 100% increase in Medicaid
eligibility was associated with a decrease of 4.088 in infant deaths (per thousand births). To obtain the effect of
becoming newly insured, we multiply this estimate by five and divide by the mean of 10.66, which yields 1.9174
(191.74%).

8

Summary and Contributions
In sum, there is little evidence to suggest that the Medicaid expansions had a positive effect on
infant health, as measured by birth weight or low birth weight, prematurity, or infant mortality. There are
several possible explanations for this fact: low rates of Medicaid take-up, crowd out of private insurance,
and limited ability of medical care to improve birth outcomes. The apparent lack of success of the
original Medicaid expansions targeted at pregnant women and infants seems inconsistent with the
political support for later expansions such as SCHIP and expansion of Medicaid along the lines recently
enacted by Massachusetts. These later expansions of Medicaid may have little impact on health because
they suffer from the same problems that potentially explain why the earlier expansions targeted at
pregnant women and infants had few health benefits. Take-up rates remain low, crowd out of private
insurance is a continuing issue, and the link between primary care and improved health may be limited to
particular diseases or specific to the health indictors chosen. Therefore, whether or not the initial
expansions were a success in terms of improving infant health is an important research question because
of the policies the initial expansions have spawned. In addition, the absence of sufficient evidence about
the effects of the initial expansions, for example, little study of the extent of take-up and crowd out of
pregnant women, suggests the need for additional study.
Our work in this paper begins to fill in the gaps. Specifically we provide virtually the first study
of the effects of the initial Medicaid expansions on insurance coverage of pregnant women and infants,
and we provide an additional analysis of the effects of the expansions on prenatal care and infant health,
as measured by birth weight. We also study additional measures of the use of health services (e.g.,
cesarean section, length of stay) not previously examined using the National Hospital Discharge Survey.
In all analyses, we pay special attention to the empirical problems caused by the absence of a true natural
experiment. Finally, we provide estimates of the implied effect of becoming newly insured on infant
health (i.e., instrumental variables estimates).

Research Design

9

Our research design initially proceeds as if the Medicaid expansions represented a true natural
experiment. We are interested in the effect of the expansions on insurance coverage, prenatal care, and
infant health as measured by birth weight. We begin the description of the research design with the effect
on insurance coverage. For each type of health insurance category (HI), we estimate the following
regression model:

HI ijt = α j + β t + δ ELIGkjt + X i Γ + Z jt λ + u ijt
i = 1,..., N
(1) k = 1,2,3
j = 1,...,50
t = 1985,...,1996

(persons)
(race)
(states)
(years)

In equation (1), HI is a specific health insurance category (private, Medicaid, uninsured) for woman i in
state j and year t; ELIG is the fraction of women in group k, which is defined by race, in state j and year t
that are eligible for Medicaid; X are individual characteristics of pregnant women such as age and race;
and Z are the unemployment rate (lag, contemporaneous, and lead) and fraction of single males with
private insurance in state j and year t. Equation (1) also includes state ( α j ) and year ( β t ) effects. In
models in which the sample includes persons of different races, we allow state and year effects to differ
by race. We chose to define our group cells by race, in addition to state and year, because of the large
racial differences that exist in infant outcomes.
The use of the fraction of women eligible for Medicaid in each state and year to measure
Medicaid eligibility follows the innovation of Currie and Gruber (1996) and Cutler and Gruber (1996).
The key to this measure is that it consists of the fraction of a fixed sample of women in each state who are
Medicaid eligible, avoiding the endogenous relationship between Medicaid eligibility of an individual
mother and the health of that mother or her infant.5 To form the measure, we select a sample of women
aged 18 to 39 from the 1986 to 1997 March CPS surveys (covering data from 1985-1996). We adjust all
5

Currie and Gruber (1996) and Cutler and Gruber (1996) use a national sample instead of state-specific samples.
However, given that the measure is based on state variation in timing and magnitude of Medicaid expansions, using
state-samples introduces no additional variation that would bias estimates. State samples will produce less
measurement error, which is relevant to correlation between eligibility and insurance.

10

financial variables for price changes so that everyone's incomes are deflated (inflated) from the actual
year (e.g., 1985,..,1996) to the policy year (e.g., 1988) for which eligibility will be calculated. Using
these inflation-adjusted state-specific samples and the Medicaid eligibility rules in a state in a specific
year, we assign eligibility to the (fixed) state sample. So eligibility is calculated using the same sample of
women in each year for a given state. We then calculate the proportion of women aged 18 to 39 within a
race-state-year cell that would be eligible for Medicaid if they became pregnant.
Data for the analysis, which we describe in more detail below, come from hospital discharge
records in the National Hospital Discharge Survey (NHDS). The key aspect of these data is that they
provide information on insurance coverage for pregnant women at the time of delivery. We restrict the
sample to women aged 18 to 39 years. The instrument—the fraction of women that would be eligible for
Medicaid conditional on pregnancy—is merged with the NHDS data by year, state and race.
We modify this basic model in a number of ways to address specific issues. First, we allow the
eligibility measure (ELIG) to have non-linear effects, which may be likely given that higher levels of
eligibility are affecting persons with increasingly higher rates of private insurance and lower rates of
uninsured (Card and Shore-Sheppard 2004). We do so by including eligibility and eligibility squared in
the regression. Second, in some models we include state-specific trends to adjust for the less than perfect
nature of the natural experiment. State-specific trends adjust for the potential endogeneity of the
Medicaid expansions. Here too, we allow for separate race-specific state and year effects in models that
are estimated using a sample with different races. Third, we restrict the sample to the period 1985 to
1991, which is the period that witnessed the greatest change in Medicaid eligibility. As we show later,
while the fraction of Medicaid-eligible births increased from about seven percent in 1985 to almost 30
percent in 1996, most of the expansions had already taken place by 1991. Finally, we also conduct
separate analyses by race.
We estimate a similar model related to infant health outcomes: number of prenatal visits, timing
of first prenatal care visit, birth weight for gestational age, low birth weight for gestational age, cesarean

11

section, place of birth (public hospital versus non-profit or for-profit hospital) and length of stay in
hospital. For these outcomes (represented by BW), the regression model is:

~
~
~
BWijt = α~ j + β t + γ i + δ ELIGijt + Z jt λ + u~ijt
(2)

i = 1,..., N

(group)

j = 1,...,50
t = 1985,...,1996

(states)
(years)

In equation (2), the symbol ~ is used to differentiate parameters from equation (1). Data for this analysis
come from two sources: the National Hospital Discharge Survey for length of stay in hospital, cesarean
section, and place of birth, and vital records for measures of prenatal care and birth weight. Analyses of
vital statistics data are conducted using individual data collapsed into state-year-group (age by race) cells.
The index i in equation (2) reflects this fact and is defined by age and race. Models estimated for birth
weight and low birth weight are adjusted for gestational age, but are otherwise the same as equation (1).
The fraction of women eligible for Medicaid is merged to these cells by year, state and race. Here too, we
alter the model specification to allow for non-linear effects of eligibility and to control for unmeasured,
state-specific time trends. All models are estimated via ordinary least squares, with weights as noted.
An implicit estimate of the effect of insurance coverage on measures of infant health, for example
birth weight, is provided by the following:

~

(3) TOTIV

δ
=
δ

We refer to the effect of insurance on birth weight as the treatment on the treated (TOT), or more
appropriately as the local average treatment effect (LATE) because it pertains to women and infants
affected by the Medicaid expansions, who may not represent the typical Medicaid participant. As
equation (3) shows, this estimate can be derived from the ratio of the effect of Medicaid eligibility on
birth weight (BW) to the effect of Medicaid eligibility on insurance (i.e., any insurance) coverage.

12

Data
We use three primary data sources for the analysis: the National Hospital Discharge Survey
(NHDS), the National Detailed Natality Files, and the CPS. The CPS is used to calculate the fraction of
women eligible for Medicaid by race, state and year as described in the previous section of the paper. It is
also used to calculate the fraction of never-married men aged 18 to 39 who are privately insured by state
and year, one control for trends in health insurance coverage by state.

National Hospital Discharge Survey
Our study of the effect of Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage of mothers and
infants at the time of birth relies on the National Hospital Discharge Survey (NHDS), conducted by the
National Center for Health Statistics. The data are collected from a sample of inpatient records obtained
from a national probability sample of non-Federal, short-stay hospitals (defined as those with average
length-of-stay of less than thirty days) within the 50 U.S. states. The NHDS follows a three-stage sample
design using geographically defined sampling units to select a sample of hospitals and a sample of records
within hospitals. All analyses use sample weights which inflate estimates by reciprocals of the
probabilities of sample selection and adjust for non-response among sampled hospitals.6 The NHDS
contains information on patient age, sex, race, up to three expected sources of payment, and up to seven
patient diagnoses coded according to the International Classification of Diseases- 9th Revision- Clinical
Modification (ICD-9-CM) (Public Health Service, 1998).
We study the effect of Medicaid eligibility on insurance coverage of mothers at the time of birth
using weighted linear probability models, controlling for mother’s age category (18-24, 25-29, and 30-34,
relative to 35-39), race (black and other race relative to white), state-specific unemployment rate (lag,
contemporaneous, and lead), state-specific private insurance rate for males, year and state effects, and
race-specific year and state effects (in models which pool all races).

6

Dennison and Pokras (2000) provide additional information about the design of the NHDS.

13

We examine the effect of Medicaid expansions on the primary expected source of payment for
delivering mothers, with expected source of payment categorized as Medicaid, private insurance
(including a small number of cases coded as worker’s compensation), and uninsured (cases coded as self
pay or charity). Our initial sample for 1985 to 1996 consists of 299,634 women aged 18 to 39 delivering
a baby (identified in NHDS by primary ICD-9-CM of V27). To put this sample size in perspective, the
CPS has about 5,000 women a year who have had a baby in the last year, and it is not possible to know
for sure when the insurance data pertain to relative to the pregnancy, whereas here we know when
insurance status is coded (at time of delivery). We use the restricted-access version of the NHDS which
contains patient zip code of residence and allows us to infer state of residence. We drop 6,918 (about 2%)
of mothers with missing, invalid or foreign zip codes of residence or who live in Puerto Rico, U.S. Virgin
Islands, and two U.S. states where the number of records is too small to estimate state fixed effects. We
have 284,179 observations after dropping 7,547 records with unknown or other primary expected source
of payment and 990 records with primary expected source of payment of Medicare. 7
In addition to insurance status, we also analyze the effect of Medicaid eligibility on four measures
of the use of health services from the NHDS. First, we consider whether or not the birth took place via
Cesarean section, a relatively rare occurrence for Medicaid patients (Gregory et al., 1999). Second, we
consider whether a mother gives birth in a public hospital (as opposed to a non-profit or for-profit
hospital). Poor and uninsured women are more likely than others to give birth in public hospitals, and
one way that a change in insurance status may affect infant health is by giving mothers access to hospitals
that are more often used by insured mothers and may differ in quality of care (Aizer, Lleras-Muney, and
Stabile, 2005). Finally, we consider whether or not the length-of-stay in the hospital of mother or infant

7

We impute race for the 52,469 (nearly 19%) mothers in the sample who are missing this information using data
from non-missing observations. For mothers whose race is reported, we use a multinomial logit model to predict
race as a function of the fraction of the population of women aged 18 to 39 who are black or other race in the
mother’s zip code of residence, using information from the 1990 Census. We also control for age and age squared.
We then apply these coefficients to data for those missing race in the NHDS, and assign race based on cut offs that
match the observed race distribution among those not missing race. We have verified, however, that our results are
not substantively different when we drop those missing race from the analysis.

14

is more than two days, as this may be an indication of relatively poor health at the time of delivery (for
infants, see, for example, Phibbs and Schmitt, 2006).8
In addition to age and race, our independent variable of interest – Medicaid eligibility – varies by
state, year and race. All analyses thus allow for arbitrary correlation of standard errors within state-yearrace cells (Moulton 1990; Donald and Lang 2001).9

Natality Files
In addition to the delivery-related outcomes from the NHDS, we further assess the impact of
Medicaid expansions on infant health and the utilization of medical services by pregnant women using
data from individual birth records. Detailed information on all individual births occurring in the 50 states
and D.C. are submitted by hospitals to state vital registration offices, which is then reported to the
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). Information on each birth includes date and place of birth
along with the demographic characteristics of the mother such as age, race, education, marital status, and
parity. We employ data from the Detailed Natality Files for the years 1985 through 1996, enveloping the
major Medicaid income eligibility expansions that took place. The sample is limited to women between
the ages of 18 to 39 who had non-plural births. Records from two small states are also excluded in order
to facilitate comparison with the results based on the NHDS sample and the construction of the implicit
IV estimates. This yields a final analysis sample of 39,238,023 births.
We examine the effects of Medicaid expansions on pregnant women’s health care utilization, as
measured by the frequency and timing of prenatal care visits. In addition to the total number of prenatal
8

The sample for our analysis of length-of-stay among infants consisted of 294,721 records after dropping 16,687
records for one of the reasons discussed for the sample of mothers. We imputed race for 52,003 infants based on the
race distribution of women aged 18 to 39 in the zip code, though again, our results are not sensitive to dropping
infants whose race was imputed.
9
Errors are not clustered by sampling design unit, since no design information is extant for the NHDS prior to 1988.
Although weighted linear probability analysis of the effect of Medicaid eligibility (as the only covariate) on
Medicaid insurance status using the 1990 NHDS sample of mothers found that standard errors on the eligibility
variable are 2.3 times higher when allowing for clustering of errors among sampling design units compared to no
clustering, errors are actually slightly higher when allowing for clustering by state-year-race cell compared to
sampling design unit. The approach taken in this paper is therefore expected to result in comparable or conservative
standard errors compared to analyses that were able to cluster errors by sampling design unit.

15

visits over the pregnancy, two dichotomous indicators are constructed for whether prenatal care was
initiated on time (during the first trimester) or late (during the third trimester), respectively. An additional
indicator for whether prenatal care was adequate is also defined. Adequacy is based on the
Kessner/Institute of Medicine criteria, which considers both the timing and frequency of care (Kessner et
al., 1973). According to these criteria, prenatal care is considered adequate if it is initiated in the first
trimester and is composed of a minimum number of visits depending on gestation. Thus, for a normal 36weeks gestation period, adequate care constitutes first-trimester initiation and more than eight prenatal
care visits over the term. We examine standard measures of infant health: birth weight in grams, and a
dichotomous indicator for low birth weight (less than 2500 grams). While there are other, more specific
measures of infant health that one may consider, low birth weight remains a strong predictor of perinatal
health and may also be associated with long-term developmental outcomes (Hack et al., 1995). Focusing
on birth weight further allows a comparison of our results with those in the literature. Models estimated
for birth weight and low birth weight are adjusted for age of gestation, since the clinical literature
suggests that the ability of medical care to affect fetal growth may be greater than its ability to affect
prematurity, since relatively little is known about the causes of preterm delivery (Joyce, 1999; Hack and
Merkatz, 1995; Li et al., 1993).10 Specifically, the models control for the percent of births in each cell
which are very premature (gestation less than 32 weeks) and premature (32-36 weeks), in reference to
normal gestation (37 weeks or above).
For computing convenience, specifications are estimated on cells collapsed by mothers’ age
groups (18-24, 25-29, and 30-34 relative to 35-39), race groups (white, black, other), state of maternal
residence and year of birth.11 Although the NCHS natality files are relatively complete, four states
(California, New York, Texas and Washington) had incomplete information on educational attainment

10

Models estimated for gestation did not find any significant or consistent effects of Medicaid eligibility.
Thus, for the full time-period analysis, there are 7,344 cells (51 states times 12 years times 4 age groups times 3
race groups). All models are weighted by cell frequencies. With this weighting scheme, models estimated on
collapsed cells lead to identical parameter estimates as those estimated on the individual records. Standard errors
are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within state, year, and race cells.

11

16

during various years from 1985 through 1991.12 Since all models are weighted by cell frequencies, this is
not a significant cause for concern. As a sensitivity check, we re-estimated all models omitting these four
states for the time periods during which the education records were incomplete. The results are quite
similar to those reported below.

Results
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Insurance Coverage of Pregnant Women
The first question we examined was the effect of expanding Medicaid eligibility on the health
insurance status of pregnant women. Table 1 presents the estimates. For each type of insurance coverage
including uninsured or any insurance, we estimated several models that differ in the way Medicaid
eligibility is entered into the model, and in the control variables that are included. Medicaid eligibility is
first entered using a linear term, and next using both a linear and a quadratic term to allow for non-linear
effects. We also used two sets of control variables: one that excluded state-specific trends and one with
state-specific trends. In sum, we estimated four separate regression models for each type of insurance.
Estimates in Table 1 indicate that Medicaid eligibility is positively associated with Medicaid
coverage and having any type of insurance, and negatively associated with private insurance coverage and
being uninsured. Estimates are quite sensitive to the inclusion of state-specific trends, which is consistent
with what has been noted in the earlier crowd out literature. Specifically, estimates in the top row (linear
specification) indicate that a 20 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility, which is the
approximate change that occurred over the 1985 to 1996 period (see Figure 2), is associated with 3.5
(with state trends) to 5.6 (without state trends) percentage point increase in Medicaid coverage among
pregnant women ages 18 to 39. Given that the mean rate of Medicaid coverage was approximately 0.2 in
1985 (see Figure 3), these estimates suggest that the Medicaid expansions during this period increased
Medicaid coverage by between 18 and 28 percent. Estimates in second row (quadratic specification)

12

Educational information is incomplete for the following years: CA -1985-1988; NY - 1988-1990; TX - 19851988; WA - 1985-1991.

17

suggest a similar conclusion, although there do appear to be non-linear effects. Medicaid take-up (i.e.,
marginal participation) appears to increase with increases in eligibility. Based on estimates obtained from
models that include state-specific trends, the marginal Medicaid take-up rate is 0.122 when eligibility is
0.20 (20 percent of population is eligible) and 0.182 when eligibility is 0.30.
In regards to private insurance coverage, estimates in the top row (linear specification) indicate
that a 20 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility is associated with a 1.9 (with state trends) to 2.9
(without state trends) percentage point decrease in private insurance coverage. Estimates in the second
row (quadratic specification) show that marginal declines in private insurance are greater with increases
in eligibility. Estimates from models that include state-specific trends indicate that the marginal decline
in private insurance is 0.005 when eligibility is 0.20 and 0.112 when eligibility is 0.30. The decreases in
private insurance coverage suggested by estimates in the top row represent approximately 50 percent of
the increase in Medicaid coverage, or what has commonly been referred to as crowd out. Moreover, these
estimates of crowd out do not depend on model specification even though the addition of state-specific
trends had a significant mediating effect on the estimates of the effect of eligibility. Allowing for nonlinear effects suggest virtually no crowd out at low levels of eligibility but up to 60 percent crowd out
when 30 percent of population is eligible.
Consistent with these estimates of crowd out, expansions in Medicaid eligibility are associated
with smaller decreases in the proportion uninsured than increases in the proportion covered by Medicaid.
Estimates in the top row indicate that a 20 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility is associated
with a 1.6 to 2.7 percentage point decrease in the proportion uninsured; these percentage point changes
represent relative effects of between 9 to 16 percent given a mean proportion uninsured of approximately
17 percent in 1985 (see Figure 3). The effects of eligibility on uninsured are also non-linear; when
eligibility is 0.20, the marginal effect of eligibility on uninsured is -0.126, but when eligibility is 0.30, the
marginal effect of eligibility on uninsured is -0.07 (based on estimates controlling for state-specific
trends.).

18

To assess whether the results differ by race or time period, we conducted additional analyses. In
Table 2 we present estimates of the effect of Medicaid eligibility on health insurance status of white
women. Estimates in Table 2 are similar to those in Table 1, but there are some differences. Estimates in
Table 2 suggest that white women have relatively higher take-up rates than black women, having rates
that range from 0.17 when 20 percent of population is eligible to 0.25 when 30 percent of population is
eligible (based on the quadratic specification with state-specific trends). There also appears to be slightly
larger and more pronounced non-linear effects of eligibility on private insurance for white women.
Estimates obtained from models that include state-specific trends indicate that the marginal effect of
eligibility on private insurance is -0.05 when eligibility is 0.20 and it is -0.21 when eligibility is 0.30.
These estimates imply rates of crowd out that are significantly higher than those implied by the estimates
in Table 1. For white women, estimates from models that include controls for state-specific trends
suggest rates of crowd out of between 32 to 84 percent, as eligibility goes from 20 to 30 percent of the
population. Estimates relating to the effect of eligibility on uninsured are consistent with these large
estimates of crowd out; the marginal effect of eligibility on uninsured is -0.11 when eligibility is 0.20 and
-0.05 when eligibility is 0.30 (figures derived from estimates obtained including controls for state-specific
trends). In sum, estimates in Table 2 suggest that expansions in Medicaid eligibility initially decreased
the proportion of uninsured white women, but as eligibility increased, the expansions resulted in near
complete crowd out of private insurance and relatively little change in the proportion uninsured.
In Table 3, we present estimates of the effect of Medicaid eligibility for years 1985 to 1991, the
period that witnessed the largest expansions in Medicaid eligibility (see Figure 2). We only discuss
estimates obtained from models that include state-specific trends. Overall estimates in Table 2 indicate
less crowd out of private insurance and more pronounced non-linear effects. Medicaid (marginal) take-up
rates increase with eligibility; when eligibility is 0.15, as in the beginning of period, (marginal) take-up
rates are basically zero, but when eligibility is 0.25 (highest during this period), (marginal) take-up rates
are 0.13. Similar nonlinearities characterize estimates of the effect of eligibility on private insurance.
However, estimates indicate no decline in private insurance and virtually no crowd out from Medicaid

19

throughout most of the range of Medicaid eligibility observed during the period. It is not until eligibility
rises to 25 percent that it is negatively associated with private insurance. Given this pattern of results, the
marginal effect of Medicaid eligibility on the proportion uninsured is between -0.12 and -0.14.
Our results of the effect of Medicaid eligibility on the health insurance coverage of pregnant
women are consistent with those reported by Dubay and Kenney (1997). The Medicaid expansions of the
late 1980s and early 1990s were associated with a significant and relatively large increase in Medicaid
participation, but substantially smaller decreases in the proportion uninsured because a large fraction of
the newly enrolled Medicaid participants previously had private insurance. The less than perfect
“experiment” of the Medicaid expansions warrants appropriate caution in reaching conclusions, but
assuming that the inclusion of state-specific trends, state unemployment rates and the fraction of single
men with private insurance addresses the endogenous nature of the Medicaid expansions, the results of
the current analysis suggest that Medicaid expansions for pregnant women induced a significant
substitution of private for public coverage and as a result, increased the cost of expanding public
insurance coverage. The problem was particularly severe for white women and for later years of the
expansions when eligibility reached relatively large portions of the population. In addition, the relatively
small changes in the proportion of the population that was uninsured as a result of the expansions,
approximately 10 percent or so, suggests that analyses of the effects of the Medicaid expansions on infant
health will have small population effects that may be difficult to detect reliably.

Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Prenatal Care and Birth Weight—Natality Files
Estimates of the effects of Medicaid eligibility on prenatal care and infant health derived from the
Natality files are presented in Tables 4 through 7. Statistical analyses of these outcomes are similar to
those for insurance. We conduct analyses using the entire sample for the 1985 to 1996 period and then
analyses by race and time period. However, because we expect Medicaid eligibility to affect loweducated women the most, in some analyses we limit the sample to those with less than a high school
degree. Similar analyses could not be conducted for insurance because the NHDS does not provide

20

information on education. For each outcome, we show estimates from two models: one that excludes
state-specific trends and one that includes these controls.
Table 4 presents estimates for the entire sample for the period 1985 to 1996. We focus on
estimates obtained from models that include state-specific trends, as the inclusion of these controls
appears to affect estimates considerably. Focusing on the first row of Table 4, estimates indicate that
Medicaid eligibility is not significantly associated with the timing or number of prenatal care visits, birth
weight, or the incidence of low-birth weight. Estimates are also extremely small. For example, a 20
percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility, which is approximately the change in eligibility that
occurred over this period, is associated with 0.02 (0.1 percent) fewer prenatal care visits; a 0.005
percentage point (0.7 percent) lower rate of adequate prenatal care; a 0.3 gram decrease in birth weight;
and a 0.0003 percentage point (0.6 percent) increase in the prevalence of low-birth weight. Estimates in
row 2 suggest equally small effects. While there is some evidence of nonlinear effects for the measures
of prenatal care, the range of marginal effects for the observed variation in eligibility is small and the
magnitudes of the marginal effects are also small and similar to those for the linear specification. Most
importantly, estimates suggest little evidence that Medicaid eligibility increased use of prenatal care or
improved birth weight.
Despite the large sample size underlying estimates in Table 4 and the relatively precise nature of
the estimates, our analysis may lack statistical power to detect reliably expected effect sizes. The
explanation for this is the fact that Medicaid eligibility is associated with relatively small changes in
insurance status. Consider results (row 1) from Table 1 that suggest that a 100 percentage point increase
in Medicaid eligibility is associated with an 8 to 13 percentage point increase (decrease) in insurance
coverage (uninsured). Assuming that the effects of the eligibility expansions on prenatal care and birth
weight work only through increasing the proportion of the population with insurance, we would follow
equation (3) and multiply estimates in Table 4 by a factor of 8 to 13 to obtain the (instrumental variablesLATE) effects of gaining insurance coverage on prenatal care and birth weight. Doing so yields a
relatively large range of estimates of the effect of insurance coverage. For example, if we construct a 95

21

percent confidence interval around the estimate of the effect of eligibility on the incidence of low-birth
weight and multiply by a factor of 10 (roughly midpoint of 8 and 13), we obtain estimates of the effect of
insurance coverage on the prevalence of low-birth weight of between -1.4 to 4.7 percentage points, which
are large effects relative to the overall sample mean (5.6 percent), and even relative to the mean among
low educated mothers (6.5 percent). While this interval likely indicates no beneficial effect of Medicaid
on weight for gestational age, we cannot rule out a clinically important improvement (-1.4 percentage
points). An alternative way to illustrate this point is to multiply the standard errors of the estimate (linear
specification) of the effect of eligibility on low-birth weight by the same factor (10), which yields an
estimate of 0.016. Standard errors of this magnitude indicate that we could not reject an effect of
insurance coverage on the incidence of low birth-weight for gestational age of less than 3.1 percentage
points, which is a non-trivial effect. In short, the absence of a substantial effect of Medicaid eligibility on
insurance coverage raises the possibility that we do not have sufficient power to detect reasonably sized
effects of eligibility on prenatal care and birth weight. Only if insurance coverage has very large effects
would we be able to detect them reliably.13 Nevertheless, point estimates indicate that Medicaid
eligibility does not increase use and adequacy of prenatal care or improve birth weight.
In Table 5, we present the estimates of the effect of Medicaid eligibility on prenatal care and birth
weight of white women. Note that estimates of the effect of Medicaid eligibility on insurance for this
group indicated high rates of crowd out and little change in the proportion uninsured. Therefore, we
would expect very little effect of the Medicaid expansions on prenatal care and birth weight for this
sample (assuming that the primary causal mechanism is a change in insurance). In fact, estimates in
Table 5 are very similar to those in Table 4, which is not that surprising given that white women
constitute nearly 80 percent of the sample used to obtain estimates in Table 4.

13

On the other hand, if Medicaid expansions affected prenatal care and birth weight through other avenues (such as
increased access to medical care for the uninsured because of the cash infusion to providers from Medicaid
expansions) than solely by increasing the proportion of the population with insurance, we may expect larger reduced
form effects of eligibility.

22

One way to improve the statistical power of the analysis is to limit the sample to those most likely
affected by the Medicaid eligibility expansions (those with a high school degree or less) which we are
able to do only in the vital statistics data (thus not on the insurance outcomes) due to a lack of educational
information in the NHDS. Those with relatively less education should have higher Medicaid take-up
rates and larger changes in insurance coverage than those with more education because the latter group is
unlikely to be affected by the eligibility expansions. Therefore, we expect somewhat larger reduced form
estimates. Table 6 presents estimates pertaining to the low-educated sample.
Estimates in Table 6 are slightly more suggestive of a beneficial effect of the Medicaid
expansions. The coefficients on Medicaid eligibility indicate that expansions in eligibility were
associated with an increase in the number and adequacy of prenatal care visits and an increase in birth
weight. Estimates for low-birth weight indicate an increase in prevalence—not the expected decrease.
However, estimates remain small in magnitude. For example, the estimate of the effect of eligibility on
birth weight indicates that a 20 percentage point change in eligibility is associated with a 1.3 gram
increase in birth weight. Further, if we assume a scaling factor of 5 (i.e., insurance coverage for this
group goes up by 20 percentage points as a result of a 100 percentage point increase in eligibility) for this
group, the instrumental variables (LATE) estimator for birth weight is 33 grams (1%).14 Magnitudes of
other estimates are equally small, although implied instrumental variables (IV) estimates related to the
prenatal care variables are non-trivial (using a scaling factor of 5). Implied IV estimates for the number of
prenatal care visits is 1.5. Estimates in the second row (quadratic specification) do not indicate any
significant nonlinear effects that substantially affect inferences.
The final set of estimates we present are for the years 1985 to 1991, the period that witnessed the
largest increases in Medicaid eligibility. This is also the period that had the least amount of crowd out of
private insurance coverage and the greatest increase in the proportion of the population covered by
insurance, although that proportion remains a small fraction (0.12 to 0.14) of the population. Estimates

14

The confidence interval of the implied instrumental variables (LATE) estimate of the effect of insurance on the
incidence of low-birth weight for gestational age is -0.011 to 0.029, which is a relatively large interval.

23

for this period are in Table 7. Here we again see some evidence that the Medicaid expansions had
beneficial effects: increased number and adequacy of prenatal care, and increased birth weight. However,
here too, estimates remain quite small in magnitude. Estimates of the effect of Medicaid eligibility on the
number of prenatal care visits and birth weight suggests that a 20 percentage point increase in Medicaid
eligibility is associated with a 0.21 increase in the number of prenatal care visits and 0.72 gram increase
in birth weight. If we use estimates from Table 3 to construct implied IV estimates, the (instrumental
variables) effect of gaining insurance coverage on the number of prenatal care visits is large—10.5 visits
(10 times 1.046). However, there is no correspondingly large estimate related to birth weight (or low
birth weight); the IV estimate for birth weight (low-birth weight) is small—35.9 grams (-0.002).

Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Delivery Length of Stay, Cesarean Section and Location of Delivery
An advantage of the NHDS is that we have information about additional health related outcomes
that are not available on Natality files: a dichotomous indicator of whether the infant or the mother stayed
in hospital more than two days, whether the mother had a Cesarean Section (C-section), and whether the
delivery occurred in a public hospital. A disadvantage of the NHDS is sample size, which is relatively
small for our purposes and results in relatively imprecise parameter estimates. Statistical analyses of
these outcomes are similar to those previously presented. Results are presented in Table 8.
Estimates in Table 8 indicate that Medicaid eligibility is not associated with length of stay of the
mother or the infant; estimates from models that include state trends are small relative to the mean and not
statistically significant. For example, a 20 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility is associated
with a 0.8 percentage point decrease in the probability that an infant stayed more than two days and 1.4
percentage point increase in the probability that a mother stayed more than two days. Relatively long
lengths of stay may be an indicator of poor health, so the absence of any consistent association between
Medicaid eligibility and length of stay of the mother or infant accords with evidence from birth
certificates that found little evidence of an association between Medicaid eligibility and birth weight.
Medicaid eligibility is significantly associated with C- section. Focusing on estimates obtained from

24

models that include state-specific trends, a 20 percentage point increase in Medicaid eligibility is
associated with a 2.4 percentage point increase in rate of C- section. For C-sections, there appears to be a
significant non-linear effect. The marginal effect of Medicaid eligibility on the probability of having a Csection decreases slightly with eligibility; when eligibility is 20 percent, the marginal effect is 0.149, and
when eligibility is 30 percent, the marginal effect is 0.114.15 Finally, estimates in Table 8 indicate that
Medicaid eligibility is positively associated with delivering in a public hospital, but the estimate is
imprecise and not statistically significant.

Conclusions
The relatively large proportion of the US population that is uninsured is a longstanding issue of
concern for researchers and policymakers. To address this problem, state and federal governments have
dramatically expanded Medicaid over the last twenty years to provide insurance for an increasingly large
proportion of poor and near-poor persons, and further expansions have been proposed as a way to expand
health insurance.
Expansion of Medicaid may have several benefits besides providing insurance (e.g., indirect
income support), but an important rationale for expansion is that it will decrease the proportion of the
population that is uninsured, and as a result increase use of health care services and improve health. This
is the rationale that motivated the initial expansions in Medicaid that pertained to pregnant women. The
question we sought to answer was whether the initial expansions of Medicaid that were targeted at
pregnant women achieved these goals. Did the Medicaid expansions significantly reduce the proportion
of pregnant women who were uninsured? And did these expansions result in increased use of health care
services by pregnant women and improved birth weight? Surprisingly, there has been only one limited
analysis of the former question and while there has been several studies of the effect of Medicaid
expansions on use of services and infant health, there is no consensus conclusion.

15

These marginal effects of eligibility on C-section rate imply implausibly large instrumental variables estimates of
the effect of becoming insured on C-section.

25

Our analysis of the effect of the Medicaid expansions on the health insurance coverage of
pregnant women suggests that much of the increase in Medicaid participation that resulted from more
generous income eligibility thresholds came at the expense of private insurance coverage. Over the entire
period, we estimate that 50% of the increase in Medicaid participation came from private insurance.
Crowd out of private insurance was particularly severe among white women and at higher levels of
eligibility, which is consistent with the higher rates of private insurance coverage among white women
and women with higher incomes. For every newly insured woman, the government paid for at least one
additional woman who would have otherwise had private insurance. Indeed, for some demographic
groups, estimates indicate that approximately 80% of the increase in Medicaid came from private
insurance. Nevertheless, the Medicaid expansions did reduce the proportion of pregnant women who
were uninsured by approximately 10 to 15% from the level of uninsured in 1985.
Given that the Medicaid expansions had a relatively small effect on the proportion of women
uninsured, we would not expect these expansions to have much of an impact on population health. In
fact, this is what we found in our analyses of the effect of the expansions on prenatal care, birth weight
and hospital length of stay. Changes in Medicaid eligibility were associated with very small changes in
prenatal care use, birth weight for gestational age and incidence of low-birth weight for gestational age.
However, we also attempted to assess whether gaining health insurance mattered by constructing
instrumental variables (LATE) estimates of the effect of gaining insurance on prenatal care and birth
weight. Unfortunately, we lacked the statistical power to achieve this goal with certainty. Instrumental
variables estimates suggest that the Medicaid expansions may have had some significant effects on
prenatal care and birth weight, particularly for low-educated women. We did find some evidence that the
Medicaid expansions and the increase in health insurance coverage that resulted from them were
associated with increases in the use and adequacy of prenatal care and an increase in birth weight of
approximately 35 grams (1%). There was very little evidence that the Medicaid expansions affected the
incidence of low-birth weight even for the low-educated group that seemed to increase use of prenatal

26

care services the most. Similarly, we found little evidence that Medicaid eligibility was associated with
longer delivery length of stay for either the infant or the mother.
Based on the evidence presented, we believe that the Medicaid expansions for pregnant women
had limited effects perhaps because of the significant crowd out of private insurance that occurs, or
because they increase the use of services that may have limited impact on birth weight. Future health
policy should take these findings into account when developing policies and programs to improve infant
health. The difficult part is to identify programs that are effective.

27

References
Aizer, A., A. Lleras-Muney, and M. Stabile. 2002. Access to care, provider choice, and the infant health
gradient,” American Economic Review 95(2): 248-252.
Behrman, R.E., and A.S. Butler 2006. Preterm birth: causes, consequences, and prevention. Washington
(DC): Institute of Medicine
Card, D., and L.D. Shore-Sheppard. 2004. Using discontinuous eligibility rules to identify the effects of
the Federal Medicaid expansions on low-income children. The Review of Economics and Statistics 2004
86(3):752-766.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2002. Infant mortality and low birth weight among black
and white infants—United States, 1980—2000. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 51(27): 589592.
Currie J, and J Gruber. 1996. Health insurance eligibility, utilization of medical care, and child health.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111: 431-466.
Cutler, D., and J. Gruber. 1996. Does public insurance crowd out private insurance?” Quarterly Journal
of Economic 111: 391-430.
Dennison C., and R. Pokras. 2000. Design and operation of the National Hospital Discharge Survey:
1998 redesign. Vital and Health Statistics 1(39): 1–13.
Donald, S,., and K. Lang. 2001. Inferences with difference in differences and other panel data. Boston
University Working Paper.
Dubay, L., and G. Kenney. 1997. Did the Medicaid expansions for pregnant women crowd-out private
insurance?” Health Affairs 16(1): 185-193.
Ellwood, M., and G. Kenney. 1995. Medicaid and pregnant women: Who is being enrolled and when?"
Health Care Financing Review 17(2): 7-28.
Gregory, K.D., E. Ramicone, L. Chan, and K.L. Kahn. 1999. Cesarean deliveries for Medicaid patients:
A comparison in public and private hospitals in Los Angeles County,” American Journal of Obstetrics
and Gynecology 180(5): 1177-1184.
Gruber, J., and K. Simon. 2008. Crowd-out ten years later: Have recent public insurance expansions
crowded out private health insurance?" Journal of Health Economics 27: 201–217
Hack M. N. Klein, and G.H. Taylor. 1995. Long-term developmental outcomes of low birth weight
infants. The Future of Children 5(1): 176-196.
Hack, M. and I. Merkatz. 1995. Preterm delivery and low birth weight – a dire legacy. New England
Journal of Medicine 333: 1772-1773.
Hadley, J. 2003. Sicker and poorer--the consequences of being uninsured: a review of the research on the
relationship between health insurance, medical care use, health, work, and income. Medical Care
Research and Review. 60(2 Suppl):3S-75S.

28

Howell, E.M. 2001. The impact of the Medicaid expansions for pregnant women: A synthesis of the
evidence. Medical Care Research and Review 58(1): 3-30.
Institute of Medicine Report (IOM). 1985. Preventing low birthweight. Washington DC: National
Academy Press.
Joyce, T. 1999. Impact of augmented prenatal care on birth outcomes of Medicaid recipients in New
York City. Journal of Health Economics 18: 31-67.
Kessner D.M., J. Singer, C.E. Kalk, and E.R. Schlesinger. 1973. Infant death: An analysis by maternal
risk and health care. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine and National Academy of
Scientists.
Ku, L. 2005. Medicaid: Improving health, saving lives” Center for Budget and Policy Priorities,
Washington D.C., available at http://www.cbpp.org/7-19-05health.pdf (accessed September 26, 2008).
Levy, H., and D. Meltzer. 2004. What do we really know about whether health insurance affects health?”
pp179-204 in C. McLaughlin ed Health policy and the uninsured. Urban Institute Press, Washington
D.C.
Li, C.Q. et al. 1993. The impact on infant birth weight and gestational age of Cotinine-validated
smoking reduction during pregnancy. Journal of the American Medical Association 269: 1519-1524.
Lo Sasso, A.T., and T.C. Buchmueller. 2004. The effect of the State Children's Health Insurance
Program on health insurance coverage. Journal of Health Economics 23(5): 1059-82.
Lu, M., V. Tache, G.R. Alexander, M. Kotelchuck, et al. 2003. Preventing low birth weight: Is prenatal
care the answer?” Journal of Maternal-Fetal and Neonatal Medicine 13(6): 362-380.
Moulton, B.R. 1990. An illustration of a pitfall in estimating the effects of aggregate variables in micro
units,” Review of Economics and Statistics LXXII: 334–338.
National Commission to Prevent Infant Mortality. 1988. Death before life: The tragedy of infant
mortality. Washington D.C.
Phibbs, C.S., and S.K. Schmitt. 2006. Estimates of the cost and length of stay changes that can be
attributed to one-week increases in gestational age for premature infants. Early Human Development
82(2): 85-95.
Public Health Service and Health Care Financing Administration. 1998. International classification of
diseases, 9th revision, clinical modification, 6th edition. Washington DC: Public Health Service.
Shore-Sheppard, L. 2008. Stemming the tide? The effect of expanding Medicaid eligibility on health
insurance coverage. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 8(2): Article 6.
Simon, K.I., and A. Handler. Forthcoming. Welfare reform and insurance coverage during the pregnancy
period: Implications for preconception and interconception care. Women’s Health Issues.

29

Strong, T. 2000. Expecting trouble: The myth of prenatal care in America. University Press, New York.

30

Table 1
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Health Insurance Coverage
National Hospital Discharge Survey 1985 to 1996, All Races

Medicaid

Private Insurance

Any Insurance

Uninsured

Eligibility

0.278
[0.054]***

0.173
[0.047]***

-0.145
[0.052]***

-0.093
[0.056]*

0.133
[0.037]***

0.08
[0.044]*

-0.133
[0.037]***

-0.08
[0.044]*

Eligibility

0.254
[0.135]*
0.041
[0.199]

0.001
[0.107]
0.303
[0.169]*

0.086
[0.137]
-0.401
[0.208]*

0.239
[0.133]*
-0.585
[0.205]***

0.34
[0.099]***
-0.36
[0.155]**

0.239
[0.105]**
-0.282
[0.171]*

-0.34
[0.099]***
0.36
[0.155]**

-0.239
[0.105]**
0.282
[0.171]*

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.296

0.296

0.623

0.623

0.919

0.919

0.081

0.081

Eligibility Squared

State Trends

Mean of Dep. Var.

The table reports coefficients from weighted linear probability models controlling for race, age categories, unemployment rate by
state-year with one lead and lag, the fraction of never-married men aged 18 to 39 privately insured by state and year, and racespecific year and state effects. Standard errors are correlated by state-year-race cell and are in brackets. The sample size is
284,179 . ***significant at 1%, * * significant at 5%, * significant at 10%

31

Table 2
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Health Insurance Coverage
National Hospital Discharge Survey 1985 to 1996, White Only

Medicaid

Private Insurance

Any Insurance

Uninsured

Eligibility

0.333
[0.071]***

0.185
[0.053]***

-0.176
[0.070]**

-0.083
[0.070]

0.157
[0.044]***

0.101
[0.049]**

-0.157
[0.044]***

-0.101
[0.049]**

Eligibility

0.153
[0.233]
0.378
[0.456]

-0.004
[0.159]
0.43
[0.338]

0.14
[0.230]
-0.664
[0.454]

0.253
[0.198]
-0.766
[0.405]*

0.293
[0.152]*
-0.286
[0.275]

0.249
[0.177]
-0.336
[0.360]

-0.293
[0.152]*
0.286
[0.275]

-0.249
[0.177]
0.336
[0.360]

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.224

0.224

0.703

0.703

0.927

0.927

0.073

0.073

Eligibility Squared

State Trends

Mean of Dep. Var.

The table reports coefficients from weighted linear probability models controlling for race, age categories, unemployment rate
by state-year with one lead and lag, the fraction of never-married men aged 18 to 39 privately insured by state and year, and
race-specific year and state effects. Standard errors are correlated by state-year-race cell and are in brackets. The sample size
is 200,217 . ***significant at 1%, * * significant at 5%, * significant at 10%

32

Table 3
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Health Insurance Coverage
National Hospital Discharge Survey 1985 to 1991, All Races

Medicaid

Private Insurance

Any Insurance

Uninsured

Eligibility

0.295
[0.060]***

0.149
[0.058]**

-0.132
[0.067]**

-0.032
[0.064]

0.163
[0.051]***

0.117
[0.049]**

-0.163
[0.051]***

-0.117
[0.049]**

Eligibility

0.076
[0.130]
0.415
[0.208]**

-0.18
[0.109]*
0.627
[0.191]***

0.183
[0.147]
-0.598
[0.236]**

0.352
[0.131]***
-0.732
[0.219]***

0.259
[0.113]**
-0.183
[0.181]

0.172
[0.104]*
-0.105
[0.178]

-0.259
[0.113]**
0.183
[0.181]

-0.172
[0.104]*
0.105
[0.178]

State Trends

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Mean of Dep. Var.

0.25

0.25

0.65

0.65

0.90

0.90

0.10

0.10

Eligibility Squared

The table reports coefficients from weighted linear probability models controlling for race, age categories, unemployment rate by
state-year with one lead and lag, the fraction of never-married men aged 18 to 39 privately insured by state and year, and racespecific year and state effects. Standard errors are correlated by state-year-race cell and are in brackets. The sample size is
151,232 . ***significant at 1%, * * significant at 5%, * significant at 10%

33

Table 4
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Prenatal Care and Birth Weight
National Natality Files 1985 to 1996, All Races
Prenatal Visits

1st Trimester Care

3rd Trimester Care

Adequate Prenatal Care

Birth Weight

Low Birth Weight

0.24642
(0.23598)
-1.22301**
(0.51456)

-0.07873
(0.28266)
-1.02029**
(0.47058)

0.05850***
(0.01801)
-0.03759
(0.04048)

-0.00174
(0.02195)
-0.07554**
(0.03591)

-0.02473***
(0.00576)
0.00503
(0.01417)

-0.00221
(0.00288)
0.03339***
(0.00600)

0.03006
(0.02293)
-0.11199**
(0.05056)

-0.02520
(0.02044)
-0.12953***
(0.03475)

-0.99059
(5.19775)
-15.13683
(11.60811)

-1.46687
(5.11257)
-3.13465
(10.57654)

0.00139
(0.00136)
0.00061
(0.00313)

0.00165
(0.00156)
-0.00070
(0.00349)

Eligibility
Square

2.58313***
(0.72976)

1.67696***
(0.55627)

0.16891***
(0.05858)

0.13143***
(0.04239)

-0.05232***
(0.01925)

-0.06341***
(0.00948)

0.24971***
(0.06994)

0.18581***
(0.04368)

24.87004
(17.76657)

2.97065
(15.44569)

0.00136
(0.00561)

0.00419
(0.00598)

State
Trends
Mean of
Dep. Var.

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

11.18

11.18

0.791

0.791

0.034

0.034

0.714

0.714

3375.6

3375.6

0.056

0.056

Eligibility
Eligibility

The table reports coefficients from Ordinary Least Squares models. Standard errors are clustered by state, year and race cells, and reported in parentheses. All
models contain state fixed effects, year fixed effects, state by race, and year by race fixed effects. Models control for age (18-24, 25-29, 30-34, relative to 35-39),
race (black, other race, relative to white), state unemployment rate (contemporaneous, one-year lag, one-year lead) and state private insurance rate for never
married males. Models for birth weight and low birth weight also control for gestation (very premature: <32 weeks, premature: 32-36 weeks, relative to normal
gestation: ≥37 weeks). Sample size is 39,238,023 observations. Significance is denoted as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < pvalue ≤ 0.10.

34

Table 5
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Prenatal Care and Birth Weight
National Natality Files 1985 to 1996, Whites
Prenatal Visits

1st Trimester Care

3rd Trimester Care

Adequate Prenatal Care

Birth Weight

Low Birth Weight

0.15841
(0.31335)
-2.93622***
(0.89286)

-0.16058
(0.41737)
-1.59610**
(0.74841)

0.04805**
(0.02301)
-0.20306***
(0.06416)

-0.01013
(0.03266)
-0.15930***
(0.05426)

-0.02078***
(0.00769)
0.02963
(0.02266)

0.00360
(0.00313)
0.03679***
(0.01033)

0.01994
(0.03005)
-0.29180***
(0.08427)

-0.04092
(0.03045)
-0.20752***
(0.05696)

4.76063
(6.20054)
-32.46898*
(17.73650)

2.72313
(6.30327)
-25.65803
(15.96171)

-0.00001
(0.00118)
0.00094
(0.00354)

0.00058
(0.00132)
-0.00126
(0.00384)

Eligibility
Square

6.44644***
(1.81853)

3.21223
(1.97517)

0.52309***
(0.13173)

0.33381**
(0.15122)

-0.10501**
(0.04350)

-0.07427***
(0.02187)

0.64940***
(0.16871)

0.37280**
(0.14803)

77.55607**
(34.95605)

63.51186*
(33.15278)

-0.00197
(0.00701)

0.00412
(0.00798)

State
Trends
Mean of
Dep. Var.

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

11.43

11.43

0.819

0.819

0.029

0.029

0.748

0.748

3422.5

3422.5

0.045

0.045

Eligibility
Eligibility

The table reports coefficients from Ordinary Least Squares models. Standard errors are clustered by state, year and race cells, and reported in parentheses. All
models contain state fixed effects and year fixed effects. Models control for age indicators (18-24, 25-29, 30-34, relative to 35-39), race (black, other race,
relative to white), state unemployment rate (contemporaneous, one-year lag, one-year lead) and state-level private insurance rate for never married males.
Models for birth weight and low birth weight also control for gestation (very premature: <32 weeks, premature: 32-36 weeks, relative to normal gestation: ≥37
weeks). Sample size is 31,648,294 observations. Significance is denoted as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤ 0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10.

35

Table 6
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Prenatal Care and Birth Weight
National Natality Files 1985 to 1996, All Races
Low Educated Mothers (High School and below)
Prenatal Visits

1st Trimester Care

3rd Trimester Care

Adequate Prenatal Care

Birth Weight

Low Birth Weight

0.67862**
(0.26566)
-0.60235
(0.62240)

0.30736
(0.24257)
-0.12623
(0.59655)

0.09570***
(0.02255)
0.02525
(0.05556)

0.02650
(0.02242)
-0.00223
(0.05322)

-0.03324***
(0.00656)
0.00377
(0.01554)

-0.01677***
(0.00599)
0.0055
(0.01502)

0.08132***
(0.03000)
-0.04077
(0.07167)

0.02865
(0.02804)
-0.01381
(0.06832)

8.91898
(7.12566)
7.62682
(15.83398)

6.60549
(6.19115)
19.95514
(13.53802)

0.00149
(0.00202)
-0.00383
(0.00442)

0.00181
(0.00203)
-0.00622
(0.00456)

Eligibility
Square

2.12028***
(0.78218)

0.72536
(0.69373)

0.11662
(0.07159)

0.04805
(0.06152)

-0.06125***
(0.02065)

-0.03725**
(0.01768)

0.20210**
(0.08674)

0.07103
(0.07503)

2.13937
(22.60920)

-22.33246
(19.37143)

0.00882
(0.00730)

0.01344*
(0.00737)

State
Trends
Mean of
Dep. Var.

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

10.66

10.66

0.725

0.725

0.046

0.046

0.638

0.638

3329.4

3329.4

0.065

0.065

Eligibility
Eligibility

The table reports coefficients from Ordinary Least Squares models. Standard errors are clustered by state, year and race cells, and reported in parentheses. All
models contain state fixed effects, year fixed effects, state by race, and year by race fixed effects. Models control for age indicators (18-24, 25-29, 30-34, relative
to 35-39), race (black, other race, relative to white), state unemployment rate (contemporaneous, one-year lag, one-year lead) and state-level private insurance
rate for never married males. Models for birth weight and low birth weight also control for gestation (very premature: <32 weeks, premature: 32-36 weeks,
relative to normal gestation: ≥37 weeks). Sample size is 21,442,593 observations. Significance is denoted as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤
0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10.

36

Table 7
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Prenatal Care and Birth Weight
National Natality Files 1985 to 1991, All Races
Prenatal Visits
0.08001
1.04638*
(0.31594)
(0.60374)
-0.5965
0.23412
(0.46209)
(0.69377)

1st Trimester Care
0.01966
0.07672*
(0.02371)
(0.04322)
-0.02043
0.02042
(0.03425)
(0.05000)

3rd Trimester Care
-0.00287
0.00630*
(0.00318)
(0.00365)
0.00557
0.02058***
(0.00677)
(0.00590)

Adequate Prenatal Care
-0.01197
0.03582
(0.02154)
(0.03718)
-0.07914**
-0.03814
(0.03426)
(0.04453)

Birth Weight
-2.10520
3.59227
(6.85720)
(5.62865)
-12.64051
-2.22474
(12.80397)
(9.41260)

Low Birth Weight
0.00000
-0.00018
(0.00179)
(0.00186)
0.00007
-0.00035
(0.00354)
(0.00347)

Eligibility
Square

1.28665**
(0.63990)

1.56693**
(0.76942)

0.07625
(0.04762)

0.10859*
(0.05599)

-0.01605
(0.01115)

-0.02754***
(0.00955)

0.12773**
(0.05013)

0.14268***
(0.05093)

20.03886
(21.36659)

11.23864
(15.15429)

-0.00014
(0.00721)

0.00033
(0.00688)

State
Trends
Mean of
Dep. Var.

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

11.00

11.00

0.775

0.775

0.038

0.038

0.696

0.696

3379.0

3379.0

0.055

0.055

Eligibility
Eligibility

The table reports coefficients from Ordinary Least Squares models. Standard errors are clustered by state, year and race cells, and reported in parentheses. All
models contain state fixed effects, year fixed effects, state by race, and year by race fixed effects. Models control for age indicators (18-24, 25-29, 30-34, relative
to 35-39), race (black, other race, relative to white), state unemployment rate (contemporaneous, one-year lag, one-year lead) and state-level private insurance
rate for never married males. Models for birth weight and low birth weight also control for gestation (very premature: <32 weeks, premature: 32-36 weeks,
relative to normal gestation: ≥37 weeks). Sample size is 22,144,278 observations. Significance is denoted as follows: *** p-value ≤ 0.01, ** 0.01 < p-value ≤
0.05, * 0.05 < p-value ≤ 0.10.

37

Table 8
Effects of Medicaid Eligibility on Health
National Hospital Discharge Survey 1985 to 1996, All Races

Infant LOS > 2 Days

Maternal LOS > 2
Days

Cesarean Section

Delivery in Public
Hospital

Eligibility

0.084
[0.065]

-0.044
[0.058]

0.205
[0.058]***

0.068
[0.047]

0.116
[0.029]***

0.12
[0.031]***

-0.076
[0.090]

0.065
[0.087]

Eligibility

-0.011
[0.157]
0.164
[0.235]

0.009
[0.131]
-0.093
[0.199]

-0.065
[0.141]
0.469
[0.218]**

0.003
[0.110]
0.115
[0.169]

0.172
[0.078]**
-0.098
[0.120]

0.218
[0.077]***
-0.173
[0.118]

0.193
[0.250]
-0.467
[0.382]

0.132
[0.214]
-0.119
[0.309]

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

0.387

0.387

0.425

0.425

0.235

0.235

0.296

0.296

Eligibility Squared

State Trends

Mean of Dep. Var.

The table reports coefficients from weighted linear probability models controlling for race, age categories (except for
infants), unemployment rate by state-year with one lead and lag, the fraction of never-married men aged 18 to 39 privately
insured by state and year, and race-specific year and state effects. Standard errors are correlated by state-year-race cell and
are in brackets. The sample size is 284,179 for maternal deliveries, and 294,721 for infants. ***significant at 1%, * *
significant at 5%, * significant at 10%

38

Figure 1.
Infant Mortality (per 1000 Births) and Low Birth Weight (Per 100 Births)
by Race, 1980 to 2000
25

20

15

10

5

0
1980

1985
W-IMR

1990
Year
B-IMR

1995
W-LBW

2000

B-LBW

39

Figure 2

40

Figure 3

0

.2

.4

.6

.8

Insurance Status of Deliveries in the NHDS

1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996
Year
Medicaid
No Insurance

Private Insurance

41

