                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 AN ANALYSIS OF THE HEALTH AND
                RETIREMENT STATUS OF THE ELDERLY


                        Robin C. Sickles

                          Paul Taubman



                     Working Paper No. l159




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September l981




This research was supported by a National Institutes of Health
grant to the National Bureau of Economic Research. We wish to
thank C. A. Knox Lovell, Janet Meininger and Janice Shack—Marquez
for useful comments. We would also like to thank Alan Mathios for
his valuable research assistance. The research reported here is
part of the NBER'S research program in Health Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #1459
                                              September 1984




                         An Analysis of the Health and
                       Retirement Status of the Elderly




                                   ABSTRACT



     in this paper we specify and estimate a structural limited dependent

variable model with which we study both the health and retirement status of

the elderly. Standard linear estimators, which assume that these variables

are continuous, are not appropriate and categorical estimation techniques are

preferred. Our model differs from previous work in that we have longitudinal

data and random effects that are correlated over time for different

individuals. The problem is made more complicated because there is sample

truncation, which could potentially bias coefficient estimates, since

approximately twenty percent of the individuals in our sample die. We outline

the full information maximum likelihood estimator for such a model and

implement it in our empirical analysis. With our structural estimates we

analyze, among other things, the degree to which       endogeneously determined

health status affects the probability of retirement and how changes in social

security benefits and eligibility for transfer payments modify both

healthiness and the demand for leisure.


                                                   Robin C. Sickles
                                                   Paul Taubman
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   University of Pennsylvania
                                                   3718 Locust Walk/CR
                                                   Philadelphia, PA 19104

                                                   (215) 898—7708
     Substantial empirical interest has been focused recently on the question

of how health and retirement decisions are related. The empirical work to

date typically has used a reduced form model and, most recently, nonlinear

specifications such as the multinomial logit (Anderson and Burkhauser (1983))

or hazard rate model (Hausman and Wise (1983a)) have been used. Standard

linear estimators, which assume that these variables are continuous, are not

appropriate and categorical estimation techniques are preferred. The

aforementioned studies have generally found that health and retirement are not

independent and that health and Social Security wealth have significant

effects on the retirement decision.

     In this paper we focus on the efficient estimation of a structural model

of the health and the retirement decisions of the elderly. Our model differs

in part front previous work in that we have longitudinal data and random

effects that are correlated over time for different individuals. Efficient

estimation of a structural system of limited dependent variables such as ours

in the context of a panel data set has to our knowledge not been

implemented. The problem is made more complicated because there is a twenty

percent death rate and hence sample truncation which could potentially bias

coefficient estimates.

     We build the full information maximum likelihood estimator from the

univariate results of Butler and Mofitt (1982) and use it in our empirical

analysis. With our structural estimates, we can analyze, among other things,

the degree to which the endogeneously determined health status affects the

probability of retirement and how changes in Social Security benefits and

eligibility for transfer payments modify both healthiness and the demand for

leisure. The studies cited above addressed these issues in part but either

used inefficient estimators or based their findings on reduced form models.

Another study which focused primarily on retirement (Hanoch and Honig (1983))


                                      1
did not control for random effects. By controlling for heterogeneity we can

be more precise and can examine the extent to which ignoring heterogeneity

could bias parameter estimates. Furthermore, we can test whether or not a

systems estimator has any empirical appeal by a direct test of the

significance of the covariance parameter.

     The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 1 discusses the economic

model of joint health and retirement status and the variables that enter into

it. Section 2 outlines the statistical model.. Section 3 discusses the data

set used in the analysis and reviews our estimation results. Section 4

concludes.



1. The Model

     Our model contains both a health and a retirement equation. The

retirement equation is based on the assumption that an individual maximizes a

utility function given by:

    (1.1)      U = u(C,L,H)

where C is consumption, L is leisure, and H is health.'

Health is included to account for pain and suffering and shifts in tastes,

e.g., some activities may be less desirable if you have a physically limiting

health problem such as arthritis.

     Equation (1.1) is maximized subject to a budget constraint and a health

production function given in equations (1.2) and (1.3).

    (1.2)         =
                      w(T—L)
                               + rA + X PcCt + H
    (1.3)      Ht =   F(Age, z, Or))
where w is the hourly wage rate, T is total time (hours) in time period t, r

is the return on financial investments, A is the amount of financial assets, X


'Although our model is a long—run static one, some elements of other periods
are allowed to enter via discounting future benefits.


                                       2
 Is other sources of income including earnings of a spouse, Pc is the price of

 consumption, H is the price of medical care, Z is the amount of medical care,

 and 0 is job and personal characteristics.

      In principle it is possible to find the first order conditions for a

maximum and to obtain demand equations for health, for hours of work and

 leisure, and for consumption. However, since the theoretical model of

retirement is well known and since the information available to us does not

allow us to obtain labor supply elasticities, we will merely specify the

arguments entering each of the equations.'-

     The standard retirement model asserts that an individual compares the

utility generated from working versus that from fully or partially retiring.

Utility differs in these situations because working is unpleasant and because

income differs. If retired, the individual may be eligible for Social

Security benefits and pensions. If he works, he may forfeit all or a part of

these benefits and pensions but he receives a wage or salary. Future Social

Security and pension payments may also be changed if retirement is

postponed. Thus we wish to include in the retirement equation the benefits if

retired permanently, the expcted change in the benefits if retirement is

postponed a year, wage earnings if the person works, and other sources of

income.

     While anecdotal stories exist that suggest retirement per se causes bad

health via boredom, we are not aware of any firm evidence that retirement

debases health. To the extent that economic decisions are made in a rational

fashion, retirement should not directly modify the unobservable health

stock. Moreover, Ekerdt (1983) in a detailed study based on medical

examinations found retirees' health deteriorated no more than that of a



2See Parsons (1980), Boskin (1977) or Quinn (1977).


                                      3
control group of nonretirees. Thus we specify a triangular model with health

affecting retirement but with no feedback from retirement to health.3

     The general specification of the health equation is based on the work of

Anderson and Burkhauser (1983), Grossman (1972), Lee (1982), Taubman and Rosen

(1982), and Taubman and Sickles (1984). The unobservable health stock is

endogeneously determined and can be augmented by investment in health services

or depreciated by the environment of the work place. The health stock differs

across individuals and families and is determined in part by: social and

            fiI'PAr Q11rh   p1iitilirn 1tyuQt 'iinPnn      r.ip nd
                                                           —


degree to which an individual Is able to gain access to information on
available health services which we proxy by marital status, number of

children, and education; and ability to pay for health services for which we

include income, assets, spouse's income, and pension and social security

benefits.

     We omit from the analysis in year t those already dead. However we

include these same people in earlier periods if alive. During the 8 years the

survey spans, more than 20% of the Initial respondents died and there is a

selectivity problem whose solution is discussed below.



2. Statistical Model

     Our statistical model Is an extension of the single equation limited

dependent variable model of Heckman (1981). The longitudinal nature of the

data set is accommodated by using a conventional error components

specification (Balestra and Nerlove (1966)) in which heterogeneity between

individuals Is modeled as a random effect. There are two equations in our

system —— one which links health status to the retirement decision and one


3A statistical test of this maintained hypothesis — which is accepted ——    is
discussed in Section 3.


                                      4
which models changes in the unobservable health stock. Since we argued

earlier that these are jointly determined, a systems estimator would be

expected to yield more efficient estimates than limited information

techniques. In this section we outline both full information (FIML) and

limited information maximum likelihood (LIML) estimators.

        The system can be written as



                      —    (1)       +     (1)
(2.1)                     x1 i            cit




                          I2Yjt + x2 +
               *(2)   =                                                        1, ..., N
                                                                       t   —
                                                                               1, •.•, T


where

(2.2)                  =   (j) +                       (j    1, 2)



and where

                                               a (j)    +a   (j)   for     j=l, 1k, ts
            E[4 CksI =                         a(j)     forjl, 1=k, t*s
                                               a     for j*1, i=k, t=s
                                                v1v2
                                               0 elsewhere


Here        and            are (lxk1) and (lxk2) vectors of exgoneous variables,

    and        are conformable vectors of structural coefficients,

         and          are scalar unobserved dependent variables whose observed

counterparts are                 and y; 2 is a scalar coefficient for the right—

hand—side endogeneous observable, and                       and            are the errors in the two

equations which are decomposed by the rule in (2.2). The unobserved are

linked to the observed by the following rules:



(2.4)             =   j if           —
                                         x11
                                               <                   —
                                                                       x11,     j1,...,4

                                                   5
with A1), A1) normalized at —, +         respectively, and



(2.5)             = i A2 —           <             —
                                                       x22,   j=1,2



with A2 arid 42) normalized at , 4w respectively.

        Equation (2.4) is the polytomous probit with ordered responses and (2.5)

is a binary probit. We use the standard normalization that

           = 1, j=1,2. We furthermore assume that the errors are distributed

normally, with joint density f(r.(1)         eis(2)0) where
 S =                                We assume that the parameter space is

compact, that the likelihood LN                   0) based on N panels is a

                                               {y*()
                                       *                  *(2)
continuous function of 0 for every set y =
                                                         Y5 J, that
(1/N)1og(y*; 0) converges to a function Q(0) almost surely uniform for

every 0, and that this function has a unique maximum at the true parameter

point. We furthermore assume that the log likelihood function is three times

differentiable, and that the absolute value of the third derivative is bounded

by some function with finite expectation (Cramer (1946)). Based on these

assumptions the maximum likelihood estimate of 0 is consistent and has the

limiting distribution given by v'N (0—0)     N(O,Z1) where 9. is the Fisher

information matrix. A computational issue arises when implementing FIML since

calculation of the joint probabilities of observing differing configurations

of health—retirement states for the same individual over the T time periods is

problematic if the number of time periods is large. Our data set contains

five biennial periods. Since the calculation of the joint retirement—health

states for an individual at time t requires two dimensional integration, the

calculation of the set of retirement—health states for an individual over (at

most) five dependent time periods requires ten dimensional integration.


                                         6
Numerical methods for handling such problems are available (Clark (1964)) but

are both computationally burdensome and have an approximation error which is

difficult to bound.

      Fortunately, the evaluation of multi—dimensional integrals is made much

simplier by the particular form for the correlation pattern of disturbances

implied by the variance components model. This point has recently been made

by Butler and Moff it (1982) for simpler univariate probit models. For the

joint model a similar approach can be taken.

      We ftrst defIne the domaIns of IntegratIon over whIch the varIous

functionals are evaluated. Since there are eight possible configurations ——

 ()   () —— there are eight domains (D1,...,D8). Let R be the domain
corresponding to a particular configuration of health—retirement states and

examine the joint probability of observing this generic configuration for the

ith individual at time t




      R
          dF =
                 R   f(4, 4))          de de
For the ith individual the joint probability of observing the T health—

retirement states is




          f...JdF = ff        ii (1)        (1) (2)       (2)   (1)
                                       ,...,eIT cil '''1T )d11 •..dcjT
                                                                       (2)




                     = J...f 5
                                 r f(vii(1) SViT ,V11 ,...,VIT
                                 j
                                                (1) (2)         (2) (1) (2)
                         R


                     g(jj(1)jj(2)) d Ud2)dv1)


                     = 5     h1('/42)[ f h2(i42)[ll                             .




                                            7
                                                       (1)
                            dvit
                              'd vit
                                  (2)ld i 2'd

                            f h1(i41/i42)[ 5 e
                                                             2
                        =
                                                              h3(z)dz] di4'



(2.6)                       J        e   h4(w)dw



        This last expression can be evaluated using the Hermite Integration

formula


              2                  G
        j   eW h4(w)dw =
        —                    j=l w.h(w.)
where G is the number of evaluation points and h4(wj) is h4 evaluated at w.

The evaluation Is done in a nested fashion with evaluation of the bivariate

distribution function, for which highly accurate algorithms exist, left as the

only numerical burden.

        Denote this last expression as P1. Then the likelihood function is


                   *         N             *
(2.7)                   =
                            i= 1 P(O;y
             LN(O;y )                          )




        We turn our attention now to the way in which sample truncation is

handled and to the calculation of estimates of 0 •                  The former point must be

addressed since sample attrition occurs over time as people die and, for a

particular individual, the conditional probability of an observed health—

retirement state (with health state possibly deceased), given that the person

was alive in the previous period, is a function of the joint probability of

not having died in all previous time periods. Sample truncation can be

handled by conditioning the joint probability of retirement—health states for

an Individual on the joint probability that the indivtdual was alive in the

previous periods. If the individual dies, he is removed from the sample in


                                                   8
the next period. Call this joint probability P(o;y*) and denote the modified

likelihood function as LN(O;y ).     Under the conditions outlined above the FIML

estimates have the limiting distribution


                              N
                                      *       *
                                   logL logL
      N (O—e) +
                  N(O,lim[. i= 1                  ]

     To generate LIML estimates, first estimate the health equation using the

single equation analogue of our bivariate model. Next estimate the quasi—

reduced form for the retirement equation conditional on the observed health

state using maximum likelihood. Finally concentrate the likelihood function

(2.7) with respect to all parameters except                and maximize it with respect
                                                      12
to the single covariance parameter. Note that all these calculations

utilize P(o;y*) instead of Pi(O;y*). The LIME.. estimates can also be used in

a single Newton—Raphson iteration to yield consistent and asymptotically

efficient estimate of 0.



3. Data, Variables, and Estimation Results

     The data come from the Retirement History Survey (RHS) which contains

five biennial panels taken during the period 1969 through 1977 and

individually matched records of Social Security earnings beginning in 1951.

The sample contains about 8500 men who were heads of households in 1969. It

contains objective health information such as data on death and

hospitalization and subjective information such as how your health compares

with others of the same age and how it has changed over time.

     Our dependent variable indicator for retirement is constructed in the


4Because of potential differences in the way women and men perceive their
health, we deleted 2500 women heads of household from our analysis and put off
estimating a model with a fully interactive female status dummy.


                                          9
following fashion. One question asked in the RHS is "are you presently

working part time, full time, or are you retired?" We chose to use the

working full—time/not—working—full—time dichotomy instead of either deleting

those who are semi—retired or introducing a new category for retirement

status. We have examined models in which we use semi—retired as another

category and found comparable results. We rely on either the retired or not

retired results for simplicity and comparability with most other studies.

     Turning to the health measure, we find a number of empirical studies

which conclude that health affects retirement decisions. (See footnote 2.)

Many of these studies have used one of two health measures. The first is the

answer to a question like "Does your health limit your ability to work or to

get about?" For people who retired prior to their 65th birthday, this type of

question allows, and perhaps invites, the subject to cite health limitations

as a socially acceptable reason. A second health measure frequently used is

whether or not a person died within some follow—up time interval. Used alone

this is also a far from ideal measure. Deaths from accidents and from

diseases which strike swiftly and which would not be preceded by pain,

suffering, and loss of ability in earlier years are quite different than those

caused by chronic diseases. Long—term debilitating illnesses would not be

accurately modeled with the early post—sample death measure while future

accidents and the like probably don't affect retirement calculations.

     Our study uses a subjective measure of health status which we think is

superior to the aforementioned measures. The RHS solicites answers to the

question "How does your health compare with that of others of the same age?"

The possible responses are better, same, or worse. The public health

literature suggests that subjective ratings by the elderly are highly

correlated with the arguably more objective physician ratings (Ferraro



                                      10
(1980)), Mossey and Shapiro (1982)). Also, in the RHS, the people who report

themselves in worse health are twice as likely to die in a four year span as

those in better health (Taubman and Rosen (1982)), and generally display the

properties one would expect in a health production function (Taubman and Rosen

(1982), Asher (1984)). Taubman and Sickles (1984) have used the

objective/subjective health variable to analyze the health effects of the

Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program with quite reasonable results.

    To these subjective rankings we add a fourth category —— deceased.   While

the R.HS records a perso&s death when they learn of it during an attempted

reinterview, they often don't obtain this information. We rely instead on

files from Social Security who record this information to stop paying benefits

to the deceased, begin paying survivors their benefits, and to justify paying

burial allowances. Recent work by Duleep (1983) indicates that in recent

years these files are extremely accurate in obtaining death information. The

Social Security data go through 1979. Both year and month of death are

given. We have cross—checked the RHS files against Social Security's

information up to the 1977 survey date. We found 2 instances where the RHS

lists the person as dead but the other file doesn't. We also found that if

Social Security lists an individual as dying between two surveys, the RHS

either lists that individual as having no response or the RHS indicates that

the respondent is the surviving spouse.

    Before turning to the results we should point out that a number of

different specifications of the joint health—retirement model were

considered. We first examined a model in which the endogenous variables both

entered in their unobservable forms as right—hand—side variables. Although we

considered only consistent two—Step estimators of these models (Mallar (1977))

our results were not at all supportive of this type of fully latent



                                      11
 structure. Furthermore, the effect of the unobservable work effort variable

on the health stock was negligible and insignificant. The question of whether

or not a mixed model, in which observed/unobserved endogenous variables appear

on the right hand side, was also considered. Because of the categorical

nature of both endogenous variables, mixed structures or structures in which

just the observed counterparts of both endogenous variables appear on the

right hand side would be forced by coherency conditions to be triangular

(Heckman (1978), Gourieroux, Laf font, and Moufort (1980)). Therefore, only a

model in whIch health affects the mean of retIrement or one In whIch

retirement effects the mean of health (specified as unobservables or as

observable counterparts) are empirically relevant. These are inherently

nonnested models. Two—step procedures were again used to examine competing

structures. The effect of observed retirement status on the health stock was

(as with its latent counterpart) negligible and insignificant. For this

reason and the reasons cited in section 1, we focus on the triangular system

in which health determines the mean level of retirement propensity but in

which no direct feedback is permitted from retirement to health. Unexplained

effects can certainly cause unexplained variations in the two endogenous

variables to be correlated and this provides FIML with an efficiency gain over

LIML.

        Due to computational constraints, a random sample of 808 people was

selected from the roughly 8500 people in our original sample. The means and

standard deviations, calculated from the panel, of the variables used in the

analysis are presented in Table 1.

        Social Security benefits are the benefits one would expect to receive if

retirement begins in the respective year. It is computed using covered

earnings taken from each persont s Social Security record, which is part of the



                                         12
RHS, and then replicating Social Security's rules. Thus we first calculated

each person's Average Monthly Earnings (ANE). This was accomplished by using

the respondent's earnings since 1951, which were truncated at the maximum

allowable earnings level. The five lowest years of income are dropped and the

sum of the remaining incomes is divided by the number of months worked. The

resulting AME is then used to compute the Primary Insurance Amount (PIA) based

on the tables in the Social Security Handbook. These account for inflation

and therefore change over the 1969—1977 sample period. Once the PIA was

computed, the benefits total was determined on the basis of PIA and marital

status. By using benefits available rather than those paid to actual

retirees, we avoid an obvious selection problem. It should be pointed out

that since benefits are increased by 50 percent if the individual is married,

the effect of marital status on both retirement and health will depend in part

on the benefits' coefficient.

     Income from assets is the sum of yearly income generated from the value

of assets: stocks, bonds, life insurance annuities, etc. Pensions are not

incorporated in this variable but are included separately. The gain from

postponing retirement is calculated by taking earnings in 1969 (In each

respective year these earnings are Inflated by the CPI.) plus the gain in

Social Security benefits from postponing retirement one additional year ——

discounted   to the averaged expected lifetime of the individual based on age ——

less the Social Security benefits the individual would have received. As
Mitchell and FIelds (1983) have noted, this variable may be positively

correlated with retirement since the substitution effect (away from leisure)

may dominate the income effect (toward leisure). Average income from assets

was lower than average Social Security benefits but close to average pension

income while spouse's earnings were greater than all three.



                                        13
     We included a dummy variable to indicate whether or not the person was

eligible in 1975 or 1977 for Supplement Security Income (sSI), which began in

1974, and interacted this variable with a time trend to identify changes in

the health stock over time for SSI eligibles. In an earlier study with a

somewhat different model of health, Taubmart and Sickles (1984) found that

those who were eligible to receive SSI in 1975 or 1977 were in worse health In

1969 than those who would not meet the eligibility criterion, but the

differential narrowed over time and became insignificant.

     As shown in Table 1 most of the men are married although widowers make up

about 5% of the person—year observations. In our subsample all the men

happened to have been married at some point in their life and the omitted

category is thus divorced/separated. The most common longest occupation was

as a skilled worker with the omitted category of unskilled workers accounting

for roughly 25% of the sample.

     An interesting problem arises because eligibility for Social Security's

old age benefits only occurs at age 62. A 60 year old could calculate the

value of his future Social Security benefit stream and obtain an unsecured

loan against it or run down existing assets, but, since (nonhousing) assets

are small, this may be difficult if capital markets are imperferct. We allow

for these difficulties by Including in the retirement equation a pre age 62

dummy variable.5 We now turn to the estimation results.

    The retirement equation, presented in Table 2, is familiar to economists

although it has a few novel variables as well as some interesting quantitative

results. The advantages of not retiring in a particular year are given by the

"gain from postponing retirement" variable. It is the most significant of the



5This is not perfectly colinear with a set of time dummies since in 1969 and
1971 some people are not 62.


                                      14
income variables and its coefficient an order of magnitude larger than the

asset, spouse's earnings, or pension income coefficients. We can easily

translate the raw coefficients into marginal probabilities at the sample means

by scaling the estimated coefficient by the normal density evaluated at the

estimated mean of the index describing *(2)•6    If the gain from postponing

retirement is increased one standard deviation from its sample mean ($739),

then the probability of retiring is reduced by 0.044. Similar increases in

income from assets, spouse's earnings, and pension income increase the

probability of retirement by about .02, .03, arid .035 respectively.

     Of the occupation variables, only the self—employed dummy seems to have

any significant explanatory power and the effect is quite sizeable: self—

employment reduces the probability of retiring by 0.18.

     During the 1970's retirement benefits paid by Social Security increased

substantially faster than inflation. To some extent benefits grew because of

secular growth in wage rates which help determine an individual's primary

insurance amount and benefits. However, to a large extent, the benefits

increased because of two legislated changes. One was the institution of

Supplemental Security Income (sSI) to the elderly on welfare.7 SSI gave money

to those on welfare and made them eligible for Medicaid. The other change was

the provision of overgenerous protection against changes in the CPI. The

indexing provisions were technically deficient because both the benefit

schedules and earnings histories, to which the benefit schedules were applied,

were shifted with the CPI. Our structural model allows us to examine the

consequences of these changes. In preliminary analysis SSI was found to have



6The mean index for te reçiiit equation is 12.9 and the normal density
orresponding to A1 —              is   0.391.
 To some extent SSI replaced state based Old Age Assistance but on average it
increased benefits substantially.


                                        15
an insignificant and second order effect in the retirement equation which is

why it is excluded in our final results. However, Social Security benefits

(embedded in our gain from postponing retirement variable) were quite

significant and had a relatively large effect. The first major change in

benefits occurred from January 1971 to September 1972 and was about 13 percent

in real terms (Leimer and Lesnoy (1983)). The second major change ——    basing
benefits on wage—indexed earnings — occurred in September 1977. According to

figures compiled by Summers (1982), the ratios of primary benefits for an

"average—earnings" man retiring at age 65 to earnings in the year before

retirement were 34.3, 39.4, 40.7, 43.6, 45.5 for the years 1971, 73, 75, 77,

79. The effect of these Social Security reforms on the probability of

retirement seems to be quite small, amounting to only .84, .34, 1.90, and 1.25

percentage point increases in the respective years. Although our results do

not directly tell us what effect these reforms had on the age of retirement,

they indicate that its effect is rather limited and are consistent with the

retirement age effects found by Hausman and Wise (1983b) and Fields and

Mitchell (1984).

     Turning to the age variable, we find that it is, not surprisely, quite

significant and highly correlated with retirement. Based on its coefficient,

an individual of 62 is almost 17% less likely to retire than an individual of

64. The dummy for being less than 62 has a highly significant negative

coefficient. Finding the effect of age less than 62 is complicated because

changing the variable results in an obvious change in age. If we look at the

effect of aging one year from 61 to 62, then the probability of retiring

increases by almost .31 while aging one year from 60 to 61 increases the

probablity by almost .08. It would seem that there is evidence for either

substantial imperfection in capital markets or a fairly high discount rate for



                                      16
the people in our sample.

     Years of schooling have an important bearing on the retirement

decision. The better educated retire later in their lives. For example, a

college educated male would, at age 64, be almost .12 less likely to retire

than a high school graduate. While human capital models often assume that the

more educated have the same length of career as the less educated to make the

analytics more tractable, there is no necessary reason for this to occur.

However, it may well reflect the differential work activities of the more

educated which are less affected oy aging.

    Married and widowed males are both less likely to retire than those who

are divorced or separated although the coefficient for the widowed category is

not very significant. The actual effect of marital status on retirement is

confounded by the gain from postponing retirement variable. Since benefits

one would receive if one retired are increased by 50% if the individual is

married, there is an obvious interaction between the two variables. At

average levels of the gain from postponing retirement, married males are about

16% less likely to retire than the divorced or separated, with a t—statistic

of —3.37. The widowed are less likely to retire than the divorced or

separated by about .08.

    We next focus attention on the health variable which is significant at

the 99% level. Previous work has not considered the form in which health

affects the retirement decision. That is, should health status enter the

retirement equation in its unobservable form or should an observable

counterpart be used? This issue of appropriate specification is in principle

a testable hypothesis. Because of the triangular nature of the system, both

variables could be included in the retirement equation and conventional t—

tests could be carried out. However, as a practical matter the inclusion of



                                      17
both health measures will result in severe multicollinearity and render the

test rather powerless. A somewhat different strategy which we use does not

require a composite model to test the hypothesis. Furthermore, it has the

attractive property that the general specification of the model, as opposed to

just the particular hypothesis concerning the appropriate health measure, can

be tested. Under the null hypothesis that the measured health status variable

is appropriate, FIML on the system will result in consistent and

asymptotically efficient estimates. Under the alternative that the retirement

equation is misspecif ted, the FIML estimates of the health equation will be

inconsistent because of specification error in the correlated retirement

equation. However, in this case the LIML estimates of the health equation

will still be consistent. Thus the Hausman—Wu test can be utilized.

The     statistic for this test is 15.6 while x1,005 31 suggesting that our

specification is appropriate. Further support for our specification and the

main reason for the relatively low test—statistics, is that the estimated

correlation between equations is only —.101 with a t—statistic of —1.79.

      Because the health variable is endogenous, we cannot manipulate the other

explanatory variables since health status is changed by the same variables we

are holding constant in the retirement equation. If we view the change in

health status in an ex ante sense then a movement from a poor to a good health

status reduces the probability of retirement and thus increases expected

average earnings by almost .21. Add to this figure the potential reduction in

medical expenditures owing to better health, and there is a substantial real

income gain from lower morbidity.

      Before moving to the health equation estimates we note that the random

effects are sizeable, accounting for almost 1/3 the total variation in the

total error, and highly significant. Heterogeneity is quite evident in the



                                      18
retirement decision.

        We now turn to the health equation, results for which are presented in

Table 3. Recall that the variable is scaled so that higher numbers indicate

worsening health. We present our results as we did with the retirement

equation and in general compare states of better health with health same as

others of your age.8

        Focusing first on the economic variables, we see that the only first—

order effects come from social security benefits and from pension income. For

example, an annual increase in these variables by $10,000 would Increase the

probability of being in better health by about .16 and .09 respectively.9

Eligibility for transfer payments from the Supplemental Security Income

program are not highly significant although the point estimates provide

evidence of the same sort found by Taubman and Sickles (1984).10 Those who

were eligible for SSI in 1975/77 were in worse health in 1969 than those who

would not meet the eligibility criteria but the differential narrowed over

time. From 1969—1977 the probability of being in better health for SSI

eligibles increased by about .16 and the probability of dying fell almost

•   .

80ther binary comparisons are easily made by appropriately m9d.fying the
thresholds since the only quantatitive differences are the A'' (and the
average value across states for the explanatory variable whose effect we are
analyzing). The mean index for the health equation is 2.064 and the normal
density associated with the probability of being in better health is 0.349.
This will be the scale factor in analyzing the marginal probabilities
associated with the raw coefficients.
9it is possible that long term Ill health has reduced labor market activity
and earnings which determine the benefits. Since we do allow for individual
specific effects in our equations, we don't think this is the cause of the
correlation.
10At average levels of benefits the t—statistic associated with the joint
hypotheses that SSI has no effect is 1.34.
1'One qualification on the SSI results should be noted. Eligibility for SSI
in 1975 or 1977 Is not completely known for those who died in 1974 or
earlier. For those who died prior to 1975 we do have information on whether
they were receiving state assistance when the survey starts and they were


                                        19
       The other statistically significant coefficients are on the age, number

of dependents, education and longest occupation variables. Remembering that

health is scaled such that poorer health receives a higher number, the age

effect is not surprising even if people compare themselves to others of the

same age. This means that more older people are dead and/or that people

compare themselves to the median rather than the mean person of the same age.

       It is generally argued that the more educated are brighter, are better

equipped to make decisions, make more informed decisions, and adapt new

products more quickly. Thus it is not surprising that the more educated are

in better health, ceteris paribus. An increase in education completed from 12

to 16 years would raise the probability of being in better health by about

.05.

       The omitted longest occupation in our sample is unskilled labor who are

in worse health than people in the other occupations. We can not determine if

this occurs because their job worsens their health, because less healthy

people are more likely to work as unskilled laborers, or because poorer people

invest less in health preserving regimes. The probability of being in better

health is .16 lower for unskilled laborers than, for example, those who had

been in management positions.

       An increase from two to three dependents increases the probability of

being in better health by almost 2%. There are several possible reasons for

this outcome. First a number of people have argued that larger social

networks lead to better health with people exchanging information on health

and doctor quality.12 Second, healthy (unhealthy) parents may beget healthy


alive. These people were eligible for SSI. However, it seems that we are
still understating the number of eligibles who died prior to 1975. Thus the
health of the SSI group between 1969 and 1975 should be worse than our numbers
would indicate, meaning that the estimated SSI dummy and the relative
improvement over time for the SSI group are probably understated.


                                       20
(unhealthy) children. The unhealthy children may die early. Moreover

unhealthy parents may chose to have fewer children because of their low income

and energy levels.

     We can also examine the direct effect of legislated changes in Social

Security benefits on the healthiness of the aged and, through the health and

gain from postponing retirement variables, on their propensity to retire.

Based on Summerst figures the total change from 1971—79 in the probability of

being in better health due to the reforms was only .0199. The feedback from

the health equation would lessen the probability of retiring by only about

.2%, reducing the 2.8% direct increase in the probability of retiring due to

the Social Security reforms of 1971—79 changes to about 2.6%.

     Heterogeneity is significant and important in the health equation.

Although the relative size of the random effects is smaller than with the

retirement equation, random effects still contribute almost 30% to the total

unexplained variation in the health stock.

     A final comment should be made about the use of FIML over LIML

estimation. The former is approximately an order of magnitude more cpu

intensive than the latter. Controlling for heterogeneity in both the

retirment and the health equations using direct controls and individual

specific random effects seems quite adequate in reducing the correlation in

unexplained variations to a small (—.101) and marginally insignificant Ct—

statistic = —1.79) level. It is not as clear that the substantial

computational investment needed to carry Out FIML on models of this sort is

justified.




'2See Asher (1982) for a survey on social networks' impact on health and some
important evidence.


                                      21
4. Conclusions

     This study has focused on the structural estimation of a joint health—

retirement model in which both sample truncation and error dependencies

substantially complicate the implementation of an efficient estimator. We

have been able to isolate the effect of perceived health status' on the

retirement decision in a structural setting. Furthermore, we have performed

several important policy simulations to see how the double indexing and

increased transfer payments affected the retirement decision both directly and

by way of modifications in the health status of the eligible Individuals. Our

results indicate that retirement decisions are strongly affected by health

status, variables that change the shape and position of the income/leisure

opportunity set, marital status, self employment status and education. We

also find that those not yet eligible for Social Security status are far less

likely to retire. This suggests that if part of the solution to the known

future financing difficulties of the Social Security System involves raising

the normal retirement age to 67 or 68, then a major policy decision is whether

to leave 62 as the early retirement age or to raise it to 64 or 65. The

latter change would induce more people to work longer and pay more taxes.

     Our health equation results Indicate that Social Security and pension

payments have positive effects on healthiness. The other significant

variables are number of dependents and longest occupation being unskilled.

     We calculate that the planned and unplanned increases in Social Security

benefits in the 1970's raised the probability of retirement by about .026 and

increased the percentage in better health by almost .02.

     We also find that random effects are quite Important in both equations.

However, due to the rather small and marginally significant estimated

correlation between equations after we control for heterogeneity, efficiency



                                      22
gains from a FLML do not appear to be worth the cubstantlal computational

inveatnient necessary for its implementation.




                                      23
                                     Table 1

                           Sample Summary Statistics



Variable                      Mean              Standard Deviation




Age                         64.3                       3.31

Age Less Than 62            .215                       .411

Black                      .0592                       .236

Married                     .902                       .297

Widowed                    .0511                       .220

Number of Dependents        .229                       .713

Receiving SSI              .0275                       .166

Years of Education         10.02                       3.15

Longest   Occupation
      Professional          .218                       .409

      Clerk                .0893                       .285

      Skilled Labor         .429                       .495


      Management            .150                       .357


Self—Employed               .104                       .305

Social Security Benefits   1716.                       1642.

Income From Assets         1113.                       3782.


Spouse's Earnings          2039.                       4469.

Pension Income             1237.                       3541.

Gain From Postponing
  Retirement                594.                        739.

Health                      1.93                       .775

Retirement                  1.55                       .498




                                       24
                              Table 2

                       Estimation Results
                       Retirement Equation

Variable               Coefficient           t—statistic




Age                      .211                   43.7

Age <62                 —.585                   —7.78

Black                    .0501                  0.31

Harried                 —.259                   —2.05

Widowed                 —.213                   —1.27

Number of Dependents    —.0128                  —0.37

Education               —.0771                  —6.52

Professional             .0171                  0.12

Clerk                    .0289                  0.18

Skilled Laborer          .0613                  0.51

Management               .00286                 0.02

Self—Employed           —.468                   —6.61

Income From Assets       .138 x iO              2.17

Spouse's Earnings        .169 x 1O4             2.44

Pension Income           .249 x io              2.14

Gain From Postponing    —.151 x IO              —4.63

  Retirement

Health                    .263                  3.13

Threshold 1            12.7                     38.6

                          .522                   13.7
  11




                                  25
                                 Table 3

                         Estimation Results
                           Health Equation

Variable               Coefficient            t—statistic

Age                        .0448                    7.18

Black                    —.114                     —1.00

Married                  —.00209                   —0.02

Widowed                  —.145                     —1.14

Number of Dependents       .0555                    2.13

Education                —.0382                    —4.27

Professional             —.337                     —4.03

Clerk                    —.349                     -.3.54

Skilled Laborer          —.296                     —4.44

Management               —.467                     —5.24

Self—Employed            —.0563                    —0.85

SSI                      4.00                       1.18

SSI x Time               —.0540                    —1.21

Income From Assets       —.594 x 10'               —0.99

S.S. Benefits            —.462 x io                —3.29

Pension Income           —.266 x io                —4.09

Spouse's Earnings        —.131 x 10                —0.27

Threshold 1              1.55                       3.66

Threshold 2              3.08                       7.53

Threshold 3              4.08                       9.76

                          .375                     19.6




                                   26
                                   References

Anderson, K., and R. Burkhauser: "The Effect of Actual Mortality Experience

    within a Retirement Decision Model," unpublished manuscript, 1983.

Anderson, K., R. Burkhauser, and J. Quinn: "Do Retirement Dreams Come True?

    A Rational Expectations Approach to the Retirement Decision," unpublished

    manuscript, 1983.

Asher, C.: "The Impact of Social Support Networks on Adult Health," Medical

    Care, 22 (1982), 349—359.

Balestra, P., and M. Nerlove: "Pooling Cross—Section and Time Series Data in

    the Estimation of a Dynamic Model: The Demand for Natural Gas,"

    Econoruetrica, 34 (1966), 585—612.

Bartel, A., and P. Taubman: "The Impact of Specific Diseases on Earnings,"

    Review of Economics and Statistics, 61 (1979), 1—9.

Boskin, M.: "Social Security and Retirement Decisions," Economic Inquiry, 15

    (1977), 1—15.

Butler, J. S., and R. Moffitt: "A Computationally Efficient Quadrature

    Procedure for the One—Factor Multinoinial Probit Model," 'Econometrica,

    50 (1982), 761—764.

Clark, C.: "The Greatest of a Finite Set of Random Variables," Operations

    Research, 9 (1964), 145—162.

Cramer, H.: Mathematical Methods of Statistics, Princeton: Princeton

   University Press, 1946.

Duleep, H.: "The Socieoeconomic Determinants of Mortality: The Role of

    Income," paper presented at the American Economic Association Winter

    Meetings, December, 1983.

Ekerdt, D., et al.: "The Effects of Retirement on Physical Health," American



                                         27
    Journal of Public Health, 73 (1983), 779—783.

Ferraro, K.: "Self—Ratings of Health Among the Old and the Old—Old," Journal

    of Health and Social Behavior," 21 (1980), 377—383.

Fields, C., and 0. MitchelL, "The Effects of Social Security Ref onus on

    Retirement Ages and Retiiement Incomes," NBER Working Paper No. 1348, May

    1984.

Gourieroux, C., J. J. Laf font, and A. Monfort: "Coherency Conditions in

    Simultaneous Linear Equation Models with Endogeneous Switching Regimes,"

    Econometrica, 48 (1980), 675—696.

Grossman, M.: "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health,"

    Journal of Political. Economy, 80 (1972), 223—255.

Hanoch, C. and H. Honig: "Retirement, Wages, and the Labor Supply of the

    Elderly," Journal of   LaIor   Economics, 1 (1983), 131—151.

Hausman, J., and D. Wise: "Social Security, Health Status, and Retirement,"

    unpublished manuscript, NBER, March, 1983a.

_______________________ "Retirement and Subsequent Work," Paper presented at

    the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference on Pensions, Labor,

    and Individual Choice, Dorado Beach, Puerto Rico, March 1983b.

Heckman, J.: "Dummy Endogeneous Variables in a Simultaneous Equation System,"

    Econometrica, 46 (1978), 931—960.

__________    "Statistical   Models for Discrete Panel Data," in Structural

    Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications, edited by C.

    Manski and D. McFadden. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1981.

Lee, L. F.: "Health and Wage: A Simultaneous Equations Model with Multiple

   Discrete Indicators," International Economic Review, 23 (1982), 199—222.

Leimer, D., and S. Lesnoy: "Social Security and Private Saving: An

   Examination of Feldstein's New Evidence," ORS Working Paper Series #31,



                                         28
    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, October, 1983.

Mallar, C.D.: •The Estimation of Simultaneous Probability Models,"

    Econometrica 45 (1977), 1717—1722.

Mitchell, 0., and G. Fields: "The Economics of Retirenent Behavior," NBER

    Working Paper No. 1128, 1983.

Mossey, J., and E. Shapiro: "Self—Rated Health: A Predictor of Mortality

    Among the Elderly," American Journal of Public Health, 72 (1982), 800—808.

Parson, D.: "The Decline in Male Labor Force Participation," Journal of

    Political Economy, S3 (195U), 11/—134.

Quinn, J.: "Microeconoinic Determinants of Early Retirement: A Cross—

    Sectional View of White Married Men," Journal of Human Resources, 12

    (1977), 329—346.

Summers, L.: "Observations on the Indexation of Old Age   Pensions,"   NBER

   Working Paper No. 1023, November, 1982.

Taubman, P., and R. Sickles: "Supplemental Security Income and the Health of

    the Poor", NBER Working Paper No. 1062, June, 1984.

Taubman, P., and S. Rosen: "Healthiness, Education and Marital Status," in

   Economic Aspects of Heal, edited by V. Fuchs. Chicago: University of

   Chicago Press, 1982.




                                     29
