                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               OPTING OUT OF THE GREAT INFLATION:
  GERMAN MONETARY POLICY AFTER THE BREAK DOWN OF BRETTON WOODS

                                            Andreas Beyer
                                              Vitor Gaspar
                                          Christina Gerberding
                                             Otmar Issing

                                         Working Paper 14596
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14596


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2008




We thank Edward Nelson and Athanasios Orphanides for sharing their real-time output gap data with
us. Furthermore, we thank our discussant Benjamin Friedman for his challenging and thought-provoking
comments. We are also grateful to Michael Bordo, Vítor Constancio, Gabriel Fagan, Dieter Gerdesmeier,
Alfred Guender, Lars Jonung, Athanasios Orphanides, Werner Roeger, Franz Seitz, Ulf Söderström,
Lars Svensson, Guntram Wolff, Andreas Worms and Charles Wyplosz for insightful discussions and
their valuable suggestions. We also wish to thank participants of a seminar held by the Eurosystem's
MPC and participants of the NBER conference at Woodstock for their comments that helped improving
an earlier draft of this paper. Last but not least we would like to express our gratitude to Aurelie Therace
for her efficient help in preparing the final manuscript. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Andreas Beyer, Vitor Gaspar, Christina Gerberding, and Otmar Issing. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Opting Out of the Great Inflation: German Monetary Policy After the Break Down of Bretton
Woods
Andreas Beyer, Vitor Gaspar, Christina Gerberding, and Otmar Issing
NBER Working Paper No. 14596
December 2008
JEL No. E31,E32,E41,E52,E58

                                              ABSTRACT

During the turbulent 1970s and 1980s the Bundesbank established an outstanding reputation in the
world of central banking. Germany achieved a high degree of domestic stability and provided safe
haven for investors in times of turmoil in the international financial system. Eventually the Bundesbank
provided the role model for the European Central Bank. Hence, we examine an episode of lasting importance
in European monetary history. The purpose of this paper is to highlight how the Bundesbank monetary
policy strategy contributed to this success. We analyze the strategy as it was conceived, communicated
and refined by the Bundesbank itself. We propose a theoretical framework (following Söderström,
2005) where monetary targeting is interpreted, first and foremost, as a commitment device. In our
setting, a monetary target helps anchoring inflation and inflation expectations. We derive an interest
rate rule and show empirically that it approximates the way the Bundesbank conducted monetary policy
over the period 1975-1998. We compare the Bundesbank's monetary policy rule with those of the FED
and of the Bank of England. We find that the Bundesbank's policy reaction function was characterized
by strong persistence of policy rates as well as a strong response to deviations of inflation from target
and to the activity growth gap. In contrast, the response to the level of the output gap was not significant.
In our empirical analysis we use real-time data, as available to policy-makers at the time.


Andreas Beyer                                         Christina Gerberding
European Central Bank                                 Deutsche Bundesbank
Postfach 16 03 19                                     Monetary Policy Division
D-60066                                               D-60431 Frankfurt am Main
Frankfurt am Main                                     christina.gerberding@bundesbank.de
Germany
andreas.beyer@ecb.int                                 Otmar Issing
                                                      Centre for Financial Studies
Vitor Gaspar                                          Goethe University Frankfurt
Banco de Portugal                                     Mertonstrasse 17-25
Special adviser                                       D-60325 Frankfurt am Main
Av. Almirante Reis, 71 - 8                            Germany
1150-012 Lisboa                                       wue@otmar-issing.de
Portugal
vitor.gaspar@ec.europa.eu
1. Introduction



In the second half of the twentieth century, the German Bundesbank established its reputation
as one of the most successful central banks in the world. Along with the Swiss National Bank,
the Bundesbank was the first central bank to announce and pursue a strategy based on
monetary targets after the breakdown of Bretton Woods. In this paper, we relate the
Bundesbank success in maintaining price stability and in anchoring inflation expectations to
its strategy. We examine the strategy as it was presented, refined and communicated by the
Bundesbank itself. Our goal is to provide a historical account of the conduct of monetary
policy, focusing especially on the first ten years of monetary targeting, from 1975 until the
middle of the 1980s, when price stability was virtually reached in Germany.


According to the Bundesbank Act the objective of monetary policy is to safeguard the
currency. The Bundesbank has always interpreted its mandate as giving precedence to
(domestic) price stability. It is, therefore, clear that monetary targets were intermediate
targets. They were instrumental to achieving price stability. Helmut Schlesinger (1988) – as
quoted in von Hagen (1995) - made the point crystal clear:


"… the Bundesbank has never, since 1975, conducted a rigid policy geared at the money
supply alone; all available information about financial markets and the development of the
economy must be analyzed regularly … Furthermore, the Bundesbank had to check the
consistency of her original monetary targets with the ultimate policy goals."


Moreover, the Bundesbank’s operational framework for monetary policy implementation
implied that the first step in the transmission mechanism was the control over a money market
interest rate. Thus, in this paper, we characterize the Bundesbank’s monetary policy strategy
through an interest rate rule in the tradition of Taylor (1993, 1999), modified to take account
of the implications of monetary targeting for the Bundesbank’s interest rate decisions. The
issue has already been repeatedly considered in the literature (e.g. Clarida et al., 1998,
Gerberding et al., 2005).




                                                                                             1
The central role of monetary policy in anchoring inflation and inflation expectations was
recognized as crucial by the Bundesbank early on. Such concern is transparent in the
mechanics of the derivation of the monetary target. From this viewpoint, central banking
practice progressed ahead of theory's emphasis on credibility and reputation (as developed
later in the work of Kydland and Prescott, 1977; Barro and Gordon 1983a, 1983b).


In the last fifteen years, the new neoclassical synthesis and new Keynesian models became
the workhorse for the theory of monetary policy-making (see Woodford, 2003, and Galí,
2008, for authoritative, book length, surveys).1 These models rely on a Real Business Cycle
core. They add on price setting by monopolistic competitive firms subject to some constraint
or cost on price changes, leading to nominal stickiness. Another key feature is that economic
agents form expectations in a forward-looking way, taking into account what they know about
the central bank’s reaction function. Hence, despite their well-known limitations, these
models provide a natural environment to discuss commitment, credibility and reputation (see,
for example, Gaspar and Kashyap, 2007).


Building on the modified loss function approach (pioneered by Rogoff, 1985), we will show
in this paper how focusing on money growth helps to bring the conduct of monetary policy
closer to optimal policy under commitment (thereby improving on the outcome under
discretion). It does so by inducing a persistent, history-dependent response of policy rates to
deviations of inflation and output from target. Therefore, it allows us to rationalize monetary
targeting as a commitment device (here we follow the lead of Söderström, 2005).


Inevitably, such stylized story does not do full justice to monetary targeting as practiced by
the Bundesbank. Nevertheless, it does, in our view, help to interpret the historical evidence.
Specifically, our stylized story suggests one mechanism through which monetary targeting
provided a means to anchor inflation and inflation expectations. We derive an interest rate
rule corresponding to this set-up and confront it with real-time data. We find that the interest
rate rule implied by our model of monetary targeting captures the Bundesbank’s monetary
policy actions well. We compare the policy pursued in Germany with those conducted by the
FED and the Bank of England.


1
    These models have also been actively used in policy-making institutions. Prominent examples are the ECB, the
     Board of Governors and the IMF. Relevant references are Smets and Wouters (2003, 2007), Coenen et al.
     (2008), Christiano et al. (2008) Erceg et al. (2006), Edge, et al. (2007) and Bayoumi et al. (2004).


                                                                                                              2
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we provide an overview of the relative
performance of German monetary policy as compared with other industrialized countries. In
section 3 we briefly describe institutions and history of monetary policy in Germany in the
relevant period. We elucidate the concept of "pragmatic monetarism" and clarify the crucial
role of the explicit derivation of the monetary target. In section 4 we introduce a simple
macroeconomic framework based on the standard new Keynesian model. We derive a role for
monetary targeting as a commitment devise. We obtain the instrument rule implied by our
framework. In section 5 we estimate an interest rate rule, inspired by our theoretical analysis,
using real time German data and compare the results with estimates for the US and the UK. In
section 6 we conclude.




                                                                                              3
2. Brief overview of inflation developments in selected industrial countries
in the period 1959-1998


In the second half of the twentieth century, the German Bundesbank acquired a strong
reputation for maintaining lower inflation rates than many other countries could. In this
section we will look at the relevant stylized facts and put them into historical context, in
particular from a monetary policy perspective. From a global view, the second half of the 20th
century was marked by three periods: by the system of Bretton Woods which lasted until
1973, to be followed by the period of the “Great Inflation” until the end of the 1970s and
subsequently by the period of “Great Moderation” from the early to mid 1980s onwards.


2.1. Rise and fall of the Bretton Woods regime


The first part of the post-world war II period was marked by the Bretton Woods International
Monetary Regime. The beginning of this stage is characterized by the transition to a regime of
convertibility, for current account transactions, by most Western European Countries, in
December 1958. It involved the fixing of a par value for each currency in terms of gold. The
framers of the system intended to reconcile the positive aspects of the classical gold standard
(for example exchange rate stability, intense international trade) with autonomous national
macroeconomic policies. The idea was that currency convertibility would be expected only
for current account transactions (capital controls were accepted) and that exchange rates
would be fixed but adjustable (in the face of fundamental disequilibria). According to Garber
(1993): "The collapse of the Bretton Woods system of fixed exchange rates was one of the
most accurately and generally predicted of major economic events." The intuition is that there
are intrinsic elements of internal tension in any gold exchange standard. Bordo (1993)
categorizes the problems under the heading adjustment, liquidity and confidence. One aspect
is known as the Triffin (1960) dilemma. The system relied on the convertibility of the US
dollar into gold. On the other hand it required the availability of US dollars as liquidity. The
latter required US balance of payment deficits, thereby undermining (the former)
convertibility of the US dollar. The most symbolic moment was, perhaps, the suspension of
the convertibility of the dollar into gold, in August 1971. The system then collapsed
completely into a system of generalized floating in 1973. With the collapse of the last
operational link to gold, the age of a commodity standard was over.



                                                                                              4
According to a very well-known folk theorem of international monetary economics, fixed
exchange rates, freedom of movement of financial capital and autonomous monetary policy
constitute an impossible trinity. As mentioned above, the Bretton Woods regime allowed for
capital controls. Nevertheless, over time, in the context of full convertibility for current
account transactions, the effectiveness of capital controls was gradually diminishing. The
Bundesbank was vividly aware of the constraint that participation in the Bretton Woods
systems imposed on its ability to pursue domestic price stability. During the period 1959-1973
the DM was re-valued three times against the US dollar (1961, 1969 and 1971)2.


2.2. The stylized facts


In the period 1960-1998, German inflation, measured in accordance with the Consumer Price
Index, was, on average, 3.1 per cent per year (with a standard deviation of 1.8 percentage
points). During this period German inflation was the lowest and most stable, as recorded
internationally (see Table 2.1, which reports the average numbers of key macroeconomic
variables for the G7 countries and Switzerland over that period). Only Switzerland came close
with an average inflation rate of 3.3 per cent (and a standard deviation of 2.3 percentage
points). These results compare with the US that recorded an inflation rate of 4.4 per cent, on
average per year, with a standard deviation of 2.9 percentage points. Across the G7 countries
inflation was highest and most volatile in Italy with, respectively, 7.4 per cent and 5.4
percentage points for annual inflation and for its standard deviation. After the full period the
Deutsche Mark (DM) had retained about 30 per cent of its original value, compared with less
than 20 per cent for the US dollar, the Canadian dollar and the Japanese Yen, about 13 per
cent for the French Franc, about 8.5 per cent for the Pound Sterling and only about 6 per cent
for the Italian Lira.
It is interesting (and instructive) to recall that during the 1960s, in the context of the Bretton
Woods system, inflation was actually slightly higher in Germany than in the US. Specifically,
the ten-year average was 2.4 per cent in Germany, while it was 2.3 per cent in the US (Canada
was very close with an inflation rate of 2.5 per cent). Nevertheless, in the UK, France, Italy
inflation was on average above 3 per cent and in Japan above 5 per cent. However, using an
average for the sixties can be misleading. In the last years of the sixties, the rise in consumer


2
    There were also short episodes of floating.


                                                                                                5
prices was accelerating in the US with inflation at 2.8 per cent in 1967, 4.2 per cent in 1968,
5.4 per cent in 1969 and 5.9 per cent in 1970. The corresponding numbers for Germany were
1.6, 1.6, 1.9 and 3.4 per cent.


The differences between the inflation rates in Germany and the other G7 countries were most
marked at the start of the period of floating exchange rates. In fact, in the period 1974-1982
prices increased by 46 per cent in Germany (with an average annual rate of 4.8 per cent). In
the same period of eight years, prices almost doubled in the US (with an annual average
inflation rate of 9 per cent). The differences persisted in the subsequent disinflation. In the
longer period 1974-1989 (the year of the fall of the Berlin Wall), prices increased by 72 per
cent in Germany (with an average annual rate of 3.5 per cent) and by 181 per cent in the US
(corresponding to an annual average rate of 6.7 per cent). It is also worth noting that only in
Germany and Switzerland did inflation peak at single-digit levels in the 1970s and the 1980s.
Italy and the UK recorded two-digit ten-year averages in the 1970s. Italy did so in the 1980s
as well (see Fig. 2.1). Table 2.1 shows that the same comparison also applies to the volatility
of inflation3.


Germany’s favorable performance applies also to the behavior of nominal interest rates. In
Figure 2.2 we show the averages of short-term (3 months) and long-term (10 years) interest
rates during the 1970s. Evidently, German interest rates were then at the lower end of the
interest-rate spectrum.


Regarding the behavior of real variables, however, it is worth noting that they did not diverge
significantly among industrialized countries during the same period. Figure 2.3 shows that in
the 1970s, there was no obvious trade-off between real GDP growth rates and inflation across
countries.


2.3. Explanations of the Great Inflation


To avoid the accusation of omitting important facts, let us refer briefly to the most widespread
explanation of the Great Inflation. According to Bruno and Sachs (1985), the key factor




3
    With some qualification for the case of Canada.


                                                                                              6
behind the acceleration of prices were the oil price shocks4. Bruno and Sachs (1985) state
(page 7): "A clear and central villain of the piece is the historically unprecedented rise in
commodity prices (mainly food and oil) in 1973-74 and again in 1979-80 that not
coincidentally accompanied the two great bursts of stagflation." The traditional explanation
emphasizes supply shocks and the subsequent demand response. Supply shocks play the role
of the initial exogenous impulse followed by endogenous adjustment of the private sector and
policy authorities. Barsky and Kilian (2002, 2004) offer an alternative reading of the facts.
According to their account, oil prices, and other commodity prices, should be seen as
responding to global supply and demand factors. Specifically, the authors account for the
increase in oil prices in 1973 as a delayed adjustment to consistent demand pressure persisting
since the late 1960s. The adjustment was delayed because during the 1960s oil prices were
regulated through long term contracts between oil producers and oil companies. In a situation
of clear excess demand at the going price, conditions were ripe for OPEC to renege on its
contractual agreements with oil companies leading to much higher oil prices. From such a
viewpoint, it seems plausible that broad upward trends in commodity prices, the collapse of
Bretton Woods and the collapse of the oil market regime were all driven by excess demand
growth in the late 1960s and the early 1970s. This would be compatible, following Barsky
and Kilian, with a broad monetary account of the Great Inflation. Despite our obvious
sympathy for such an account, investigating it is beyond the scope of this paper.


Still, the fact that inflation in the US and other member countries of the Bretton Woods
System accelerated well before the first hike in oil prices supports the hypothesis that demand
shocks (among them, increases in government spending) in conjunction with accommodative
monetary policy prepared the ground for the inflationary surges of the 1970s. Furthermore,
Figure 2.1 suggests that it was the response to the oil price shocks of the 1970s that made
most of the difference. The Bundesbank did not manage to avoid price acceleration
completely (CPI inflation averaged 4.8 per cent during the 1970s) but performed much better
than most of all other industrialized countries.5 The remainder of the paper is thus devoted to
the question: how did Germany manage to opt out of the Great Inflation?




4
  Other related references would be Samuelson (1974), Gordon (1975), Blinder (1979), Darby (1982) and
  Hamilton (1983).
5
  The differences would be even more striking if one would consider a wider sample of industrialized countries
(see, for example, Frenkel and Goldstein, 1999, who consider 23 countries).


                                                                                                            7
3. Sound money and price stability in Germany



3.1. The legacy of the Bundesbank and stability-oriented monetary policy


On 31 December 1998, together with all national central banks joining European Monetary
Union, the Deutsche Bundesbank ended its life as a central bank responsible for conducting
monetary policy for its currency. Combining this period with the term of its predecessor, the
Bank deutscher Länder, the overall period coincides with the existence of the D-Mark.6

The D-Mark developed − together with the Swiss Franc − into the most stable currency in the
world after 1945, and the Bundesbank achieved a reputation as a model of a solid, successful
central bank. This left a legacy reaching beyond its existence as a central bank responsible for
a national currency. The statute of the European Central Bank, enshrined in the Maastricht
Treaty, reflects this fact very well. But it is also fair to say that, in addition, the Bundesbank's
track record influenced the world of central banking on a global scale.

This world-wide attention was heavily influenced by the fact that Germany (again together
with Switzerland) avoided the “Great Inflation” of the 1970s. What explains such a superior
ability to approach price stability? In this sub-section, we will examine the historical, cultural
and institutional background. In the next sub-section, we will develop a theoretical model
which formalizes the Bundesbank’s strategy and in section 5, we will characterize
quantitatively the conduct of monetary policy by the Bundesbank.

To explain Germany’s post Second World War monetary history one has to go back to 1948
and even beyond. The institutional foundation was laid in 1948 by law of the allies – (West)
Germany did not yet exist as a state - which gave the Bank deutscher Länder independence
from any political authorities.7 When a few months later the D-Mark was introduced, this
institution was entrusted preserving the stability of the new currency.




6
  To be precise: The Bank deutscher Länder was established on 1 March 1948. The D-Mark became the currency
   of (then) West Germany on 21 June 1948. The Bundesbank replaced its predecessor on 26 July 1957.
7
  De jure the Allied Bank Commission could interfere, but never made any use of this prerogative. See
   Buchheim (1999).


                                                                                                        8
The currency reform in cooperation with the simultaneous economic reforms of Ludwig
Ehrhard laid the foundations of (West) Germany’s economic success, the so-called
“Wirtschaftswunder” (economic miracle).

As a consequence, most Germans for the first time in their life enjoyed a stable currency. This
experience had a deep impact on the mind of the German people. The Mark, initially (1873)
created as a currency based on gold had ended its existence in the hyperinflation of 1923
which destroyed Germany’s civil society.8 The successor of the Mark, the Reichsmark,
created in 1924 ended its short life with the currency reform of 1948. People had again lost
most of their wealth invested in nominal assets. No wonder that a strong aversion against
inflation and a desire for monetary stability became deeply entrenched in the mind of the
German people!9 It became so entrenched in Germans' expectations, habits and customs that it
deserved the special expression "stability culture". It is interesting to stress the virtuous
interaction between Germany's stability culture and the independence of the Bundesbank.

A particular historical episode illustrates it emphatically. The German Constitution of 1949
required the Government to prepare the Deutsche Bundesbank law. It was no secret that then
chancellor Konrad Adenauer was not a friend of an independent central bank. However, his
clash with the central bank in May 1956 when he criticised in public the increase of the
discount rate (from 4.5 to 5.5 percent) – “…the guillotine will hit ordinary citizens…” had
already demonstrated to what extend the media and the public, at large, were behind the
independence from political interference of the central bank. As a consequence, he lost the
battle against the minister of the economy Ludwig Erhard. In the end, the Bundesbank law of
1957 in section 12 stated explicitly that: “In exercising the powers conferred on it by this Act,
[the Bundesbank] is independent of instructions from the Federal Government.” Together
with the mandate in section 3 of “safeguarding the currency” the Bundesbank Act established
the institutional fundament for a stability oriented monetary policy. 10




8
     Stefan Zweig (1970), a writer, claims in his memoirs of that time that the experience of this total loss of the
      value of the currency more than anything else made Germans "ripe for Hitler".
9
     It was interesting to see that in the days before the Berlin Wall fell demonstrators in the streets of Leipzig
      carried posters saying: “If the D-Mark is not coming to us we will come to the D-Mark”. So this desire for
      stability had also affected the mind of East Germans.
10
     It is interesting to note that "safeguarding the currency" initially referred to the "domestic" as well as the
     "external" value (i.e. the exchange rate) of the currency. Over time the Bundesbank succeeded in obtaining
     general acceptance of its interpretation of safeguarding the purchasing power of the currency.


                                                                                                                  9
Notwithstanding the fact that this law could have been changed at any time by a simple
majority of the legislative and insofar seemed to be based on shaky legal ground, the
reputation of the Bundesbank became such that there was never any serious initiative to
change the law. The status of the Bundesbank and the support for its stability oriented
monetary policy was firmly grounded on (and, in turn, reinforced) the “stability culture” (see
Issing 1993).

At the time of the ratification of the Bundesbank Act there were not only hardly any
independent central banks in the world, it is even difficult to find any serious discussion in the
literature on the issue of an appropriate institutional arrangement for a central bank. Interest in
this topic was mainly triggered by the experience of the “Great Inflation” in the 1970s and the
more and more obvious failures of monetary policy in many countries. First publications
discussed credibility issues (Barro and Gordon) and the time inconsistency problem (Kydland
and Prescott). The outcome of monetary policy depending on the statute − here the degree of
independence of the central bank − commanded broader attention only in the 1990s, with a
paper by Alesina and Summers.11

Since, the number of publications on central bank independence has exploded, discussing all
aspects from defining independence, measuring its degree to designing optimal contracts for
central bankers. Is it wrong to say that the good performance of the Bundesbank not least in
the 1970s has contributed to, if not triggered, this branch of research?

This interest in the topic and the result by more and more research papers has also supported
the claim to give independence to the new central bank which still had to be founded, the
European Central Bank. One should not forget that some of the countries signing the
Maastricht Treaty at that time (1992) still had not given independence to their own national
central banks. Since then “independence” of the central bank has become a model also on a
global scale.

In a nutshell the message stemming from experience and theory is: Institutions matter! The
outcome of monetary policy is heavily dependent on the institutional design of the central
bank.




11
     See Alesina and Summers (1990). An early paper by Bade and Parkin (1980) was widely ignored and not even
     published.


                                                                                                          10
Another aspect of great importance pertained the exchange rate regime (see previous section
for a brief reference to the Bretton Woods system and some selected references to the relevant
literature). For many years, the Bundesbank was in favour of a fixed exchange rate of the D-
Mark against the US-Dollar. It even argued against the appreciation of the D-Mark in 1961.
The law of the “uneasy triangle” had been more or less forgotten (Issing 2006). However,
towards the end of the 1960s, it became increasingly apparent that the fixed exchange rate
was a constraint for conducting a monetary policy geared towards a domestic goal, namely
price stability. (Richter 1999; von Hagen 1999). In a regime of a fixed exchange rate and free
capital flows, money growth becomes endogenous and any attempt to withstand the import of
inflation is finally self-defeating.

The Bundesbank experienced a period of excessive money growth driven by interventions
buying US-Dollars. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the external component of money
creation was sometimes even higher than the growth of the monetary base, implying that the
internal contribution of money creation was negative. The consequences of this constellation
for the institutional design of monetary policy were far-reaching: The Bundesbank,
notwithstanding its independence from political interference, equipped with all the necessary
instruments, was powerless with respect to pursuing a domestic goal since the exchange rate
was fixed and capital flowed freely across borders. This fundamentally changed when in
March 1973 Germany let its currency float against the US-Dollar. The Bundesbank being
relieved from its obligation to intervene in the exchange market could now consider
conducting a monetary policy to safeguard the internal stability of its money, i.e. maintaining
price stability.

The Bundesbank declared the fight against inflation to be the principal goal of its monetary
policy12 and, in line with this, had already started to slow down inflation (which had peaked at
almost 8 per cent in mid-1973) when in October 1973, the first oil crisis broke out. The rise in
oil prices thwarted the efforts of the Bundesbank while real output started to decline at the
same time. Being confronted with such a situation, the Bundesbank attempted to keep
monetary expansion within strict limits in order to avoid possible spill-over effects into the
wage and price-setting. In doing so, it did, however, not commit itself to any clear strategy
and quantification.13 Instead, the Bundesbank mainly tried to influence the behaviour of

12
     See Deutsche Bundesbank (1974), Annual Report, p. 45.
13
     In fact, the Bundesbank tried to ensure that “monetary expansion was not too great but not to small either”.
     See Deutsche Bundesbank (1974), Annual Report, especially p. 17.


                                                                                                              11
market participants by means of “moral suasion”. However, the social partners more or less
ignored the signals given by the Bundesbank and agreed on high increases in nominal wages
in 1974 trying to compensate for the loss in real disposable income. As a consequence
unemployment increased and inflation went up.

Against this experience, the idea of adopting a formal quantitative target for money growth
which would provide a nominal anchor for inflation and inflation expectations rapidly gained
ground. As it happened this period coincided with the “monetarist counterrevolution.” The
leading monetarists Milton Friedman, Karl Brunner and Alan Meltzer claimed that central
banks should abstain from any attempt to fine-tune the economy and should instead follow a
strategy of monetary targeting. (A floating exchange rate was a necessary condition for
controlling the money supply.) These ideas in principle found positive reactions in Germany
(Richter 1999; von Hagen 1999). The Bundesbank discussed this approach internally and with
leading proponents. Helmut Schlesinger, member of the Executive Board and chief
economist, had an intensive exchange of views not least when participating in the
intellectually influential Konstanz Seminar founded by Karl Brunner in 1970.14 The rejection
of fine-tuning and the medium-term orientation of monetary policy implied by monetary
targeting was strongly supported also by the German Sachverständigenrat (1974).

However, in spite of the Bundesbank being the first central bank in the world to adopt a
monetary target (for the year 1975), the honeymoon with leading monetarists came soon to an
end. This process started already when the Bundesbank declared its move to the new strategy
“an experiment”, stressed that it would not (and, in the short run, could not) control the
monetary base, and over many years missed its monetary target.

The Bundesbank interpreted its approach as a kind of “pragmatic monetarism” and kept to
this strategy until 1998 (see Baltensperger 1999, Issing 2005, and also Neumann, 1997, 1999).
Not surprisingly, this attitude was heavily criticised especially by Karl Brunner (1983).
However, in its monetary policy practice, the strategy served the Bundesbank well in
defending the stability of its currency - if not in absolute terms it did at least (together with the
Swiss National Bank) substantially better than most other central banks.




14
     See Fratianni and von Hagen (2001). The authors give a comprehensive survey on subjects discussed and
     persons attending. The seminar still continues and was chaired for many years by the leading German
     monetarist Manfred Neumann.


                                                                                                       12
3.2. The conduct of policy under monetary targeting15


a) Derivation of the money growth target

The choice of a monetary target in 1974 undoubtedly signalled a fundamental regime shift.
Not only was it a clear break with the past but also a decision to discard alternative
approaches to monetary policy.16 There were two main arguments in favour of providing a
quantified guidepost for the future rate of monetary expansion. First and foremost was the
intention of controlling inflation through the control of monetary expansion. Second, the
Bundesbank tried to provide guidance to agents' (especially wage bargainers') expectations
through the announcement of a quantified objective for monetary growth.17 Therefore, with its
new strategy, the Bundesbank clearly signalled its responsibility for the control of inflation.
At the same time, the Bundesbank expressed its view, that while monetary policy by
maintaining price stability in the longer run would exert a positive impact on economic
growth, the fostering of the economy’s growth potential should be considered a task of fiscal
and structural policies, while employment was a responsibility of the social partners
conducting wage negotiations.

Although the formulation of the new strategy was heavily influenced by the ideas of the
leading monetarists, the implementation of monetary targeting in Germany deviated from the
theoretical blueprint in a number of ways. One important difference was that Bundesbank did
not formulate its targets in terms of the monetary base, but in terms of a broadly defined
monetary aggregate, the central bank money stock (defined as currency in circulation plus the
required minimum reserves on domestic deposits calculated at constant reserve ratios with
base January 1974).18 Secondly, the Bundesbank did not attempt to control the money stock
directly, but followed an indirect approach of influencing money demand by varying key
money market rates and bank reserves (two-stage implementation procedure). Thirdly, the
Bundesbank made it clear from the beginning that it could not and would not promise to



15
   Parts of the following section are taken from Issing (2005).
16
   It must be recognized that the start of monetary targeting was characterized by a high degree of uncertainty.
   After all, Germany had just come out of the Bretton Woods “adjustable peg” system in which many topics
   were seen as irrelevant.
17
   See Schlesinger (1983) on this issue.
18
     The ratios were 16.6% for sight deposits, 12.4% for time deposits and 8.1% for savings deposits. After the
     mid-eighties, the heavy weight on currency increasingly proved to be a disadvantage, and when setting the
     target for 1988, the Bundesbank switched to the money stock M3. See Deutsche Bundesbank (1995), p. 81f.


                                                                                                             13
reach the monetary target with any degree of precision. Accordingly, in this period, the new
regime of monetary targeting was in many respects an experiment.

From the outset, the Bundesbank recognized the importance of adopting a simple, transparent
and at the same time comprehensible method for the derivation of the annual monetary
targets.19 The analytical background for the derivation formula was provided by the quantity
theory of money. Starting from the quantity identity, one gets that average money growth,
Δm , and average inflation, Δp , will fulfil the identity:

(3.1)                                  Δmt + Δvt ≡ Δpt + Δyt

where p, m, y and v are the (logs of the) price level, the money stock, real income and the
income velocity of money, respectively, and the bars denote long-run average values. Taking
the velocity trend and the long-run average rate of real output growth to be exogenous, it
follows from (3.1) that trend inflation can be pinned down by controlling the trend rate of
money growth:

(3.2)                                  Δpt = Δmt − Δy t + Δvt


Based on this reasoning, the Bundesbank derived the target for average money growth in year
t, Δmt* , from the sum of the (maximum) rise in prices it was willing to tolerate, Δpt* , the

predicted growth in potential output, Et −1 Δy t* , and the expected trend rate of change in

velocity, E t −1 Δvt* :

(3.3)                                  Δmt* = Δpt* + E t −1 ( Δy t* ) − E t −1 ( Δvt* )

where the deltas now represent year-on-year changes, and Et-1 denotes expectations at the end
of year t-1. The target rate for average (year-on-year) money growth was then translated into a
target rate for money growth in the course of the year (see Table 3.2 and Neumann, 1997,
180ff).

The approach reflected the insight that monetary growth consistent with this derivation would
create the appropriate conditions for real growth in line with price stability. While these basic
relationships were uncontested over medium to longer-term horizons, the Bundesbank was


19
     See also Issing (1997) for the following considerations.



                                                                                              14
fully aware of the fact that they might not strictly apply over the shorter term. On a month-to-
month or quarter-to-quarter basis and even beyond, the basic relationship between the money
stock and the overall domestic price level was often obscured by a variety of other factors.
Any attempt to strictly tie money growth to its desired path in the short-term might have led
to disturbing volatility in interest and exchange rates, thus imposing unnecessary adjustment
costs on the economy. Accordingly, the Bundesbank repeatedly pointed to the medium-term
nature of its strategy and explained that it was prepared to tolerate short-term deviations from
the target path if that seemed advisable or acceptable in terms of the overriding goal of price
stability.

b) From 1975 to 1978 – the learning phase

First experiences with monetary targets were not particularly encouraging. Between 1975 and
1978, the quantitative targets were clearly (and in 1978 considerably) overshot (see Table
3.2). The sharp increase in interest rates which had taken placed immediately after the end of
the Bretton Woods System was almost completely reversed in 1974/75 and real short-term
interest rates were kept rather low until the beginning of 1979 (see Figure 4.2a). Clarida and
Gertler (1997) interpret this as evidence “that the Bundesbank’s commitment to fight inflation
waned somewhat during the period between the two major oil shocks”. Von Hagen (1999)
argues that following the first oil price shock, short-term employment-related goals gained
prominence. In the Bundesbank’s own reading, the loosening was mainly motivated by two
considerations which, in hindsight, turned out to be partly based on misjudgments. First,
policymakers apparently overestimated the extent to which the currency appreciation would
dampen real activity and inflation. The second misjudgment concerned the depth of the 1975
recession, which in hindsight, turned out to have been greatly overestimated (see Gerberding
et al., 2004).20

Nevertheless, the Bundesbank was able to slow down inflation from the high levels before to
2.7% in 1978. During this period the Bundesbank gained valuable insights into the new
regime and introduced a number of technical modifications (see Table 3.2). These experiences
helped the Bundesbank to enhance the monetary targeting concept from its experimental stage
into a fully-fledged strategy. As a consequence, at the end of 1978, the potential-oriented
monetary targeting strategy had been established and had proven its value. Therefore, the


20
     See Bundesbank, AR 1975 and 1976.


                                                                                             15
Bundesbank was well prepared when the German economy entered especially troubled
waters.


c) From 1979 to 1985 – the strategy bears fruit

The economic situation in 1978 was broadly seen as rather comfortable. German real GDP
had grown by around 3 per cent, accompanied by high levels of employment growth and
falling unemployment. The situation was, however, less positive in terms of monetary growth
and inflation. Monetary growth had overshot its target and there were signs of acceleration in
the rate of inflation, which in 1978 stood, on average, at 2.7%. Furthermore, in 1979, the
sharp increase in oil prices associated with the second oil price shock hit the German
economy. The resulting massive increase in import prices, especially energy prices,
augmented by a weakening of the exchange rate, brought about a turnaround in Germany’s
current account position, leading to a current account deficit in 1979 for the first time in many
years.

At the same time, government fiscal policy was clearly expansionary. Thus, fiscal policy
rendered the central bank’s task even more difficult. Moreover, the European Monetary
System (EMS), an exchange rate regime defining the exchange rates of participating
currencies in terms of central rates against the ECU, had begun rather quietly in March 1979,
but subsequently faced tensions and the need to adjust parities from as early as September
1979.

It was obvious from the beginning that the direct effect of the oil price shock on consumer
prices could not be prevented by monetary policy. At the same time, the Bundesbank had
carefully analysed the lessons of the first oil price shock. Against this experience, in 1979 the
Governing Council of the Bundesbank was well aware of the threat that the oil price increase
could translate again into sustained increases in inflation brought about by second-round
effects in wage and price-setting.21 In responding to these challenges, the Bundesbank took
decisive action. The discount rate was increased in steps from 3 per cent at the start of 1979 to
reach 7.5 per cent in May 1980. In parallel, the Lombard rate was increased from its initial
level of 3.5 per cent to 9.5 per cent in May 1980, and in February 1981 - as a special Lombard




21
     See Schlesinger (1980) on this point.



                                                                                              16
– to as much as 12 per cent, the normal Lombard window being closed.22 By subsequently
reducing the monetary targets from 1979 onwards, the Bundesbank sent out a clear signal for
restoring price stability.

Not until the second half of 1981 did the growth rates for the monetary base begin to come
down. Towards the end of 1981, there were increasingly clear signs of an easing of price and
wage pressures. The D-Mark regained confidence in the foreign exchange markets and
strengthened again, not only within the EMS but also in relation to the US-Dollar. The
external adjustment process was promoted through a slowdown in domestic demand and the
current account position improved noticeably. Furthermore, through the “monetary warning”,
the government became aware of the unsustainability of its deficit policy. From then on,
budget consolidation was increasingly recognized as being an urgent task.

The subsequent years 1982-85 can be regarded as a phase of monetary relaxation and
normalisation. The Bundesbank’s monetary policy was focused on bringing down inflation
and restoring the stability of the currency, and it proved able to realise this aim throughout the
period. The benchmark figure for the tolerated rate of inflation (which, until 1984, was termed
the “unavoidable” rate of price increase) was gradually reduced from 3 ½ % in 1982 to 2% in
1985. At the same time, actual inflation fell steadily from an annual average rate of 5.2% in
1982 to 2.0 % in 1985. When price stability was virtually reached in the middle of the 1980s,
the Bundesbank changed over from the concept of an “unavoidable” rate of inflation to a
medium-term price norm or price assumption of no more than 2% (see Table 3.1).

d) The last test – German reunification

Given the stability-oriented monetary policy strategy and the developments described above it
is far from surprising that, at the end of the eighties, the Bundesbank was one of the most
respected central banks in the world. At the beginning of the 1990s, it was about to face an
important historical test, in the form of German re-unification.

The D-mark was introduced in the eastern Länder on 1 June 1990. Curiously the introduction
of the currency preceded political unification (3 October 1990). The extension of the
territorial scope of monetary policy clearly led to a significant increase in uncertainty.
Specifically, the operation entailed an increase in money supply of the order of 15% of West

22
      See Baltensperger (1999) for a more detailed description of this period, the monetary targets and their
     realisations.


                                                                                                          17
German money stock. This number compared with about 10%, which would have been
appropriate on the basis of estimates of the relative size of the former GDR's GDP at market
prices. Moreover, there were additional factors challenging the conduct of the Bundesbank's
stability-oriented policy. In fact, German re-unification led to a massive expansion of
aggregate expenditure in Germany, including sizeable general government deficits. As a
consequence inflation rose quickly, with price increases (in West Germany) exceeding 4% in
the second half of 1991.

How could the Bundesbank under these circumstances maintain price stability over the
medium term? How could it preserve credibility?

The Bundesbank decided to stick to its tried and tested framework, including the normative
rate of 2% for inflation. This option implied that the Bundesbank was, for a short time,
prepared to accept monetary expansion above the announced target. Again, the money growth
targets proved to be highly beneficial in terms of anchoring inflation expectations, even
though it was not easy to derive an adequate money growth target for reunited Germany (see
Issing et al., 2005, p. 3f). The Bundesbank abided by its well-proven strategy right up to the
beginning of EMU in January 1999. While some technical features of the strategy (e.g. the
exact definition of the target variable) were changed over time, its major elements – the
explicit derivation of the annual money growth targets from medium-term macro-economic
benchmark figures, the flexible implementation which included temporary departures from
the medium-term rule, and the two-stage implementation procedure- - stayed intact. In this
respect, the Bundesbank’s approach certainly stands out by reason of its consistency and
remarkable continuity.

e) Lessons

What are the lessons that can be drawn? Why was Germany better able to counter the
inflationary shocks of the 1970s than most other countries? Several key aspects emerge from
this brief review of German monetary policy after the end of the Bretton Woods System. To
begin with, the Bundesbank was the first central bank to announce a monetary target and thus
to undertake a strategy of commitment, transparently communicated to the public.23
Moreover, when announcing the money growth targets, the Bundesbank disclosed the most
important guiding principles behind its decisions, such as the maximum rise in prices that

23
     See Issing, 1992, p. 291.


                                                                                           18
would be tolerated by the central bank and its estimate of potential output growth. By doing
so, the Bundesbank fostered transparency and provided an anchor for medium-term inflation
expectations. In retrospect, against the background of the more recent debate about the merits
of an intensive communication policy, these elements of the Bundesbank’s strategy appear
very modern indeed.

After the initial years of experimentation, the strategy had proven its value in the baptism of
fire of 1979 and the early 1980s. In doing so, it had managed to establish credibility which, in
turn, had started to set in motion a virtuous circle. Still, one may well ask – and indeed, it has
often been asked – how the Bundesbank was able to get away with its practice of deviating
time and again from the announced targets while at the same time preserving its reputation as
a bulwark of monetary stability.24 After all, even if one excludes the years 1975-78, the
targets were missed seven out of 20 times (see Figure 3.1).

As explained by Issing (1997, p. 71f), the target misses were rarely of a completely
involuntary nature, but mostly constituted deliberate monetary policy decisions. Yet, it was
exactly in those situations that the monetary targets had an especially valuable disciplining
effect because once a target was missed the decision makers were put under pressure to justify
the outcome in terms of the ultimate aim of safeguarding the currency. Similarly, Schlesinger
(2002) argues that the targets imposed discipline on the decision makers by forcing them to
explain their decisions and to persuade the public that failures to meet the intermediate target
did not jeopardise the final goal of policy. Finally, according to Neumann (2006, p. 14), “the
Bundesbank was the first central bank that provided the public (or at least, an elite audience),
with an intelligible numerical framework that facilitated the evaluation of its policy course
from the outside”. Viewed from this perspective, the money growth targets represented a
movement away from purely discretionary policy towards a more rule-based behaviour. The
Bundesbank itself has sometimes designated its strategy as constrained or disciplined
discretion, Neumann (1997) talks of “rule-based discretion”.




24
     See Neumann, 2006, p. 14.


                                                                                               19
4. Monetary targeting as a commitment device

As explained in the previous section, the Bundesbank did not attempt to control the money
stock directly, but followed an indirect management procedure which worked via influencing
conditions in the money market. Hence, on a basic level, the Bundesbank’s approach may be
described as setting the short-tem interest rate so as to achieve the rate of money growth that
was viewed as consistent with the attainment of the final goal, price stability. In this section,
we present a model which formalises this approach and enables us to compare the implied
interest rate rule with other interest rate rules proposed in the academic literature (such as the
Taylor rule and its many variants).

Taylor (1999) and more recently, Orphanides (2003) and Kilponen and Leitemo (2008) have
discussed the implications of targeting money growth for a central bank which sets the short-
term interest rate. Although we know from the previous section that the Bundesbank’s
practice of monetary targeting differed from the monetarist blueprint in a number of ways, it
is still instructive to consider the simple case of a “pure” or “strict” money growth rule first.
Under strict money growth targeting, the central bank is required to find the short-term
interest rate, it, which sets the growth rate of money equal to the pre-specified target:

(4.1)                        Δmt = Δmt*

subject to a money demand relation that relates real money holdings to output and the interest
rate:25

(4.2)                        ( mt − pt ) = η y ⋅ yt − ηi ⋅ it + ε tmd

where ε tmd captures short-run dynamics and shocks to money demand. Taking first
differences, the growth rate of money is related to the inflation rate, the change in the nominal
interest rate and the growth rate of output through

(4.2a)                       Δmt = πt + ηy Δyt - ηi Δit + Δ ε tmd .

Given the money demand relation (4.2), equilibrium velocity can be written as


25
     Such a money demand equation can be derived from the optimization problem of a household who values
     money holdings in its utility function that is separable in real balances and consumption goods, see Woodford
     (2003).


                                                                                                               20
                              vt* = − ( (mt − pt )* − yt* ) , where
(4.3)                          (mt − pt )* − yt* = (η y − 1) yt* + ηi ⋅ it* + ε tv*
                              => vt* = (1 − η y ) yt* − ηi ⋅ it* − ε tv*


and equilibrium changes in velocity

(4.3a)                        Δvt* = (1 − η y )Δyt* − ηi ⋅ Δit* −Δ ε tv*


are represented by a function of potential output growth and of changes in the steady-steady
level of the nominal interest rate (if there are any). We define the velocity shock ε tv* as a

shock to equilibrium money demand. We interpret ε tv* as a portfolio shock that can be
observed by the central bank due to its institutional knowledge.

As discussed in the previous section, a central bank with the objective of controlling long-run
average inflation will set the money growth target equal to the “acceptable” rate of inflation,
πt*, adjusted for the predicted growth rate of potential output and the expected trend rate of
change in velocity (which is exactly what the Bundesbank did):

(4.4)                         Δm t* = πt* + EtΔyt* - EtΔv t*

Note that in contrast to Eq (3.3), we now assume that the money growth targets are based on
current-period expectations of Δyt* and Δvt* , which presupposes that the money growth
targets are regularly updated to take account of revisions in the estimates of potential output
growth and the trend change in velocity.26 From (4.3a) the formula for the money growth
target can be reformulated as:

(4.4a)                        Δmt* = π t* + η y Et Δyt* +Δ ε tv* .


where we abstract from changes in the nominal equilibrium interest rate (as the Bundesbank
did).27

Combining (4.2a) and (4.4a), the deviation of money growth from target can now be
expressed as:


26
     As regards the Bundesbank, the fact that the targets were usually formulated as a corridor of 2 or 3 percentage
     points (see Table 3.2) provided flexibility for adjustments to changes in the underlying estimates. In addition,
     there was a regular mid-year review of the targets.


                                                                                                                 21
(4.5)                          Δmt − Δmt* = π t − π t* + η y (Δyt − Et Δyt* ) − ηi Δit + {Δε tmd − Δε tv* .       }
Using the equality of actual money growth with target (equation (4.1)) entails:


(4.6)                         π t − π t* + η y (Δyt − Et Δyt* ) − ηi Δit + {Δε tmd − Δε tv* = 0 }
Solving for the nominal interest rate, (4.6) can be transformed into an instrument rule of the
form:

                                                                     ηY
(4.7)                          it = it −1 +
                                              1
                                              ηi
                                                   (π t − π t* ) +
                                                                     ηi
                                                                                          1
                                                                        (Δyt − Et Δyt* ) + {Δε tmd − Δε tv*
                                                                                          ηi
                                                                                                              }
According to (4.7), money growth targeting implies an interest rate reaction to the lagged
interest rate, to the deviation of inflation from target, to the deviation of actual output growth
from (the central bank’s estimate of) potential output growth (which is equivalent to the
change in the output gap), and to the difference between the “true” money demand shock
Δε tmd , and the portfolio shock observed by the central bank, Δε tv* . As pointed out by
Orphanides (2003), the interest rate rule implied by (strict) money growth targeting thus
belongs to the class of “natural-growth targeting rules”, which do not rely on estimates of the
natural rate of interest and output and thus “stay clear of the pitfalls known to plague the
natural-rate-gap-based policy approach” (p. 990). Notice, however, that in order to be a
meaningful specification, which would be suitable for characterizing the practical
implementation of monetary policy, the money demand shocks in (4.7) should have
reasonable properties. We will discuss this issue in more detail in Section 5 where we present
our empirical results.

However, as discussed in the previous section, the Bundesbank did not adhere to a strict
version of the Friedman rule, but instead pursued a strategy of “pragmatic monetarism”. Most
importantly, the assumption that the central bank hits the money growth target each period
which underlies Equation (4.1) is at odds with the Bundesbank’s acclaimed medium-term
orientation and the fact that it tolerated short-term deviations from target.

According to Issing, one of the fundamental functions of a monetary policy strategy is to
confer credibility to the achievement of the final goal of price stability (see, for example,

27
     See Gerberding et al. (2007), p. 5f.


                                                                                                                      22
Issing et al. 2005). In order to incorporate the key issues of credibility, commitment and
reputation in our analysis, we choose a framework which allows us to interpret a monetary
target as a commitment device. Specifically, we assume that the Bundesbank council re-
optimized the setting of the policy instrument(s) every period, that is, it acted under
discretion. However, in our reading, policymakers were aware of the problems associated
with discretionary policy and used monetary targeting as a device to get closer to the optimal
(but time-inconsistent) commitment solution. In particular, we assume that when setting
interest rates, the objective of the Bundesbank council was to minimize deviations of inflation
and money growth from target, while also seeking to stabilize output and the interest rate
around their respective target values:28


                                        [                                                                   ]
                                  ∞
                              E0 ∑ ß t (π t − π t* ) 2 + λˆx xt + λˆi (it − it* ) 2 + λˆm (Δmt − Δmt* ) 2
                                                               2
(4.8)
                                 t =0



where ß is the discount factor, xt is the output gap defined as the gap between actual output, yt,
and potential output, yt*, and λ̂ x , λ̂i and λ̂m are the relative weights attached to the output,
interest rate and money growth terms.

The use of a modified loss function to attenuate the pitfalls associated with discretionary
monetary policy was pioneered by Rogoff (1985). More recently, several authors have
analysed the properties of monetary policy strategies based on modified loss functions in the
context of forward-looking new Keynesian-type models. There are many variants of modified
loss functions including, price level targeting (Svensson, 1999, Vestin, 2006, Røisland, 2006
and Gaspar et al., 2007), average inflation targeting (Nessén and Vestin, 2005), interest rate
smoothing (Woodford, 1999), nominal income growth targeting (Jensen, 2002) and speed
limit targeting (Walsh, 2003).

For our purposes, the most closely related contribution in the literature is Söderström (2005)
who analyses the implications of delegating a loss function to the central bank which deviates
from society’s true loss function by an additional money growth target. As shown by
Söderström, this modification can be beneficial for a central bank acting under discretion
since the money growth target introduces interest rate inertia and history dependence into

28
     In the loss function (4.8), we have abstracted from the complications arising from a gap between the efficient
     and the natural level of output, but one should keep in mind that with a positive value of x*, the optimal
     discretionary policy suffers from an average inflation bias as well as a stabilisation bias; see Woodford, 2003,
     p. 469ff.


                                                                                                                 23
interest rate decisions, both of which are features of the optimal commitment policy. In
Söderström’s baseline simulations, a money growth target closes about 80% of the gap
between discretionary policy and the optimal policy under pre-commitment. This result is the
more remarkable given the fact that it is obtained in the context of a standard New Keynesian
model where money growth is neither useful as an indicator of future inflation nor of output
growth, and where money plays no direct role in the transmission mechanism of monetary
policy.

Nevertheless, our objective differs from Söderström’s. Specifically, we want to derive the
interest rate rule characterizing optimal discretionary policy under the modified loss function
(4.8). In our reading, this loss function captures some relevant dimensions of the
Bundesbank's approach of pragmatic monetarism. Most importantly, it accounts for misses of
the monetary target in the context of a strategy where monetary growth is always important
for monetary policy-making. Hence, we expect the interest rate rule implied by this loss
function to provide a useful starting point for the empirical analysis undertaken in Section 5.

In order to derive the interest rate rule implied by the modified loss function (4.8), we need a
model of the underlying structural relationships between the target variables. To keep the
analysis as simple as possible, we assume that these relationships are adequately captured by
the standard New Keynesian model which, despite its well-known limitations, is the
workhorse in the theory of monetary policy-making.

Specifically, we use the baseline version of the model which consists of an aggregate supply
and an aggregate demand equation, augmented by the simple money demand relation (4.2): 29

(4.9)                        π t − π t* = ß( Etπ t +1 − π t*+1 ) + κ xt + utπ

(4.10)                        xt = Et xt +1 − ϕ (it − Et π t +1 − rt n )


(4.2)                        ( mt − pt ) = η y ⋅ yt − ηi ⋅ it + ε tmd

where utπ is a cost-push shock and rtπ is a natural-rate shock. For simplicity’s sake, we
assume that both are i.i.d. Combining Eq (4.2) with the definition of the money growth target
from Eq (4.4a) yields:


29
     For details on the model, see Woodford, 2007, p. 6f.


                                                                                              24
                                                                                  {
                   Δmt − Δmt* = π t − π t* + η y (Δyt − Δyt* ) − η i Δit + Δε tmd − Δε tv*          }
(4.11)
                                     = π t − π t* + η y Δxt − η i Δit + Δε t


where ε t = ε tmd − ε tv* and we have again assumed that the money growth target is regularly
updated to take account of observed portfolio shifts and of revisions in the central bank’s
estimates of potential output growth. Alternatively, the shock variable in (4.11) would have to
be modified to include shocks to potential output growth.30

Clearly, the model misses some important elements for understanding monetary policy
making, such as the role of financial factors in the transmission mechanism. Nevertheless, it
does provide a simple and workable framework to discuss the key issues of commitment,
credibility and reputation (see, for example, Gaspar and Kashyap, 2007).

We are now in a position to derive the interest rate rule implied by the modified period loss
function (4.8) subject to the underlying model composed of Eq. (4.9), (4.10) and (4.11a).
Formally, the solution can be found by minimising the Lagrangian expression:

(4.12)
        ⎡(π t − π t* ) 2 + λˆx xt 2 + λˆi (it − it* ) 2 + λˆm (Δmt − Δmt* ) 2                                 ⎤
        ⎢                                                                                                     ⎥
        ⎢+ ß (π t +1 − π t*+1 ) 2 + ßλˆx xt +1 + ßλˆi (it +1 − it*+1 ) 2 + ßλˆm (Δmt +1 − Δmt*+1 ) 2 + ß 2 ...⎥
                                                 2

        ⎢                                              π                                                      ⎥
        ⎢+ φ1,t ( ß( Et π t +1 − π t +1 ) + κxt + ut − (π t − π t ))
                                     *                                  *
                                                                                                              ⎥
        ⎢+ φ ( E x − ϕ (i − E π − r n ) − x )                                                                 ⎥
Lt = Et ⎢    2 ,t   t t +1         t      t t +1     t        t                                               ⎥
        ⎢+ φ (π − π * + η Δx − η Δi + Δε − (Δm − Δm* ))                                                       ⎥
        ⎢ 3,t t            t       y    t      i   t        t            t        t
                                                                                                              ⎥
        ⎢+ ßφ1,t +1 ( ß( Et +1π t + 2 − π t*+ 2 ) + κxt +1 + utπ+1 − (π t +1 − π t*+1 ))                      ⎥
        ⎢                                                                                                     ⎥
        ⎢+ ßφ2,t +1 ( Et +1 xt + 2 − ϕ (it +1 − Et +1π t + 2 − rt n+1 ) − xt +1 )                             ⎥
        ⎢                                                                                                     ⎥
        ⎣⎢+ ßφ3,t +1 (π t +1 − π t +1 + η y Δxt +1 − η i Δit +1 + Δε t +1 − (Δmt +1 − Δmt +1 )) + ...
                                   *                                                     *
                                                                                                              ⎦⎥

with respect to the paths of each of the four endogenous variables, πt, xt, Δmt and it. The
derivation is complicated by the fact that the money growth target introduces lagged values of
the endogenous variables into the state vector. In any stationary equilibrium therefore, the
expected values of the endogenous variables will depend on their own lagged values.31 In


30
   Loss function (4.8) assumes that output is targeted at the natural rate, which is a time-varying variable. If
   output-gap targeting is feasible, the value of the natural rate must be known (or, in real-life terms, a good
   estimate is available). Therefore, ytn can, in principle, also serve as an input for the (time-varying) money
   growth target. See Jensen, 2002, p. 948.
31
   See Clarida et al.(1999), p. 1692, FN 74, or Walsh (2003).


                                                                                                                   25
general, analytical solutions to this kind of problem are not available, but Söderlind (1999)
and Dennis (2007) have developed algorithms which provide numerical solutions. While we
do not want to take that route here, it is possible to gain important insights into the nature of
the policy problem by considering the analytical solution to the much simpler static version of
the problem.32 Hence, in what follows we assume that when taking interest rate decisions, the
Bundesbank Council was concerned only with minimizing the current period loss function,
taking private sector expectations as given. In this case, (4.12) reduces to:

                        ⎡(π t − π t* ) 2 + λˆx xt 2 + λˆi (it − it* ) 2 + λˆm (Δmt − Δmt* ) 2 ⎤
                        ⎢                                              π
                                                                                              ⎥
                        ⎢+ φ1,t ( ß ( Et π t +1 − π t +1 ) + κxt + ut − (π t − π t ))
                                                    *                              *
                                                                                              ⎥
 (4.12a)        Lt = Et ⎢                                                                     ⎥
                        ⎢+ φ2,t ( Et xt +1 − ϕ (it − Et π t +1 − rt ) − xt )
                                                                      n
                                                                                              ⎥
                        ⎢+ φ (π − π * + η Δx − η Δi + Δε − (Δm − Δm* ))⎥
                        ⎣ 3,t t            t      y      t    i   t        t       t       t  ⎦

and the first-order conditions are:

                    ∂L
(4.13a)                       = 2(π t − π t* ) − φ1,t + φ3,t = 0                                       for all t
               ∂ (π t − π t )
                          *




        ∂L    ˆ
(4.13b) ∂x = 2λ x xt + φ1,t κ − φ 2,t + φ3,tη y = 0                                                    for all t
          t



                ∂L
(4.13c)             = 2λˆi (it − it* ) − φ 2,tϕ − φ3,tη i = 0                                          for all t
                ∂it


                   ∂L
(4.13d)                      = 2λˆm (Δmt − Δmt* ) − φ3,t = 0                                           for all t
              ∂ (Δmt − Δmt )
                         *




Solving for the Lagrangian multipliers and inserting the solutions into (4.13c) yields:

(4.14)        λˆi (it − it* ) − ϕλˆx xt − ϕκ (π t − π t* ) − (ϕκ + ϕη y + η i )λˆm (Δmt − Δmt* ) = 0

which can be transformed into an (implicit) instrument rule of the form:

                      λ xϕ      κϕ                λ ϕ    η
(4.15) it = it* +          xt +    (π t − π t* ) + m (κ + i + η y )(Δmt − Δmt* )
                       λi       λi                 λi    ϕ



32
     For a similar approach, see Guender and Oh (2006).


                                                                                                            26
Eq (4.15) reproduces the well-known result that the implicit interest rule under discretion
takes the form of a standard Taylor rule. However, the inclusion of a money growth term in
the loss function implies an additional interest rate response to deviations of money growth
from target. Interestingly, the Euler equations (“targeting rules”) derived by Dennis (2007) for
the case of fully optimal discretionary policy take essentially the same form as Eq (4.15). This
suggests that the functional form of the policy rule (4.15) is not specific to the simple one-
period optimization problem considered here, but carries over to the much more complex
intertemporal optimization problem.33 Note, however, that in order to apply the Dennis
algorithm to the problem described by Eq (4.12), the model has to be extended to include the
first difference of the interest rate in the vector of endogenous variables.34 As a consequence,
under fully optimal discretionary policy, the current interest rate will be a function of the first
difference of the interest rate as well as of all the variables included in Eq (4.15).

In order to test whether the Bundesbank attached any weight to its money growth targets
(relative to other potential targets), we could stop the analysis here and estimate Eq (4.15)
directly. This is the route taken by most empirical studies, such as Clarida et al.(1998).
However, in order to make the policy rule implied by the modified loss function (4.8) more
directly comparable with other types of simple interest rate rules, we do not follow this
approach here, but instead repeat the above exercise and eliminate the money growth term
from Equation (4.15). The process of elimination of money growth deviations from the policy
rule mimics the steps we have taken above for the case of pure money growth targeting. To
simplify the procedure, we first re-write Eq (4.15) as:

                          Γ2     Γ                 Γ
(4.16)       it = it* +      xt + 3 (π t − π t* ) + 4 (Δmt − Δmt* )
                          Γ1     Γ1                Γ1


with Γ1 = λ̂i , Γ2 = λˆxϕ , Γ3 = ϕκ , Γ4 = λˆm (ϕκ + η i + ϕη y )


and then use Eq (4.11) to substitute out the money growth term:

                           Γ2     Γ                 Γ
(4.17)        it = it* +
                           Γ1     Γ1                Γ1
                                                        (
                              xt + 3 (π t − π t* ) + 4 π t − π t* + η y Δxt − η i Δit + Δε t   )


33
     See Dennis (2007), Eq (25).
34
     The model is closed by including the definition of the additional variable, Δit = it − it −1 , among the model
equations. See Dennis (2007), Technical Appendix.


                                                                                                                27
Finally, solving for it , we get:


              it =
                          Γ1
                                  it* +
                                        Γ2         (Γ + Γ4 ) (π − π * ) + Γ4η y Δx
                                               xt + 3
                     (Γ1 + Γ4η i ) (Γ1 + Γ4ηi ) (Γ1 + Γ4η i ) t t (Γ1 + Γ4η i ) t
(4.18)
                              Γ4                  Γ4η i
                      +                 Δε t +              i
                          (Γ1 + Γ4η i )        (Γ1 + Γ4η i ) t −1

According to (4.18), the interest rate rule of a central bank that targets money growth differs
from a standard Taylor rule in that it implies a response to the deviation of actual output
growth from potential output growth (which is equivalent to targeting the change in the output
gap) as well as a response to the lagged interest rate and to the difference between the “true”
money demand shock and the portfolio shock observed by the central bank. As shown by
Giannoni and Woodford (2003), responding to the lagged interest rate (interest rate inertia)
and to the change rather than the level of the output gap (history dependence) are both
features of the optimal commitment policy. (4.18) therefore nicely illustrates the argument put
forth by Söderström (2005) that money growth targeting may play a useful role in overcoming
the stabilisation bias of discretionary policy. The response to money demand shocks implied
by Eq (4.18) is usually viewed as a major drawback of monetary targeting. However, it cannot
be established a priori how serious this problem is when the central bank takes into account
portfolio shifts when implementing monetary targeting (as routinely practiced by the
Bundesbank ). In section 5 we attempt to look at the relevant empirical evidence.

Equation (4.18) is the basis for the interest rate rule that we will estimate in the next section.35
As before, the intuition presented is predicated on some restrictions on the behavior of the
error term in the money demand equation. We will further discuss the issue in section 5
below.




35
     In the simple model above we do not consider lags in monetary transmission. In the empirical results we will
     see that forecast inflation performs better than current inflation. Transmission lags can rationalize such result
     (see comments in section 5).


                                                                                                                  28
5. The Conduct of Monetary Policy and Monetary Policy Rules

In this section, our goal is to provide a systematic comparison of policy rules followed in
Germany, the US and the UK. To allow for a fair comparison, our aim was to use model
specifications for each of the three countries that are as similar as possible regarding the
dynamic structure and the corresponding variables. In order to provide a more precise
characterization of systematic differences in the conduct of monetary policy, we estimate and
compare interest rate reaction functions. The specification of the estimated reaction functions
is based on the interest rate rule derived in the previous section, which includes the elements
of a standard Taylor rule as well as the features implied by including a money growth target
in the loss function.


5.1. Brief reference to the literature


There is a voluminous literature about monetary policy reaction functions, especially as
regards the US. According to the established view, there was a regime shift around October
1979 (the start of the Volcker disinflation)36. The broad strand of the empirical literature sees
the main difference between the pre-Volcker period and the Volcker-Greenspan period as
pertaining to the interest response to an increase in inflation (or expected inflation).
Specifically, the claim is that the coefficient, measuring the interest rate response to inflation
was significantly below unity during the pre-Volcker period and significantly above unity in
the later period. An inflation coefficient below unity corresponds to accommodative monetary
policy as real interest rates decline in response to an inflation increase (see, for example,
Clarida et al., 1998, 2000 or Lubik and Schorfheide, 2004). In other words, before 1979 US
monetary policy does not comply with the Taylor principle. Characterization of monetary
policy in the interim period, between 1979 and 1982, is difficult as it seems dominated by
transition dynamics induced by the Fed's monetary experiment. Moreover, the Fed's policy
response to economic slack also seems difficult to pin down. Orphanides (2003, 2004) goes as
far as to argue that the key distinction does not involve the response to expected inflation, but
rather the response to policymakers’ real-time perceptions of real activity (excess demand).
Using real-time data to re-estimate the Fed’s policy rule, he finds that, prior to Volcker’s
appointment, policy was too responsive to perceived output gaps.                      Specifically, loose


36
     See Beyer and Farmer (2007) for an econometric investigation and Gaspar et al. (2006) for an analytical
     narrative drawing on the documentary evidence provided in Lindsey et al.(2005).


                                                                                                         29
monetary policy was a consequence of responding strongly to overestimations of economic
slack. More recent papers (Boivin, 2006, Kim and Nelson, 2006, Partouche, 2007), using a
time-varying coefficients framework, find important, but gradual changes in the Fed’s
response to both inflation and real activity, not properly accounted for by the typical split-
sample approach.


5.2. A comparison of empirically estimated policy rules


As a starting point for a comparative analysis of German and US monetary policy reaction
functions during the Great Inflation, it is useful to take another look at the relative inflation
performance of the two countries from the mid-1960s to the early 1980s. According to Figure
5.1, the upsurge of inflation in Germany in the early 1970s was stopped by quick disinflation
which preceded the Volcker disinflation by about six years. Still, the dating of the regime
shift is not as straightforward for Germany as it is for the US, where the appointment of Paul
Volcker as Chairman provides an obvious date for a structural break. Two potential
candidates are the break down of the Bretton Woods System in March 1973 and/or the official
start of the monetary targeting regime in 1975Q1.37 However, most studies on the
Bundesbank’s reaction function, including Clarida et al. (1998) and Gerberding, Seitz and
Worms (2005, 2007), choose an even later date, namely 1979Q1, as the starting point of their
analysis. The reason for doing so can best be understood by comparing the behaviour of real
interest rates and inflation during the period in question.


As shown in Figure 5.2, pre-1979 the US real rate steadily declines as inflation rises,
becoming persistently negative during most of the seventies. In late 1979, the real rate rose
sharply, leading to a subsequent decline in inflation. This observation provides the rationale
for the analysis in Beyer and Farmer (2007). They argue that the source of the inflation build-
up in the 1970s was a downward drift in the real interest rate that was translated into a
simultaneous increase in unemployment and inflation by passive Fed policy. For Germany,
the picture is different. Real interest rates rose sharply after the break-down of the Bretton
Woods System in March 1973. Moreover, real interest rates were (almost) always
significantly positive throughout the period. Nevertheless, the early increase in real interest
rates was almost completely reversed in 1974/75 and the real rate was kept rather low until

37
     The Bundesbank had already established an internal monetary target for its own orientation for the year 1974
     (see Dudler, 1980, p. 299), so 1974Q1 may be considered another potential breakpoint.


                                                                                                              30
the beginning of 1979 (data: inflation measured by CPI inflation against previous quarter, real
rates calculated by subtracting period t+1 inflation from three-month money market rates,
three-quarter centered moving averages). Overall, however, the visual comparison between
the conduct of monetary policy in Germany and the US in the 1970s suggests loose monetary
policy in the latter country, but not in Germany.


In the remainder of this section, our aim is to characterize differences in monetary policy in
terms of differences in the estimated monetary policy reaction functions. In order to be better
able to capture empirical regularities, we extend the interest rate rule derived in the previous
section - Eq (4.18) - in two directions. First, the theoretical model of Section 4 was silent on
the frequency of the data, but it is usually taken to describe regularities observed in quarterly
data and in quarterly rates of change. However, when applying the model to the Bundesbank’s
monetary policy, we have to take account of the fact that the Bundesbank’s money growth
targets were annual targets which referred to money growth over the previous four quarters.
Hence, in the empirical application of Eq (4.18), we extend the time horizon of the inflation
and output growth variables to annual (four-quarter) rates of change. Secondly, we allow for
forward-looking behaviour on part of the policymakers, that is, we allow them to focus on
expected rather than current inflation. This modification of Eq (4.18) can be rationalised by
lags in the transmission of monetary policy impulses which are not accounted for in the
baseline New Keynesian model.38 Thirdly, in order to capture interest rate dynamics not
accounted for by the first lag of the interest rate, we also included the second lag of the
interest rate among the endogenous variables. Hence, we start from a specification of the
following form:
                                 ⎛ α + ßE ((π ta+ n − π * ) Ωt ) + γ 1E (( yt − yt* ) Ωt ) ⎞
                                 ⎜                                                         ⎟
(5.1)        it = (1 − ρ1 − ρ2 ) ⎜                                γ2                   v* ⎟ + ρ1it −1 + ρ 2it − 2 + ut
                                   +γ E (Δ 4 ( yt − yt ) Ωt ) + (Δ 4ε t − Δ 4ε t )
                                                      *                     md
                                 ⎜ 2                             ηy                        ⎟
                                 ⎝                                                         ⎠
where E (π ta+ n Ω t ) is policymakers’ inflation forecast for period t+n formed in t on the basis

of the information available at time t, πa denotes annual inflation, E (( y t − y t* ) Ω t ) is

policymakers’ estimate of the current output gap, again formed on the basis of information
available at the time, ut is an error term and Δ4 denotes changes over the previous four



38
     Strictly speaking, this argument is valid only for the part of the interest rate response to inflation which derives
     directly from the inflation stabilization objective in the loss function (4.8). Therefore, we also estimated


                                                                                                                         31
quarters. An important issue is the method used to generate the forecasts of inflation, the
output gap and the output growth gap. Unfortunately, as regards the Bundesbank, real-time
forecasts of these variables over the relevant time horizons and at the appropriate frequency
do not exist. Therefore, we follow the method first proposed by McCallum (1976) and proxy
the unobserved forecasts by the corresponding realizations (see Clarida et al., 1998). Hence,
the error term ut is a linear combination of the forecast errors and the exogenous disturbance
term. In order to keep the forecast errors as small as possible, we use the initial (unrevised)
figures on inflation and output as well as the first available estimates of the output gap.39 To
avoid endogeneity problems, these variables are instrumented by a vector of variables It which
were part of policymakers’ real-time information sets and which are orthogonal to the error
term ut (for details on the instrument sets, see Table 5.1-5.3).


Finally, for empirical tractability, the model requires a sufficiently stable empirical money
demand function. Reviewing the empirical literature on money demand we are confident that
this condition is fulfilled as there is broad evidence for the existence of sufficiently stable
cointegrated money demand models. In conventional cointegrated money demand models
money is usually explained by output (e.g. GDP, serving as a scale variable), and one or more
suitable interest rate variables that represent own rates and opportunity costs for holding
money. Derivations of actual money from the long-run money demand relationship
(m − m* ) are then interpreted as stationary (i.e. transitory) money demand shocks,
corresponding to the level of ε t in (4.18). For example, Beyer (1998) finds a stable
cointegrated long run money demand function for German M3 over the sample period 1975 –
1994 with stationary money demand shocks. The standard deviation of their first differences
is 4.6%, compared with a standard deviation of 3.5% for the year-on-year growth rate of
money. Similarly, Baba et al.(1992) find a stable long-run money demand function for US
M1 for the sample period 1960 – 1988 and likewise see Hendry and Ericsson (1991a) for UK
M1 over the sample 1963-1989.40 Hence we believe that the empirical model (5.1) is a valid
approximation for empirically estimating our modified theoretical Taylor rule (4.18).




   specifications of the interest rate reaction function which allow for a response to current as well as expected
   future inflation. However, not surprisingly, in these exercises one of the two terms usually drops out.
39
   See Gerberding et al. (2005), p. 279f..
40
   Using annual data Hendry and Ericsson (1991b) find a stable long-run money demand function for US M1
   over the sample period 1878-1970.


                                                                                                              32
We first report our findings for Germany which are summarized in Table 5.1. The estimates
are based on the real-time data set described in Gerberding et al. (2004). In order to compare
the conduct of monetary policy in Germany before and after the collapse of Bretton Woods,
the data set was extended backwards to 1965 so that it now covers the sample period 1965–
1998.41 As formal tests for structural break do not yield unambiguous results, we present
estimates for three different break points, with the Bretton Woods/Pre-Monetary Targeting
samples ending in 1973Q1, 1974Q4 and 1978Q4, respectively. In Table 5.1, we only report
results for a forward-looking specification of the reaction function where the horizon of the
inflation forecast variable has been set to four quarters. However, in order to check the
robustness of the results to changes in the horizon of the inflation variable, we conducted the
exercise for different horizons of the inflation forecast, reaching from n=0 to n=4, and found
that the results were qualitatively the same.42 Our estimations also established that the term
(Δ 4ε tmd − Δ 4ε tv* ) does not play a major econometric role. In theory, this term is unobservable.
Point estimates and standard errors of regressors in model (5.1) remain virtually unaffected
whether an empirical proxy of that term is included or not. However, as part of a money
demand shock this error variable has interesting policy implications which we will discuss
further below (see 5.3).


The analysis yields a number of interesting results. First, we find that the coefficient ß, which
captures the interest rate response to inflation, is significantly below one before the
introduction of monetary targeting (that is, for the sample periods 65Q1-73Q1 and 65Q1-
74Q4, respectively), but significantly above one afterwards (that is, for the samples starting in
75Q1 and later). Note, however, that the standard error of the inflation coefficient and of the
equation is lowest for the (arguably more stable) 1979-1998 period. From this, we conclude
that the Bundesbank respected the Taylor principle (responded to a rise in (expected) inflation
in a stabilizing way) right from the beginning of the monetary targeting regime. This contrasts
with empirical estimates of standard Taylor rules for the US over the 1970s. Second, the
response to the perceived output gap, γ1, is significantly positive with point estimates about
0.5 in the Bretton Woods/pre-Monetary Targeting sub-samples. By contrast, it is close to zero

41
   The first vintage of Bundesbank estimates of potential output that we were able to reconstruct dates from April
   1972 (Bundesbank, AR 1971). In order to go back beyond this date, we proxied the unavailable “true” real-
   time data by the estimates dating from April 1972. We think this justifiable since there are no indications of
   major revisions during the time span 1965-1972. For instance, the estimates of the German output gap in the
   1960s published by the OECD in April 1970 (see OECD, 1970) are very similar to the estimates that we
   reconstructed from the April 1972 vintages of Bundesbank data on actual and potential output.
42
   Results available from authors on request.


                                                                                                              33
and insignificant under monetary targeting. If one follows Orphanides (2003), the lack of
response to real-time estimates of the output gap, which at the time were heavily biased
downwards in most countries, may also have been an important reason for Germany’s
superior inflation performance after the regime shift. Thirdly, the coefficient on the output
growth gap, which is insignificant before the introduction of monetary targeting, becomes
highly significant afterwards. According to our theoretical model, this is an important feature
which distinguishes the Bundesbank’s policy under monetary targeting from a purely
discretionary approach. Hence, we interpret this result as evidence that the money growth
targets did bring the Bundesbank policy closer to the (otherwise not feasible) optimal
commitment solution. Fourthly, we find a significant degree of interest rate inertia, captured
by ρ, in all sub-sample periods, with point estimates about 0.6 before and about 0.8 after the
regime change. The high degree of inertia after the regime shift is in accordance with the
predictions of the theoretical model as well as with the Bundesbank´s often professed
preference for conducting policy with a steady hand (“Politik der ruhigen Hand”).43


Tables 5.2a and b present the results for a very similar formulation for the US. We use the
three months T-Bill rate as a short term interest rate. Regarding the explanatory variables,
inflation is again measured by year-on-year changes in CPI. For the output gap, ( yt − yt* ) , we

use the real-time perceptions of the US output gap reconstructed by Orphanides (2003). We
report results for annual changes in the output gap as well as for its quarterly changes. Notice,
that for the US we normalize the inflation target π * at zero. For the forward-looking element,
we use inflation expectations one period ahead that are formed at period t. In Table 5.2a, we
use real-time inflation forecasts based on Greenbook data (as in Orphanides 2003, 2004),
whereas in Table 5.2b, we use the lead of revised inflation data. For interest rate smoothing
we restricted ourselves to reporting the case of one lag only44.


For analyzing the US we follow the strategy that is common in the empirical literature and
estimate over samples that correspond to the chairmanships of Burns - Miller and Volcker -
Greenspan. Using quarterly data we consider the period 1970Q1 – 1979Q2 (“the Burns-Miller




43
   In Gerberding et al. (2007), we show that for the sample period 1979Q1 to 1998Q4, this result is robust to the
   inclusion of an AR(1)-model for the error term.
44
   We also estimated the models with two lags and got very similar quantitative and the same qualitative results
   compared to the one lag only specification.


                                                                                                             34
period”) and the period 1983Q1 - 1998Q4 (“the Volcker-Greenspan period”). The omitted
interim period is characterized by transitional dynamics and does not yield useful estimates.


We are able to reproduce a number of well known findings. First, for real time inflation
forecast data (see Tab. 5.2a) we can replicate Orphanides’ (2003) findings with a Taylor
coefficient greater than unity also in the Burns-Miller period whereas for revised inflation
data (Tab. 5.2b) the Taylor coefficient on inflation is significantly below unity in the Burns-
Miller period and significantly above one in the Volcker-Greenspan period. Second, the
coefficient on the lagged interest rate is much larger in the latter period (becoming close to
one). Third, and focusing on formulation with the annual measure of the change in the output
gap, the coefficient on the output gap is always significant, at the 5% level, except for the
Volcker – Greenspan period in case of quarterly changes of the output gap (see Tab. 5.2b, 3rd
row). Regarding the history dependence of monetary policy we find significant differences
between the US and Germany. For the US the coefficients for both, quarterly or annual
changes in the output gap is insignificant during the 1970s. Conversely, it is highly significant
during the 1980s and 1990s whereas for Germany it is significant throughout the entire post-
Bretton Woods sample period. The comparison of the models for Germany and the US
between Table 5.1 and Table 5.2a,b therefore suggests that the conduct of monetary policy in
the US and Germany differed during the 1970s but after 1983, US monetary policy
approached the practice that the Bundesbank followed since 1975.


Turning to the case of UK, already from eyeballing Figures 2.1-3 one would expect, with
respect to Germany but to a lesser extent also to the US, very different empirical results for
any estimated Taylor rule. Compared to US and Germany inflation in UK peaked highest,
interest rates during the 1970s were at a much higher level whereas growth performance was
comparatively much weaker than in US or Germany. In order to explain the UK three-month
T-bill rate, we use the real-time perceptions of the UK output gap reconstructed by Nelson
and Nikolov (2003). For future inflation we use revised data, analogue to Table 5.2b for the
US The results in Table 5.3 confirm our priors. Interest rates in the 1970s appear to follow a
near-unit root process. Neither output nor inflation gap are remotely significant. This changes
only later in the 1980s and 1990s, when the output gap remains insignificant but the Taylor
coefficient on inflation is estimated rather tightly at 1.5.




                                                                                                35
5.3. The role of money demand shocks


As pointed out in the previous subsection, dealing with the term (Δ 4ε tmd − Δ 4ε tv* ) has
interesting policy implications. The term represents those (exogenous) changes in money
demand that are not identified and accounted for by the central bank. Ignoring this term in the
empirical model implies an assumption that the central bank – in our case the Bundesbank -
did not make systematic mistakes in identifying shocks to money demand. Under this
assumption, the variable (Δ 4ε tmd − Δ 4ε tv* ) will be a white noise (or at least stationary) process

which can be subsumed as, say, u%t , into the error term of Eq (5.1). However, we are aware
that our framework also has testable implications for the Bundesbank’s response to
unidentified disturbances to money demand.45 Specifically, we would expect to find that
policy was tightened in response to an increase in this variable and vice versa. Unfortunately,
since we do not have reliable information on the magnitude of the portfolio shocks observed
by the Bundesbank, in real time, ε tv* , we cannot test this hypothesis directly. However, as a
robustness check, we conducted an alternative test which is based on the assumption that the
Bundesbank was able to identify a fraction δ of the “true” money demand shock so that
ε tv* = δε tmd holds. Under this assumption, we can rewrite Eq (5.1) as:

                           ⎛ α + ßE ((π ta+ n − π * ) Ωt ) + γ 1E (( yt − yt* ) Ωt ) ⎞
                           ⎜                                                         ⎟
(5.1a) it = (1 − ρ1 − ρ2 ) ⎜                                γ                          + ρ i + ρ2it −2 + ut
                             +γ 2 E (Δ 4 ( yt − yt* ) Ωt ) + 2 (1 − δ )Δ 4ε tmd ⎟ 1 t −1
                           ⎜                                ηy                       ⎟
                           ⎝                                                         ⎠
where δ denotes the fraction of the “true” money demand shock that the Bundesbank was
able to identify. In the special case when δ = 1 the Bundesbank could identify all shocks as
portfolio shocks, whereas if δ = 0 the shock to money demand remained unreduced. Using
the residuals from the money demand model of Beyer (1998) to estimate Eq (5.1a), we find
that the coefficient δ is highly significant, with a point estimate of 0.77.46 On the other hand,
the fact that our estimate of δ is also significantly different from one suggests that the
Bundesbank did react to shocks to money demand which it was unable to identify in real time.
Specifically, when money growth increased as a consequence of a non-identified disturbance
to money demand, the Bundesbank would tighten policy, in contrast with what would be the
case under perfect information. This empirical finding is in line with the testable implication


45
     We thank our discussant Benjamin Friedman bringing this important point to our attention. .
46
     Results available from Andreas Beyer on request.


                                                                                                              36
from the theoretical model presented in the previous section. Nevertheless, the relatively high
value of δ suggests that the Bundesbank was able to identify most money demand
disturbances in real time. Hence, it responded to such shocks in a much muted way, thereby
limiting the volatility of policy rates.


5.4. Summary


To sum up, the empirical results for Germany, US, and UK suggest that monetary policy in
the three countries was conducted very differently in the 1970s. For Germany and US
estimating a Taylor rule for that period produces reasonable results but reveals different
policy strategies. Money as a commitment device has worked well for Germany and is
reflected by a significant coefficient in changes of the output gap variable. For the US we do
not find any similar history dependence in the data for the 1970s but we do find it for the
Volcker-Greenspan period in the 1980s and 1990s. By sharp contrast, monetary policy in the
UK has been very different both with respect to US and Germany. Our empirical findings do
not allow for any Taylor-type characterization of UK monetary policy in the 1970s and only
very vaguely for the 1980s and 1990s.




                                                                                            37
6. Conclusion
In this paper we examine an important episode in European monetary history. We investigate
the conduct of monetary policy in Germany in the 1970s and the 1980s. It was during this
period that the Bundesbank acquired its credibility and reputation as a bulwark against
inflation. Our goal was to illustrate how the monetary growth targeting strategy, followed by
the Bundesbank since 1975, contributed to this success. We wanted, as much as possible, to
examine the strategy as conceived, communicated and refined by the Bundesbank itself.
Naturally we are not able to do full justice to the Bundesbank's approach. We can only present
a simplified (stylized) view of the conduct of monetary policy in that period.


Nevertheless, we think that by focusing on anchoring inflation and inflation expectations, we
capture a fundamental aspect of the interaction between monetary policy and the behavior of
economic agents. Using a standard new Keynesian model and a modified loss function
(incorporating money growth deviations) we are able to explain the role of money growth
targeting as a commitment device. Under some mild conditions regarding the existence of a
stable money demand function which are fulfilled at least for Germany for the time period
under consideration, we are able to derive a role for money as a commitment device, succeeds
even in the context of the new Keynesian model (in which money plays no active role).


The operation of monetary growth targeting as a commitment device is compatible with target
misses, even repeatedly. In the modified loss function framework monetary growth targeting
is permanently relevant and imposes structure on the monetary policy reaction function.
Nevertheless, given that monetary deviations from target have to be traded off against other
arguments in the loss function frequent deviations from target cannot be excluded. In practice,
the Bundesbank had to account for the determinants of observed deviations and explain how,
in the end, it would deliver on the final goal of price level stability.


A standard objection to monetary targeting is that it induces unwarranted volatility in policy
rates in response to unidentified disturbances to money demand. In the context of our
theoretical model, it is the case that the central bank will tighten in response to non-observed
positive shocks to money demand. Empirically, we find this holds true for the Bundesbank.
Nevertheless, empirical evidence shows that money demand was stable in Germany during
the period. Moreover, the Bundesbank appears to have been able to take into account most



                                                                                             38
special factors in real time. Hence, the response of policy to money demand disturbances was
much attenuated, limiting the relevance of this concern for the historical performance of the
Bundesbank.


Issing in his Stone Lecture (Issing et al., 2005) affirms: "The Bundesbank missed its target
roughly half of the time … This does not mean, however, that the Bundesbank did not take
monetary targets seriously. On the contrary, money growth targets were regarded as
constituting the basis for a rules-oriented approach to monetary policy. Announcing a
monetary target implied a commitment by the Bundesbank towards the public. Deviations of
money growth from the target had always to be justified. Even if it is true that the reputation
of the Bundesbank ultimately was achieved by its success in fulfilling its mandate to
safeguard the stability of its currency, its final goal, current policy continuously had to be
justified in the context of its pre-announced strategy. In this sense, the strategy contributed to
the transparency, the accountability and the credibility of Bundesbank's policy."


From our theoretical framework we derive an interest rate rule. Using real-time data, we find
that it closely approximates the monetary policy, as it was conducted by the Bundesbank, in
the period of 1975 to 1998. The main finding is that the Bundesbank response to the output
growth gap was highly significant. Such response is a characteristic of the conduct of
monetary policy under commitment. It is also robust policy against problems in the
measurement of the level of potential output in real time. A similar response to the growth
gap was not present in the reaction function of the Federal Reserve System during the Burns-
Miller period. It does become significant, for the US, in the later Volcker-Greenspan period.
We were able to characterize systematic monetary policy for Germany and the US. Our
empirical findings suggest a much less stable approach in the UK.




                                                                                               39
REFERENCES


Alesina, A. and Summers, L. (1990), Central bank independence and macroeconomic
performance, discussion paper, Harvard University.


Baba, Y., D. F. Hendry, and R. M. Starr (1992), The Demand for M1 in the U.S.A., 1960—
1988, Review of Economic Studies, 59, 1, 25—61.

Bade, R. and Parkin, M (1980), Central bank laws and monetary policy, discussion paper,
University of Ontario.


Baltensperger, E. (1999), Monetary policy under conditions of increasing integration (1979-
96), in: Deutsche Bundesbank (ed.), Fifty years of the deutsche Mark − Central Bank and the
currency in Germany since 1948, Oxford University Press, pp. 419-523.


Barro, R. J. and D. B. Gordon (1983a), A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural
Rate Model, Journal of Political Economy 91, 589-610.


Barro, R. J. and D. B. Gordon (1983b), Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of
Monetary Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics 12, 101-121.


Barsky, R. B. and L. Kilian (2002), Do We Really Know that Oil Caused the Great
Stagflation? A Monetary Alternative, NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2001, Cambridge: MIT
Press pp. 137-183.


Barsky, R. B. and L. Kilian (2004), Oil and the Macroeconomy since the 1970s, Journal of
Economic Perspectives, vol. 18(4), pages 115-134, Fall.


Bayoumi, T, H Faruqee, B. Hunt, D. Laxton, J. Lee, A. Rebucci, I. Tchakarov and P.D.
Karam (2004), GEM: A New International Macroeconomic Model, IMF Occasional Papers
239, International Monetary Fund.


Beyer, A. (1998), Modelling Money Demand in Germany, Journal of Applied Econometrics,
Vol. 13 (1), 57-76.


                                                                                        40
Beyer, A. and R. Farmer (2007), Natural Rate Doubts, Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 31 (2007) 797–825


Blinder, A. (1979), Economic Policy and the Great Stagflation, New York: Academic Press.


Bordo, M. (1993), The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: A Historical
Overview, in M. Bordo and B. Eichengreen (eds.), A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods
System, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Boivin, J. (2006), Evidence from Drifting Coefficients and Real-Time Data, Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 38(5), August 2006.


Brunner, K. (1983), Has monetarism failed?, Cato Journal Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 23-62.


Bruno, M and J. Sachs (1985), Economics of Worldwide Stagflation, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press


Buchheim, C. (1999), The Establishment of the Bank deutscher Länder and the West German
Currency Reform, in: Deutsche Bundesbank (ed.), Fifty Years of the deutsche Mark − Central
Bank and the currency in Germany since 1948, Oxford University Press, pp. 55-100.


Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2008), Two Reasons Why Money and Credit May
be Useful in Monetary Policy, in A. Beyer and L. Reichlin (eds.), The role of money: money
and monetary policy in the 21st century, ECB, Frankfurt.


Clarida, R. and M. Gertler (1997), How the Bundesbank Conducts Monetary Policy, in C.
Romer and D. Romer (eds.), Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy, Chicago, 363–412.


Clarida, R., J. Galí, and M. Gertler (1998), Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some
International Evidence, European Economic Review 42, 1033-1067.


Clarida, R., Galí, J., Gertler, M. (1999), The science of monetary policy, Journal of Economic
Literature 37, 1661–1707.



                                                                                           41
Clarida, R., J. Galí and M. Gertler (2000), Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
Stability: Evidence and Some Theory, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 147-180.


Coenen, C., K. Christoffel and A. Warne (2008), The new area wide model of the Euro area: a
micro founded open economy model for forcasting and policy analyses, ECB Working Paper
Series, N° 944, October.


Darby, M.R. (1982), The Price of Oil and World Inflation and Recession, American Economic
Review, 72(4), September, p.


Dennis, R. (2007), Optimal Policy In Rational Expectations Models: New Solution
Algorithms, Macroeconomic Dynamics. 11(01), 31-55.


Dudler, H.-J. (1980), Examination of Witnesses: Hermann-Josef Dudler, Testimony,
November 10, 1980, in Treasury and Civil Service Committee, Monetary Policy Volume II:
Minutes of Evidence, 297–307. London: HMSO, 1981.


Deutsche Bundesbank, Annual Report, Various years.


Edge, R.M, M.T. Kiley and J-P. Laforte (2007), Documentation of the Research and Statistics
Divisions Estimated DSGE Model of the U.S. Economy: 2006 Version, FED Reserve Board
Discussion Paper 2007-53.


Erceg, C L. Guerrieri, and C. Gust (2006), SIGMA: A New Open Economy Model for Policy
Analysis, International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 2(1), March., 1-50.


Fratianni, M. and J. von Hagen (2001), The Konstanz Seminar on monetary theory and
policy, European Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 17, 641-664.


Frenkel, J. and M. Goldstein (1999), The International Role of the Deutsche Mark, in
Deutsche Bundesbank (ed.) Fifty Years of the Deutsche Mark: Central Bank and Currency in
Germany since 1948, Oxford: Oxford University Press.



                                                                                        42
Galí, J. (2008), Monetary Policy, Inflation and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the
New Keynesian Framework, Princeton: Princeton University Press.


Garber, P. (1993), The Collapse of the Bretton Woods Fixed Exchange Rate System, in M.
Bordo and B. Eichengreen (eds.), A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.


Gaspar, V. and A. Kashyap (2007), Stability First: Reflections Inspired by the ECB's Success
as the ECB's Chief Economist, in Monetary Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice,
Frankfurt, ECB


Gaspar, V., F. Smets and D. Vestin (2006), Monetary Policy over Time, Macroeconomic
Dynamics, 10 (02), 207-229.


Gaspar, V., F. Smets, and D. Vestin (2007), Is Time Ripe for Price Level Path Stability? ECB
Working Paper Series, No. 818.


Gerberding, C., F. Seitz and A. Worms (2004), How the Bundesbank really conducted
monetary policy: An analysis based on real-time data, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion
Paper Series1, No 25/2004.


Gerberding, C., F. Seitz and A. Worms (2005), How the Bundesbank Really Conducted
Monetary Policy, North American Journal of Economics and Finance 16, 277-292.


Gerberding, C., F. Seitz and A. Worms (2007), Money-Based Interest Rules, Lessons from
German Data, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper Series 1, No. 06/2007.


Giannoni, M. P. and M. Woodford (2003), How Forward-Looking is Optimal Monetary
Policy?, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 35 (6, Part 2), 1425–69.


Gordon, R. (1975), Alternative Responses to External Supply Shocks, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1: 183-206.




                                                                                         43
Guender, A. V. and D. Y. Oh (2006), Price stability through price-level targeting or inflation
targeting? A tale of two experiments, Journal of Economics and Business, 58(5-6), 373-391.


von Hagen, J. (1995), Inflation and Monetary Targeting in Germany, in Leonard Leidermann
and Lars Svensson (eds.), Inflation Targets, CEPR.


von Hagen, J. (1999), A New Approach to Monetary Policy (1971-78), in Deutsche
Bundesbank (ed.) Fifty Years of the Deutsche Mark: Central Bank and Currency in Germany
since 1948, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Hamilton, J. (1983), Oil and the Macroeconomy since World War II, Journal of Political
Economy, 91 (2), 228-248.


Hendry, D. F. and N. R. Ericsson (1991a), Modelling the demand for narrow money in the
United Kingdom and the United States, European Economic Review, 35(4), 33-86.


Hendry, D. F. and N. R. Ericsson (1991b), An econometric analysis of UK money demand in
monetary trends in the United States and the United Kingdom by Milton Friedman and Anna
J. Schwartz, American Economic Review, 81(1), 8-38.


Issing, O. (1992): Theoretical and Empirical Foundations of the Deutsche Bundesbank’s
Monetary Targeting, Intereconomics 27, 289-300.


Issing, O. (1993), Central Bank Independence and Monetary Stability, The Institute of
Economic affairs, Occasional Paper 89, London.


Issing, O. (1997), Monetary Targeting in Germany: The Stability of Monetary Policy and of
the Monetary System, Journal of Monetary Economics, June 1997, 39(1), pp. 67-79.


Issing, O. (2005), Why did the Great Inflation not happen in Germany?, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis Review, March/April, 329-336.




                                                                                           44
Issing, O. (2006), Europe’s hard fix: the Euro area, International Economics and Economic
Policy, Vol. 3, No 3-4, pp. 181-196.


Issing, O., V.Gaspar, O. Tristani and D. Vestin (2005), Imperfect knowledge and monetary
policy, The Stone Lectures in Economics, Cambridge University Press.


Jensen, H., (2002), Targeting nominal income growth or inflation?, American Economic
Review 92, 928–956.

Kilponen, J. and K. Leitemo (2008), Model Uncertainty and Delegation: A Case for
Friedman's k-percent Money Growth Rule?, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,
forthcoming.

Kim, C. and C. Nelson (2006), Estimation of a Forward-Looking Monetary Policy Rule: A
Time-Varying Parameter Model using Ex-Post Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics 53
(Nov.), 1949-66.


Kydland, F. and E. Prescott (1977), Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of
Optimal Plans, Journal of Political Economy 85, 473-491.


Lindsey, D., A. Orphanides and R. Rasche (2005), The Reform of October 1979: How it
Happened and Why, Finance and Economics Discussion Paper, Federal Reserve Board.


Lubik, T. A. and F. Schorfheide (2004), Testing for indeterminacy: An application to U.S.
monetary policy, American Economic Review, 94(1), 190-217.


McCallum, B. (1976): Rational Expectations and the Estimation of Econometric Models: an
Alternative Procedure, International Economic Review, 17, 484-90.




Nelson, E. and K. Nikolov (2003), UK Inflation in the 1970s and 1980s: The Role of Output
Gap Mismeasurement, Journal of Economics and Business, July/August 2003, 55(4), pp. 353-
70.




                                                                                      45
Nelson, E. (2007), The Great Inflation and Early Disinflation in Japan and Germany
International Journal of Central Banking, December 2007, 3(4), 23-76.


Nessén, M. and D. Vestin (2005), Average Inflation Targeting, Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking 37, 837-863.


Neumann, M. J. M. (1997), Monetary Targeting in Germany, in: I. Kuroda (ed.), Towards
more effective monetary policy, Hampshire, pp. 176-198.


Neumann, M. J. M. (1999), Monetary Stability: Threat and Proven Response, in Deutsche
Bundesbank (ed.) Fifty Years of the Deutsche Mark: Central Bank and Currency in Germany
since 1948, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


Neumann, M. J. M. (2006), Pre-commitment and Guidance - Lessons from the Bundesbank’s
History, in: European Central Bank (ed.), Monetary Policy - A Journey from Theory to
Practice, Frankfurt 2006, 5-13 (forthcoming).


OECD (1970), Economic Survey of Germany, April 1970.


Orphanides, A. (2003), Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule, Journal of
Monetary Economics 50, 983-1022.


Orphanides, A. (2004), Monetary Policy Rules, Macroeconomic Stability and Inflation: A
View from the Trenches, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 36, 151-157.


Partouche, H. (2007), Time-Varying Coefficients in a GMM Framework: Estimation of a
Forward Looking Taylor Rule for the Federal Reserve, Banque de France Working Paper No.
177, September 2007.


Richter, R. (1999), German monetary policy as reflected in the academic debate, in: Deutsche
Bundesbank (ed.), Fifty years of the deutsche Mark − Central Bank and the currency in
Germany since 1948, Oxford University Press, pp. 525-571.




                                                                                         46
Rogoff, K. (1985), The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate monetary target,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100 (4), 1169-89.


Røisland, Øistein (2006), Inflation Inertia and the Optimal Hybrid Inflation / Price Level
Target, in Journal of Money Credit and Banking


Sachverständigenrat zur Begutachtung der gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung         (1974),
Vollbeschäftigung für Morgen, Stuttgart.


Samuelson, P. (1974), Worldwide Stagflation, in Nagatani and Crowley (eds.), Collected
Scientific Papers vol. 4, Cambridge MIT Press, 1977.


Schlesinger, H. (1980), Notenbankpolitik: weiter am kurzen Zügel, Wirtschafts Woche, 1980,
Jg. 34, Heft 5, pp. 77-80.


Schlesinger, H. (1983), The Setting of Monetary Objectives in Germany, in P. Meek (ed.),
Central Bank Views of Monetary Targeting. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
1983, pp. 6-17.


Schlesinger, H. (1988), Das Konzept der Deutschen Bundesbank, in W. Ehrlicher und D. B.
Simmert (eds.), Wandlungen des geldpolitischen Instrumentariums der Deutschen
Bundesbank, Kredit und Kapital Supplement 10, Berlin, pp. 3-20.


Schlesinger, H. (2002), Die Bundesbank und ihre Geldpolitik, in B. Scheffold (ed.),
Exogenität und Endogenität – Die Geldmenge in der Geschichte des ökonomischen Denkens
und in der modernen Politik, Marburg, pp. 137-159.


Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2003), An estimated stochastic dynamic general equilibrium model
of the euro area, Journal of European Economic Association, Vol 1 (5), 1123-1175.


Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007), Shocks and frictions in US business cycles: a Bayesian
DSGE approach, American Economic Review, 97(3), 586-607.




                                                                                        47
Söderlind, P. (1999), Solution and estimation of RE macromodels with optimal policy,
European Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 43, 813–23.


Söderström, U. (2005), Targeting Inflation with a Role for Money, Economica 72, 577–596.



Svensson, L.E.O., (1999), Price level targeting vs. inflation targeting: a free lunch?, Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 31, 277–295.


Taylor, J. (1993), Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice, Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 39:195-214


Taylor, J. (1999), A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules, in John. B. Taylor (ed.),
Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago: University of Chicago Press


Triffin, R. (1960), Gold and the Dollar Crisis, New Haven: Yale University Press.


Vestin, David (2006), Price-level versus inflation targeting, Journal of Monetary Economics
53, 1361-1376.


Walsh, Carl E. (2003), Speed Limit Policies: The Output Gap and Optimal Monetary Policy,
American Economic Review, 93(1): 265-278.

Woodford, M. (1999), Optimal monetary policy inertia. Working Paper no. 7261, National
Bureau of Economic Research.


Woodford, M. (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
Princeton University Press.


Woodford, M. (2007), How Important is Money in the Conduct of Monetary Policy?, paper
prepared for the Conference in Honor of Ernst Baltensperger, Bern, June 8, 2007.


Zweig, S. (1970), Die Welt von Gestern- Erinnerungen eines Europäers, Frankfurt, p. 359.




                                                                                            48
              Table 2.1: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators for G7 & Switzerland

              CA          CH      DE              FR          IT      JP             UK        US
             60-98       60-98   60-98           60-98      60-98    60-98          60-98    60-98
            me s.d.     me s.d mea s.d.        mea s.d     mea s.d mea s.d         mea s.d mea   s.d.


   CPI      4.5   3.1   3.3   2.   3.1   1.8   5.3   3.6   7.4    5.   4.4   4.0   6.5   4.   4.4   2.9
  %p.a.
real GDP    3.6   2.1   2.3   2.   2.7   2.0   3.3   1.9   3.4    2.   4.5   4.0   2.4   1.   3.4   2.0
  %p.a.
real Cons   3.2   2.4   2.6   2.   3.3   2.8   3.0   2.1   3.7    2.   4.4   3.7   2.1   2.   2.9   2.3
  %p.a.
  Empl      2.2   1.6   0.7   1.   0.2   1.2   0.6   0.8   0.1    1.   1.0   0.8   0.3   1.   1.8   1.3
  %p.a.
 Unemp      7.7   2.4              5.4   3.6   6.5   3.9   8.2    2.   2.2   0.9   6.3   3.   6.0   1.5
  %p.a
   RL       8.5   2.6   4.6   1.   7.1   1.5   8.3   2.9   10.4   4.   6.0   2.3   9.4   2.   7.4   2.5

   RS       7.2   3.5              5.3   2.3   7.7   3.4   11.7   4.   6.0   3.0   8.3   3.   6.0   2.7
FIGURE 2.1. Inflation in G7 countries and Switzerland


                                                                    D4LP_CA    D4LP_CH
0.225                                                               D4LP_DE    D4LP_FR
                                                                    D4LP_IT    D4LP_JP
                                                                    D4LP_UK    D4LP_US
0.200

0.175                                           UK

0.150
                                                  US
0.125

0.100                                                Germany

0.075                                                   CH

0.050

0.025

0.000

        1960   1965   1970     1975     1980     1985        1990    1995     2000
Figure 2.2: Average nominal interest rates in the 1970s


                                                             Long term and short term interest rates: 1970-1980

                                       14
 Long term rates (10 y Gov. Bonds)




                                                                                                       UK
                                       12
                                                                                                                               IT        CA
                                       10                                                                                                DE
                                                                                                      FR                                 FR
                                                                  DE            CA
                                               8                                                                                         IT
                                                                        US          JP                                                   JP
                                               6                                                                                         UK
                                                                                                                                         US
                                               4

                                               2
                                                   4               6                     8                           10             12
                                                                           Short term rates (3 month)




Figure 2.3: Average inflation and real growth rates in the 1970s


                                                           Trade-off between inflation and GDP growth: 1970-1980

                                                   5
                                               4.5
                                                                                                           JP
                                                   4                                                                                     CA
                                                                                             CA                                IT        CH
                                               3.5
                             GDP growth rate




                                                                                                           FR                            DE
                                                   3
                                                                               DE            US                                          FR
                                               2.5                                                                                       IT
                                                   2                                                                                     JP
                                                                                                                               UK
                                               1.5                                                                                       UK
                                                                               CH                                                        US
                                                   1
                                               0.5
                                                   0
                                                       0      2        4            6             8             10        12        14
                                                                                    Inflation rate




                                                                                                                                              51
Table 3.1: Numerical inputs for the derivation of the money growth targets

Average annual changes in %
Period                      Expected       Expected change in           Envisaged
           Medium-          growth of                                   increase in
           term price       potential      Capacity      Trend          money
           assumption*      output         utilisation   velocity (-)   stock         Target**      Sources

                                                                                                    MR Dec. 74
  1975                      no explicit derivation by single factors                     +8
                                                                                                    AR 76, MR
  1976         + 4/+5           +2            +2½             -1            +8
                                                                                                    Jan. 76
                                                                                                    AR 76, MR
  1977      + 3 ½1)/+ 42)       +3             +2             -1            +8          (6-7)
                                                                                                    Jan. 77
                                                +                                                   AR 77, MR
  1978       + 3/+ 3 ½          +3                                          +8          (5-7)
                                                                                                    Jan. 78
                                                +                                                   MR Jan. 79
  1979           +              +3                            +                          6-9
                                                                                                    AR 79, MR
  1980          +4              +3                            -1           (+ 6)         5-8
                                                                                                    Dec. 79
                                                                                                    AR 80, MR
  1981       + 3 ½ /+ 4        +2½                            -1         +5/+5 ½         4-7
                                                                                                    Dec. 80
                                                                                                    AR 81, MR
  1982        + 3 ½ 1)       + 1 ½ /+2                         0         (+ 4 ¾)         4-7
                                                                                                    Dec. 81
                                                                                                    MR Dec. 82
  1983         +3½           + 1 ½ /+2                                                   4-7
                                                                                                    AR 83, MR
  1984          +3              +2                                          +5           4-6
                                                                                                    Dec. 83
                                                +                                                   MR Dec. 84
  1985          +2            Over 2                                      +4½            3-5
                     1)                                                                             MR Jan. 86
  1986          +2             +2½                                        +4½         3½-5½
                                                                                                    MR Jan. 87
  1987          +2             +2½                                                       3-6
                +2                                                                                  MR Feb. 88
  1988                          +2                           +½                          3-6
                +2                                           +½                                     MR Dec. 88
  1989                       + 2/+ 2 ½                                       5         about 5
                +2                                           +½                                     MR Dec. 89
  1990                         +2½                                        about 5        4-6
                +2                                           +½                                     AR 90, MR
 19913)                     + 2 ½ (+ 2                                                4-6 (3-5)3)
                                                                                                    July 91
                               ¼)3)
                +2                                           +½                                     MR Dec. 91
  1992                         +2¾                                                     3 ½ -5 ½
                +2                                                                                  MR Dec. 92
  1993                          +3                           +1             +6         4 ½ -6 ½
                +2                                           +1                                     MR Jan. 94
  1994                         +2½                                        +5½            4-6
                +2                                           +1                                     MR Jan. 95
  1995                         +2¾                                        +5¾            4-6
                +2                                           +1                                     MR Jan. 96
  1996                         +2½                                        +5½            4-7
                                                             +1                                     MR Jan. 97
  1997       + 1 ½ /+ 2        +2¼                                          +5         3 ½ -6 ½
                                                             +1                                    MR Jan. 98
  1998        + 1 ½ /+ 2          +2                                      +5            3-6
*Before 1985: unavoidable increase in prices. **Targets referred to central bank money stock (defined as
currency in circulation plus required minimum reserves on domestic deposits calculated at constant reserve ratios
with base January 1974) until 1987 and the broad money stock M3 thereafter. 1) Explicit reference to GDP
deflator; 2) Explicit reference to consumer price index. 3) Downward correction of target range in midyear
review.




                                                                                                              52
Table 3.2: Monetary targets and their implementation
in %

           Target:
           Growth of central bank money stock (1975- Actual money growth
           1987) or money stock M3 (from 1988)
Year       in the course   annual            midyear       in the        annual
                                                                                      Target        Inflation rate
           of the year1    average           review        course of     average
                                                                                      achieved      (CPI)4
                                                           the year
1975              8                                         10.1 (9.5)       7.8           no            5.9
1976                              8                           (9.0)          9.2           no            4.2
                       2
1977           (6-7)              8                           (9.5)          9.0           no            3.8
                       2
1978           (5-7)              8                           (12.1)        11.4           no            2.7
1979             6-9                         lower limit       6.3           9.1           yes           4.1
1980             5-8             (6)         lower half        4.9           4.8           yes           5.4
1981             4-7           (5-5 ½)       lower half        3.5           4.4           yes           6.3
1982             4-7            (4 ¾)        Upper half        6.0           4.9           yes           5.3
1983             4-7                         Upper half        7.0           7.3           yes           3.4
1984             4-6             (5)                           4.6           4.8           yes           2.3
1985             3-5            (4 ½)                          4.5           4.6           yes           2.2
1986         3½-5½              (4 ½)                          7.7           6.4           no            -0.2
1987             3-6                                           8.1           8.1           no            0.3
1988             3-6                                           6.7           6.3           no            1.2
1989           about 5      (just under 5)                     4.7           5.7           yes           2.8
1990             4-6          (about 5)                        5.6           4.3           yes           2.7
1991             4-6           (5/5 ¼)          3-5            5.2           4.6           yes           3.6
1992          3 ½- 5 ½         (5-5 ¼)                         9.4           8.1           no            4.0
1993         4½-6½               (6)                           7.4           7.8           no            3.6
1994             4-6            (5 ½)                          5.7           9.0           yes           2.7
1995             4-6            (5 ¾)                          2.1           0.6           no            1.8
1996             4-7            (5 ½)                          8.1           7.5           no            1.4
       3
1997          3 ½- 6 ½                                         4.7           6.2           yes           1.9
19983            3-6                                           5.5           4.4           yes           1.0
Mean                                                           6.6           6.5                         3.0
1 Between the fourth quarter of the previous year and the fourth quarter of the current year; 1975: Dec. 1974 to
Dec. 1975. – 2 According to Annual Reports for 1977 and 1978. – 3 Embedded in a two-year orientation for
1997/1998 of about 5% per year. – 4 From 1995, all-German figures.




                                                                                                                53
Figure 3.1: Money Growth Targets 1975-1998

               1975-1987: T argets for the central bank m oney stock                     1988-1998: T argets for the m oney stock M 3
  Change against
  previ ous year i n %

      12                                                                  12


      10                                                                  10


       8                                                                   8
               1)

       6                                                                   6


       4                                                                   4


       2                                                                   2


       0                                                                   0

            75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88                          88   89      90    91    92    93     94    95    96      97   98
                         Central bank m oney stock (quarterly averages)                     M oney stock M 3 (quarterly averages)
                         Annual average target                                              4th quarter to 4th quarter target corridor
                         4th quarter to 4th quarter target corridor


           1) Point target for Dec. 1974 to Dec. 1975.




                                                                                                                                                   54
Figure 5.1: Inflation in Germany and the US (consumer prices, quarterly data)

   Change against previous year in %
            16

                                                              Germany
                                                              US
            12



             8



             4



             0



            -4
             1960    1965    1970      1975   1980   1985   1990   1995




                                                                                55
Figure 5.2a: Interest Rates and Inflation in Germany


    16



    12



     8



     4



     0
            Inflation (CPI, 3QCMA)
            3month money market rate (3QCMA)

     8



     4



     0



    -4
                                        Real rate (ex post, 3QCMA)


    -8
     1960   1965   1970   1975   1980     1985    1990    1995




                                                                     56
Figure 5.2b: Interest Rates and Inflation in the US


   16



   12



    8



    4



    0
            Inflation (CPI, 3QCMA)
            3month money market rate (3QCMA)

    8



    4



    0



    -4

                                     Real rate (ex post, 3QCMA)

    -8
     1960   1965   1970   1975   1980    1985   1990    1995




                                                                  57
Table 5.1: Estimates of the extended reaction function, inflation forward-looking (from t
to t+4), change in output gap from t-4 to t, real-time data

Estimation equation:

                    ⎛ α + ßE (π ta+ 4 Ω t ) + γ 1 E (( yt − yt* ) Ω t ) ⎞
it = (1 − ρ1 − ρ 2 )⎜                                                   ⎟+ ρ i + ρ i +u
                    ⎜ + γ E (Δ ( y − y * ) Ω )                          ⎟   1 t −1 2 t −2 t
                    ⎝ 2       4      t     t     t                      ⎠

                  ß            γ1         γ2         ρ1            ρ2            R2           SEE        J-stat (p-
                                                                                                         values)

Germany’s “Great” Inflation
1965Q1-73Q1       0.52***      0.44***    -          0.72***       -0.12*       0.71          1.09       0.64
                  (0.09)       (0.08)                (0.07)        (0.06)
1965Q1-74Q4       0.69***      0.51***    -          0.72***       -0.17*       0.76          1.41       0.55
                  (0.15)       (0.13)                (0.12)        (0.09)
1965Q1-78Q4       1.05***      0.52***    -          0.62***       -0.04        0.81          1.21       0.79
                  (0.24)       (0.07)                (0.14)        (0.11)
Post-Bretton Woods/Monetary Targeting
1973Q2-98Q4       0.82***      0.58**     1.39**     1.02***       -0.09        0.92          0.81       0.63
                  (0.30)       (0.25)     (0.66)     (0.05)        (0.06)
1975Q1-98Q4       1.70***      0.06       0.75***    1.05***       -0.21***     0.92          0.69       0.59
                  (0.22)       (0.13)     (0.23)     (0.06)        (0.05)
1979Q1-98Q4       1.89***      0.05       0.74***    0.98***       -0.17***     0.94          0.64       0.89
                  (0.19)       (0.10)     (0.24)     (0.07)        (0.05)

***(**/*) denotes significance at the 1% (5%/10%) level; estimation method: GMM; HAC-robust standard
errors in parentheses. R²: adjusted coefficient of determination; SEE: standard error of the regression; J-stat: p-
value of the J-statistic on the validity of overidentifying restrictions.
Variables: left-hand-side variable: 3-month money market rate (end-of-quarter); right-hand-side variables:
inflation gap according to CPI; output gap with Bundesbank's own estimates of production potential. For further
details on the data see Gerberding et al. (2004).
The instrument set includes contemporary values of the inflation variable (CPI over previous year in %) and a
commodity price variable (change of HWWA index of commodity prices in D-Mark over previous quarter in %)
as well as up to three lags of each explanatory variable, the commodity price variable and a money growth
variable (change in the Bundesbank’s respective monetary target variable over previous year in %). Pretesting
suggests that this instrument structure is sufficient.




                                                                                                                58
Table 5.2a: The US. Estimates of the extended reaction function, inflation forward-
looking y-o-y (from t-3 to t+1) using real-time inflation forecast


Estimation equation:

               (                                                                                 )
it = (1 − ρ1 ) α + ßEt (π ta+1 Ω t ) + γ 1 Et (( yt − yt* ) Ω t ) + γ 2 Et (Δ j ( yt − yt* ) Ω t ) + ρ1it −1 + u t


                   ß             γ1           γ2           ρ1             Const         R2           SEE             J-stat
                                                                                                                     (11dof)
                                                                                                                     (p-
                                                                                                                     values)
1970Q1-            1.100***      0.367***     0.064        0.592***       0.009**       0.86         0.006           0.11*34
1979Q2                                                                    (0.003)
                   (0.114)       (0.072)      (0.053)      (0.098)                                                   (>10%)
j=1
1970Q1-            1.023***      0.390***     -0.013       0.545***       0.012***      0.87         0.006           0.15*34
1979Q2             (0.128)       (0.098)      (0.026)      (0.109)        (0.004)                                    (>10%)
j=4
1983Q1-            3.499***      0.926***     0.512***     0.912***       -0.004**      0.93         0.004           0.15*60
1998Q4             (1.150)       (0.418)      (0.183)      (0.028)        (0.002)
                                                                                                                     (>10%)
j=1
1983Q1-            2.721***      0.458***     0.122***     0.89***        -0.003        0.96         0.003           0.17*60
1998Q4             (0.609)       (0.161)      (0.035)      (0.029)        (0.002)
                                                                                                                     (>10%)
j=4
***(**/*) denotes significance at the 1% (5%/10%) level; estimation method: GMM; HAC-robust standard
errors in parentheses. R²: adjusted coefficient of determination; SEE: standard error of the regression; J-stat: p-
value of the J-statistic on the validity of overidentifying restrictions.
Variables: left-hand-side variable: 3-month T-Bill rate; right-hand-side variables: Greenbook inflation forecasts
(y-o-y CPI); output gap; and y-o-y changes in the output gap. For further details on the output gap data see
Orphanides (2003), p. 996ff.
The instrument set includes up to 3 lags of i, π , ( x − x*) . Extending the set by including changes of
commodity prices as well as three lags of nominal money growth M2 (y-o-y) does not change the results
qualitatively.




                                                                                                                          59
Table 5.2b: The US. Estimates of the extended reaction function, inflation forward-
looking y-o-y (from t-3 to t+1)


Estimation equation:

               (                                                                                 )
it = (1 − ρ1 ) α + ßEt (π ta+1 Ω t ) + γ 1 Et (( yt − yt* ) Ω t ) + γ 2 Et ( Δ j ( yt − yt* ) Ω t ) + ρ1it −1 + ut


                   ß             γ1           γ2           ρ1             Const         R2           SEE             J-stat
                                                                                                                     (11dof)
                                                                                                                     (p-
                                                                                                                     values)
1970Q1-            0.619***      0.195***     0.095        0.458***       0.018***      0.87         0.006           0.22*34
1979Q2                                                                    (0.001)
                   (0.030)       (0.040)      (0.059)      (0.064)                                                   (>10%)
j=1
1970Q1-            0.591***      0.206**      0.014        0.493***       0.018***      0.86         0.006           0.22*34
1979Q2             (0.033)       (0.084)      (0.028)      (0.108)        (0.002)                                    (>10%)
j=4
1983Q1-            2.73*         1.406        0.419***     0.960***       -0.002*       0.94         0.004           0.15*60
1998Q4             (1.506)       (1.035)      (0.076)      (0.025)        (0.001)
                                                                                                                     (>10%)
j=1
1983Q1-            2.040***      0.475**      0.149***     0.89***        -0.002        0.96         0.003           0.17*60
1998Q4             (0.540)       (0.221)      (0.027)      (0.029)        (0.002)
                                                                                                                     (>10%)
j=4
***(**/*) denotes significance at the 1% (5%/10%) level; estimation method: GMM; HAC-robust standard
errors in parentheses. R²: adjusted coefficient of determination; SEE: standard error of the regression; J-stat: p-
value of the J-statistic on the validity of overidentifying restrictions.
Variables: left-hand-side variable: 3-month T-Bill rate; right-hand-side variables: inflation (y-o-y CPI); output
gap; and y-o-y changes in the output gap. For further details on the output gap data see Orphanides (2003), p.
996ff.
The instrument set includes up to 3 lags of i, π , ( x − x*) . Likeweise, as for the model in Table 5.2a extending
the set of instruments by including changes of commodity prices as well as three lags of nominal money growth
M2 (y-o-y) does not change the results qualitatively. .,




                                                                                                                          60
Table 5.3: The UK. Estimates of the extended reaction function, inflation forward-
looking y-o-y (from t-3 to t+1)


Estimation equation:

               (                                                                                 )
it = (1 − ρ1 ) α + ßEt (π ta+1 Ω t ) + γ 1 Et (( yt − yt* ) Ω t ) + γ 2 Et ( Δ j ( yt − yt* ) Ω t ) + ρ1it −1 + ut


                   ß             γ1           γ2           ρ1             Const         R2           SEE             J-stat
                                                                                                                     (11dof)
                                                                                                                     (p-
                                                                                                                     values)
1970Q1-            -0.10         0.007        0.02         0.869***       0.015***      0.73         0.015           0.24*35
1979Q2                                                                    (0.005)
                   (0.463)       (0.34)       (0.05)       (0.10)                                                    (>10%)
j=1
1970Q1-            0.058         -0.02        0.07         0.827***       0.016**       0.74         0.014           0.23*35
1979Q2             (0.33)        (0.37)       (0.083)      (0.081)        (0.006)                                    (>10%)
j=4
1983Q1-            1.531***      -0.32        -0.09        0.70***        0.002         0.92         0.0078          0.16*53
1996Q1             (0.14)        (0.28)       (0.095)      (0.071)        (0.002)
                                                                                                                     (>10%)
j=1
1983Q1-            1.526***      -0.20        -0.02        0.72***        0.004         0.92         0.0079          0.16*53
1996Q1             (0.156)       (0.299)      (0.081)      (0.069)        (0.003)
                                                                                                                     (>10%)
j=4
***(**/*) denotes significance at the 1% (5%/10%) level; estimation method: GMM; HAC-robust standard
errors in parentheses. R²: adjusted coefficient of determination; SEE: standard error of the regression; J-stat: p-
value of the J-statistic on the validity of overidentifying restrictions.
Variables: left-hand-side variable: 3-month T-Bill rate; right-hand-side variables: inflation (y-o-y CPI); output
gap; and y-o-y changes in the output gap. For further details on the output gap data see Nelson and Nikolov
(2003).
The instrument set includes up to 3 lags of i, π , ( x − x*) , and changes of commodity prices as well as three
lags of nominal money growth “money + quasi-money” (y-o-y).




                                                                                                                          61
