NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFORMED TRADING, LIQUIDITY PROVISION, AND STOCK SELECTION BY
MUTUAL FUNDS
Zhi Da
Pengjie Gao
Ravi Jagannathan
Working Paper 14609
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14609

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

We thank Robert Battalio, Jonathan Berk, Roger Edelen, Craig Holden, Paul Irvine, Tim Loughran,
Rick Mendenhall, David Musto, Lubos Pástor, Christine Parlour, Paul Schultz, Clemens Sialm, Laura
Starks, Sheridan Titman, Charles Trzcinka, Lance Young and seminar participants at Northwestern
University, IU/ND/Purdue Finance Symposium, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University
of Michigan, Barclays Global Investors, Tilburg University, the 4th Vienna Symposium on Asset Management,
FRA 2007 Annual Meeting, NBER Asset Pricing Meeting, the Western Finance Association 2008
Annual Meeting for comments. Some of the results in the paper appeared in "When does a mutual
fund's trade reveal its skill?" (NBER WP# WP13625) by the same authors. Patricia Andersen provides
excellent editorial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Zhi Da, Pengjie Gao, and Ravi Jagannathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Informed Trading, Liquidity Provision, and Stock Selection by Mutual Funds
Zhi Da, Pengjie Gao, and Ravi Jagannathan
NBER Working Paper No. 14609
December 2008
JEL No. G00,G11,G12,G2
ABSTRACT
We show that a mutual fund’s “stock selection skill” computed using the Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman
and Wermers (1997) procedure can be decomposed into additional components that include impatient
“informed trading” and “liquidity provision,” thereby helping us understand how a fund creates value.
We validate our method by verifying that liquidity provision is the dominant component of selection
skill for Dimensional Fund Advisors U.S. Micro Cap fund, as observed by Keim (1999). Index funds
lose on liquidity absorbing trades, since they pay the price impact on trades triggered by index rebalancing,
inflows and redemptions. Consistent with the view that a mutual fund manager with superior stock
selection ability is more likely to benefit from trading in stocks affected by information events, we
find that funds trading such stocks exhibit superior performance that is more likely to persist. Further,
such superior performance comes mostly from impatient informed trading. We also find that informed
trading is more important for growth-oriented funds while liquidity provision is more important for
younger funds with income orientation.

Zhi Da
University of Notre Dame
239 Mendoza College of Business
Notre Dame, Indiana 46556-5646
zda@nd.edu
Pengjie Gao
Department of Finance
Mendoza College of Business
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, Indiana 46556-5646
pgao@nd.edu

Ravi Jagannathan
J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
2001 Sheridan Road
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@northwestern.edu

As of 2007, US mutual fund managers collectively had over $12 trillion under their management
with more than half of it in stocks. A signi…cant portion of this amount is actively managed, as
indicated by a turnover rate in excess of 50% for stock funds.1 During 1980 to 2006, investors
paid over 0:67 percent of portfolio value per year to the active portfolio managers (French, 2008).
Naturally, investors would like to understand how active fund managers add su¢ cient value to
justify their higher fees and trading costs relative to passively managed index funds. For that
purpose, the common practice is to attribute the performance of a portfolio manager to two sources:
security selection and asset allocation (also known as market timing). Knowing what securities a
manager held makes attributing the performance of a manager to these two components easier, and
the approach has become standard industry practice.
In this paper, we show that the security selection component of the performance can be further decomposed into performance arising from (a) recent liquidity absorbing impatient informed
trading, (b) recent liquidity providing trades, (c) positions in securities taken earlier, and (d) an
adjustment term for in‡ows and out‡ows. We believe that such a decomposition will facilitate
individual and institutional investors understand the strengths of an active portfolio manager and
the extent to which such strengths will continue to be of value in the future.
Ultimately, an active mutual fund manager’s skill comes from superior ability to process valuationrelevant information on a stock that helps correctly identify potential mispricing. How a manager
with superior skill trades to add value will depend on how long it takes for the market to realize
that the manager is right. Based on how long the informational advantage lasts, a manager’s trades
can be classi…ed into the following three types.
First, the manager can add value from long-term “value investing” by taking a position in a
stock expecting the market to eventually agree with her view in, say, a few years.2 Second, the
manager can add value from medium-term informed trading by transacting in “mispriced” stocks
expecting the market to agree with her view within, say, a quarter.3 Third, the manager can
1

These numbers are taken from Figures 2.1 and 2.9 the Investment Company Fact Book (2008) published by the
Investment Company Institute.
2
Using fundamental analysis, Mario Gabelli, a money manager, realized that the stock of Hudson General Corp
(HGC) was heavily undervalued at around $25 in early 1994 and started to accumulate shares of HGC for his Gabelli
Funds (see Figure 1A). The investment paid o¤ after two years, when the stock price reached $40. The market
eventually agreed with Mr. Gabelli, after Lufthansa took over HGC at $76 per share. See Greenwald, Kahn, Sonkin
and Biema (2001) for details on this case.
3
The year-to-year same store sales growth reported by Starbucks every month is a widely watched number, and
is considered about as important as the company’s quarterly earnings announcements for valuation purposes. For

1

add value from short-term liquidity provision by taking the other side of a trade when liquidity
is most needed.4 Active fund managers taking the other side of those trades will bene…t from
liquidity provision. Since fund managers often hold an inventory of stocks in order to track their
performance benchmarks, they have a natural advantage in making a market in those stocks.
Moreover, the superior knowledge about the stocks covered by a manager will help in the market
making activities by minimizing potential losses that may arise by trading with those having an
information advantage.5
In the …rst case, the exact timing of trades would not be critical. Evaluating the stock selection
skill of such a portfolio manager who makes a few concentrated long term bets will be di¢ cult based
only on quarterly observations on what the manager holds. Therefore, in this paper our focus is on
identifying how much of the value added by a manager comes from the latter two activities.
While in theory knowledge of what the manager holds should help evaluate a portfolio manager’s
skill better, the fact that mutual fund stock holdings data are available only at infrequent intervals
(quarterly in most cases) makes it di¢ cult to assess a manager’s abilities when the manager trades
actively in between two holdings reporting points in time. As Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng (2007)
and Elton, Gruber, Krasny and Ozelge (2006) show, “unobservable”actions (trades that cannot be
inferred from quarterly holdings) by mutual funds could be important for some funds. Because of
that, we are only able to capture the partial e¤ect of a liquidity shock that persists over a calendar
quarter-end.
In spite of this limitation, a mutual fund’s recent trades inferred from its quarterly holding
January to September 2005, Starbucks’ reported sales growth rates were in the range of 7% to 9%. Most analysts
were of the view that a large part of that growth rate was attributable to the 3% sales price increase that took e¤ect
in October 2004, and that this price increase would not help with respect to same-month year-to-year sales growth
rates beginning with October 2005. That probably explains the much smaller anticipated growth rate (analyst
consensus was 3.6%). However, a careful analysis of sales breakdown would have indicated that the 3% price increase
in October 2004 explained little of the sales growth during January-September 2005. So, the October sales growth
…gure should be more like that for the early months of 2005. While most mutual funds decreased their holdings of
Starbucks stock during Q3 2005 in anticipation of an announcement of a drop in same-store sales growth for October,
Putnam Voyager Fund actually accumulated more shares (see Figure 1B). On November 3, 2005 Starbucks reported
unexpectedly strong sales growth of 7% for October, and its share price jumped. Details on this case can be found
in Blumenthal (2007).
4
It is well known that when index funds trade following index rebalancing, their trades tend to demand liquidity
from the market (see Blume and Edelen, 2004). Active fund managers taking the other side of those trades will
bene…t from liquidity provision.
5
Sometimes managers may not be directly motivated by the “liquidity provision”objective. For example, consider
a mutual fund with a policy of not investing more than a certain percentage of its assets in any one stock. The fund
may decrease its holdings of a stock that experiences a recent sharp price increase in order to satisfy its portfolio
weighting constraints. Such trades are likely to provide liquidity and will therefore be classi…ed as “liquidity provision”
even when liquidity provision was not the motivation behind the trade.

2

changes, still contain valuable information about a manager’s abilities, especially in the mediumterm informed trading, if we can separate the medium-term informed trading from the short-term
liquidity provision in order to reduce the noise in the data. This becomes possible when we recognize
that informed trading tends to be liquidity-absorbing on average because information loses value
over time. Based on that insight, we develop a method for decomposing the stock selection skill
of a manager (the characteristic selectivity measure as in Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers
1997) into a liquidity absorbing informed trading component, a liquidity providing component, and
other components using a mutual fund’s holdings.
We examine several empirical properties of the decomposition that lend support for its validity.
First, we show that mutual funds are likely to provide liquidity on average only when they reduce
their holdings, consistent with our conjecture that it is easier to provide liquidity on stocks that one
currently owns. Second, we verify that the decomposition results for the two cases, (a) Dimensional
Fund Advisors (DFA) and (b) a group of index funds, are consistent with what one would expect
based on the …ndings reported in the literature.6 Third, as expected, we …nd that the informed
trading component is more important than the liquidity provision component in explaining crosssectional variation in the CS measures; and informed trading becomes relatively more important
for growth-oriented funds while liquidity provision becomes relatively more important for incomeoriented funds. Fourth, we …nd that funds with higher “return gaps” (de…ned in Kacperczyk,
Sialm and Zheng (2007) to capture the bene…t of “unobservable” actions of mutual funds) add
value through liquidity provision.
Having demonstrated the e¤ectiveness of our decomposition method, we then apply it to analyze the performance of a large sample of active US equity mutual funds. To analyze the di¤erent
channels through which a fund manager can add value, one …rst needs to identify skillful fund managers. Ultimately, an active mutual fund manager’s success derives from his or her superior skill in
processing valuation-relevant information about a stock, a skill that should allow the identi…cation
of potential mispricing. Thus, it is reasonable to expect such skills to be more valuable when stocks
the manager can invest in are a¤ected by more value-relevant information events. To the extent
6

Keim (1999) …nding that the small-cap equities “9-10 fund”of Dimensional Fund Advisors (DFA) outperformed
its benchmark by about 2.2% during the period between 1982 to 1995, illustrates how skillful trade execution can
enhance fund performance. Cohen (2002) documents that managers at DFA add value by systematically providing
liquidity to those who want to trade small cap stocks for non-information based reasons. We verify that most of the
value added by DFA through stock selection indeed comes from the liquidity provision component (CS liq ).

3

that rational managers have the option not to trade such stocks when they know that they do not
have an advantage in analyzing the information a¤ecting a stock, we should expect to …nd that
managers who choose to trade earn higher returns on average. To measure the frequency and intensity of information events, we focus on a market microstructure based measure: the Probability
of Informed Trading (P IN ) proposed by Easley, Kiefer, O’Hara and Paperman (1996) although we
obtain very similar results using several alternative measures of information events.
We …nd that funds trading high-P IN stocks outperform those trading low-P IN stocks by 53 bps
per quarter (t-value = 2:87) after controlling for stock characteristics such as size, book-to-market
ratio and return momentum. Easley, Hvidkjaer and O’Hara (2002) document that High-P IN stocks
earn higher returns on average. They interpret this as being compensation for risk associated with
private information, i.e., P IN -risk. That does not drive our results. Both stocks that mutual
funds buy and sell have about the same P IN values, but stocks bought by mutual funds tend to
outperform those sold by mutual funds. In addition, after controlling for P IN risk directly, we
obtain very similar results. Further, we show that our …ndings are not driven by momentum trading
rules described in the literature. Interestingly, a large fraction of the superior stock selection skill of
managers trading high-P IN stocks comes from impatient informed trading. In contrast, liquidity
provision appears more important for funds trading in low-P IN stocks where there is little adverse
selection risk as studied by Glosten and Harris (1998).
The early literature on portfolio performance evaluation …nds that most managed portfolios
earn close to zero or negative risk-adjusted returns especially after taking fees into account7 . More
recent studies …nd that some funds do add value and it is possible to identify those funds based on
past performance and the stocks they hold.8 However, during the more recent sampling period from
1983-2004, both Kosowski, Timmermann, Wermers and White (2006) and Fama and French (2008)
document that historical alpha alone does not reliably pick up funds with positive (after-fee) alphas
going forward. We take the stand that past superior performance is more likely to be an indication
of future performance for a manager who attained such performance by trading stocks associated
with more information events, i.e., we should expect stronger fund performance persistence among
7

See Jensen (1968), Elton, Gruber, Das, and Hlavka (1993), Brown and Goetzmann (1995), Gruber (1996) and
Carhart (1997).
8
See Grinblatt and Titman (1989, 1993), Wermers (1997), Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1997), Chen,
Jegadeesh and Wermers (2000), Schultz (2007)

4

funds that traded in High-P IN stocks recently.
Consistent with our conjecture, among funds that trade high-P IN stocks, those that earn higher
past alphas have higher quarter t + 1 alphas than funds that earn low past alphas. The spread
between three-factor alphas is 186 bps per quarter (t-value = 5:76) during the …rst quarter, and
it remains statistically signi…cant for the next three quarters as well. Interestingly, among funds
trading high-P IN stocks, those that earn higher past alphas continue to earn signi…cant positive
three-factor alpha of 94 bps (t-value = 3:63) during the …rst quarter even after accounting for fees
and expenses.9 Controlling for the momentum investment style with a four-factor model produces
similar results. In other words, by also examining the information events associated with the stocks
they trade, we can identify fund managers who are able to outperform the market (net of fees) even
during the more recent sampling period; and most of that alpha comes from impatient informed
trading.

In sharp contrast, among funds that trade low-P IN stocks recently, the performance

persistence is much weaker. Consistent with Berk and Green’s (2004) argument that fee may serve
as a measure of manager’s skill, among funds that trade high-P IN stocks, past winners experience
a much higher fee growth rate than the past losers.
It is well recognized that several mutual fund characteristics are related to superior stockselection skills. For example, funds that follow “aggressive growth” and “growth” styles (Daniel,
Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers, 1997); hold stocks of …rms whose headquarters are located geographically closer to the fund’s headquarters (Coval and Moskowitz, 2001); have more industry
concentration in their holdings (Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng, 2004); have less diversi…cation in
their holdings (Baks, Busse and Green, 2006); have larger deviations from passive index or larger
“active shares” (Cremers and Petajisto, 2006); and less dependency on analyst’s recommendation
(Kacperczyk and Seru, 2007) tend to perform better. In addition funds that are smaller in size
(Chen, Hong, Huang and Kubik, 2004) perform better after controlling for mutual fund family size.
We contribute to this literature by showing that the informed trading component of stock selection
skill is more important for growth-oriented funds whereas the liquidity provision component is more
9
Mamaysky, Spiegel, and Zhang (2007b) show that past alphas can predict future alphas better with clever …lters
to reduce estimation errors associated with historical alphas. They construct a portfolio of superior funds with
an out-of-sample alpha of 4% per year during 1970-2002. A growing body of studies on hedge funds also identify
managers with skills. For example, Agarwal and Naik (2000) …nd hedge funds exhibit performance persistence at
the quarterly horizon. Fung, Hsieh, Naik and Ramadorai (2006) show that it is possible to identify hedge funds
that deliver superior alphas. Jagannathan, Malakhov and Novikov (2007) …nd performance persistence among hedge
funds at the three-year horizon.

5

important for income-oriented funds.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We develop the decomposition method in
section 1. We describe the data sources and the sample construction procedure in section 2. In
section 3, we evaluate the validity of the decomposition method by examining Dimensional Funds
US Micro Cap Portfolio and a group of index funds, and relate the decomposition procedure to the
“return gap” concept developed by Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng (2007). In section 4, we then
empirically examine the channels through which funds that trade during information events add
value, thereby illustrating the use of our decomposition. We conclude in section 5. The appendices
contain a numerical example on our decomposition, a brief discussion on the variance decomposition
approach, and a short note on various measures of private information events.

1

Decomposing Mutual Fund’s Stock Selection Skills

In order to separate the value-added through security selection by a mutual fund manager into
di¤erent components, we start with the characteristics-based performance measure — characteristic
selectivity (CS) — developed by Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (DGTW, 1997) and
Wermers (2004). The CS measure of a mutual fund during quarter t + 1, based on its actual stock
holdings at the end of quarter t, can be computed as:

CSt+1 =

X

wj;t [Rj;t+1

BRt+1 (j; t)]

j

= RHt+1

BRt+1 :

where Rj;t+1 is the return on stock j during quarter t + 1; wj;t is the dollar value weight of stock j
held by the mutual fund at the end of quarter t; and BRt+1 (j; t) is the benchmark portfolio return
during quarter t + 1 to which stock j is matched at the end of quarter t based on its size, book-tomarket equity ratio, and past 12-month return. In addition RHt+1 denotes the implied return of
the fund holdings during quarter t + 1 based on the fund holding at the end of quarter t and BRt+1
is the return on the benchmark portfolio with matching stock characteristics. Intuitively, the CS
measure detects whether managers are able to select stocks that outperform average stocks with
similar characteristics.

6

We can further decompose the CS measure. A numerical illustration of such decomposition is
provided in Appendix A. Suppose mutual funds rebalance only at discrete points in time, t = 1, 2,
3, . ., T . For convenience, we assume time periods are measured in quarters. Let Nt be a column
vector of mutual fund stock holdings (in number of shares, split-adjusted) at the end of quarter t.
By comparing Nt

1

and Nt , we can de…ne three stock portfolios:

1. Hold portfolio, which has stock holdings:
NtH = min (Nt

1 ; Nt )

where the operator min() calculates the element-by-element minimum; and NtH captures
holdings that appear in both quarters.
2. Buy portfolio, which has stock holdings:
NtB = Nt

NtH

The Buy portfolio holds stocks bought by the fund during quarter t.
3. Sell portfolio, which has stock holdings:
NtS = Nt

1

NtH

The Sell portfolio contains stocks sold by the fund during quarter t.
Over time, the mutual fund stock holdings change as follows:

Nt = Nt

NtS + NtB

1

Figure 2 contains a graphical representation of these three portfolios. Let the smaller pie
represent the fund’s holdings at the end of quarter t

1 and the bigger pie represent the fund’s

holdings at the end of quarter t. The intersection of the two pies thus represents the Hold portfolio
which contains stocks untouched by the fund during quarter t. The portion of the smaller pie
excluding the Hold portfolio represents the Sell portfolio which contains stocks sold by the fund
7

during quarter t. The portion of the bigger pie excluding the Hold portfolio represents the Buy
portfolio which contains stocks recently bought by the fund during quarter t.
Let Pt be a column vector of corresponding stock prices at the end of quarter t. Let us denote
the market value of Hold, Buy and Sell portfolios as Ht , Bt and St , respectively. Accordingly, we
have:
Ht = Pt0 NtH
Bt = Pt0 NtB
St = Pt0 NtS

At the end of quarter t, the mutual fund’s stock holdings are a combination of the Hold portfolio
and the Buy portfolio (or the bigger pie in Figure 2). The fund CS measure for quarter t + 1 is
therefore the value-weighted average of CS measures on the Hold portfolio and Buy portfolio for
quarter t + 1:
CSt+1 =

Bt
Ht
CSH;t+1 +
CSB;t+1 ;
Ht + Bt
Ht + Bt

where CSH;t+1 and CSB;t+1 denote CS measure on Hold and Buy portfolios for quarter t + 1.
We then decompose the CS measure into three components:
adj
O
T
CSt+1 = CSt+1
+ CSt+1
+ CSt+1
O
CSt+1
=
T
CSt+1
=
adj
CSt+1
=

(1)

Ht
St
CSH;t+1 +
CSS;t+1
H t + St
H t + St
Bt
St
CSB;t+1
CSS;t+1
Ht + Bt
H t + St
Ht St Bt
CSH;t+1
Ht + Bt Ht + St

O ), can be interpreted as the CS measure of
The …rst component, the old component (CSt+1

the fund as if the fund did not balance its portfolio at all during quarter t. If nothing happens
to the fund during quarter t, its stock holdings would remain unchanged (Nt = Nt

1 ),

and thus

would be composed of stocks in the Hold portfolio and Sell portfolio (or the smaller pie in Figure
2). Consequently, the CS measure for quarter t + 1 would be the value-weighted average of CS
measures on the Hold portfolio and Sell portfolios. Intuitively, this captures the value-added to the

8

fund during quarter t + 1 from fund investments prior to quarter t, and likely corresponds to the
bene…t from long-term investment.
T ), measures the characteristics-adjusted
The second component, the trade component (CSt+1

returns on the most recent mutual fund stock trades during quarter t. Finally, the adjustment
adj
component (CSt+1
) represents a small adjustment term whenever St 6= Bt , which could happen

whenever there is in‡ow or out‡ow to the fund.
T ) measures value-added from both medium-term informed trading
The trade component (CSt+1

and short-term liquidity provision. Since mutual fund holdings are typically reported at quarterly
frequency at most, in order to make a reasonable attempt to separate them, we rely on a key
di¤erence between these two types of trades. Informed trading, unlike the liquidity provision trade,
is likely to demand liquidity since the value of information erodes quickly over time, so timely
execution becomes important. Given this intuition, we can further decompose the trade component
T
CSt+1
into two components by comparing the sign of quarterly mutual fund holding change and

the sign of market order imbalance for each stock traded by the fund (the stocks in the buy or
sell portfolios) during quarter t. The stock-level market order imbalance is de…ned as the total
number of buyer-initiated trades minus the total number of seller-initiated trades in the quarter
for the individual stock. Following the standard practice in the literature, we implement the trade
classi…cation using the algorithm in Lee and Ready (1991). We then classify stock trades where
the two signs are identical into one group, denoted by superscript “+”; and where the two signs are
di¤erent into another group, denoted by superscript “ ”. As a result, the characteristics-adjusted
T :
returns on trades from these groups sum up to CSt+1

inf
liq
T
CSt+1
= CSt+1
+ CSt+1
inf
CSt+1
=
liq
CSt+1
=

Bt+

+
CSB;t+1
Ht + Bt
Bt
CSB;t+1
Ht + Bt

(2)
St+

+
CSS;t+1
H t + St
St
CSS;t+1
H t + St

Given that the aggregate market order imbalance is a good measure of the direction of liquidity
inf
needs of a stock, CSt+1
measures the characteristics-adjusted return on mutual fund trades that

on average absorb market liquidity (see Chordia and Subrahmanyam, 2004). Such trades are likely

9

liq
driven by information and are therefore classi…ed as “informed trading.”CSt+1
, on the other hand,

measures the characteristics-adjusted return on mutual fund trades that on average supply market
liquidity, and hence are classi…ed as “liquidity provision”. In the extreme case where the fund
manager trades only one stock and when the time interval is one minute rather than one quarter,
liq
CSt+1
will closely resemble the realized spread of Huang and Stoll (1996), which measures the

reward to market makers’liquidity provision activities. To summarize, we decompose the fund CS
measure as:
adj
O
T
CSt+1 = CSt+1
+ CSt+1
+ CSt+1
;

(3)

inf
liq
T
CSt+1
= CSt+1
+ CSt+1
:

2

Data and Sample Construction

We employ data from several sources. The mutual fund holding data come from the CDA/Spectrum
S12 mutual fund holding database, which collects the holding information from the N30-D …lings
to the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC). A detailed description of the database can be
found in Wermers (1999). We exclude index funds and lifecycle funds as the latters are hybrid
funds.10 Following the standard practice in the mutual fund literature, we also omit international
funds, sector funds, bond funds, and domestic hybrid funds based on the self-reported fund style
in the CDA/Spectrum database. Thus, we only keep funds that are self-reported as Aggressive
Growth (AGG), Growth or Growth and Income (GNI). To ensure that the funds we examine are
reasonably active, we only include fund / quarter observations if the fund trades at least 10 stocks
and turns over at least 10% of its holdings during that quarter. Finally, we only include fund /
quarter observations for which the fund holdings at the end of previous quarter are also available
so holding changes can be computed over consecutive quarters. We obtain the information on the
after-fee performance of the fund and other fund characteristics from the Center for Research in
Security Prices (CRSP) survivor-bias-free mutual fund database.
The CDA/Spectrum mutual fund holding data are matched to CRSP Mutual Fund data using
the MFLINKS database produced by the Wharton Research Data Service (WRDS) and updated by
10

Speci…cally, we exclude a fund if its name contains any of the following: “INDEX”, “INDE”, “INDX”, “S&P”,
“DOW JONES”, “MSCI” or “ISHARE”.

10

Professor Russ Wermers. An appealing feature of MFLINKS database is that it allows us to map
di¤erent share classes of the same fund, that are recorded as distinct funds in the CRSP Mutual
Fund database, to the corresponding mutual fund holdings data in the CDA/Spectrum database.
For multiple share classes in CRSP that correspond to the same fund in the CDA/Spectrum database, we aggregate those share classes into one large portfolio.
The stock data come from CRSP. We include all common stocks (CRSP share codes 10 and
11) traded on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. The accounting information comes from COMPUSTAT database. To link COMPUSTAT and CRSP, we use CRSP-LINK produced by CRSP.
The tick-by-tick stock transaction data come from ISSM (1983 to 1992) and TAQ (1993 to 2004)
databases.
Overall, there are 4; 654 distinct funds in our sample during the period from 1983 to 2004. On
average, there are about 701 distinct funds every quarter. The number of funds per quarter increases
from about 134 in 1983 to about 1; 700 towards the end of the sample as shown in Table 1. About
61% of the funds in our sample are self-reported as “Growth” funds, about 26% are reported as
“Growth and Income (GNI)”and the remaining 13% are reported as “Aggressive Growth (AGG)”.
We collect two groups of fund-level characteristics every quarter. First, we obtain common fund
characteristics from CRSP mutual fund database. These characteristics include: age (the age of
the fund in months since inception, in terms of percentile rank in the cross-section);11 turnover
(the turnover rate of the fund); expense (the expense ratio of the fund); T N A (the total net assets
under management by the fund in millions US$); and pct_f low (the net fund ‡ows in percentage
de…ned as

T N A(t) T N A(t 1) (1+Ret(t 1;t))
).
T N A(t 1)

Second, we aggregate stock characteristics at fund level

by value-weighing them for stocks held by the fund using the quarter-end dollar values of the
holdings. These characteristics include: f und_holding (average percentage of total number of
shares outstanding of stocks held by the fund); f und_size (average market capitalization of stocks
held by the fund, in billion dollars); f und_bm (average book-to-market ratio of stocks held by the
fund), f und_mom (average past one-year return on stocks held by the fund) and f und_amihud
(average Amihud (2002) illiquidity measure, in terms of percentile rank in the cross-section, of
stocks held by the fund).12
11

We use percentile age ranks to remove a time-series (increasing) trend in the age variable.
Amihud illiquidity measure is de…ned as the average ratio between absolute daily return and daily dollar volume.
We use percentile Amihud ranking for two reasons. First, there is a time-series (downward) trend in the Amihud
12

11

3

Validating the Decomposition Approach

There are several potential empirical issues associated with the implementation of our decomposition procedure. First, because we use quarter-end mutual fund stock holdings for the decomposition
of stock holdings, we will miss high-frequency turnovers by mutual funds; see Kacperczyk, Sialm
and Zheng (2007) and Elton, Gruber, Krasny and Ozelge (2006).13 To the extent that short-term
liquidity provision occurs within a calendar quarter, by using quarter-end holdings only, we may
underestimate the bene…t from liquidity provision.
Second, the division of informed trading and liquidity provision is imprecise. On the one hand,
not all informed trading is liquidity demanding, especially when the trader is very patient and
trades in small quantities over a relatively long period of time. While trading relatively large quantities quickly to take advantage of the time value of information, however, it is extremely hard
not to absorb liquidity. As a result, liquidity-demanding trades are still likely information-driven
on average. On the other hand, not all liquidity-demanding trades are information driven. For
example, distress stocks sales by mutual funds (see Da and Gao, 2008) and assets …re-sales due to
extreme ‡ows (see Coval and Sta¤ord, 2007) are likely to absorb liquidity but have nothing to do
with mispricing trading motives. As distressed stocks are typically of small market capitalization,
the impact of transactions will be alleviated, as each component of the CS measure is computed
using the value-weighted average. When we leave out value-adding informed trading that is not
liquidity demanding and including value-destorying distressed trading that is liquidity demanding,
we are underestimating the bene…t of informed-trading, and overestimating the bene…t of liquidity
provision. Finally, our classi…cation of informed trading and liquidity provision depends on quarterly data, which could also be noisy. Collectively, these noises may prevent us from …nding any
signi…cant results.
In spite of these challenges, we …nd that the data contains interesting information about the
contribution of impatient informed trading and short-term liquidity provision to a mutual fund’s
stock selection ability. In what follows we …rst empirically validate our decomposition approach.
measure due to an increase in trading volume; second, the Amihud measure may be extreme and subject to outliers.
Using percentile ranking alleviates these issues.
13
Campbell, Ramadorai and Schwartz (2007) attempts to infer institutional transactions within a given quarter
by selecting trade sizes that best match quarterly holdings changes. Relying on a unique regulation governing mutual
fund trade disclosure in Canada, Christo¤ersen, Keim and Musto (2006) investigate essentially all trades of 210
Canadian mutual funds between 2001 and 2003.

12

3.1

Type of Trades and Average Order Imbalances

In our decomposition, order imbalance plays a critical role – we assume that a mutual fund that,
on average, trades with the order imbalance demands liquidity and a fund that trades against the
order imbalance provides liquidity. According to the conventional wisdom, funds will be relatively
impatient when opening or closing out a position, since such actions will more often be based on
short-lived superior information. In contrast, funds will be relatively patient when they increase
of decrease their holdings thereby providing liquidity to the market for the securities they hold in
inventory.
In order to examine this hypothesis, for funds in our sample we …rst examine their holding
changes over two consecutive quarters and categorize them into four groups: (1) open (holdings
increase from zero to positive); (2) close (holdings decrease from positive to zero); (3) increase
(holdings increase but not from zero) and (4) decrease (holdings decrease but not to zero). For
each group, we then compute the average dollar holding change as a percentage of the total dollar
holding change of the fund (computed using prices at quarter-end); and the average order imbalance measure. The average order imbalance measure is de…ned as the di¤erence between total
number of buyer-initiated shares brought and total number of seller-initiated shares sold divided
by total number of shares traded during the quarter, the resulting number is then cross-sectionally
demeaned. The associated t-value is computed using the time-series average with Newey-West
adjustment for autocorrelations.
The results are provided in Panel A of Table 2. The average order imbalance measure for
each trade type tells us whether the trade is on average demanding liquidity. We …nd that when
fund managers open new positions and close out standing positions, they are likely to absorb
market liquidity. That is consistent with our expectation that those trades are likely motivated
by considerable mispricing perceived by fund managers who are willing to pay for the price of
immediacy. We also …nd that when fund managers adjust their holdings, they are likely to provide
liquidity on average. Again, that is, consistent with our conjecture that it is easier to provide
liquidity on stocks a fund currently owns.

13

3.2

Dimensional Fund Advisors (DFA)

Dimensional Fund Advisor (DFA) is an asset management …rm founded in 1981. Allegedly, the
…rm does not pick stocks via fundamental analysis. Instead, the …rm helps its clients get exposure
to certain segments of the asset markets via passive indexing or enhanced indexing. Anecdotal
evidence suggests that a subset of the funds managed by DFA create value by systematically
providing liquidity to those who want to trade small stocks for non-information related reasons.14
If it is the case, using our decomposition procedure, one would expect to …nd a positive liquidity
provision component in DFA’s CS measure and an informed trading component close to zero. Of
course, since we examine one speci…c fund over a limited time span, the statistical signi…cance could
be weak.
We examine the quarterly stock holdings of DFA’s US Micro Cap Portfolio during the period
from 1983 to 2004 and decompose its CS measure. The results are provided in Table 2 Panel B
(upper panel). The overall CS measure for the fund is 36:1 bps per quarter but not statistically
signi…cant (t-value = 1:72), indicating that the fund does not seem to select stocks that outperform
those with similar characteristics. As expected, the largest component of the overall CS measure is
due to liquidity provision (20:5 bps per quarter) which is signi…cant at 10% level (t-value = 1:84).
In contrast, the informed trading component is very close to zero and statistically insigni…cant,
which is consistent with what …rm’s investment policy claims.

3.3

Index Funds

Since the majority of index funds are formed to track the market index or other broad indices with
the objective of minimizing tracking errors, we do not expect them to have a large CS measure.
Index funds are most likely to trade during index rebalancing and demand liquidity in those trades
(see Blume and Edelen, 2004). These trades would be incorrectly classi…ed as “Informed Trading”
within our decomposition framework, and the Informed Trading component, if di¤erent from zero,
is likely to be negative. It is therefore less appropriate to apply the decomposition to index funds.
For that reason we will focus only on actively managed funds for the remaining parts of the paper. Nevertheless, examining index funds provides another opportunity to test the validity of our
14

See the case studies by Keim (1999) and Cohen (2002).

14

decomposition approach.
We identify the index funds by their fund names recorded in CDA/Spectrum S12 mutual fund
holding database. During the period from 1983 to 2004, there are about 11 domestic index fund
portfolios identi…ed each quarter on average from the holding database, starting from 1 fund each
quarter in 1983 to about 25 funds each quarter after 2000. Using their stock holdings, we apply
our decomposition to each fund and the results are then equally-weighted across funds during every
quarter. The results are again presented in Table 2 Panel B (lower panel). The overall CS measure
for index funds as a group is almost exactly zero. The index fund group has a positive although not
signi…cant CS O component of about 25 bps per quarter on average (t-value = 0.93). In addition,
the index funds on average make some pro…t (although not signi…cant) from providing liquidity, as
evident from a positive CS liq component of about 6 bps per quarter (t-value=0.36). Interestingly,
the positive CS O and CS liq are o¤set by a negative Informed Trading component (CS inf = -35
bps) which is statistically signi…cant, indicating a sizable price for liquidity paid by the index funds
for trades that arise due to index rebalancing, new money ‡owing in, and redemptions.

3.4

Fund Styles

Panel C of Table 2 suggests that, overall, active fund managers seem to have some stock selection
skill that requires trading with the order imbalance in the market. The average character selectivity
measure is 23.5 basis points per quarter (t-value = 1:91), indicating the stocks selected by fund
managers outperform stocks with similar characteristics. Of the 23.5 basis points, 13.9 basis points
come from the passive buy-and-hold strategy and 14.2 basis points come from stocks recently
traded by the funds. The adjustment component is small in absolute term (-1.8 basis points) but
signi…cant, potentially driven by fund ‡ow to managers with skills as empirically documented by
Chevalier and Ellison (1997), and Sirri and Tufano (1998), among others, and theoretically analyzed
by Berk and Green (2004).15 Finally, although both the informed trading component (CS inf ) and
the liquidity provision component (CS liq ) are positive, neither is signi…cant.
Across fund styles, we expect growth-oriented funds and funds to have more shorter-term informed trading opportunities. Income-oriented funds are more likely to augment their returns
15

When managers have skill (CS P is likely to be positive), fund in‡ow is more likely (B > S); when managers
have no skill (CS P is likely to be negative), fund out‡ow is more likely (S > B). Both e¤ects lead to a negative
CS adj as in equation (1).

15

through liquidity provision. In addition, we should also expect relatively more variation in informed trading component within growth funds and relatively more variation in liquidity provision
component within income-oriented funds. The results in Panel C of Table 2 con…rm our conjectures.
On average, growth-oriented funds have a larger informed trading component and income-oriented
funds a larger liquidity provision component.
We examine the relative importance of di¤erent components of CS measures using the variance decomposition procedure detailed in Appendix B. In a nutshell, the variance decomposition
delineates how much the cross-sectional variation in the total CS measure can be attributed to
the cross-sectional variation in each of its four components. The results are reported in Panel C
of Table 2 for the full sample of all active US equity funds, and across three style subsamples. As
we expected, the informed trading component, CS inf varies relatively more across funds among
growth-oriented funds while the liquidity provision component varies relatively more CS liq becomes
relatively more across funds in the income-oriented category.

3.5

Return Gap

Since we observe a fund’s holdings only at the end of each quarter, there is little we can say regarding
what a fund did during the quarter except whether such actions added value. To examine how
much additional value a fund adds relative to the return on a hypothetical buy-and-hold strategy
based on the quarterly holdings reported by the mutual fund, we use the “return gap” measure in
Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng (2007). Return gap is de…ned as the di¤erence between the return
available to investors and the return the fund would have generated if its holdings changed only at
the end of each quarter net of fees:

RGt = RFt + EXPt

RHt

where RGt is the return gap during quarter t, RFt is the fund return available to investors during
quarter t, RHt is the implied return of the fund holdings during quarter t and the holding of the
fund is based on the fund holding at the end of quarter t

1, EXPt is the fund’s expenses.

The return gap captures the net bene…ts and costs associated with the unobserved actions
of the mutual fund managers. Kacperzcyk, Sialm, and Zheng (2007) show that funds with high

16

return gaps tend to have higher alphas in the future. They conjecture that the higher alpha could
be in part due to the liquidity provision and market making activities that funds are engaging in
during a quarter which are not captured by end-of-quarter holdings. Such activities can lead to
“negative” price impact thus contribute to the fund’s alpha. If that is true, and to the extent
liquidity provision and market making activities take place uniformly over the quarter, we should
be able to …nd a positive correlation between the return gap and the liquidity provision component
of the characteristic selectivity measure (CS).
Both the return gap (RG) and the CS measure are likely to contain a component re‡ecting the
fund manager’s skill which persists over time. However, RGt and CSt are likely to be negatively
correlated contemporaneously due to idiosyncratic shocks to RHt which do not a¤ect RFt . Consider
an example in which a fund sold a stock before a sharp idiosyncratic price run-up within a quarter
t. This price run-up will lead to a large RHt since the stock is held by the fund in the beginning of
the quarter. It will not a¤ect the characteristics-benchmark portfolio return (BRt ) since the price
run-up is idiosyncratic in nature. It will not contribute to RFt either since the fund sold the stock
before the run-up occurs. As a result, RGt will decrease while CSt increases.
To examine the contemporaneous relation between the return gap and CS measures, we …rst
sort funds based on the current quarter return gaps and report the average CS components at
the portfolio level in the same quarter. The results are presented in Panel D1 of Table 2. The
magnitudes of the average monthly return gaps (RG) across quintile portfolios are comparable to
those found in Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng (2007). We document that return gap is strongly
negatively correlated with the Old CS component (CS O ) and the Informed Trading component
(CS inf ). Interestingly, despite the negative contemporaneous correlation between the return gap
and the CS measures, return gap is strongly positively correlated with the liquidity provision
component (CS liq ). Such positive correlation is more likely driven by managers’ skill which is
present in both RG and CS liq , and is consistent with the notion that funds specializing in liquidity
provision are more likely to trade a stock within a quarter.
We then examine the relation between the current return gap and future CS measures. Following Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng (2007), we sort funds based on their past one-year return gaps
and report the average CS components at the portfolio level during the next quarter. The results
are presented in Panel D2 of Table 2. We …rst con…rm the …ndings in Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng
17

(2007) that fund’s return gaps strongly predict future fund performance. Funds with large return
gaps earn 50 bps more than funds with low return gaps in terms of four-factor alphas during the
next quarter (t-value = 4:84). Among the four components of the CS measure, only the liquidity
provision component (CS liq ) seems to be signi…cantly related to past return gaps. The liquidity
provision component of funds with large return gaps is 11 bps more than that of funds with low
return gaps during the next quarter (t-value = 1:81). Overall, the positive correlation between the
return gap and the liquidity provision component lends further support that our decomposition
approach helps to isolate di¤erent kinds of managers’skills.
In summary, the empirical challenges for our decomposition procedure mainly arise from the
lack of high frequency mutual fund transaction data. Nevertheless, we show that the decomposition,
in particular, classifying trades into informed trading and liquidity provision, seems to make sense
in several settings. In these settings, we demonstrate that the decomposition results are consistent
with what one would expect. In the next section, we will take the decomposition procedure further
to analyze a larger sample of mutual funds to better understand how skilled fund managers add
value.

4

Information Events and Mutual Fund Stock Selection

Before we can examine the di¤erent channels through which skilled fund managers add value,
we have to …rst identify who those skillful fund managers are. Ultimately, an active mutual fund
manager will be successful if he or she has superior skill in processing valuation-relevant information
on a stock, which helps in identifying potential mispricing. Having superior information processing
abilities is not enough. There has to be opportunities as well. More opportunities arise when
stocks are a¤ected by information events. Because rational managers can choose not to trade such
stocks if they do not have an advantage in analyzing information, we should expect those managers
who choose to trade them to earn superior returns on average. The assumption is that those who
take the opposite side are “noise traders” who trade for a variety of reasons that we do not fully
understand.
To identify the occurrence of information events, we …rst make use of the Probability of Informed
Trading measure (P IN ), of Easley, Kiefer, O’Hara and Paperman (1996), and Easley, Kiefer and
18

O’Hara (1997). In their model, there are two types of traders: informed traders and uninformed
traders. In the absence of information events, only uninformed traders trade (for unspeci…ed
“liquidity” reasons,), and the order is equally likely to be a buy or a sell, resulting in an order
imbalance measure close to zero on average, and a low P IN measure. On the other hand, when
there are signi…cant information events and informed traders also trade, there will be large amounts
of buy orders or sell orders (depending on the nature of the information), resulting in a large order
imbalance and a high P IN measure.16 Empirically, P IN decreases with trading volume, size
and analyst coverage, but increases with bid-ask spread, and insider and institutional ownership,
consistent with it being a reasonable measure of private information events.
To estimate P IN , we use tick-by-tick transaction data for each quarter from 1983 to 2004,
employing the entire three-month data to ensure precision of the estimates. Overall, we have
on average 4110 stocks with P IN measures in a quarter. Due to data availability from ISSM,
NASDAQ stocks enter the sample in 1987 and account for a large portion of the sample afterwards.
The mean of P IN measures in our sample is 25:8% with an associated standard deviation of 12:1%.
Consistent with Easley, Hvidkjaer and O’Hara (2002), we …nd that high-P IN stocks are likely to
be smaller and less liquid stocks.
In each quarter and for each fund, we then compute a trade_P IN variable by value-weighting
the P IN of stocks traded by the fund during the quarter using the dollar value of the trade.
Speci…cally, we compute trade_P IN for the j-th mutual fund at the end of quarter t in our sample
as:

trade_P INj;t =

N
X

P INi;t

di;j

i=1

N
X

(4)
di;j

i=1

where P INi;t is the estimated P IN measure of the i-th stock traded by mutual fund j during
quarter t, and di;j is the absolute dollar value (using the stock price at the end of the quarter) of
the holding change during quarters t as reported by the mutual fund j. Intuitively, funds that buy
or sell more high-P IN stocks should have higher trade_P IN measures.
To evaluate the mutual fund performance, we use both factor-adjusted returns and holding16

A more detailed description of the P IN measure and its estimation procedure is contained in Appendix C.
Recently, the P IN measure has been widely used in the empirical …nance literature, for instance, in Brown, Hillegeist
and Lo (2004), Vega (2006), Bharath, Pasquariello and Wu (2006), and Chen, Goldstein and Jiang (2006).

19

based characteristics-adjusted returns performance. Our …rst factor-based performance measure
is based on the Carhart (1997) four-factor model, which augments the Fama-French three factor
model (1993) with a momentum factor (UMD). We sum across the four-factor-adjusted alphas
within a quarter to obtain the mutual fund’s quarterly four-factor-adjusted return.
It is important to note that the momentum factor is not usually regarded as a pervasive risk
factor but a style factor capturing what a fund manager does in order to create value (see Pastor
and Stambaugh, 2002a and 2002b). Whereas momentum trading involves price impact that has to
be taken into account (see Korajczyk and Sadka, 2005), the UMD factor does not. Therefore, a
fund that has a positive three-factor alpha but a negative four-factor alpha may still be preferred
by an investor. In view of that, we also report the three-factor alphas. In order to examine whether
a mutual funds three-factor alpha may be from activities that expose the fund to economy-wide
pervasive liquidity risk, we also examined performance by augmenting the four-factor model with
the aggregate liquidity factor of Pastor and Stambaugh (2003). Since the …ve- and four- factor
alphas are very similar, we do not report the …ve-factor alphas.
Our second performance measure is the DGTW “Characteristic Selectivity (CS)” measure
which is computed using the quarterly fund stock holdings. The characteristics-adjusted mutual
fund returns di¤er from the factor-adjusted mutual fund returns in several important aspects.
First, while the four-factor adjusted-returns are after fees and expenses, the characteristic-adjusted
returns are before fees and expenses. This di¤erence explains why the characteristic-adjusted
returns are typically higher than the factor-adjusted returns. Second, unlike the factor-adjusted
fund returns, the characteristics-adjusted fund returns ignore possible cash, stock holdings below
reporting threshold and other non-stock holdings of the mutual fund. However, such holdings are
usually small, accounting for less than 5% of the fund holdings on average in our sample. In addition,
factor-adjustment and characteristics-adjustment generate similar return spreads between the top
and bottom fund deciles, which indicates that non-stock holdings by mutual funds are unlikely to
introduce any systematic biases to our results.

4.1

Information Events and Informed Trading

At the end of each quarter over 1983 - 2004, we sort all mutual funds in the sample into deciles
according to their trade_P IN s and examine the factor-adjusted and the DGTW characteristics20

adjusted mutual fund portfolio returns (CS measures) in the next four quarters after portfolio
formation within each decile. The results are summarized in Table 3.
The central message in Table 3 is that funds trading more high-P IN stocks outperform the
funds trading low-P IN stocks. Using the four-factor model for risk adjustment, we …nd that funds
in the top trade_P IN decile outperform funds in the bottom trade_P IN decile by 48 basis points
in the next quarter with a t-value of 3:15. The return spread is 46 basis points in the second quarter
with a t-value of 2:98. Return spreads are 35 basis points in the third quarter (t-value = 2:24)
and 35 basis points in the fourth quarter (t-value = 2:26). Thus, within a one-year horizon after
portfolio formation, funds within the highest trade_P IN decile outperform the funds within the
lowest trade-PIN decile by roughly 1:6 percentage points. Using three-factor alphas which arguably
are better measures of fund managers’skill, we …nd that funds trading high-P IN stocks outperform
those trading low-P IN stocks by 56 basis points during the …rst quarter and by 2:1 percentage
points during the …rst one year.
In general, we see a positive relation between future risk-adjusted fund returns and the trade_P IN
variable: the lowest …ve trade-PIN decile portfolios usually have large negative and statistically signi…cant factor-adjusted return during four quarters after portfolio formation; in contrast, the highest …ve trade-PIN decile portfolios have small negative and in most cases statistically insigni…cant
factor-adjusted returns.
The results are similar for the characteristics-based risk adjustment. On average, the top tradePIN decile portfolio of funds outperform the bottom decile portfolio by 53 and 40 basis points per
quarter in the …rst and second quarter after portfolio formation. These di¤erences are signi…cant
at 1% signi…cance level. The return spreads between the top and bottom deciles attenuate to
19 to 9 basis points in the third and fourth quarter. Notice that the CS measure exhibits less
persistence than the three- and four-factor alphas. That may be due to the fact that the CS
measure does not capture value added trough within-quarter trading activities. To the extent that
the manager’s skill in creating value through trading within quarters is likely to persist, we should
expect more persistence in the three- and four-factor alphas when compared to the persistence in
the CS measure.

21

4.1.1

Why Do Funds Trading High-PIN Stocks Have Higher Alphas?

PIN Risk?
Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2002) document that high-P IN stocks earn higher returns in
order to compensate the agents for the risk of trading with informed traders. Since high trade_P IN
funds may also hold high-P IN stocks, the high returns they earn might simply be due to higher
risk that is not captured by the four-factor model or the DGTW benchmark characteristics risk
adjustment.
To address this concern, we …rst directly control for P IN risk in the risk adjustment. In
the case of the factor-risk adjustment, we augment the benchmark four-factor model with a PIN
risk factor - P INt . Similar to Easley, Hvidkjaer, and O’Hara (2004), we construct the P IN risk
factor as the high-P IN decile portfolio return minus the low-P IN decile portfolio return. The
resulting …ve-factor-adjusted mutual fund return thus controls for any systematic P IN risk. In the
case of characteristics-based risk adjustment, we construct characteristics benchmark portfolios by
matching along size, book-to-market, past return, and P IN characteristics simultaneously. At the
end of each quarter, we sort all stocks into 81 portfolios using a 3 by 3 by 3 by 3 sequential sort
based their sizes, book-to-market ratios, past 12 month returns and P IN measures (in that order).
We then compute a new characteristics-adjusted fund return or characteristic selectivity measure
(CS ) using the 81 benchmark portfolio returns.
Both the …ve-factor-adjusted fund returns and the new characteristics-adjusted returns during
the next quarter in the trade_P IN sorted fund deciles are presented in the …rst two columns
of Panel A, Table 4. In general, the risk-adjusted fund returns increase with the trade_P IN
measure. Funds trading high-P IN stocks perform better than those trading low-P IN stocks, even
after directly controlling for P IN risk. The spread between the returns on the high-trade_P IN
funds and the low-trade_P IN funds, after directly controlling for P IN risk, narrows slightly but
remains positive and statistically signi…cant. The …ve-factor alpha spread is 45 basis points per
quarter with a t-value of 2:85, while the new characteristics-adjusted return spread is 43 basis points
per quarter with a t-value of 2:11.
In a further check, we show that our results are robust to three alternative measures of the
number of information events. We describe these three alternative measures in Appendix C. The

22

…rst measure we consider is the asymmetric information component (adjP IN ) of the modi…ed P IN
measure proposed by Duarte and Young (2007), which removes the illiquidity component of the
original P IN measure. Duarte and Young (2007) show that the pricing of P IN risk is driven by
the illiquidity component, while adjP IN is not priced in the cross-section. The second measure
is the information asymmetry component of the bid-ask spread (theta) as proposed in Madhavan,
Richardson, and Roomans (1997). In addition to causing large order imbalance, informed-trading
will also force the market maker to increase the bid-ask spread which can be captured by a higher
theta measure. Finally, assuming that signi…cant information events usually lead to abnormal
trading in a stock, we use a measure of abnormal turnover (aturn) calculated following Chordia,
Huh and Subrahmanyam (2006).
To measure the average number of information events associated with stocks traded by mutual
funds during a quarter, we compute trade_adjP IN , trade_theta, and trade_aturn in the same
fashion as trade_P IN by replacing P IN in (4) with adjP IN , theta, and aturn accordingly. The
results appear in Table 4, Panel A. For brevity, we do not report the three-factor alphas which in
fact generate even larger spreads between the extreme fund deciles.
We obtain very similar results for these alternative measures of the amount of information.
The next-quarter mutual fund risk-adjusted returns (using benchmark risk adjustment models) in
general increase with these alternative measures. In addition, funds trading stocks associated with
more information events outperform funds trading stocks associated with fewer information events
by about 48 basis points per quarter, similar to the results using the original P IN measure. These
risk-adjusted return spreads are highly signi…cant in the cases, and independent of whether we use
factor adjustment or characteristics adjustment to account for risk. The fact that we obtain very
similar results using adjP IN instead of P IN provides further support that P IN risk is not driving
our results.
Finally, we directly examine the average P IN of stocks bought and sold by the funds separately
in Panel B of Table 4. In each quarter and for each fund, we …rst compute the value-weighted
average P IN of stocks in the “buy” portfolio (stocks recently bought by the fund) and the “sell”
portfolio (stocks recently sold by the fund). These P IN s are then averaged across funds in the
same trade_P IN decile and across time. Among funds trading high-P IN stocks, the stocks they
recently bought and sold have very similar average P IN s (0:2294 vs. 0:2301 and their di¤erence
23

is not statistically signi…cant). However, later we con…rm in Table 5 that the trade component
of the CS measure is positive and signi…cant for funds trading high-P IN stocks. Recall that the
trade component measures the value-added from the most recent mutual fund stock trades (both
buy and sell). A positive and statistically signi…cant trade component thus suggests that stocks
recently bought by those funds outperform those recently sold by them although these stocks are
of similar P IN s. This …nding again suggests that the alpha generated by funds trading high-P IN
stocks comes from superior stock selection skill rather than the P IN risk.
Momentum Trading?
Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1995) document that mutual funds often use momentum as a
stock selection criterion, so momentum e¤ects can signi…cantly in‡uence mutual fund performance
(see also Carhart, 1997). Panel B of Table 4 shows that funds trading high-P IN stocks hold more
recent winners than funds trading low-P IN stocks, resulting in a higher f und_mom on average.
A natural question arises: could the di¤erence in the CS measures between funds trading high- and
low-P IN stocks be driven by the momentum e¤ect? We believe that the answer is no for several
reasons.
First, factor-adjusted and characteristics-adjusted fund returns are computed throughout after
adjusting for momentum e¤ects. Second, when we later regress the risk-adjusted fund returns on
several fund characteristics in a cross-sectional regression, we …nd f und_mom to be insigni…cant,
while trade_P IN is still highly signi…cant (see Table 9), con…rming that the higher return associated with funds trading high-P IN is not driven by the momentum e¤ect. Finally, we directly
examine the average past return characteristics of stocks bought and sold by the funds separately
in Panel B of Table 4. In each quarter and for each fund, we …rst compute the value-weighted
average past one-year return of stocks in the “buy” portfolio (stocks recently bought by the fund)
and the “sell” portfolio (stocks recently sold by the fund). These past returns are then averaged
across funds in the same trade_P IN decile and across time. Although high-trade_P IN funds
seem to buy more recent winners than low-trade_P IN funds (the average past one-year return
in the “buy” portfolio is 34.3% for high-trade_P IN funds vs. 20.9% for low-trade_P IN funds),
high-trade_P IN funds also sell more extreme recent winners at the same time (the average past
one-year return in the “sell” portfolio is 46.6% for high-trade_P IN funds); they thus are not momentum traders in the traditional sense. In addition, funds in trade_P IN deciles 7 to 9 seem to
24

buy or hold even more winners than funds in the top trade_P IN decile. If the momentum e¤ect
drives the high CS measure, we would expect funds in trade_P IN deciles 7 to 9 to have higher
risk-adjusted returns on average. This is clearly not the case. In what follows, we therefore proceed
to examine the relative importance of informed trading and liquidity provision components to total
performance of these funds.
Informed Trading or Liquidity Provision?
Table 5 presents results of the decomposition applied to the decile portfolios of funds sorted on
trade_P IN . This reveals interesting di¤erences in value-added between funds trading high-P IN
stocks and funds trading low-P IN stocks. For high-trade_P IN -funds, a large part of the character
selectivity (CS) measure comes from active trading during the previous quarter (CS T = 31:2 basis
points with a t-value of 2:83). We can con…rm that the stocks bought by mutual funds (the buy
portfolio) and the stocks sold by mutual funds (the sell portfolio) have very similar average P IN
measures. The trade component, measuring their return di¤erence, should be less subject to P IN
risk. The fact that it is positive and signi…cant indicates that we are not capturing just the P IN
risk. Although both the informed trading component (CS inf ) and the liquidity provision component
(CS liq ) are positive for high-trade_P IN -funds, only the informed trading component is signi…cant
(20:4 basis points with a t-value of 2.25), and it is twice the size of the liquidity provision component
(10.4 basis points). This is consistent with our conjecture. When skillful managers absorb liquidity
by trading high-P IN stocks, they are likely to have valuation-relevant information, and thus make
money on informed trading. For them, there is less of an added cost of demanding immediacy
in the market than there is a bene…t from superior information, as Grossman and Stiglitz (1980)
would predict. In terms of liquidity provision, not all of them can perform well consistently. As
a result, although the liquidity provision component is positive on average, it is much smaller and
not signi…cant, perhaps because of the possibility of trading against informed traders and the noise
associated with identifying liquidity provision using quarterly mutual fund holdings data .
The low-trade_P IN -funds, despite near zero stock selection skill on average, seem to possess
some skill in liquidity provision. The liquidity provision component (16.2 basis points) is signi…cant
(t-value = 2.57). This is because when fund managers trade low-P IN stocks, they are likely to
trade with uninformed traders. When they trade against market order imbalance, they are likely to
make money by providing the needed liquidity. Although the reward for liquidity provision on these
25

stocks is lower than that on the high-P IN stocks, the risk of adverse selection is also lower, making
liquidity provision more easily detected. The positive liquidity provision component is partly o¤set
by a negative informed trading component, resulting in a close-to-zero CS measure.
To sum this up, the decomposition exercise reveals interesting patterns in how mutual fund’s
trades can add value. While informed trading is more likely to add value at times when the stock
traded are associated with information events, liquidity provision is more likely to add value (or be
easily detected in a statistical sense) when the stocks traded are associated with few information
events.

4.2

Persistence in Alphas

A key challenge in mutual fund studies is to distinguish skill from luck. If the superior performance
of a mutual fund is due to its manager’s skill, to the extent that such skill persists in the near
future, we would expect past winner funds to continue outperforming the past loser funds. If the
superior performance of a mutual fund is due to luck however, we would not expect persistence in
fund performance. In this subsection, we examine the fund performance persistence in our sample.
At the end of each month from 1983 to 2004, we sort all mutual funds in our sample into
deciles according to their four-factor alphas (Fama-French three factors augmented by Carhart’s
momentum factor) estimated using the previous 5 years of monthly mutual fund return data. Each
fund decile portfolio is then held for one month and rebalanced next month. We then compute
the three-factor and four-factor alphas on these rebalanced fund decile portfolios. The results are
presented in Table 6. While past winners continue to outperform past losers by about 34 bps per
month (t-value = 2:93), this outperformance is mainly driven by persistence in poor performance
by the past losers. Funds associated with the lowest alphas in the past continue to underperform
the market by 32 bps per month (t-value = 3:48). On the other hand, funds associated with the
highest alphas in the past do not signi…cantly outperform the market in the future. Their average
four-factor alpha in the next month is only 2 bps (t-value =0:21). The results are similar with
three-factor alphas.
Mamaysky, Spiegel and Zhang (2007b) point out that historical alphas contain large measurement errors, and they propose three …lters which substantially help predict future alphas of funds
in their sample. We repeat the sorting exercise after including those three …lters at the time of
26

portfolio formation. Speci…cally, the following criteria must be met for any fund to be included in
any decile: (1) the absolute value of alpha must be less than 2% per month, (2) the CAPM beta
must be in between 0 and 2, and (3) in the previous month the forecasted alpha the di¤erence
between the realized return and the market return must have the same sign. Details on these …lters
can be found in Mamaysky, Spiegel and Zhang (2007b). Consistent with the …ndings in Mamaysky,
Spiegel and Zhang (2007b), fund performance becomes more persistent after applying these …lters
as shown in Table 6. Past winners now outperform past losers by almost 78 bps per month (t-value
= 4:12). In addition, funds associated with the highest alphas in the past outperform the market
by a large amount (15 bps per month). However, the outperformance is not statistically signi…cant
(t-value =0:21). In other words, by sorting funds into deciles based on their past alphas in the more
recent sampling period (1984-2004), we are not able to identify fund portfolios that, on average,
outperform the market going forward into the future after fees and expenses. This is consistent
with the …ndings reported in Kosowski, Timmermann, Wermers and White (2006) and Fama and
French (2008).17 A potential explanation is given by Berk and Green (2004): erosion in the after
fee performance of superior mutual funds due to in‡ows coupled with the diseconomies of scale,
and the entry of new funds that on average have little superior abilities makes it di¢ cult to identify
funds that provide superior returns to investors going forward. The failure of historical alpha alone
in predicting positive future alphas suggests the need for bringing in additional information. We
take this up next.
4.2.1

Information Events and Performance Persistence

The managers’skill ultimately come from their superior ability in processing information. As we
argued earlier, that skill is likely to have more value in stocks that are a¤ected by information
events. To the extent that a manager’s skills are likely to persist for some time, past superior
performance is more likely to be an indication of future performance for a manager who attained
that performance by trading stocks associated with more information events. In other words, we
would expect stronger fund performance persistence among funds that traded in High-P IN stocks
17

If we examine a longer sampling period from 1970-2002 as in Mamaysky, Spiegel and Zhang (2007b), the top
10% of funds (after applying the …lters) associated with the highest past alpha indeed outperform the market in
the future by 3% per year (t-value = 2:68). Also consistent with the …ndings in Mamaysky, Spiegel and Zhang
(2007b), computing alphas using Kalman Filters (Mamaysky, Spiegel and Zhang, 2007a) instead of rolling-window
OLS regressions does not improve the fund performance persistence test.

27

recently and we will be able to identify funds that outperform the market in the future more likely
in this group.
To evaluate this conjecture, at the end of each quarter from 1983 through 2004, we …rst sort
all mutual funds in the sample into two groups according to their trade_P IN variables during the
quarter. Within each group, we then further sort funds according to their four-factor alphas in the
previous year into …ve portfolios. Overall, we have 10 fund portfolios, which is comparable to the
earlier exercise using fund deciles. To preserve space, we report in table 7 the future performance
of fund portfolios associated with the lowest past alphas, medium past alphas and the highest past
alphas within each trade_P IN group.
Panel A reports the quarterly three-factor alphas,four-factor alphas and characteristics-adjusted
returns (CS) during the …rst four quarters after portfolio formation. The quarterly factor-model
alphas equal to the monthly OLS factor model regression intercept terms multiplied by three.
Again, the CS measure di¤ers from the alpha since the former does not account for fees, expenses,
non-stock holdings and intra-quarter turnovers of the funds. Consistent with our conjecture, among
funds that trade high-P IN stocks, funds that earn high past alphas have higher quarter t+1 alphas
than funds that earn low past alphas. The spread between four-factor alphas is 124 bps per quarter
(t-value = 4:51) during the …rst quarter, and it remains statistically signi…cant for the next two
quarters as well. Such spread is unlikely driven by the PIN risk since funds with high and low
past alphas in the same trade_P IN group have almost the same trade_P IN s.18 Interestingly,
in the high trade_P IN group, funds that earn higher past alphas continue to earn signi…cant
positive four-factor alpha of 44 bps (t-value = 1:98) during the …rst quarter even after accounting
for fees and expenses. In other words, by also examining the information events associated with
the stocks they trade, we can identify fund managers who are able to outperform the market (net
of fees) even during the more recent sampling period. When we use the three-factor model as the
benchmark, the results are even stronger. Among funds that trade high-P IN stocks, those with
high past alphas outperform those with low past alphas by a larger and more signi…cant amount.
The funds with high past alphas also outperform the market by a large amount for a longer period.
Finally, we reach very similar conclusions using CS measures. Overall, we …nd strong performance
18
We have also veri…ed that controlling for the PIN risk directly using the PIN risk factor or using PIN characteristic
adjustement produces very similar results.

28

persistence among funds trading stocks associated with more information events. In addition, funds
with high past alphas in this group continue to produce positive and signi…cant alphas (net of fees)
go forward.
In sharp contrast, among funds that trade low-P IN stocks recently, the performance persistence
is much weaker. Funds with high past alphas do not signi…cantly outperform those with low past
alphas during the …rst quarter if we look at four-factor alphas or the CS measures. In addition, no
fund portfolio is able to produce positive and signi…cant alpha going forward.
Berk and Green (2004) argue that fund managers with skills command higher fees. As a result,
zero after-fee alpha does not necessarily imply that the manager has no skill. In another words,
mutual funds’ pre-fee performance and their fee growth rates could serve as additional measures
of manager skills. When we examine factor-alphas before fees and expenses in Panel B, we …nd
that funds with high past alphas and trading high-P IN stocks earn a higher four-factor alpha of
75 bps on average during the …rst quarter (t-value = 3:43). In addition, the signi…cantly positive
four-factor alphas now persist up to three quarters. Among funds that trade high-P IN stocks,
those with high past alphas experience a much higher total-dollar-fee growth rate of 13% during
the …rst quarter. The fee growth rate for the funds with low past alpha during the same quarter,
by contrast, is only 2:01%.
Sources of Future Performance
Table 8 gives the decomposition of the CS measures of these fund portfolios. Past winner
funds in the high trade-P IN group have a total CS measure of 107 bps in the following quarter.
About half of that (48 bps) indeed comes from informed trading, and the rest mostly come from
positions taken from earlier quarters. The positive and signi…cant CS inf and CS O explain why
these past winners are able to outperform the other funds in the future. They are indeed very
good at informed tradings. Interestingly, the past loser funds in the low trade-P IN class have a
signi…cantly positive liquidity provision component (CS liq ) and a signi…cantly negative informed
trading component (CS inf ) – only that the two are about equal (in absolute term) and cancel
each other. A potential explanation is that these funds do not possess skill and are trading stocks
associated with little information. When they demand liquidity, they pay a price, resulting in a
negative informed trading component. When they supply liquidity, they bene…t from the price
concession, resulting in a positive liquidity provision component. Since the stocks they trade are
29

associated with little adverse selection risk, it is easier to detect both components in a statistical
sense.

4.3

Fund Characteristics and Performance Components

To examine the relation between fund characteristics and the CS measures, we use a Fama-MacBeth
(1973) cross-sectional regression approach. Speci…cally, we regress the next-quarter CS measure
and its components on several fund-level characteristics for each quarter from 1983 to 2004. All
right side variables are measured as deviations from their corresponding cross-sectional means,
standardized to have unit variance, and winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles to alleviate the
e¤ect of outliers. In addition, the regression intercept can be interpreted as the average e¤ect of
having a Growth-and-Income (“GNI”) fund style. Finally, the regression coe¢ cients are averaged
across time, and the associated t-values are computed using the Newey-West correction with lag
terms of 8 quarters to account for autocorrelations in the error terms. The regression results are
reported in Table 9.
When we regress the total CS measure on fund characteristics, we …nd trade_P IN to be
signi…cant even in the presence of many other fund-level characteristics, indicating that the di¤erence in stock selection skill between funds trading high-P IN stocks and those trading low-P IN
stocks is not entirely driven by other correlated fund characteristics. We also …nd that f low has
a positive and signi…cant coe¢ cient, consistent with the notion that money is chasing skilled fund
managers rationally. In addition, the signi…cance of dummy_AGG means that funds with an “Aggressive Growth (AGG)”investment style are better in selecting stocks, con…rming earlier …ndings
by Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1997).
We also focus on the two particular components of the total CS measures: the informed
trading component (CS inf ), and the liquidity provision component (CS liq ). Interestingly, fundcharacteristics associated with informed trading, and with liquidity provision are quite di¤erent.
When we regress CS inf on fund characteristics, we …nd trade_P IN to be even more signi…cant,
indicating that the positive relation between stock selection skill and high trade_P IN is likely
driven by informed trading. In addition, f low and dummy_AGG remain signi…cant, indicating
that informed trading is more prevalent in funds with an “Aggressive Growth (AGG)” investment
style and money is chasing fund managers who are good at informed trading. In contrast, regress30

ing CS liq on fund characteristics causes di¤erent patterns to emerge. First, trade_P IN is now
negatively related to CS liq (although not signi…cantly). Second, intercept and age are signi…cant,
indicating that younger funds and funds with “Growth and Income (GNI)” investment styles are
likely to be more highly rewarded, via liquidity provision.

5

Conclusion

The traditional approach to portfolio performance evaluation is to decompose the skill of a portfolio
manager into two components: security selection and market timing. In this paper we suggest a
further decomposition of the security selection skill based on whether the portfolio manager’s trades
demand liquidity (“informed trading”) or provide liquidity (“liquidity provision”). We develop a
method for such decomposition based on the composition of the portfolio holdings of a mutual fund.
We illustrate the use of our decomposition method by empirically examining the stock selection
ability of managed mutual funds.
We validate and illustrate our decomposition method using quarterly mutual fund holdings
data for the period from 1983 to 2004. Consistent with the notion that a mutual fund manager
with superior stock selection ability is more likely to bene…t from trading in stocks a¤ected by
information-events, we document that funds trading such stocks exhibit superior performance that
is more likely to persist. Such superior performance mainly comes from informed trading while
liquidity provision is more likely to add value for stocks associated with less information events
thus a low level of adverse selection risk. In addition, informed trading is relatively more important
for funds with a growth-oriented investment style, while liquidity provision is more important for
younger funds with more of an income orientation.
Overall, we …nd that even quarterly data on mutual funds’holdings contain interesting information about how a mutual fund manager adds value. In practice, our decomposition approach could
be more valuable to plan sponsors and large institutional investors who have access to holdings on a
daily or weekly basis. Our procedure could allow them to evaluate a manager’s contribution on both
informed trading and liquidity provision dimensions with greater precision, thereby contributing to
better allocation of resources across di¤erent money managers.

31

Appendix A: A Numerical Example for the Decomposition of Mutual Fund Stock
Selection Skill
Assume there are six stocks (A, B, C, D, E, and F). A mutual fund’s holdings in these stocks
at the end of quarter t

1 (Nt

1)

and t (Nt ), stock prices at the end of quarter t (Pt ), and the

characteristics-adjusted stock returns during quarter t+1 [Rj;t+1

BRt+1 (j; t)] can be summarized

in the following table:

Stock

Nt

1

Nt

Pt

Rj;t+1 BRt+1 (j; t)

A

2

1

10

3%

B

2

0

15

2%

C

2

2

20

1%

D

2

2

25

1%

E

2

3

30

2%

F

0

2

35

3%

The Hold, Buy and Sell are then de…ned by the holdings NtH , NtB and NtS :

Stock

NtH = min (Nt

1 ; Nt )

NtB = N t N H
t

NtS = N t

1

A

1

0

1

B

0

0

2

C

2

0

0

D

2

0

0

E

2

1

0

F

0

2

0

Value

Ht = 160

Bt = 100

St = 40

NH
t

The portfolio values Ht , Bt , and St are determined using the prices at the end of quarter t
(Pt ). Notice that Bt > St , and the di¤erence is likely …nanced by fund in‡ows, or a reduction in
cash position or the sale of other non-stock assets held by the fund. The Hold, Buy, and Sell can
be treated as three separate funds whose CS measures can be computed using equation (??) and

32

holdings as:

CS

Hold

Buy

Sell

CS H;t+1 = 0:63%

CS B;t+1 = 2:70%

CS S;t+1 =

2:25%

Given this information, equation (1) then decomposes the total CS measure into three components:
CS t+1

CS O
t+1

CS Tt+1

1:42%

0:05%

1:49%

CS adj
t+1
0:12%

If we further assume that the fund trades B and F in the same direction as the aggregate order
imbalance and trades A and E against the direction of aggregate order imbalance, equation (2)
T ) into an informed trading component (CS inf )
further decomposes the trade component (CSt+1
t+1
liq
):
and a liquidity provision component (CSt+1

CS Tt+1

CS inf
t+1

CS liq
t+1

1:49%

1:11%

0:38%

Appendix B: Variance Decomposition of the “Characteristic Selectivity”(CS) Measure
Empirically, we decompose the total “Characteristic Selectivity”(CS) measure (DGTW, 1997)
into four components:19
CS = CS O + CS adj + CS inf + CS liq .
Consequently, we have
var(CS) = cov(CS; CS O ) + cov(CS; CS adj ) + cov(CS; CS inf ) + cov(CS; CS liq ),

where var ( ) and cov ( ) are the cross-sectional variance and covariance, respectively. Dividing both
sides of the above equation by var(CS), we then have

1=
19

P

+

adj

+

inf

+

liq .

For simiplicity of notation, we omit the time subscript t and fund superscript i.

33

The term

()

then measures the contribution of component ( ) to the cross-sectional variations

of CS. The sum of the contribution from the four components is equal to one by construction.
can be measured by regression. For instance,

is estimated by regressing CS O on CS cross-

P

sectionally. Empirically, we have a panel data of cross-sectionally demeaned CS, CS O , CS adj ,
CS inf and CS liq . To estimate , we run a Weighted Least Squares (WLS) regression. In practice,
this means de‡ating the data for each fund-quarter by the number of funds in the corresponding
cross-section.
Appendix C: Measures of Private Information Events — A Brief Description
Easley and O’Hara, along with their coauthors, in a series of papers develop this measure
to capture the probability of information-based trading. Let
information event occurs;
of informational event;
buy orders;

s

denote the probability that an

denote low value of underlying asset, conditioning on the occurrence

is the rate of informed trade arrivals;

b

is the arrival rate of uninformed

is the arrival rate of uninformed sell orders. Easley, Hvdkjaer and O’Hara (2002)

propose the following MLE estimation to estimate the parameter vector

L ( jB; S) = (1

)e

B
b

b

B!

e

s

f ; ; b; s; g

S
s

S!
( + s )S
+ e b e ( + s)
B!
S!
B
( + s) ( + b)
+ (1
)e
e
B!
B
b

(5)
s

S
s

S!

where B and S represent total buy trades and sell trades for the day respectively. Given the above
speci…cations, the probability of information-based trade, P IN , is

P IN =

+

b

+

:

(6)

s

With some independence assumptions across trading days, the likelihood function (5) becomes

L

j (Bi ; Si )i=N
=
i=1

N
Y
i=1

L ( jBi ; Si ) :

(7)

The problem with estimation of P IN measure is that later years (since 2001), the number of
buy and sell orders becomes extremely large, particularly for some NASDAQ stocks. One way to
34

solve this problem, as in Vega (2006), is to impose the constraint that the arrival rates of informed
and uninformed orders are the same,
b

=

= ;

s

(8)

hence we estimate a modi…ed version of (5),

L ( jB; S) = (1

)e

2

B+S

B!S!

+

e

B

( +2 )

( + )S
+
B!S!

(1

)e

( +2 )

S

( + )B
B!S!

(9)

and consequently, the probability of informed trading, P IN , is

P IN =

+2

:

(10)

It is interesting to note that the probability that an information event occurs ( ) and the
rate of informed trade arrivals ( ) enter P IN as a product term (

). Although

and

may

be individually estimated rather imprecisely, since estimation errors in these two parameters are
usually strongly negatively correlated, the resulting P IN estimate is quite precise. In addition, the
variation in

and

are o¤setting, making P IN a much stable measure bounded between 0 and 1.

Duarte and Young (2007) extend (5) to take into account large buy and sell volatilities, and
pervasive positive correlation between buy and sell orders. Their model allows the possibility of
order ‡ow shocks and di¤erent distributions of the number of the buyer-initiated informed trades
and the number of the seller-initiated informed trades. With such an extension, one may estimate
an adjusted version of the probability of informed trading (AdjPIN) as

AdjP IN =

[(1

)

b

+

[(1
s] + (

)
b+

b

+

s)

s]
0

+ (1

)

+

b

+

(11)
s

where the additional parameter denotes the probability of symmetric order ‡ow shocks conditional
on no arrival of private information event, and

0

denotes the probability of symmetric order ‡ow

shocks conditional on the arrival of private information.

b

and

s

denote the additional arrival rate

of buy orders and sell orders conditional on the arrival of the symmetric order ‡ow shocks. Duarte
and Young (2007) simplify (11) by restricting

=

0

. To reduce the sheer volume of calculations,

and to estimate a relatively parsimonious model with fewer parameters, we further impose the

35

constraints that

b

=

s

=

and

b

=

s

=

. According to Duarte and Young (2007), the

adjusted-PIN estimated with these constraints generate similar results to their full-‡edged model.
Thus, the adjusted-PIN measure we estimate is speci…ed as:

AdjP IN =

+2

+2

In addition to causing large order imbalance, informed-trading will also force the market maker
to increase the bid-ask spread. In the structural model of intra day trading costs proposed by
Madhavan et. al. (1997), the price change can be captured by:

pt

pt

1

= ( + )xt

( +

)xt

1

+ ut

Here xt is the sign of the order ‡ow (1: trade at ask, -1: trade at bid, 0: trade between bid and ask),
is the market maker’s cost of supplying liquidity,

is the autocorrelation of the order ‡ow, and

captures the sensitivity of beliefs to unexpected order ‡ows or the degree of private information.
is therefore known as the information asymmetry component of the bid-ask spread and serves
as an alternative measure of private information events.

,

and

will be jointly estimated with

transaction level data using GMM on a quarterly basis.
To the extent that signi…cant information events usually lead to abnormal trading in a stock,
our last alternative measure is a measure of abnormal turnover (aturn) calculated in a similar
fashion as in Chordia, Huh, and Subrahmanyam (2007). At the end of month t, for each stock, we
estimate a regression in a 36-month rolling window [t

35; t]:

turn = a + bx + "
where turn is monthly stock turnover de…ned as the ratio between total number of shares traded
during the month and total number of shares outstanding, and x is a vector of adjustment regressors
including 11 monthly dummy variables for months (January - November) as well as the linear and
quadratic time-trend variables. The residual term for month t, "t , after standardization is the
measure of abnormal turnover (aturn).

36

References
[1] Agarwal, Vikas, and Narayan Y. Naik, 2000, Multi-Period Performance Persistence Analysis
of Hedge Funds, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 35, 327–342.
[2] Amihud, Yahov, 2002, Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-Series E¤ects,
Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31-56.
[3] Baks, Klass, Je¤rey A. Busse, and T. Clifton Green, 2006, Fund Managers Who Take Big
Bets: Skilled or Overcon…dent, Working Paper, Emory University
[4] Berk, Jonathan, and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund ‡ows and performance in rational
markets, Journal of Political Economy 112(6), 1269–1295.
[5] Bharath, Sreedhar, Paolo Pasquariello and Guojun Wu, 2006, Does asymmetric information
drive capital structure decisions?, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
[6] Blume, Marshall E., and Roger M. Edelen, 2004, On replicating the S&P 500 index, Working
Paper, Wharton School.
[7] Blumenthal, Karen, 2007, Grande expectations: A year in the life of Starbuck’s stock, Crown
Publishing, …rst edition.
[8] Brown, Stephen, and William Goetzmann, 1995, Performance persistence, Journal of Finance
50(2), 679 - 698.
[9] Brown, Stephen, Steve Hillegeist and Kin Lo, 2004, Conference calls and information asymmetry, Journal of Accounting and Economics 37, 343-366.
[10] Campbell, John Y., Tarun Ramadorai, and Allie Schwartz, 2007, Caught On Tape:Institutional
Trading, Stock Returns, and Earnings Announcements, Journal of Financial Economics,
Forthcoming.
[11] Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance 52,
57–82.
[12] Chen, Hsiu-Lang, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Russ Wermers, 2000, An examination of the
stockholdings and trades of fund managers, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
35, 343–368.
[13] Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Je¤rey Kubik, 2004, Does fund size erode performance? Liquidity, organizational diseconomies and active money management, American
Economic Review 94(5), 1276–1302.
[14] Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein and Wei Jiang, 2006, Price informativeness and investment sensitivity
to stock prices, Review of Financial Studies 20, 619-650.
37

[15] Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to
incentives, Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167–1200.
[16] Chordia, Tarun, Sahn-Wook Huh, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2007, The cross-section of
expected trading activity, Review of Financial Studies 20, 709-740.
[17] Chordia, Tarun and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2004, Order imbalance and individual stock
returns: Theory and evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 485 - 518.
[18] Cohen, Randolph B., 2002, Dimensional fund advisors, Harvard Business School Case 294-025.
[19] Christo¤ersen, Susan Kerr, Donald B. Keim, and David K. Musto, 2006, Valuable information
and costly liquidity: evidence from individual mutual fund trades, Working Paper, Wharton
School.
[20] Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, The geography of investment: Informed
trading and asset prices, Journal of Political Economy 109(4), 811–841.
[21] Coval, Joshua D., and Erik Sta¤ord, 2006, Asset Fire Sales (and Purchases) in Equity Markets,
Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming.
[22] Cremers, Martijn, and Antti Petajisto, 2006, How Active is Your Fund Manager? a New
Measure that Predicts Performance, Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
[23] Da, Zhi and Pengjie Gao, 2008, Clientele Change, Liquidity shock, and the Return on Financially Distressed Stocks, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
[24] Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual
fund performance with characteristic based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035–1058.
[25] Duarte, Je¤erson, and Lance Young, 2007, Why is PIN priced? Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
[26] Easley, David, Soeren Hvidkjaer, and Maureen O’Hara, 2002, Is information risk a determinant
of asset returns?, Journal of Finance 57, 2185-2221.
[27] Easley, David, Soeren Hvidkjaer, and Maureen O’Hara, 2004, Factoring information into returns, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
[28] Easley, David, Nicholas M. Kiefer, and Maureen O’Hara, 1997, One day in the life of a very
common stock, Review of Financial Studies 10, 805–835.
[29] Easley, David, Nicholas M. Kiefer, Maureen O’Hara, and Joseph Paperman, 1996, Liquidity,
information, and less-frequently traded stocks, Journal of Finance 51, 1405–1436.

38

[30] Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, Sanjiv Das, and Matthew Hlavka, 1993, E¢ ciency with
costly information: a reinterpretation of evidence from managed portfolios, Review of Financial
Studies 6, 1-22.
[31] Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, Yoel Krasny and Sadi Ozelge, 2006, The e¤ect of the
frequency of holding data on conclusions about mutual fund behavior, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.
[32] Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on bonds
and stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.
[33] Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth French, 2008, Mutual fund performance, Working Paper.
[34] French, Kenneth, 2008, The cost of active investing, Journal of Finance 63(4), 1537-1573.
[35] Fung, William, David A. Hsieh, Tarun Ramadorai, and Narayan Y. Naik, 2006, Hedge Funds:
Performance, Risk and Capital Formation, Working Paper, Oxford University.
[36] Glosten, Lawrence R., and Lawrence E. Harris, 1988, Estimating the components of the bid /
ask spread, Journal of Financial Economics 21, 123-142.
[37] Greenwald, Bruce C.N., Judd Kahn, Paul.D.Sonkin, and Michael Biema, 2001, Value Investing:
From Graham to Bu¤ett and Beyond, Wiley Publishing, …rst edition.
[38] Grinblatt, Mark, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1995, Momentum investment strategies, portfolio performance, and herding: A study of mutual fund behavior, American Economic Review 85, 1088-1105.
[39] Grossman, S., and J. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of informational e¢ cient markets,
American Economic Review 70, 393-408.
[40] Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: the growth in actively managed mutual funds, ,
Journal of Finance, Vol. 51, No. 3, July 1996.
[41] Huang, Roger. and Hans R. Stoll, 1996, Dealer versus Auction markets: a paired comparison
of execution costs on Nasdaq and the NYSE, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 313-358.
[42] Jagannathan, Ravi, Alexey Malakhov, and Dmitry Novikov, 2006, Do Hot Hands Exist Among
Hedge Fund Managers? An Empirical Evaluation, Working Paper, Northwestern University.
[43] Jensen, Michael, 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945-1964, Journal of
Finance 23, 389-416.
[44] Kacperczyk, Marcin, and Amit Seru, 2007, Fund Manager Use of Public Information: New
Evidence on Managerial Skills, Journal of Finance 62, 485-528.

39

[45] Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2005, On the industry concentration of
actively managed equity mutual funds, Journal of Finance 60, 1983–2012.
[46] Kacperczyk, Marcin, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng, 2007, Unobesrved actions of mutual funds,
Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
[47] Keim, Donald B., 1999, An analysis of mutual fund design: the case of investing in small-cap
stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 51, 173-194.
[48] Korajczyk, Robert, and Ronnie Sadka, 2005, Are momentum trading robust to trading costs?
Journal of Finance 59, 1039-1082.
[49] Kosowski, Robert, Allan Timmermann, Russ Wermers, and Hal White, 2006, Can mutual fund
“stars” really pick stocks? New evidence from a bootstrap analysis, Journal of Finance 61,
2551-2595.
[50] Lee, Charles M. C., and Mark J. Ready, 1991, Inferring trade direction from intraday data,
Journal of Finance 46, 733-746.
[51] Madhavan, Ananth, Matthew Richardson and Mark Roomans, 1997, Why do security prices
change? A transaction-level analysis of NYSE stocks, Review of Financial Studies 10, 10351064.
[52] Mamaysky, Harry, Matthew Spiegel, and Hong Zhang, 2007a, Estimating the dynamic of
mutual fund alphas and betas, Review of Financial Studies 21(1), 233 - 264.
[53] Mamaysky, Harry, Matthew Spiegel, and Hong Zhang, 2007b, Improved forecasting of mutual
fund alphas and betas, Review of Finance 11, 359-400.
[54] Pástor, Luboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2002a, Mutual fund performance and seemingly
unrelated assets, Journal of Financial Economics 63,315-349.
[55] Pástor, Luboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2002b, Investing in equity mutual funds, Journal of
Financial Economics 63,351-380.
[56] Pástor, Luboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2003,Liquidity risk and expected stock returns,
Journal of Political Economy 111, 642-685.
[57] Schultz, Paul, 2007, When is stock picking by mutual funds successful?, Working Paper, University of Notre Dame.
[58] Sirri, Erik R., and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows, Journal of
Finance 53, 1589-1622.
[59] Vega, Clara, 2006, Stock price reaction to Public and private information, Journal of Financial
Economics 82, 103-133.
40

[60] Wermers, Russ, 1999, Mutual Fund Herding and the Impact on Stock Prices, Journal of
Finance 54, 581-622.

41

Figure 1: Share price and mutual fund holdings
Panel A plots the share price of Hudson General Corp (HGC) and Gabelli Fund‟s holdings of
HGC (as a percentage of total number of shares outstanding) from September 1990 to September
1998. Panel B plots the share prices of Starbucks (SBUX) from June to December 2005 (price is
normalized so that the end-of-July-price is 1) and Putnam Voyager Fund‟s holdings of Starbucks
(as a percentage of total number of shares outstanding) at the end of June, September and
December.

A: Share price of Hudson General Corp (HGC) and Gabelli‟s Holdings
HGC: Share price and Gabelli holdings
14.00%

12.00%

50

10.00%

Share price, $

40
8.00%
30
6.00%
20
4.00%
10

2.00%
Share price, $

S&P500

Gabelli holdings, % of shares outstanding

60

Gabelli holdings, %

Sep-98

Mar-98

Sep-97

Mar-97

Sep-96

Mar-96

Sep-95

Mar-95

Sep-94

Mar-94

Sep-93

Mar-93

Sep-92

Mar-92

Sep-91

Mar-91

0.00%

Sep-90

0

B: Share Price of Starbuck (SBUX, normalized) and Putnam Voyager Fund‟s Holdings
Starbucks, 2nd Half, 2005
1.2
1.15
1.1
1.05
0.41%

1
0.95
0.9
0.85

0.20%

0.8
6

7

8

9

Putnam's Holdings

42

10

11
price

12

Sbux price

Putnam holdings: % of shrout

0.62%

Figure 2: Graphic illustration of the Buy, Sell and Hold portfolios
This figure illustrates the three portfolios defined in Section 1 for the purpose of Characteristics
Selectivity (CS) decomposition. Let the smaller pie represent the fund‟s holding at the end of
quarter t-1 and the bigger pie represent the fund‟s holding at the end of quarter t. The intersection
of the two pies thus represents the Hold portfolio which contains stocks untouched by the fund
during quarter t. The portion of the smaller pie excluding the Hold portfolio represents the Sell
portfolio which contains stocks sold by the fund during quarter t. The portion of the bigger pie
excluding the Hold portfolio represents the Buy portfolio which contains stocks recently bought
by the fund during quarter t.

43

Table 1: Breakdown of mutual fund sample over time
We report the breakdown of our mutual fund sample by the self-reported investment objectives.
Consistent with prior literature on actively managed mutual funds, we exclude all index funds,
lifecycle mutual funds, bond funds, hybrid funds, sector funds, and international funds. We only
keep funds that are self-reported as aggressive growth (AGG), growth (GROWTH) or growth and
income (GNI). To ensure our sample of mutual funds are relatively active, we also exclude fund /
quarter observations with quarterly turnover less than 10% or if the fund trades less than 10
during that quarter. Finally, we only include fund / quarter observations for which the fund
holdings at the end of previous quarter are also available so that holding changes can be
computed over consecutive quarters. The CDA/Spectrum mutual fund holding data are matched
to CRSP Mutual Fund data via the MFLINKS database.

year
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
All

# of funds
per qtr
132
163
201
234
291
328
283
293
327
397
438
353
353
468
557
913
1291
1843
1431
1775
1776
1459
696

AGG

GROWTH

GNI

35
38
44
43
59
73
57
59
73
84
95
65
59
54
64
88
125
190
159
201
181
130
90

57
73
98
125
156
173
151
157
172
217
242
208
194
271
337
586
856
1182
913
1106
1116
911
423

40
52
59
66
76
82
75
77
82
96
102
80
100
142
157
238
310
472
359
468
480
419
183

44

Table 2: Empirical validations of the Characteristics Selectivity (CS) decomposition
Panel A reports type of mutual fund trades and the average order imbalances. For each fund in our sample, we examine changes in its holdings
over two consecutive quarters and categorize them into four groups: (1) “Open” (defined as holdings increase from zero to positive); (2) “Close”
(defined as holdings decrease from positive to zero); (3) “Increase” (defined as holdings increase but not from zero); and (4) “Decrease” (defined
as holdings decrease, but not to zero). For each group, we report the average dollar holding change as a percentage of the total dollar holding
change of the fund (computed using prices at quarter-end), the average order-imbalance measure and the associated t-value. The average orderimbalance measure is computed as the difference between total numbers of buyer-initiated shares bought and total numbers of seller-initiated
shares sold, divided by total number of shares traded during the quarter; the resulting number is then cross-sectionally demeaned. The sampling
period is from 1983 to 2004.
Panel B provides two examples to illustrate the decomposition of the mutual fund stock selection skill. We decompose the mutual fund
Characteristics Selectivity (CS) measure (Daniel et al., 1997) for DFA US Micro-Cap fund (FUNDNO=16500 in CDA/Spectrum S-12 mutual
fund holding database) and Index funds a group (fund whose name contains any of the following: “INDEX,” “INDE,” “INDX,” “S&P,” “DOW
JONES,” “MSCI” or “ISHARE”). Specifically, the CS measure is decomposed into: CS = CSO + CSadj + CSinf + CSliq, where CSO is the old
component; CSadj is an adjustment component due to fund inflows; CSinf and CSliq are the informed trading and liquidity provision components,
respectively. The sampling period is from 1983 to 2004. t-values associated with the average measures are reported in italics.
Panel C reports the percentage of total cross-sectional variation in the total “Characteristic Selectivity” (CS) measure (DGTW, 1997) explained by
its four components: the old component (CSO), the adjustment component (CSadj), the informed trading component (CSinf) and the liquidity
provision component (CSliq) in a variance decomposition framework outlined in the paper. We perform the variance decomposition on the full
sample and on each style subsample. The t-values associated with the percentages are reported in italics, using the weighted least squares (WLS)
method. The sampling period is from 1983 to 2004.
Panel D reports the average components of CS measure (both contemporaneous and next-quarter) on mutual fund portfolios sorted on funds‟
return gaps. The return gaps are computed based on Kacperczyk, Sialm and Zheng (2007).
Panel A: Type of mutual fund trades and average order imbalances
ALL
trade type
Open
Close
Increase
Decrease

% of all
trades
30.6%
26.7%
22.8%
19.9%

AGG

oimb

t-value

0.31%
-0.27%
0.48%
1.27%

4.09
-4.73
9.27
18.06

% of all
trades
34.5%
30.8%
17.5%
17.3%

GROWTH

oimb

t-value

0.36%
-0.15%
0.48%
1.69%

3.19
-1.32
5.86
14.51

45

% of all
trades
31.2%
27.4%
22.0%
19.4%

GNI

oimb

t-value

0.14%
-0.26%
0.55%
1.34%

1.61
-3.63
8.37
15.67

% of all
trades
27.7%
24.0%
26.4%
21.9%

oimb

t-value

0.61%
-0.30%
0.37%
0.84%

7.21
-3.75
5.07
11.17

Panel B: Characteristics Selectivity (CS, measured in bps per quarter) decomposition for DFA US
Micro-Cap fund and index funds as a group
Total
CS
(=1+2+3)
DFA US Micro-Cap:
Alpha (bps)
36.1
t-value
1.72
Index Funds:
Alpha (bps)
0.0
t-value
0.00

Old
CSO
(1)

Adj
CSadj
(2)

Trade
CST
(3=3a+3b)

Info trading
CSinf
(3a)

Liquidity
Prov
CSliq
(3b)

19.3
0.89

-4.2
-0.64

21.0
1.30

0.5
0.06

20.5
1.84

24.9
0.93

3.2
0.50

-28.1
-1.11

-34.6
-2.19

6.4
0.36

Panel C: CS decomposition across styles
Total

Old

Adj

Info
trading

Liquidity
Prov

Old

Adj

Info
trading

Liquidity
Prov

CS

CSO

CSadj

CSinf

CSliq

CSO

CSadj

CSinf

CSliq

average (bps per quarter)
All
AGG
Growth
GNI

% of variation in total CS explained

23.5

13.9

-1.8

3.6

8.8

56.8%

-2.5%

37.2%

8.4%

1.91

1.19

-2.38

0.55

1.5

127.2

-15.3

120.9

24.4

54.7

30.8

-0.9

17.4

7.3

52.1%

-1.0%

44.9%

4.0%

1.74

1.22

-0.42

1.02

0.66

44.7

-2.7

55.2

4.2

25.7

14.8

-2.7

5.6

8.0

55.7%

-3.0%

37.0%

10.2%

1.80

1.24

-2.34

0.64

1.27

96

-14.9

95

22.3

12.0

3.0

0.1

-1.7

10.7

54.1%

-2.2%

37.0%

11.1%

1.03

0.23

0.03

-0.29

1.70

56.8

-5.4

55.9

16.6

Panel D: Return Gaps and components of CS measure (in bps per quarter)
Return
Gap
Low
2
3
4
High
High
- Low

D1. Contemporaneous
CSadj

CSinf

CSliq

Four-factor
alpha

CSO

141.2

-8.4

62.0

-13.8

-47.8

7.31

-3.48

2.63

-1.39

-3.88

62.2

-3.2

15.6

2.2

4.72

-2.52

2.07

RG
(monthly)

CSO

-120.3
-30.3
-7.3
14.5
74.9
195.2

D2. Next Quarter
CSadj

CSinf

CSliq

13.3

-0.9

10.0

5.9

0.82

-0.43

0.83

0.62

-31.2

16.1

-2.1

0.8

6.5

0.34

-3.07

1.26

-1.08

0.12

0.94

11.0

-3.0

-0.1

11.5

-21.7

10.7

0.3

5.7

6.7

0.87

-1.84

-0.01

1.83

-2.19

0.86

0.22

0.82

1.07

-32.6

1.4

-11.6

17.8

-19.8

16.6

-2.6

4.4

5.5

-2.64

0.66

-1.92

2.71

-2.10

1.24

-1.79

0.48

0.86

-101.2

3.9

-34.7

22.9

2.0

23.2

-4.1

8.6

16.9

-7.03

2.03

-3.43

2.86

0.14

1.37

-1.97

0.76

1.97

-242.4

12.4

-96.7

36.7

49.9

9.9

-3.2

-1.4

10.9

-15.10

4.13

-4.51

4.15

4.84

0.81

-1.04

-0.21

1.81

46

Table 3: Risk-adjusted quarterly fund returns across trade_PIN sorted fund deciles
In each quarter and for each fund, we compute a trade_PIN variable by value-weighing PIN of stocks traded by the fund during the quarter using
the dollar value of the trade. At the end of each quarter from 1983 to 2004, we sort all mutual funds in our sample into deciles according to their
trade_PINs and examine the risk-adjusted fund portfolio return in the next four quarters within each decile. We consider two methods for risk
adjustment. The first method uses either the Fama-French three-factor model or the Four-factor model (Fama-French three factors augmented by
Carhart's momentum factor). The factor loadings are computed in a rolling window using fund returns during the past 36 months. The second
method uses a characteristics-based risk adjustment. For each stock held by the fund at the end of each quarter, we compute its future excess
returns over the returns of a characteristics-based benchmark portfolio that is matched to the stock along size, book-to-market and past return
characteristics. These excess returns are then value-weighed across stocks at the fund level using dollar value of the stock holding to arrive at a
characteristics-adjusted pseudo fund return.
trade_PIN
in Qtr t
Low
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
High
HighLow

Four-factor adjusted returns
Qtr t+1
Qtr t+2
Qtr t+3
Qtr t+4
-0.0038 -0.0037
-0.004
-0.0038
-3.45
-3.51
-3.45
-3.75
-0.0040 -0.0039 -0.0044 -0.0033
-4.01
-4.34
-4.25
-3.47
-0.0032
-0.003
-0.0039 -0.0041
-2.87
-3.03
-4.46
-3.81
-0.0031 -0.0036 -0.0037 -0.0037
-3.09
-3.66
-4.31
-3.38
-0.0017 -0.0026 -0.0035 -0.0034
-1.57
-2.39
-3.24
-3.21
-0.0027 -0.0017 -0.0019 -0.0031
-2.18
-1.33
-1.36
-2.68
-0.0025 -0.0022 -0.0016 -0.0022
-1.8
-1.67
-1.24
-1.58
-0.0019 -0.0003 -0.0008 -0.0018
-1.16
-0.22
-0.52
-1.14
-0.0018 -0.0014 -0.0018 -0.0018
-1.06
-0.82
-1.11
-1.18
0.0011
0.0009
-0.0005 -0.0003
0.85
0.67
-0.36
-0.21

Three-factor adjusted returns
Qtr t+1
Qtr t+2
Qtr t+3
Qtr t+4
-0.0040 -0.0044 -0.0048 -0.0044
-3.73
-4.22
-4.04
-4.41
-0.0035 -0.0034 -0.0040 -0.0037
-3.60
-3.94
-3.85
-3.78
-0.0030 -0.0027 -0.0033 -0.0037
-3.01
-2.80
-3.66
-3.43
-0.0023 -0.0027 -0.0031 -0.0030
-2.24
-2.96
-3.48
-2.84
-0.0006 -0.0015 -0.0025 -0.0021
-0.61
-1.42
-2.50
-2.01
-0.0018 -0.0005 -0.0004 -0.0017
-1.48
-0.41
-0.34
-1.59
-0.0008 -0.0006 -0.0001 -0.0009
-0.61
-0.46
-0.08
-0.66
-0.0007
0.0003
-0.0002 -0.0010
-0.45
0.20
-0.10
-0.67
-0.0007 -0.0002 -0.0005 -0.0005
-0.42
-0.14
-0.31
-0.34
0.0015
0.0012
0.0002
0.0003
1.27
0.91
0.13
0.23

Chracteristic-adjusted returns (CS)
Qtr t+1
Qtr t+2
Qtr t+3
Qtr t+4
-0.0003
0.0004
-0.0002
0.0002
-0.29
0.42
-0.22
0.25
0.0011
0.0015
0.0007
0.0005
0.92
1.4
0.7
0.52
0.0012
0.0007
0.0007
-0.0003
1.04
0.74
0.72
-0.32
0.0010
0.0012
0.0008
0.000
1.01
1.19
0.84
0.01
0.0029
0.0014
0.0006
0.0007
2.17
1.15
0.51
0.64
0.0032
0.0023
0.0016
-0.0005
2.07
1.58
1.26
-0.37
0.0028
0.0016
0.0016
0.0006
1.52
1.04
1.19
0.41
0.0031
0.0024
0.0024
0.0014
1.73
1.41
1.53
0.85
0.0035
0.0016
0.0006
-0.0004
1.75
0.84
0.35
-0.21
0.0050
0.0044
0.0017
0.0011
2.7
2.75
1.2
0.68

0.0048
3.15

0.0056
3.42

0.0053
2.87

0.0046
2.98

0.0035
2.24

0.0035
2.26

0.0056
3.47

47

0.0050
3.06

0.0047
2.89

0.0040
2.55

0.0019
1.29

0.0009
0.52

Table 4: Robustness checks
Panel A first reports the next quarter PIN-risk-adjusted returns on decile portfolios of mutual
funds sorted on trade_PIN. To control for the systematic risk associated with high-PIN stocks, we
compute a five-factor-adjusted mutual fund return by augmenting the benchmark four-factor
model with a PIN risk factor. The PIN risk factor is constructed as the high-PIN decile portfolio
return minus the low-PIN decile portfolio return. To control for PIN characteristics risk, we
construct characteristics benchmark portfolios by matching along size, book-to-market, past
return and PIN simultaneously.
Panel A also reports the next quarter risk-adjusted returns on decile portfolios of mutual funds
constructed using alternative measures of information events. These measures include: the
information asymmetry component of the PIN (adjPIN, Duarte and Young, 2007); the
information asymmetry component of the bid-ask spread (theta, Madhavan, Richardson and
Roomans,1997) and the abnormal turnover in stock trading (aturn, Chordia, Huh and
Subrahmanyam, 2006). Trade_adjPIN, trade_theta and trade_aturn are then computed in the same
fashion as trade_PIN to measure the average amount of information events on stocks traded by
the mutual funds.
Panel B reports the average PIN and past one-year return of stocks bought / sold by mutual funds
across trade_PIN sorted deciles. For each fund, we compute the value-weighted average PIN and
past one-year return of stocks in the “Buy” portfolio (stocks recently bought by the fund) and the
“Sell” portfolio (stocks recently sold by the fund). These PIN and past returns are then averaged
across funds and across time. t-values associated with the average measures are reported in italics.

48

Panel A: PIN-risk-adjusted fund returns and alternative measure of information events
Control for PIN risk
Portfolio

Sorted on
trade_PIN in Qtr t
5f alpha
CS*
Qtr t+1

Low
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
High

High-Low

-0.0034
-2.97
-0.0032
-2.98
-0.0026
-2.28
-0.0026
-2.57
-0.0012
-1.09
-0.0021
-1.60
-0.0019
-1.28
-0.0019
-1.05
-0.0015
-0.86
0.0011
0.86
0.0045
2.85

Qtr t+1
-0.0008
-0.75
0.0010
0.79
0.0006
0.51
0.0014
1.10
0.0021
1.49
0.0028
1.63
0.0032
1.59
0.0022
1.23
0.0019
0.88
0.0035
1.97
0.0043
2.11

Alternative measures of information events

Sorted on
trade_adjPIN in Qtr t
4f alpha
CS
Qtr t+1
-0.0033
-3.20
-0.0034
-3.09
-0.0038
-3.44
-0.0035
-2.85
-0.0022
-1.86
-0.0011
-0.88
-0.0019
-1.33
-0.0015
-1.02
-0.0012
-0.81
0.0015
1.14
0.0048
3.13

Qtr t+1
0.0010
0.79
0.0002
0.13
0.0010
0.79
0.0014
1.05
0.0033
2.26
0.0028
1.81
0.0030
1.85
0.0039
2.05
0.0037
2.16
0.0058
3.13
0.0048
2.97

Sorted on
trade_Theta in Qtr t
4f alpha
CS
Qtr t+1
-0.0035
-3.18
-0.0031
-3.11
-0.0029
-2.88
-0.0033
-3.64
-0.0029
-2.44
-0.0022
-1.81
-0.0017
-1.18
-0.0006
-0.39
0.0002
0.14
0.0006
0.40
0.0041
2.48

Qtr t+1
0.0005
0.44
0.0022
1.71
0.0016
1.41
0.0011
0.97
0.0013
1.09
0.0020
1.26
0.0030
1.84
0.0049
2.55
0.0043
2.17
0.0055
2.70
0.0050
2.66

Sorted on
trade_aturn in Qtr t
4f alpha
CS
Qtr t+1
-0.0045
-3.46
-0.0031
-3.10
-0.0032
-3.18
-0.0035
-3.95
-0.0030
-2.82
-0.0024
-1.98
-0.0026
-1.76
-0.0007
-0.53
-0.0008
-0.50
0.0004
0.29
0.0049
2.70

Qtr t+1
0.0003
0.20
0.0012
0.92
0.0021
1.78
0.0011
1.03
0.0010
0.85
0.0023
1.55
0.0016
0.99
0.0055
2.97
0.0031
1.60
0.0051
2.56
0.0048
2.23

Panel B: Average PIN and past one-year return of stocks bought / sold by mutual funds across
trade_PIN sorted deciles
trade_PIN

PIN

Past One-year Return

Buy

Sell

Buy-sell

t-value

Buy

Sell

Buy-sell

t-value

Low

0.1123

0.1144

-0.0021

-3.39

20.90%

24.30%

-3.40%

-5.74

2

0.1235

0.1250

-0.0015

-2.50

23.20%

26.40%

-3.20%

-5.18

3

0.1298

0.1323

-0.0026

-4.26

25.10%

26.80%

-1.70%

-2.96

4

0.1372

0.1383

-0.0011

-1.82

26.70%

29.60%

-2.90%

-4.08

5

0.1446

0.1455

-0.0009

-1.26

28.50%

32.10%

-3.60%

-4.48

6

0.1529

0.1547

-0.0018

-1.37

32.10%

36.20%

-4.10%

-3.66

7

0.1631

0.1642

-0.0012

-1.22

36.20%

39.60%

-3.40%

-3.13

8

0.1767

0.1779

-0.0012

-1.15

39.20%

43.80%

-4.60%

-3.6

9

0.1936

0.1953

-0.0017

-1.45

40.20%

46.10%

-5.90%

-4.65

High

0.2294

0.2301

-0.0007

-0.41

34.30%

46.60%

-12.30%

-8.93

0.1171

0.1157

13.47%

22.36%

64.53

53.82

6.37

8.42

High-Low

49

Table 5: Characteristic Selectivity (CS) measure decomposition
across Trade_PIN sorted fund deciles
In each quarter and for each fund, we compute a trade_PIN variable by value-weighing the probability of
information trading (PIN) of stocks traded by the fund during the quarter using the dollar values of the
trade as weights. At the end of each quarter from 1983 to 2004, we sort all mutual funds in our sample
into deciles according to their trade_PINs and decompose the Characteristic Selectivity (CS) measure
within each decile. The CS measure and its component are reported in basis points (bp). t-values
associated with the average measures are reported in italics.
Portfolios
sorted on
Trade_PIN
in Qtr t

Total
CS
(=1+2+3)
Qtr t+1

Old
CSO
(1)
Qtr t+1

Adj
CSadj
(2)
Qtr t+1

Trade
CST
(3=3a+3b)
Qtr t+1

Info
trading
CSinf
(3a)
Qtr t+1

Liquidity
Prov
CSliq
(3b)
Qtr t+1

Low

-2.9
-0.29
11.4
0.92
11.8
1.04
10.3
1.01
28.6
2.17
31.9
2.07
28.4
1.52
30.9
1.73
35.1
1.75
50.0
2.70
52.9
2.87

-7.6
-0.70
10.4
0.87
9.2
0.81
8.3
0.76
23.3
1.80
19.2
1.20
19.4
1.17
14.6
0.87
15.7
0.82
26.5
1.43
34.1
1.94

-0.4
-0.20
-0.7
-0.47
-1.0
-0.69
-1.1
-0.81
-2.3
-1.52
-2.4
-1.52
-0.9
-0.56
-3.4
-2.05
-2.7
-1.35
-3.2
-1.40
-2.8
-0.93

3.4
0.42
2.6
0.40
5.5
0.88
5.8
0.76
6.4
0.72
18.7
1.69
17.2
1.18
25.0
2.26
26.6
2.38
31.2
2.83
27.8
2.26

-12.1
-2.02
-6.4
-0.93
-5.5
-0.78
-3.5
-0.54
2.5
0.31
5.6
0.62
9.7
0.89
8.6
0.84
16.8
1.70
20.4
2.25
32.5
3.50

16.2
2.57
8.9
1.28
9.8
1.65
6.0
0.89
5.5
0.74
9.4
1.10
0.2
0.03
13.7
1.64
7.6
0.77
10.4
1.37
-5.8
-0.68

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
High
High - Low

50

Table 6: Performance of fund deciles sorted on previous alphas
At the end of each month from 1983 to 2004, we sort all mutual funds in our sample into deciles according to their OLS four-factor alphas (“4f”,
Fama-French three factors augmented by Carhart's momentum factor) estimated using the previous 5 years data. Each fund decile portfolio is then
held for 1 month and rebalanced next month. We then compute the three-factor („3f”) and four-factor („4f”) alphas on these rebalanced fund decile
portfolios. We also repeat the exercise after including the three filters described in Mamaysky, Spiegel and Zhang (2007). For any fund to be
included in any decile the following must be true: (1) the absolute value of alpha must be less than 2% per month, (2) the CAPM beta must be in
between 0 and 2, and (3) in the previous month the forecasted alpha the difference between the realized return and the market return must have the
same sign. t-values associated with the alphas and factor loadings are reported in italics.
Sort on previous
4f alpha
Low alpha
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
High alpha
High - Low

Without filters
4f alpha
-0.0032
-3.48
-0.0011
-2.53
-0.0012
-3.09
-0.0008
-1.95
-0.0011
-2.75
-0.0008
-1.97
-0.0007
-1.89
-0.0007
-1.62
-0.0007
-1.44
0.0002
0.21
0.0034
2.93

MKTRF
0.8877
38.26
0.8650
77.15
0.8561
90.94
0.8356
84.43
0.8385
85.63
0.8087
84.88
0.8354
87.35
0.8599
81.67
0.9014
73.44
0.9470
49.29
0.0594
2.06

SMB
0.3081
10.81
0.1570
11.39
0.1185
10.24
0.0911
7.49
0.0587
4.88
0.0549
4.69
0.0677
5.76
0.0777
6.01
0.1378
9.14
0.2641
11.19
-0.0440
-1.24

HML
0.0749
2.18
0.0679
4.10
0.0820
5.89
0.1047
7.15
0.1088
7.51
0.0927
6.58
0.0872
6.17
0.0674
4.32
0.0372
2.05
-0.1135
-3.99
-0.1884
-4.41

With filters described in MSZ (2007)
UMD
-0.0130
-0.64
0.0180
1.85
0.0264
3.22
0.0109
1.26
0.0071
0.83
0.0199
2.40
0.0062
0.75
-0.0044
-0.48
-0.0094
-0.88
-0.0085
-0.51
0.0045
0.18

3f alpha
-0.0034
-3.69
-0.0010
-2.19
-0.0009
-2.44
-0.0007
-1.73
-0.0010
-2.64
-0.0006
-1.50
-0.0007
-1.77
-0.0007
-1.76
-0.0008
-1.66
0.0001
0.11
0.0034
3.04

51

4f alpha
-0.0063
-5.50
-0.0037
-5.22
-0.0023
-4.05
-0.0021
-4.21
-0.0008
-1.55
0.0000
-0.06
0.0004
0.67
0.0000
0.01
-0.0001
-0.17
0.0015
1.19
0.0078
4.12

MKTRF
0.9238
32.45
0.9047
51.72
0.8869
61.54
0.9003
73.22
0.8828
70.05
0.8889
77.35
0.8641
65.99
0.8731
62.52
0.8365
44.86
0.8192
26.70
-0.1046
-2.23

SMB
0.2760
7.89
0.1352
6.29
0.1152
6.51
0.0817
5.41
0.0487
3.14
0.0560
3.97
0.0744
4.62
0.1290
7.52
0.1718
7.50
0.2456
6.52
-0.0304
-0.53

HML
0.1656
3.93
0.1409
5.45
0.1207
5.66
0.1066
5.86
0.0967
5.19
0.0934
5.50
0.0529
2.73
0.0620
3.00
0.0357
1.29
-0.0525
-1.16
-0.2181
-3.14

UMD
-0.0465
-1.88
-0.0093
-0.61
0.0104
0.83
0.0089
0.83
-0.0091
-0.83
-0.0082
-0.82
-0.0135
-1.18
-0.0064
-0.53
-0.0108
-0.67
-0.0265
-0.99
0.0201
0.49

3f alpha
-0.0067
-5.98
-0.0038
-5.47
-0.0022
-3.97
-0.0020
-4.13
-0.0009
-1.76
-0.0001
-0.24
0.0002
0.44
-0.0001
-0.10
-0.0002
-0.31
0.0012
1.01
0.0080
4.32

Table 7: Persistence of mutual fund alphas and trade_PINs
At the end of each quarter from 1983 to 2004, we conduct 2 by 5 double sorts based on trade_PINs and four-factor alphas of the mutual funds. We
then report the average quarterly characteristics on fund portfolios constructed by the double sorts. Panel A reports the average four-factor alphas,
three-factor alphas and Characteristics-adjusted returns (CS). Panel B reports the alphas before fees and the growth rates in dollar fees. t-values are
reported in italics.
Panel A: four-factor alphas, three-factor alphas and characteristics-adjusted returns
Trade_Pin
at Qtr t

low

Four-factor
alpha

Trade_Pin
at Qtr t

low

0.1301

medium
high
high - low
low

high

0.1290
0.1308
0.0007
0.1827

Four-factor alpha

Three-factor alpha

Characteristic Selectivity (CS)

Qtr t+1

Qtr t+2

Qtr t+3

Qtr t+4

Qtr t+1

Qtr t+2

Qtr t+3

Qtr t+4

Qtr t+1

Qtr t+2

Qtr t+3

Qtr t+4

-0.0045

-0.0050

-0.0037

-0.0047

-0.0073

-0.0071

-0.0059

-0.0059

-0.0008

-0.0010

0.0006

0.0008

-2.73

-2.97

-2.23

-2.82

-4.05

-4.05

-3.42

-3.57

-0.62

-0.75

0.43

0.48

-0.0014

-0.0035

-0.0042

-0.0037

-0.0018

-0.0039

-0.0047

-0.0044

0.0020

0.0011

0.0013

0.0016

-1.12

-2.94

-3.48

-3.20

-1.53

-3.31

-3.95

-3.83

1.72

0.92

1.16

1.40

-0.0013

0.0001

-0.0038

-0.0029

0.0001

0.0014

-0.0029

-0.0026

0.0028

0.0039

0.0016

0.0014

-0.82

0.10

-2.74

-2.04

0.06

0.95

-2.10

-1.91

1.55

1.99

0.98

0.99

0.0032

0.0052

-0.0001

0.0018

0.0074

0.0085

0.0030

0.0033

0.0036

0.0049

0.0010

0.0006

1.50

2.41

-0.06

0.92

3.05

3.68

1.40

1.68

1.75

2.61

0.57

0.33

-0.0080

-0.0050

-0.0051

-0.0020

-0.0092

-0.0053

-0.0045

-0.0010

-0.0007

0.0011

0.0031

0.0029

-3.39

-2.11

-2.18

-0.81

-3.95

-2.29

-1.95

-0.43

-0.33

0.51

1.25

1.37

-0.0025

-0.0039

-0.0018

-0.0019

-0.0020

-0.0035

-0.0016

0.0033

0.0030

0.0023

0.0028

medium

0.1817

-0.0021
-1.14

-1.37

-2.20

-0.96

-1.06

-1.14

-2.03

-0.88

2.02

1.84

1.26

1.60

high

0.1867

0.0044

0.0019

0.0016

0.0001

0.0094

0.0055

0.0045

0.0019

0.0107

0.0087

0.0073

0.0054

1.98

0.84

0.69

0.05

3.63

2.22

1.92

0.81

3.20

2.85

2.32

1.83

0.0124

0.0069

0.0067

0.0021

0.0186

0.0108

0.0090

0.0029

0.0114

0.0077

0.0042

0.0025

4.51

2.43

2.48

0.73

5.76

3.61

3.33

1.03

4.14

3.04

1.66

0.90

high - low

0.0040

52

Panel B: four-factor and three-factor alphas before fees and growth rates in dollar fees
Trade_Pin
at Qtr t

low

Four-factor
alpha

Trade_Pin
at Qtr t

low

0.1301

Three-factor alpha before fee

Fee growth rate

Qtr t+2

Qtr t+3

Qtr t+4

Qtr t+1

Qtr t+2

Qtr t+3

Qtr t+4

Qtr t+1

Qtr t+2

Qtr t+3

Qtr t+4

-0.0014

-0.0019

-0.0005

-0.0015

-0.0042

-0.0040

-0.0027

-0.0027

1.86%

1.54%

1.96%

1.42%

-0.86

-1.12

-0.32

-0.92

-2.35

-2.27

-1.59

-1.65

1.80

1.55

1.95

1.52

-0.0008

-0.0015

-0.0010

0.0008

-0.0012

-0.0020

-0.0017

4.05%

3.41%

3.79%

3.71%

medium

0.1290

0.0013
1.05

-0.71

-1.27

-0.89

0.67

-1.04

-1.70

-1.49

4.20

3.78

3.80

3.83

high

0.1308

0.0015

0.0029

-0.0010

-0.0001

0.0028

0.0041

-0.0001

0.0001

8.18%

7.77%

6.68%

5.68%

0.95

2.02

-0.75

-0.08

1.82

2.85

-0.09

0.10

7.19

6.87

6.10

5.32

0.0029

0.0048

-0.0005

0.0014

0.0071

0.0081

0.0026

0.0029

6.32%

6.22%

4.72%

4.27%

1.33

2.23

-0.26

0.71

2.90

3.52

1.22

1.47

7.66

8.12

7.06

6.73

-0.0046

-0.0015

-0.0016

0.0016

-0.0058

-0.0018

-0.0010

0.0025

2.01%

2.29%

2.78%

3.57%

-1.93

-0.63

-0.69

0.66

-2.47

-0.79

-0.42

1.07

1.55

1.79

2.10

2.76

0.0008

0.0004

-0.0010

0.0011

0.0010

0.0009

-0.0006

0.0013

5.02%

4.24%

4.22%

4.44%

0.43

0.24

-0.57

0.59

0.55

0.51

-0.35

0.70

4.51

3.84

4.00

4.15

0.0075

0.0051

0.0048

0.0033

0.0126

0.0087

0.0078

0.0051

13.00%

11.28%

10.78%

9.64%

3.43

2.23

2.09

1.43

4.84

3.52

3.27

2.20

7.82

7.18

6.89

6.19

0.0121

0.0066

0.0064

0.0017

0.0184

0.0105

0.0087

0.0025

10.99%

8.99%

8.00%

6.08%

4.41

2.33

2.36

0.60

5.68

3.51

3.21

0.91

9.72

7.97

7.56

5.71

high - low
low
high

Four-factor alpha before fee
Qtr t+1

medium
high
high - low

0.0007
0.1827
0.1817
0.1867
0.0040

53

Table 8: Characteristic Selectivity (CS) measure decomposition across Trade_PIN and
alpha double sorted fund portfolios
At the end of each quarter from 1983 to 2004, we conduct 2 by 5 double sorts based on trade_PINs
and four-factor alphas of the mutual funds. We then decompose the next-quarter Characteristic
Selectivity (CS) measure within each portfolio. The CS measure and its component are reported in
basis points (bp). t-values associated with the average measures are reported in italics.

Trade_Pin
at Qiarter t

low

Four-factor
alpha

Total
CS
(=1+2+3a+3b)

Old
CSO
(1)

Adj
CSadj
(2)

Info
trading
CSinf
(3a)

Liquidity
Prov
CSliq
(3b)

low

-7.89

-8.96

-1.92

-17.09

20.09

-0.62

-0.69

-1.21

-2.33

2.64

19.99

21.33

-1.10

-1.66

1.48

1.72

1.64

-0.77

-0.26

0.22

27.98

17.78

-1.19

4.87

6.51

1.55

1.13

-0.53

0.37

0.78

35.87

26.74

0.73

21.96

-13.58

1.75

1.42

0.28

1.79

-1.56

low

-6.79

-11.17

-2.83

0.22

6.99

-0.33

-0.59

-1.60

0.02

0.80

medium

33.41

16.59

1.61

5.51

9.70

2.02

1.04

0.87

0.56

1.21

106.86

56.32

-5.35

48.04

7.90

3.20

2.09

-1.69

2.63

0.67

113.65

67.49

-2.52

47.82

0.91

4.14

2.85

-0.76

2.99

0.08

medium
high
high - low

high

high
high - low

54

Table 9: Cross-sectional analysis
At the end of each quarter from 1983 to 2004, we regress the next quarter characteristics-adjusted return (CS) on several fund-level characteristics
in each quarter from 1983 to 2004. trade_pin is the average PIN of stocks recently traded by the funds; log_fund_size is the (log) average market
cap of stocks held by the fund; log_fund_bm is the (log) average book-to-market ratio of stocks held by the fund; fund_mom is the average past
one-year returns on stocks held by the fund; fund_amihud is the average Amihud illiquidity measure, in terms of percentile rank in the crosssection, of stocks held by the fund; log_ TNA is the (log) total net assets under management by the fund; Age is the age of the fund since inception,
in terms of percentile rank in the cross-section; flow is the percentage fund flow; turnover is the turnover rate of the fund; dummy_growth is a
dummy variable which assumes a value of 1 if the self-reported investment objective is “growth” and 0 otherwise; dummy_Agg is a dummy
variable which assumes a value of 1 if the self-reported investment objective is “AGG” and 0 otherwise. All explanatory variables (except for the
style dummy variables) are cross-sectionally demeaned and standardized so the corresponding coefficients can be interpreted as the impact on
return of a one standard deviation change in the variable. Variables are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles to alleviate the effect of outliers.
Finally, the regression coefficients are averaged across time and the associated t-values are computed using Newey-West corrections with 8 lags to
account for autocorrelations in the error terms. t-values associated with the average measures are reported in italics. There are on average 320
funds in each cross-section.
Intercept

trade_pin

log_fund
_size

log_fund
_bm

fund
_mom

fund
_amihud

log_TNA

Age

flow

turnover

dummy
_growth

dummy
_Agg

Average
R2
0.20

LHS = CS
Estimates

0.0018

0.0021

0.0017

0.0007

0.0013

-0.0001

0.0002

0.0000

0.0010

0.0001

0.0005

0.0033

t-value

1.20

2.78

1.64

0.61

1.52

-0.13

0.79

0.10

3.22

0.24

0.60

2.38

LHS = CS

inf

Estimates

0.0001

0.0010

0.0009

0.0011

0.0010

0.0000

0.0001

-0.0001

0.0008

-0.0001

0.0000

0.0016

t-value

0.17

3.03

1.48

1.52

1.30

0.09

0.52

-0.39

4.45

-0.24

-0.12

2.66

0.12

LHS = CSliq
Estimates

0.0012

-0.0002

0.0000

-0.0004

-0.0001

0.0004

0.0000

-0.0004

0.0000

0.0004

-0.0004

-0.0010

t-value

2.37

-0.76

0.04

-1.40

-0.37

1.14

-0.14

-3.55

0.07

1.78

-0.98

-1.36

55

0.10

