                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  INSTITUTIONS VS. POLICIES:
                                    A TALE OF TWO ISLANDS

                                           Peter Blair Henry
                                            Conrad Miller

                                        Working Paper 14604
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14604


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008




Henry gratefully acknowledges financial support from the John A. and Cynthia Fry Gunn Faculty
Fellowship, the Stanford Institute for economic Policy Research, the Stanford Center for International
Development, and the Freeman Spogli Institute. Miller gratefully acknowledges financial support from
a Mellon Mays Undergraduate Fellowship. We thank Jonathan Bendor, Sir Courtney Blackman, Renee
Bowen, Eleanor Brown, Cecilia Conrad, Kevin Davis, John Rapley, Tracy Robinson, members of
the Caribbean Policy Research Institute, and seminar participants at MIT and Stanford for very helpful
comments and discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Peter Blair Henry and Conrad Miller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Institutions vs. Policies: A Tale of Two Islands
Peter Blair Henry and Conrad Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 14604
December 2008
JEL No. E0,F0,N0,O0

                                               ABSTRACT

Recent work emphasizes the primacy of differences in countries' colonially-bequeathed property rights
and legal systems for explaining differences in their subsequent economic development. Barbados
and Jamaica provide a striking counter example to this long-run view of income determination. Both
countries inherited property rights and legal institutions from their English colonial masters yet experienced
starkly different growth trajectories in the aftermath of independence. From 1960 to 2002, Barbados'
GDP per capita grew roughly three times as fast as Jamaica's. Consequently, the income gap between
Barbados and Jamaica is now almost five times larger than at the time of independence. Since their
property rights and legal systems are virtually identical, recent theories of development cannot explain
the divergence between Barbados and Jamaica. Differences in macroeconomic policy choices, not
differences in institutions, account for the heterogeneous growth experiences of these two Caribbean
nations.


Peter Blair Henry
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
Littlefield 277
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
pbhenry@stanford.edu

Conrad Miller
Stanford University
ccmiller@nber.org
1. Introduction

       A long line of work emphasizes the correlation between institutions and economic

performance (Smith, 1776; Lewis, 1956; North, 1990). Rich countries have laws that provide

incentives to engage in productive economic activity. Investors rely on secure property rights,

facilitating investment in human and physical capital; government power is balanced and

restricted by an independent judiciary; contracts are enforced effectively, supporting private

economic transactions.

       Recent research moves from correlation to causation by observing that countries whose

colonizers established strong property rights hundreds of years ago have, on average, much

higher levels of income today than countries whose colonizers did not (Acemoglu, Johnson and

Robinson, 2001). Since a country’s colonial origin—literally determined centuries ago—can in

no meaningful way be said to be caused by its present-day level of income, the nature of

countries’ colonial origins enables researchers to estimate the causal impact of property rights on

long-run economic outcomes. Differences in the legal tradition that countries inherited from

their colonial masters also have a long-run impact on economic outcomes. Countries with

English common law origins provide investors with stronger protection and are less prone to

government ownership and regulation than countries with civil law origins (La Porta, Lopez-de-

Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1998). In turn, common law countries have greater financial

development, less corruption, smaller informal economies, and lower unemployment (La Porta,

Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer ,2008).

       Case studies seem to suggest that institutions also exert a causal influence on economic

outcomes over periods of time somewhat shorter than the centuries-long span emphasized by the

colonial and legal origins literature. For instance, following the Armistice of 1953, Korea broke



                                                                                                  1
into two separate nations with similar levels of income, almost identical ethnic and cultural

make-up, but starkly different institutional arrangements of the economy. North Korea resorted

to central planning while South Korea relied on property rights and markets (with a healthy dose

of state intervention). More than 50 years later South Korea’s income per capita is more than ten

times as large as North Korea’s. The divergence of the East-and-West-German economies

following the partition of Germany after World War II ostensibly provides another piece of

evidence in favor of the view that institutions play the dominant role.

       While institutions undoubtedly affect economic outcomes, the macroeconomic policies

that governments choose to implement may exert just as much (or more) influence on the

trajectory of their economies as the broader institutional framework within which those policy

decisions take place. As a matter of arithmetic, long-run income levels are the sum of a series of

short- and medium-run growth rates that are heavily influenced by fiscal, monetary, and

exchange rate policy (to name a few). This article demonstrates the relevance of the point by

analyzing a very different kind of real-world experiment than the ones in the existing literature

on institutions and growth. In contrast to the examples of North-South Korea and East-West

Germany, we examine a pair of countries whose income levels diverge over a forty-year stretch

in spite of no obvious differences in the institutional arrangements of their economies at the

beginning of the observation period.

       Specifically, Barbados and Jamaica are both former British colonies, small island

economies, predominantly inhabited by the descendants of Africans who were brought to the

Caribbean to cultivate sugar. As former British colonies, Barbados and Jamaica inherited almost

identical political, economic, and legal institutions: Westminster Parliamentary democracy,

constitutional protection of property rights, and legal systems rooted in English Common Law.



                                                                                                    2
Yet, as Figure 1 demonstrates, the standard of living in the two countries diverged in the roughly

forty-year period following their independence from Great Britain.

       Figure 1 plots the natural logarithm of an index of real GDP per capita (measured in US

dollars) in Barbados and Jamaica from 1960 through 2002. By construction, the value of the

index is 1 in 1960 so that the natural log of the index is 0 in 1960. While Barbados has not

exactly experienced a growth miracle, its economy performed reasonably well over the 42-year

period and substantially better than Jamaica’s. To be exact, by 2002, the natural log of the index

is 0.917 for Barbados and 0.356 for Jamaica, so that the average growth rate of real GDP per

capita for Barbados over the entire sample is 2.2 percent per year (0.917 divided by 42) versus

0.8 percent per year for Jamaica (0.356 divided by 42).

       One particularly striking feature of Figure 1 is the sharp decline in Jamaica’s standard of

living that sets in after 1972. Of course, the first oil price shock in 1973 precipitated a general

slowdown in world economic growth, but the central point (laid out in more detail later in the

paper) is that growth in Jamaica slowed more dramatically than it did in Barbados. While

Jamaica’s economy contracted at a rate of 2.3 percent per year from 1972 to 1987, Barbados,

whose economy has a similar structure (see Table 1) and was subject to the same external

shocks, grew by 1.2 percent per year. In other words, for a fifteen-year period income per head

in Barbados grew by 3.5 percentage points faster than it did in Jamaica.

       Turning from growth rates to levels gives a tangible sense of the impact of these growth-

rate differentials on the overall standards of living in both places over the long run. In 1960 real

GDP per capita was 3395 dollars in Barbados and 2208 dollars in Jamaica. In 2002 Barbados’s

GDP per capita was 8434 dollars while Jamaica’s was 3165. The 1187-dollar income gap that

existed between Barbados and Jamaica around the time of independence now stands at 5269



                                                                                                      3
dollars. Put another way, the income gap between the two countries now exceeds Jamaica’s

level of GDP per capita.

        Since their initial conditions were similar at the time of independence, it stretches

credulity to argue that Barbados and Jamaica diverged because of differences in colonial origins,

legal origins, geography, or some other exogenous feature of their economies. We argue that the

explanation for the divergence lies not with differences in institutions but differences in

macroeconomic policy. The rest of the paper lays out the qualitative and quantitative data that

make the case.



2. Institutions

        Jamaica won its independence from Britain in 1962, Barbados in 1966. At the time they

became sovereign nations, both countries possessed the two institutional characteristics that the

literature identifies as critical to long-run prosperity: strong constitutional protection of private

property and English Common law. A brief review of the two islands’ colonial histories

establishes this statement as an uncontroversial matter of fact.

        The English settled Barbados in 1627 and wrested Jamaica from the Spanish in 1655.

Both islands entered the modern era as plantation economies that produced sugar and other

agricultural commodities using slave labor (Willams, 1970). By the end of the 18th century,

African slaves comprised over 85 percent of the population of Barbados and Jamaica. Slavery

was abolished in the British West Indies in 1834, and following World War I the region began a

process of “constitutional decolonization” that led the islands down a gradual, if difficult, path

towards greater self government (Munroe, 1972). Reporting on his visit to the region in 1922,

Major E.F.L. Wood, Britain’s Under Secretary of State for Colonies wrote:



                                                                                                        4
         “The whole history of the African population of the West Indies inevitably
         drives them towards representational institutions fashioned after the British
         Model. Transplanted by the slave trade or other circumstances to foreign soil,
         losing in the process their social system, language and traditions…Small
         wonder if they look for political growth to the only course and pattern that
         they know, and aspire to share in what has been the particularly British gift of
         representational institutions.” (Wood, 1921).

Three subsequent empirical observations demonstrate the accuracy of Wood’s prediction that the

islands of the British West Indies (Barbados and Jamaica in particular) were destined to establish

institutions that mirrored the mother country.

       First, as sovereign nations both Barbados and Jamaica organized their governments as

parliamentary democracies in the Westminster-Whitehall tradition (Payne, 1993). Since

independence, Barbados and Jamaica have maintained two-party political systems and

consistently held free and fair elections with no unconstitutional transfers of power. While

sporadic violence often accompanies elections in Jamaica, neither Barbados or Jamaica has

suffered a coup or civil war and both countries have a free and vocal press. Four post-

independence elections in Jamaica resulted in the ruling party peacefully turning over power to

the opposition. Three such transitions occurred in Barbados.

       Second, the constitutions of Barbados and Jamaica explicitly protect private property.

The joint parliamentary committee that drafted Jamaica’s constitution was chaired by Norman

Manley: Lawyer, Rhodes Scholar, and father of the nation’s future prime minister. Discussing

the constitution in front of Jamaica’s House of Parliament on 23 January 1962 Manley says:

         “We have put into this constitution a clause which provides that property may
         not be, in effect, arbitrarily acquired. Property is protected in that it can only
         be taken under a law which has been passed. And when so taken, it must be
         taken in accordance with the terms of that law. What the law provides for
         compensation, you must get. Where the law provides for the interests that
         must be compensated, you must have a right to resort to court to determine
         those rights…it is of the highest importance for a country like Jamaica to let
         the world know that we are a people who honor our bond, and people can

                                                                                                  5
             come here to invest in this country fully protected by the laws of the land…”
             (Manley, 1962, p. 306)

Barbados, which attained full independence four years after Jamaica, adopted a constitution with

an effectively identical coverage of private property. Both constitutions assert that property

cannot be compulsorily acquired except under written law that describes a procedure for

determining and providing compensation and grants claimants the right of appeal to a court

(Chapter 3, Section 16 of Barbadian Constitution; Chapter 3, Section 18 of Jamaican

Constitution). The constitutions also delineate similar sets of exceptions to this clause, such as

cases where property is acquired in satisfaction of a tax, property is in a condition dangerous to

the health of others, or property is acquired to pay debt of the insolvent.

           Third, Barbados and Jamaica both adopted legal systems based on English Common Law

(Antoine, 1999). Describing the essence of this adoption to the Philadelphia Bar Association in

1967, Manley says: “As to the law, we took over the English common law holus bolus. But what

was more important we took over the structure and machinery which England built up for the

administration of justice” (Manley, 1967, p.340). For most of their national histories, Barbados

and Jamaica shared a highest court of appeals, the United Kingdom’s Judicial Committee of the

Privy Council.1

           Because Barbados and Jamaica possess similar economic institutions and legal systems,

neither the property-rights or legal-origins theory of long-run income determination can explain

the post-independence divergence of living standards on the two islands. Although the

institutional structures of Barbados and Jamaica are very close, the same cannot be said of their

approaches to macroeconomic policy.


3. Macroeconomic Policy
1
    In 2005 the Caribbean Court of Justice replaced the Privy Council as Barbados’s highest court of appeals.

                                                                                                                6
           When Jamaica gained independence in 1962 the Jamaican Labor Party (JLP) held a

parliamentary majority. For the next ten years the JLP remained in power and GDP per capita

grew at a rate of 5.4 percent per year, with the lion’s share of growth stemming from two

principal sources: (1) Strong US growth in the 1960s created a robust export market for Jamaican

bauxite2, and (2) rising incomes in North America boosted growth in Jamaica’s tourism industry.

           But all was not well. In classic Dutch Disease fashion, growth in the bauxite sector drove

up the relative price of non-tradeables, reducing the competitiveness of Jamaica’s agricultural

sector and precipitating an exodus of workers from the countryside to the cities (Stone and

Wellisz, 1993). Because of strong unions, wages in other sectors did not adjust downward to

absorb the excess labor released from agriculture (Caribbean Policy Research Institute, 2005).

Consequently, during its first decade of independence Jamaica experienced the odd combination

of strong growth coupled with an unemployment rate that rose from 13 percent in 1962 to 23.2

percent in 1972.

           Rising unemployment, income inequality and the attendant societal tensions proved too

much for the JLP at the ballot box. In 1972 the People’s National Party (PNP) rose to power

under the leadership of Prime Minister Michael Manley (son of Norman) and the promise of

“democratic socialism.” The two cornerstones of democratic socialism and the PNP’s economic

policies were “self-reliance” and “social justice.” Self-reliance translated as extensive state-

intervention in the economy. The PNP nationalized companies, erected import barriers in the

form of higher tariffs and outright bans, and imposed strict exchange controls (Worrell, 1987,

chapter 5). Social justice meant income redistribution through job-creation programs, housing

development schemes, and subsidies on basic food items.


2
    Bauxite is the principal ingredient in alumina.

                                                                                                   7
       Whatever merits the PNP’s economic program may have had, it was expensive.

Government spending rose from 23 percent of GDP in 1972 to 45 percent of GDP in 1978.

Revenue did not keep pace with the rise in expenditure. From 1962 through 1972 Jamaica’s

average fiscal deficit was 2.3 percent of GDP (see Table 2). In contrast, from 1973 to 1980 the

average fiscal deficit was a whopping 15.5 percent of GDP! Much of the deficit was financed

through direct borrowing from the Bank of Jamaica. Predictably, inflation also rose. From 1962

to 1972 the average rate of inflation was 4.4 percent per year. By 1980 inflation was 27 percent

per year, investment had collapsed (to 14 percent of GDP down from 26 percent in 1972), and

the PNP was voted out of power.



3A. Barbados

       Because Jamaica’s reversal of fortune coincided with the Oil Price Shock of 1973 and the

onset of world-wide stagflation, it is tempting to blame the country’s downward spiral on

external events. While many have done so (see Manley, 1987), even a cursory comparison with

Barbados makes it difficult for an objective observer to embrace that conclusion.

       The inflation rate in Barbados also spiked in the early 1970s, hitting a peak of 39 percent

in 1975, but Barbados’s policy response to the external shocks that precipitated the spike could

not have been more different than Jamaica’s. First of all, Barbados avoided nationalization, kept

state ownership to a minimum, and adopted an outward-looking growth strategy (Blackman,

2006, page 390). Second, instead of taking an accommodative stance that delayed the inevitable

retrenchment needed to adjust to higher energy prices, policy makers in Barbados kept

government spending under control. While the fiscal deficit in Barbados did climb to 7.7 percent

of GDP in 1973, by 1978 that number was down to 2.9 percent. Since much of deficit financing



                                                                                                   8
comes from the central bank, by extension, Barbados also ran a tighter monetary ship than

Jamaica. Table 2 summarizes the net result of the difference in macroeconomic policy in

Barbados and Jamaica over the two periods.



3A.1 Exchange Rate Policy

       In 1975 Barbados pegged its currency to the US dollar at a parity of B$2: US$1. The

parity came under threat when Barbados suffered a deep recession in the early 1990s and real

GDP per capita contracted by 5.1 percent per year from 1989 to 1992. In the midst of the crisis

in 1991, Barbados entered formal negotiations with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to

request financial assistance. Among other things, the IMF recommended devaluation to

stimulate production and return the economy to full employment. Deeply attached to the

stability of their currency, the Barbadians resisted the recommendation. Instead of devaluing, the

government began a set of negotiations with employers, unions and workers that culminated with

a tripartite protocol on wages and prices in 1993.

       Under the 1993 Wage and Price Protocol, workers and unions assented to a one-time cut

in real wages of about 9 percent and agreed to keep their demands for future pay raises in line

with increases in productivity. Firms promised to moderate their price increases, the government

maintained the parity of the currency, and all parties agreed to the creation of a national

productivity board to provide better data on which to base future negotiations.

       To be sure, the protocol involved costly bargaining. When negotiations began public

demonstrations broke out and the government’s wage-cut proposal was challenged in court, all

the way up to the Privy Council (Wint, 2004, chapter 3). Nevertheless, the center held. The fall

in real wages helped restore external competitiveness and profitability, thereby achieving the



                                                                                                  9
same result as a devaluation but without the risk of triggering an inflationary spiral. The

economy recovered quickly. From 1993 to 2000 GDP per capita grew by 2.7 percent per year.

          Unlike Barbados, Jamaica devalued its currency several times between 1975 and 2002.

From this fact, many observers draw the specious conclusion that the difference in exchange rate

policy accounts for Barbados’ superior economic performance (e.g., Seaga, 2006). But

Barbados’ fixed exchange rate did not cause its economy to outperform Jamaica’s. Rather, the

proximate source of Barbados’ superior performance was a set of growth-facilitating policies—

monetary restraint, fiscal discipline, openness to trade, and ultimately wage cuts to restore

competitive unit labor costs—that had the side effect of enabling the monetary authority to

maintain the exchange-rate parity without losing external competitiveness. In contrast,

Jamaica’s policies were never consistent with maintaining commitment to any parity the

government might have wanted to adopt.

          The differences in exchange rate policy do, however, raise an important issue. Faced

with a scenario like Barbados in 1991, would Jamaica be able to achieve the social consensus

needed to adopt the measures required to avoid a competitive devaluation? As stated in the

previous paragraph, we think the Jamaican record speaks for itself. Answering the deeper

question—why do some democratic societies (of which Barbados is just one example) manage to

reach constructive policy compromises while others (such as Jamaica) do not?—remains an

important research challenge.3



4. Conclusion

          It may be tempting for readers to regard this paper as a quaint tale of two exotic islands

better known for their beaches, music, and Olympic sprinters than their significance in the global
3
    See Robotham (1998) for clues about the answer to this question for Barbados and Jamaica.

                                                                                                       10
economy. On the contrary, we think that important general lessons lie at the heart of this

Caribbean parable.

       Recent work focuses on the very long-run effects of institutions to the point of exclusion

of almost all other factors. But the macroeconomic decisions of governments can exert just as

much influence on the trajectory of the economy as the institutional framework within which

those decisions take place. Countries have no control over their geographic location, colonial

heritage, or legal origin, but they do have agency over the policies that they implement. Of

particular importance for small open economies (i.e., most countries in the world), is the

response of policy to macroeconomic shocks such as a fall in the terms of trade. Pedestrian as it

may seem to say, changes in policy, even those that do not have a permanent effect on growth

rates of GDP per capita, can have a significant impact on a country’s standard of living within a

single generation.




                                                                                                 11
References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. (2001). "The Colonial Origins of
     Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation," American Economic Review
     91(5): pp. 1369-401.

Antoine, Rosemary Belle-Antoine (1999). Commonwealth Caribbean Law and Legal Systems
      Cavendish Publishers: London.

Blackman, Courtney (2006). The Practice of Economic Management: A Caribbean Perspective.
      Ian Randle Publishers: Kingston.

Caribbean Policy Research Institute (2005). Taking Responsibility: The Jamaican Economy
       Since Independence, Unpublished Working Paper: www.takingresponsibility.org

Dominguez, Jorge I. “The Caribbean Question; Why Has Liberal Democracy (Surprisingly)
     Flourished?” in Dominguez, Pastor, and Worrell (eds). Democracy in the Caribbean:
     Political Economic, and Social Perspectives Johns Hopkins University Press

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1998). “Law
       and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106(6): 1113-55.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. (2008). “The Economic
      Consequences of Legal Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature, 46(2): pp. 285-332.

Lewis, W. Arthur (1955). The Theory of Economic Growth. Unwyn Hyman: Homewood,
       Illinois.

Manley, Michael (1987). Up the Down Escalator: Development and the International Economy:
      A Jamaican Case Study. Andre Deutsch: London.

Manley, Norman Washington (1962). “The Independence Constitution” in Rex Nettleford (ed).
      (1971). Norman Washington Manley and the New Jamaica: Selected Speeches and
      Writings 1938-68. Longman Caribbean: London

Munroe, Trevor (1972). The Politics of Decolonization: Jamaica, 1944-1962. Institute of Social
      and Economic Research: University of the West Indies, Jamaica.

North, Douglas C. (1990). Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance.
       Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Payne, Anthony (1993). “Westminster Adapted: The Political Order of the Commonwealth
       Caribbean.” in Dominguez, Pastor, and Worrell (eds). Democracy in the Caribbean:
       Political Economic, and Social Perspectives Johns Hopkins University Press

Robotham, Don (1998). "Transnationalism in the Caribbean: Formal and Informal," American
      Ethnologist, 25(2): pp. 307-321.
                                                                                            12
Seaga, Hon. Edward (2006). “The Caribbean Single Market: Beneficial Path or Wayward
       Journey,” Jamaica Observer, Friday, February 10.

Smith, Adam (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. in
       Mortimer Adler (ed). (2005). Great Books of the Western World, Encyclopaedia
       Britannica: London.

Stone, Carl and Stanislaw Wellisz (1993). “Jamaica” in Findlay and Wellisz (eds). The Political
       Economy of Poverty, Equity, and Growth: Five Small Open Economies. Oxford
       University Press: New York.

Williams, Eric (1970). From Columbus to Castor: The History of the Caribbean 1492-1969.
       Random House: New York.

Wint, Alvin (2003). Competitiveness in Small Developing Economies: Insights from the
       Caribbean. University of the West Indies Press: Kingston.

Wood, Hon. E.F.L., M.P. (1921). Report of a Visit to Certain West Indian Colonies and to
      British Guiana as cited in Anthony Payne (1993), pp. 58-9.

Worrell, DeLisle (1987). Small Island Economies: Structure and Performance in the English
        Speaking Caribbean Since 1970. Praeger: New York.




                                                                                             13
                             Natural Log of Index of Real GDP per Capita
            19




                   0
                       0.2
                                    0.4
                                                   0.6
                                                                     0.8
                                                                           1
                                                                               1.2
              60
            19
              62
            19
              64
            19
              66
            19
              68
            19
              70
            19
              72
            19
              74
            19
              76
            19
              78
            19
              80
            19
              82




     Year
            19
              84
            19
              86
            19
              88
            19
              90
            19
              92
            19
              94
            19
              96
            19
              98
                                                                                     Figure 1. Standards of Living in Barbados and Jamaica Diverge After Independence.




            20
              00
            20
              02
                                                Jamaica
                                                          Barbados




14
Table 1. Barbados and Jamaica have Similar Economies

                               Barbados                Jamaica

Exports as Percent GDP           58.4                     50
Imports as Percent GDP           68.6                    60.7

Agriculture as Percent GDP        3.7                     5.7
Industry as Percent GDP           18                     33.1
Services as Percent GDP          78.3                    61.2

Population                      300,000                2,700,000
Area (Square Miles)               166                    4,244




                                                                   15
Table 2. Economic Policy and Performance in Barbados and Jamaica Diverge After 1973

                                        Barbados                    Jamaica
                                 1966-1972 1973-1980         1962-1972 1973-1980

 Growth Rate of GDP Per Capita     6.0          2.7             4.2         -4.3

 Fiscal Defict, % of GDP           2.7          5.3             2.3        15.5

 Inflation                         6.0         14.8             4.4         23




                                                                                   16
