NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF
TAXATION THAT USES MICRO—UNIT DATA:
WITH AN APPLICATION TO THE IMPACT OF
INSTITUTING A FLAT—RATE INCOME TAX

Joel Slemrod

Working Paper No. 11461

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 19814

This paper was prepared for the Conference on Policy Use of
Numerical Micro—Models: Issues, Applications and New Developments
held in Canberra, Australia, on August 22—214, 1983. I am grateful
for financial support to the National Bureau of Economic Research
and the University of Minnesota, and for research assistance to
Rebecca Finley, Richard Hoffbeck, and especially William Shobe.
This project was begun in conjunction with Daniel Frisch, who is

currently with the Office of Tax Analysis, U.S.

Treasury
It was completed while the author was a National
Fellow at the Hoover Institution, Stanford University. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Taxation and projects in Government Budget and Tax Simulation. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Department.

NBER Working Paper #1461
September 1984
A General Equilibrium Model of
Taxation That Uses Micro—Unit Data:
With an Application to the Impact of
Instituting a Flat—Rate Income Tax

ABSTRACT

This paper develops a methodology in integrating the information from a
micro—unit data file of tax returns into the framework of a general equilibrium model of taxation with endogenous financial behavior.

It discusses how

the available information on capital income flows can be used to impute
portfolios to households, and how these portfolios and the other observed
characteristics of the households can be made consistent with expected
utility maximization.

In order to illustrate the value of this methodology, it is applied to
a study of the general equilibrium impact of instituting a flat—rate income
tax system.

The analysis reveals that there would be substantial changes in

the pattern of rates of return and the distribution of asset ownership.
sectoral allocation of capital does not, though, change substantially.

The
The

micro—unit data base shows that, in general, lower—income households are
worse off and the higher—income households are better off, although there
is substantial dispersion of welfare change within income groups.

Because these results rest on a very simple model of the economy and a
particular data imputation procedure and parameterization, they should not
be taken literally as a guide to policy decisions.

Nevertheless, they do

indicate that substantial insight can be provided by integrating micro—unit
data with general equilibrium tax modeling.

Joel Sletnrod

Hoover Institution
Stanford, CA 94305
(415) 497—9171

A GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF TAXATION THAT USES MICRO—UNIT
DATA: WITH AN APPLICATION TO THE IACT OF INSTITUTING A —

——

FLAT-RATE INCOME TAX

Joel

Slemrod
University of Minnesota and the National Bureau of Economic
Research

I INTRODUCTION
In recent years, micro—unit data files with detailed

tion on

informa-

income sources and taxes have become increasingly available. Also

in the last decade computable general equilibrium models of the effects

of taxation have grown in both detail and sophistication. The primary

goal

of the research described here is to begin to develop a methodology

integrating the information from micro—unit data files into the framework of a general equilibrium model of taxation. It is hoped that this
integration will be valuable for providing a detailed understanding of the
for

impact of taxation, especially the taxation of capital income.

In

order

to illustrate this value, the methodology is applied to a study of the
economic impact of instituting a flat—rate income tax system.

The potential contribution of micro—unit data sets to research
in taxation has been amply demonstrated in a number of applications.

Several different files have been the basis of econometric investigations
of the responsiveness of particular aspects of behavior to changes in the

tax system. Among the aspects studied so far have been charitable contributions, capital gains realizations, demand for housing, and labor supply.
Micro—unit data have also been used to provide detailed accounts of the
impact of a particular aspect of the tax law, or the probable impact of a

potential change in it. For example, the files have been applied to
capital gains taxation and the integration of the corporate and personal

income tax systems. Often the results of an econometric analysis are
used to simulate behavioral responses to a particular policy.
The insights to be gained from a general equilibrium analysis

of taxation have also been well documented.1 Harberger's (1962, 1966)
original one—consumer, two—sector model has been extended to include many
consumer groups and many sectors by the work of Shoven and Whalley and

their collaborators. The interaction between taxation and financial

—

Slemrod; A GE Model of Tacation

behavior has recently been. introduced into general equilibrium modeling

by Slemrod (1980, 1982, 1983). All previous research efforts have been
based on representative households standing in for highly aggregated
classes of individuals, and usually feature no more than 20 different
2
These classes are distinguished by
classes, and often less than that.
their endowment of capital and labor in efficiency units, family size,
preferences concerning consumption goods, and possibly also their preferences concerning risk and their tax rates.
In this paper we propose to replace that state—of—the—art
procedure of considering a small number of representative households,
each of which can represent up to several million actual households, with

a procedure where the number of households is expanded to a much higher

order of magnitude. In particular, the number of representative households is expanded toward the sample size of a micro—unit data set, which
may go as high as over 90,000 households, in the case of the U.S. Treasury

Tax File. in what follows I first consider the incremental benefits of
such a procedure and then the incremental costs.

The most obvious benefit from extensive further disaggregation
is that the richness of statements about the distributional impact of a

particular policy can be greatly increased, In the current models, a
household with income of $7500 may represent all households in the $5000—

$10,000 range. The welfare impact of a policy on the household with
$7500 of income may be an inaccurate indicator of the impact on a $5000

income or a $10,000 income household. In a micro—unit data set there are
likely to be households with income within a few dollars of $5000 and
$10,000, so the welfare impact on them need not be extrapolated from the
impact on a $7500 income household.

A more important advantage of using a micro—unit data base is
that it recognizes the fact that there is a joint distribution of the

household parameters of endowment and tastes. Thus, within what the
current models refer to as "income class," there are households with very
different capital—labor ratios, very different consumption patterns, and

very different portfolios. In the event of such variation, the state—of—
the—art methodology might conclude that policy change X would cause a
dollar—equivalent welfare increase of $Y to group Z, but in fact there is

a distribution of welfare effects whose mean is approximately $Y. The
dispersion of the distribution of welfare losses is a relevant and perhaps
critical piece of information to policymakers contemplating a tax reform.3

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

This information is certainly the most important input to any discussion

of the horizontal equity implications of a policy. That is, it will
allow us to investigate to what extent a policy has greatly varying welfare effects on households of essentially the same means.
This issue of the distribution of impact within an income

class is especially interesting in the context of a general equilibrium

model with financial behavior (GEFB). The key additional household characteristics that enter a GEFB model are the degree of risk aversion, which

affects portfolio choice, and the housing tenure status. Intuition suggests that there is as much, if not more, variation in these areas than
in, for example, tastes among broad aggregates of consumption goods.

There are two principal incremental costs from using a micro—

unit data base for general equilibrium tax analysis. The first and most
obvious is the additional computational expense involved.. Even with the
most efficient machine currently available, the computational expense of

calculating equilibrium is not trivial. However, further technological
advances in computational efficiency are likely to make this a less
critical consideration.

Another issue arises due to the tremendous informational
requirements of a general equilibrium analysis with micro—unit data.

Current models already require a large amount of information and parame—

terization. In particular, for each representative household we require
the endowment of capital and labor in efficiency units, and the house-

hold's equilibrium bundle of goods, including labor supply. Because in
the baseline equilibrium the observed data must be the outcome of a consumer optimization problem, the usual procedure is to assume a particular
functional form for the utility function and then solve "backwards' for
the functionts parameters which would generate the observed data as the

optimal consumer choice. The basic approach is the same when the data
base is actual household data rather than stylized households which rep-

resent an average of many households. The GEFB model, though, also
requires information on the portfolios of households. However, the data
set which has detailed information on income sources and the tax situation of households, the Treasury Tax File, has only indirect information

about asset holdings. In particular, it has the flow of annual capital
income for some kinds of income, such as shares of stock, and no information at all about other assets such as tax—exempt bonds and pension

wealth. Thus, one critical set of data must be imputed to the households.

Slemrod: A GE Model

of

Taxation

Once these imputations are made, the parameters of the utility function
can be solved backwards so as to be consistent with the imputations.
However, the preference parameters are only as accurate as the data inipu—
tat ions.

The earlier work of Pechman

&

Okner (1974) employed an approach

which is similar to that of this project, although the goal (to study the
personal incidence of the total U.S. tax system) was somewhat different.
Their results were based on a micro—unit data file of a sample of 72,000

families. This study was distinguished by the fact that in developing its
assumptions about the incidence of particular taxes, it attempted to take

seriously

modern theoretical developments in incidence analysis, which are

based on general equilibrium considerations. Specifically, one variant of

capital income, regardless of
statutory bearer, to property income earners in general. This is an

incidence assumptions allocated all taxes on

the

incidence story that would emerge from a general equilibrium analysis
assuming perfect mobility of capital among sectors, price flexibility,
and perfect competition. A second variant of assumptions allocated the
burden of the corporate income tax to stockholders in proportion to the
dividends they received, and allocated the burden of the property tax on

dwellings in proportion to the cash on imputed rents of households. These
incidence assumptions are consistent with the view that capital is immobile

among various uses.
The incidence assumptions used by Pechman & Okner are not,

however, derived from an explicit theoretical framework, and thus can be

internally inconsistent. For example, in discussing the incidence of the
corporation

income tax, they state ". . .assuming

that the

total supply of

is fixed, the earnings of labor remain unchanged, and capital bears
the entire tax" (p. 31). This statement is not, in general, correct
within the context of the Harberger model, where the effect of a partial
capital income tax on the wage rate need not be zero, and depends on the
saving

relative factor intensities of production in the two sectors, the two
elasticities of substitution, and the demand substitutability.
There is no possibility of internal inconsistency when an
analysis of the impact of taxes is carried out within the context of an
explicit general equilibrium model, where the vector of prices assures

are equal for each market. The aim of this paper is to
utilize the richness of the micro—unit data, as did Pechxian & Okner,
within the context of such a general equilibrium model of the effects of
supply and demand

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

taxation. Before we proceed to lay out this model, we describe our
approach to the imputation of some important data that is absent from our

data file; this is done in Section II. Section III sets out the procedure
for recovering the parameters of the expected utility function that are

consistent with the household data, actual and imputed. In Section IV,
we describe the general equilibrium model in which the micro—unit household data is linbedded, and describe the baseline equilibrium solution.

The model is illustrated in Section V by simulating the impact of replacing the current U.S. income tax with a flat—rate system which yields the

same revenue. Some concluding thoughts are offered in Section VI.

II

IUTATION OF HOUSEHOLD INFORI'4ATION

Each year

the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) draws a large

stratified random sample of income tax returns and makes the information

publicly

available. Thus, for each sample taxpaying unit, we have

detailed

information on the sources of income, the amounts and kinds of

deductions and exemptions taken, marital status, state of residence,
whether any household member is over 65 years of age, and other demo—

graphic information. Using a tax calculator developed at the National
Bureau of Economic Research, we can calculate from this information the

marginal tax rate for each household. The data base for this study is a
random subsample of 459

taxpaying

units taken from the IRS sample for

1977.

Unfortunately, no direct information about household port-

folios is available on this data set. One approach to remedying this
absence is to merge the tax return information with another data set

that

information; an exact match would be ideal, but a synthetic
match would be acceptable. This was not pursued, though, because there
is no single micro—unit file which contains up—to—date information on
households' complete pattern of wealth holdings. The Federal Reserve
Board's Survey of Financial Characteristics of Consumers does have such
information, but it refers to year—end 1962 and thus is too out—of—date
to be a candidate for a merge with the tax return sample.
The approach taken in this paper is to impute the household
portfolios. The imputation procedures utilize the information on the tax
file containing capital income flows and other household data that condoes

have

veys

information about wealth holdings. These imputations also utilize

this

econometric evidence about the determinants of wealth holdings, where

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

relevant. In addition, the procedures are constrained to be consistent
with known aggregate information about wealth holdings, which is in some

cases disaggregated by income class. The goal is to construct a distribution of wealth holdings that represents the actual U.S. economy of 1977.

As is presented in detail in Section III, in the general equilibrium model household portfolio choice is based on an expected utility—

maximizing framework that includes a portfolio of five assets. The assets
are corporate equity, owner—occupied housing, other residential capital,

tax—free bonds, and net taxable interest—bearing instruments. For the
purposes of imputation the last category will be split into several assets

and liabilities components. Specifically, holdings of taxable bonds,
demand deposits, savings deposits, and home mortgage liabilities will be

imputed separately. Specific procedures for imputing each category of
asset will now be outlined.

II.A Corporate equity
The tax file contains the dollar value of dividends received
for each taxpaying unit. If the dividend—price ratio was identical for
all shares, it would be a trivial matter to capitalize the dividend flow

into asset value. Of course, the dividend—price ratio does vary among
different stocks. In fact, it is likely that that ratio varies systemat—
ically with the tax situation of the household. Shares of corporations
that retain a relatively large portion of their earnings would be pre-

ferred by relatively high tax bracket individuals. Ignoring this systematic relationship by applying a constant capitalization rate to all
households' dividends would, therefore, underestimate the concentration
of stockholdings among the highest income earners, because income is
positively correlated with tax rate.

In order to avoid this bias, we utilize the evidence collected
by Blume et al. (1974) on the observed dividend—price ratios by income

class in 1970. Two adjustments to their published figures are made.
First, the income brackets used by Blume et al. are indexed to represent

the same real income brackets in 1977. Second, each household's imputed
stockholdings are adjusted proportionately so that the imputed aggregate

equals the Flow of Funds entry for total corporate equity held by mdi—
viduals in 1977.

4

iraroc1: A Gi 1oaj oi: Laxaor
11.3 Owner—occupied housing
II.B.1. Tenure choice. The first step in imputing the value of owneroccupied housing to households is to decide which taxpayers own

a

home.

Non—owners will, of course, be assigned zero assets in this category.
In 1977, approximately one—half of all homeowners itemized

their deductions. Identifying these homeowners is fairly straightforward.
If the home mortgage interest and/or property tax deduction is present,

then the household is considered to be a homeowner. This procedure relies
on two assumptions. The first is that practically every homeowner pays
some mortgage interest or property tax. The second is that practically
all property taxes reported on Schedule A of Form 1040 (itemized deduc-

tions) correspond to homes. Property taxes on other assets, such as
business or rental capital, are generally reported in other places, such
as in the expenses section of Schedules C and E (which pertain to business
and rental incomes, respectively).

A different procedure is necessary to identify those homeown—
jug households that did not itemize their deductions, presumably due to
insufficient mortgage interest, property tax, and other itemizable deduc-

tions. The total number of owner—occupied houses is listed by income
class in the Census of Housing. Subtracting the number found to be owned
by itemizers will yield the number of nonitemizing families that must have

owned a house. Ownership will be assigned to this number of nonitemizing
returns on the basis of estimated probabilities of ownership. Recently,
much valuable work has been done on estimating the demand for housing,
including the tenure choice decision, of which Rosen (1979 b) is one

example. Rosen used cross—section data to estimate the probability that
a family will be an owner—occupier. The tax file contains information on
most of the explanatory variables used by Rosen, including income, tax
price, number of dependents, and whether the head of household is elderly.
Other variables such as race, sex, and other age categories are not avail-

able. Using Rosen's regression results, we estimate the probability of a
household owning housing using the former set of variables, with the lat-

ter set subsumed into the constant term. As mentioned above, we can calculate how many nonitemizers owned a house in 1977; by extension, we know

what percentage of nonitemizers owned. The estimated probabilities will
be adjusted proportionately so that their average equals this percentage.
Finally, whether any particular nonitemizing household owns housing is

iroa: A

Ioaei ot aaLion

determined using a random process that has the (corrected) estimated probability of ownership.

II.B.2. Value of owner—occupied housing. The next step is to impute the
value of housing held by the owners. Again, Rosen's econometric analysis
forms the basis of our procedure. He estimated quantity of housing, using
the same variables as in the tenure choice equation. Thus, we can predict
the value of housing using the variables on which we have information, and
include a constant term to reflect the others.
For nonitemizers, this procedure is the only one we can use.

For itemizers, however, there is an alternative imputation procedure sug-

gested by Hendershott & Slemrod (1983). The idea is that property tax
payments can provide an estimate of house value. If the effective property tax rate were known for each household's municipality, tax payments

could be capitalized into an accurate estimate of house value. Such
information is not available. However, the state of residence of each
household is known, and by utilizing information on statewide average
effective property tax rates,5 we can (with some unavoidable error) cap-

italize property tax payments into house value. Lacking any obvious way
to combine both sources of information about the house value of itemizing

households, the imputed value is the simple average of the two. For non—
itemizers, the first—mentioned measure is the imputed value. All imputations are then adjusted proportionately so that

the

imputed aggregate

value of housing stock matches the aggregate net value of owner—occupied
housing for 1977, reported in Musgrave (1981).

II.C Net taxable "bonds"
Although, in reality, there are innumerable different kinds of
taxable financial instruments with fixed nominal return, in the general
equilibrium model used here all such assets are aggregated into a category

called "bonds." Nevertheless, in the imputation stage it seems valuable
to separately estimate the holdings of a few important categories of
assets and liabilities, and then sum their values to arrive at a value of
net taxable "bond" holdings.

II.C.1. Bonds, time deposits, and demand deposits. For each household,
the tax file provides a value for interest received. This figure includes
interest on securities that earn the current market rate of interest and

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

also

interest on time deposits, which in 1977 earned a lower—than—market

rate of return. There is no information on zero—yielding demand

deposits,

whose return presumably comes in the form of economizing of transaction

costs that holding wealth in this form allows. Survey evidence suggests
that the ratio of time and demand deposits to short— and long—term bond
holdings is larger for lower income households, and that the former is a

major portion of their asset holdings. Thus, ignoring these low—yielding
assets will cause an overestimation of the inequality in the distribution

of wealth. The procedure outlined below is designed to avoid this error.
Using survey data, we estimate the mean and standard deviation

of the holding of time and demand deposits by income class. Then, assuming that these holdings are distributed according to a truncated (at zero)

normal distribution, we generate imputed values for each household by
drawing from a random normal distribution of the appropriate mean and

variance, and setting negative values to zero. Multiplying the estimated
deposits by the average 1977 rate of interest on these accounts yields an

estimate for the interest received on time deposits. Then the difference
(if positive) between the reported interest and the interest received on
time deposits provides an estimate of interest received on securities

that yield the market return. Using an average maturity for bonds held
by households, we can calculate the real value of the assets that would

correspond to this flow of interest receipts. Thus, this procedure yields
separate values for demand deposits, time deposits, and bond holdings.6
These values are then summed to give the imputed value for taxable "bond"
assets.

II.C.2. Home mortgage debt. For households that itemize their deductions,
the tax file contains information on the amount of mortgage interest paid.
The approach7 to imputing the real value of itemizers' mortgage debt from
current mortgage payments relies on the institutional fact that, in 1977,

most outstanding mortgages were of a standard form: fixed payment and a
30—year maturity. We assume that all mortgages were of this type and that
the ratio of the original loan to the house value was uniformly 0.80.
Looking backward in time from 1977, an outstanding mortgage could have

been issued any time between 1947 and 1977. Using the average rate of
interest on mortgages issued in any of these years, the ratio of the
remaining principal to the original value of the house can be calculated.
If we assume that

all

house values have increased by the rate of price

Sletnrod: A GE Model of Taxation

increase in the average house, we can calculate the ratio of the outstanding principal to the current house value for a mortgage issued in any year

from 1947 to 1977. Multiplying this by the interest rate at issue yields
the ratio of current interest payments to current house value. It turns
out, though this need not be true, that the relationship between time of
issue and the ratio of current interest payments to current house value is

virtually nionotonic. Because of this monotonicity, for any observed ratio
of interest payments to house value, we can determine the time to maturity

of the outstanding mortgage. Knowing the time to maturity, interest rate
at issue, and the long—term interest rate in 1977 is sufficient informa-

tion to calculate the real value of the remaining mortgage debt. In sum,
this procedure uses the imputed house value and known

mortgage

interest

payments to generate a value for mortgage debt.

No information on mortgage payments by nonitemizing households

is available. For these households, the sum of mortgage payments and all
other itemizable deductions is probably less than the applicable standard

deduction. This ensures that any outstanding mortgage is not large. We
assume that the real value of the mortgage liability of nonitemizers is
zero.

II.C.3. Total "bond holdings. The imputed figure for total net taxable
bonds is simply the sum of the imputed values of demand deposits, time
deposits, and bonds, minus the imputed real value of mortgage debt.

II.D Non—owner—occupied residential capital
All tax returns in the sample include a value for net rent

received. A straightforward procedure for obtaining the value of non—
owner—occupied residential capital (real estate) is to use a common

cap-

italization rate to convert these flows into stocks. A natural capitalization rate to choose is one that generates an aggregate imputed stock

equal to the estimated aggregate from Musgrave (1981). A serious obstacle
becomes immediately apparent, though. In 1977, almost as many returns
(2.43 million) reported a net loss on rental property as reported a net

gain (2.60 million). These negative flows cannot be sensibly converted
into negative asset holdings. The approach taken here is to capitalize
the absolute value of reported rental income, on the grounds that the
generation of losses requires capital in proportion to the reported loss.
This procedure is unsatisfactory, but no superior procedure is apparent.

Sleinrod: A GE Model of Taxation

II.E Tax—exempt bonds
No information on the income from tax—exempt bonds is avail-

able on the tax file. Survey evidence from the 1962 Survey of Financial
Characteristics of Consumers indicates that, as expected, the predominance

of these assets increases with income. This survey also indicates that
not all high income households hold tax—exempt bonds and the extent of

holdings varies greatly. In the light of this evidence, one possible
imputation procedure is to estimate a mean and variance of tax—exempt
bonds by income class and then randomly draw holdings for households.
This is essentially the procedure used for imputing demand and tine
deposits.

This procedure, though, seems to be inadequate in this con-

text for the following reason. It is likely that if a household in a
high tax bracket does not hold tax—exempt bonds, then it is holding some

alternative tax—preferred asset. Thus, to assume that households in this
position are not taking advantage of the tax "shelter" would be incorrect.

A more satisfactory approach is to assume that all households take advan-

tage of tax—preferred assets to the extent it is worthwhile. This suggests an approach to the imputation of these assets which is different

from those already described. We assume that the household holds that
amount of tax—exempt bonds that would be predicted by the maximization of
a particular expected utility function for given market rates of return,
the household's tax rate, and the appropriate wealth and income con-

straints. This procedure is described in detail in Section III.

II.F Labor supply
Each household is assumed to supply labor completely inelas—

tically. One natural measure of a household's labor supply in efficiency
units is its wage and salary income, which is known for each household.9

This procedure is not, however, adopted here. Because the portfolio
imputation procedures do not ensure that imputed taxable property income
equals actual reported property income subject to tax, using actual wage
and salary income as a measure of labor supply implies that imputed tax-

able income will be different from actual taxable income. Furthermore,
tax liability in the baseline equilibrium will be different from actual

tax liability. Because the change in the distribution of tax liability
is one of the critical objects of investigation in this study, we have
imputed labor supply as the residual between actual taxable income and

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation
imputed taxable property income plus exemptions and deductions. The virtue of this procedure is that it guarantees that the baseline equilibrium
distribution of tax liability is identical to that observed in 1977 while
at the same time retaining in the baseline equilibrium the actual distri-

bution of deductions and exemptions. If actual wage and salary income
were used as the measure of labor supply, either the tax liability (and
tax rate) or the amount of deductions and exemptions would have to be

imputed as a residual. Because both of these last two are critical to the
impact of instituting the flat—rate tax and the distribution of labor
income (in this model with inelastic labor supply) is not, it was decided

to calculate the latter as a residual. It is reassuring that the total
and distribution of imputed labor supply are not drastically different
from the observed distribution of labor income in 1977.

II.G Rental housing services
For households that do not own

their

own housing, a value for

rental housing services consumed is needed. Our procedure for imputing
this value is to utilize the regression equation for rental housing estimated by Rosen (1979b)1° in a manner analogous to that described above for

owner—occupied housing. As with owner—occupied housing, the predicted
value is adjusted proportionately to yield an aggregate value consistent
with the observed U.S. total in 1977.

III PORTFOLIOS AND EECTED UTILITY MAXIMIZATION
III.A An expected utility maximization framework
At this stage, each taxpaying unit has assigned to it a value
of wealth as well as a division of wealth into five net asset categories.
We will assume that this portfolio maximizes expected utility subject to

the household's income constraint and constraint on total wealth. We can
write these constraints as:

i

H. Bi Ei ii Ni Hi
L. + r B. + 'r E. + r N. - DEDEX.)
TAX(PLi
1
Bi Ei Ni
+ H
W. = B. + E. + M. + N.
1
i
1
1
1
1

Li

C. = P L. + r B. + r E. + r.M. + r N. —

where the notation is defined as follows:

5

1

+ TRAN. (3.1)

1

(3.2)

Slemrod: A GE 1odel of Taxation
C

expected consumption of non—housing good

wage rate
L
rB
B
rE
E

rM

N

labor supply
: nominal rate of return to taxable bonds
: taxable bond holdings

expected nominal rate of return to equity
: equity holdings

: expected nominal rate of return to tax—exempt bonds
: tax—exempt bond holdings

expected nominal rate of return to real estate

N

: real estate holdings

rate of depreciation of housing capital
H

: owner—occupied housing

W

: total wealth

fully anticipated rate of inflation

TAX

individual

y

fraction of equity income subject to individual
income tax

income tax function

DEDEX : adjustments, exemptions, and deductions from gross
income to taxable income
ThAN

transfer received from the government

In expression (3.1), consumption of the composite corporate
good is equal to labor income plus nominal property income minus depreciation on owner—occupied housing, the decline in the real value of assets
due to inflation, and tax liability, plus transfers received from the

government. Tax liability is written as a function of taxable income,
which is equal to labor income, plus taxable property income minus allow-

able deductions and exemptions. Income from tax—exempt bonds is not
included in taxable income, and only a fraction of the income from equity
is included, due to the preferential tax treatment of capital gains.

In order to simplify the consumer's problem, we assume that
expected utility can be written as a function of the expected consumption
of the two types of goods, housing services and a non—housing composite
good, and the riskiness of the income flow, measured by its variance.11
This assumption allows us to write down relatively simple expressions for
consumption and asset demands that depend on wealth, income, relative
prices, and assets' expected returns and after—tax riskiness.

Slemrod: A GE i4ode1 of Taxation

We further simplify by imposing a particular form on the

expected utility function, one in which the risk term is separable from
the two expected consumption terms and which implies constant relative

risk aversion. Specifically, we assume that

U.(C.,H.)
1 1 1

EU. =
1

—

1 1

(33)

2W

is a measure of relative risk aversion and R. is the after—tax
1
variance of the income stream. In (3.3) and hereafter it is assumed that

where

i

one unit of housing capital produces one unit of housing services. For
the TJ function, we use the constant elasticity of substitution form. It
can be written as:
—U.

U = (c.C.
i
ii

—1.1. —i/U.

1

1

+ (i-.a.)H.
1 1 1)

(3.4)

is equal to 1/1+31..

where the elasticity of substitution between C. and

The variance of the income stream depends on the portfolio
chosen and also on the risk associated with the government transfer pay-

ment. On the assumption that the returns of the risky assets (E, N, and N)
are uncorrelated, the variance of the household's income stream can be
approximated by12
R.

2

=
+

(Ej(i_tEj) + s.tE) +
4 (Nj(lt) + sjtNAN)2 .

(3.5)

terms refer to the before—personal—

In equation (3.5) the

tax variance of the return, s. refers to the share of total transfers that

is paid to household i, and t and tNA are the average economy—wide tax
rates on equity and real estate income, respectively, weighted by holdings
of the assets.

13

Collecting equations (3.1) through (3.5), we can write the
household's problem as:
—U.1 —i/U.1

—U.

Maximize

11

(c..C.

C.,H.,E.,B.,M
1 1 1 1 i,N.1

1

+ (1—cL.)H.

1 1

)

—

.R.
11
2W.

(3.6)

1

subject to
C.

1

Bi Mi Ni Hi

P L. + r B. + r N. + r N. - 6 H. -

Li

i

71W.

- TAX(p L + r B. + ir B. + r N — DEDEX.) ÷ TRAN.
i.
i

Ei Ni

Li Bi

W. = B. + E. + N. + N. + H.
1
1
1
1
1
1

(3.7)

(3.8)

Slemrod.: A GE Model of Taxation

R. =

E

22
E i_tEj + sitEAE) +
(3.9)

+ cy (Nj(l_tN.) + S.tNAN)2

M.>0

(3.10)

The first—order conditions of this maximization problem yield

closed—form expressions for all the choice variables. As they stand,
though, these expressions have certain properties that make them inadequate for our current purpose, which is to have the predicted optimal
consumer choices be consistent with the imputed portfolios.

The first undesirable property of this modeling as it stands
is that, in order to consume housing services, the household must own its

own housing. In fact, only about 65% of households are owner—occupiers.
In order to generate rental as well as owner—occupying, we assume that
housing services obtained by rental (HR) are not necessarily perfectly

substitutable for services obtained from owned housing (HO). The rate of
substitution may be thought to depend on such things as family size and

expected mobility. Thus, we can rewrite the first part of the expected
utility function of expression (3.4) as:

[ct.C.
11

1

—u. —i/u.

+ (1—c.)(S.HO. + (1—e.)HR.) 1
1
11
1
1

1

(34')

where 0. is one if the household is an owner—occupier and zero otherwise.
It is assumed that the two tenure possibilities are mutually exclusive.
The price of housing services will generally differ depending

on which tenure choice is made. The rental price is the same for everyone, but the price of owner—occupied housing includes the foregone after—
tax interest receipts, the magnitude of which depends on the applicable

tax rate. A household will prefer renting to owning housing if the relative cost advantage of renting versus owning is not outweighed by its

relative preference for owner_occupation.14 We do not inquire into the
determinants of tenure choice, and take the imputed classification to be
exogenously fixed.

15

The consumer problem now has a sequential nature. First the
household decides whether to own or rent housing. Then the household
decides how to apportion its wealth among the available assets, which
includes owner—occupied housing, if in the first stage the choice was

made to be an owner. The amount of owner—occupied housing chosen in this
second stage depends on its price and on the household taste parameters,

a. and u.. The only additional changes to be made in the foregoing

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

description of the consumer problem is that the left—hand side of (3.7)

becomes C. + RHR. where R is the rental price of housing, and the correct
interpretation of H. in expressions (3.7) and (3.8) is HO,, the amount of
owned housing.

The remaining asset demands depend on the pattern of after—tax
expected returns, the riskiness of the asset, and the measure of risk

aversion, which may vary from household to houshold. However, this single
varying parameter is not sufficient to generate the observed variations in
the mix of risky assets held by households in the same tax situation.

Moreover, it cannot explain why so many households do not hold any of a
16

particular asset.

One explanation of household differences in the mix of risky
assets held is that portfolio decisions are made on the basis of subjective expectations of the return to various assets, which differ from the

objective return distribution and which vary among households. Those with
high subjective estimates of the return to an asset are the ones who hold

it. If the distribution of these subjective evaluations is not perfectly
correlated among different assets, then there will be variation in the
mix of assets held.

Another possible explanation of this phenomenon is that households differ in the objective rate of return that can be earned from a

particular capital investment. This argument applies mostly to real
estate and less to equity and tax—exempt bonds.17 Some people's talents
are more applicable to real estate management than others', and they earn

a higher return than others. A part of that return is, strictly speaking,
a return to the particular talents, but for some reason it cannot be marketed separately from ownership of real estate.
In sum, households facing the same opportunity set may choose

different portfolios for a number of reasons: (1) they have different
tastes for owner—occupied versus rental housing; (ii) if they are owner—
occupiers, they have different tastes for housing services versus non—
housing goods; (iii) they have different degrees of risk aversion; and
(iv) they have different subjective or objective expectations of the
returns to the available assets.

Our preferred procedure draws on both of the possible explana-

tions discussed above. First, we assume that the subjective rate of

return on equity does not vary from household to household. This leaves
only one free parameter in the equity demand equation, the risk aversion

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

coefficient. Using the actual equity holdings, the equity demand equation
can be solved "backwards" to yield the household's implied risk—aversion

coefficient.18 Second, we assunie that households do differ in the rate of
return they can (or believe they can) earn on real estate holdings. Using
the risk—aversion coefficient derived from the equity equation, the real
estate demand equation is solved backwards to determine the adjustment to

the expected return to real estate that is consistent with the imputed

holding of each household. Finally, the asset demand equation for tax—
exempt securities, using the derived risk—aversion coefficient, is used to
generate an imputed holding for each household.

One aspect of this procedure makes it more difficult than

described above. In order to solve the equity demand equation backwards
for the risk—aversion coefficient, a value for W. (household wealth) is

needed. This value is calculated as the sum of the imputed values of E.,
H,, B., N.,, and N,. A problem arises since our procedure that generates

a value of M. requires the value of ..

Thus, the risk—aversion coeff 1-

cient (s.), M., and wealth (W.) must be obtained through the backward
solution of a system of three simultaneous equations.

III.B Details of recovering preference parameters from household
choices
We begin with the demand for housing and the composite corpo-

rate consumption good. From the first—order conditions of the constrained
expected utility maximization problem, the following housing demand function can be derived:
a.y.
(3.11)

Hi + a.PH.
where a. = (1—c./ct.)

. In

(3.11) .

is

the elasticity of substitution

between housing and the composite good and

is the price of housing

services to household i, which is R for renters and r3(1_t) — +

for

owner—occupiers. H. is properly interpreted as HO. for homeowners and
HR. for renters. y. is real income, equal to the right—hand side of
equation (3.7) plus the imputed rental value of owner—occupied housing.
We assume that the elasticity of substitution is the same for all house-

holds and equal to 0.5; this assumption enables us to solve (3.11) for a
for each household.

Slemrod: A GE Model

of Taxation

The demand function for C is:
y.

=
l—E

(3.12)

•

1 + a.p
1 Hi
Knowing a.., y.,, and

allows us to compute C. C,, H., and ct are suf-

ficient to calculate Us., the marginal utility of an expected unit of

consumption, which is needed in the backward solution of the risky asset
demand equations.

The asset demand equations for equity and tax—exempt bonds,
respectively, are:

E. =

W.U .(r (1—yt.)
—
1

iCiE

rB (1—t,)]
1

s.t
iEAE

-

(1—it)

(1-yt.)2

(3.13)

and

(W.U
.[rN —
1 Ci
M. = max

rB (1—t.)]
1
,

0

.

(3.14)

iN
Note that the second term of (3.13) reflects the covariance between the
transfer received from the government and the risk from equity returns.
The form of (3.14) reflects the assumption made in (3.10) that households
cannot borrow at the tax—exempt interest rate.

Since our goal is to calibrate the baseline equilibrium to
represent a stylized U.S. economy of 1977, we set r3, rM. and rE to be
consistent with rates of return prevalent at that time; specifically, we

use 0.09, 0.058, and 0.12, respectively. We assume that s, the share of
government transfers that goes to household i, is equal to the ratio of
the household's adjusted gross income to aggregate adjusted gross income.

Thus Es. is equal to one. The value of tEAE is the weighted average marginal tax rate on equity income, which can be calculated from imputed
equity holdings and households' marginal tax rates.

Finally, E., N,, and W. are linked through the wealth identity:

W. = B. + E. + N. + N. + H.

Given values of E., rE,rB,

(3.15)

t., y,s., tEAE, , and o, the three

equations (3.13), (3.14), and (3.15) can be solved for

N., and W..

Using the value of U . obtained as described above and UCi.I.,
1 we can
Ci
simply obtain . for each household.

Slemrod: A GE Iodel of Taxation

The final step is to determine the subjective/talent factor

that generates the asset demand for real estate. The asset demand function is:

—
N4 —

id

W.tJ

[r (1—t.) —

N

1

2

i —r

1
iN (1—t.)
where

. is

B

(1—t )]
i
—

2

N
s.t
iNA

(3.16)

(1

the subjective/talent factor. In (3.16), all values other

than rN and . have already been determined. Calibrating the baseline
equilibrium to satisfy a particular value of rN (in this case, rN =
then allows us to calculate

0.10)

for each household.

IV INCORPORATION OF A GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM MODEL
Upon

completion

of the procedures outlined in Sections II and

III, the following information is available: all of the 1040 information,
total wealth, net holdings of each of five assets, and taste parameters
that generate the observed portfolios from an expected utility maxirniza—

tion problem. The aggregate portfolio holdings are consistent with known

information

about economy—wide asset holdings.

The next step is to integrate this information with a general

equilibrium model of taxation. Essentially, several economy—wide parameters, such as the wage rate, and the yields on the menu of assets, are
determined endogenously by a system of equations that represent the equi-

librium conditions. A general equilibrium model with endogenous financial
behavior (GEFB) has already been developed by Slemrod (1980, 1982, 1983).
This model is a generalization of the Harberger and Shoven—Whalley models,
which feature a simple capital market equilibrium condition that the

after—tax rates of return on all assets be equal. In the CEFB models,
this is replaced

the

by explicit market—clearing relationships for each of

several assets. Asset demands are derived from expected utility max-

imization by risk—averse individuals. Asset supplies may

also

be made

endogenous.

Thegoal in designing the general equilibrium model to be
used here was to construct a very simple model that would allow us to
analyze the major aspects of tax policy proposals, and highlight the use-

fulness of a micro—unit data base. The model has two real factor inputs,
capital (K) and labor (L), and two outputs, a composite corporate good
(C), and the services from housing, which may be either owner—occupied

(HO) or rented (HR). Corporate output is produced wIth a Cobb—Douglas

Slenirod: A GE Model of Taxation

production function, and housing services require only capital input.

Labor is supplied inelastically. Without loss of generality, it is
assumed that one unit of housing capital produces one unit of housing
services.

In equilibrium all markets must clear. The market—clearing
conditions of this model are:

= (l—b)K

(4.1)

=

(4.2)

=

(4.3)

where an asterisk superscript indicates that the value is the optimal
choice of the ith household given its income and wealth constraints.

Expression (4.1) says that the aggregate demand for equity must equal its
supply, which is equal to the corporate capital stock multiplied by the

exogenously specified corporate equity—capital ratio (1—b). Expression
(4.2) represents market—clearing for rental housing: the left—hand side
is the aggregate demand for rental housing capital, and the right—hand

side is the aggregate demand for rental housing services. The aggregate
demand for tax—exempt bonds is set equal to the exogenous supply, N, in

(4.3). There is no explicit market for owner—occupied housing. Market—
clearing in the markets for bonds and the composite corporate consumption
good are assured by Wairas' Law applied to the wealth constraint and
income constraint, respectively.

The federal government purchases no goods; it merely returns

its revenues, minus real payments on its debt, to households. Each house-

hold receives a fixed share, s., of whatever revenues are returned. We
1

write

this relationship as:

A = si(.TAX.
where

is

+ TAXCORP

—

(rM—lr)M (r_Tr)BG)

(4.4)

outstanding federal government debt, taken to be exogenous.

Corporation income is subject to a flat—rate corporate income

tax at rate t. Payments to debt—holders are deductible from taxable

income, as is a depreciation allowance, , per unit of capital. The
depreciation allowance differs from actual depreciation, c' both because
of historic cost depreciation and because the schedule of allowances differs from true economic depreciation even in the absence of inflation.
Corporate capital income after corporation income tax is paid to either

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

bond holders or equity owners. Thus, we can write a corporate earnings
exhaustion equation in the form:

br3 + (l_b)rE =

where

-c

—

tc(fk

—

brB

-

+

(4.5)

is the gross earnings of a unit of capital. Total corporation

income tax revenues are described by:
—
—
TAXCORP =

tK(fk

br3

.

(4.6)

Competition in factor markets and in the market for rental
housing enforces the following relationships:
= g

P

L

= (1—g)

R =

(4.7)

[4!
LLi

—

(4.8)

L

rN

+

—

(4.9)

Equation (4.7) requires the gross earnings of capital to equal the gross
marginal product of capital; (4.8) requires the wage rate to be equal to
the marginal product of labor; (4.9) represents the relationship between
the rental price of housing and the return to real estate.

An equilibrium for this system is a vector of expected returns
for each asset, a price for rental housing services, and a portfolio allocation and consumption decision for each household, which implies aggregate totals for each asset (including the allocation of real capital).

Because all consumer decisions are based on expected utility maximization,
a value for expected utility can be calculated for each household.

V A SIMtJLATION EERflNT: THE EFFECTS OF INSTITUTING A FLAT—
RATE

INCO TAX

V.A A description of the policy experiment
In this section the methodology is illustrated by simulating
the general equilibrium impact of replacing the 1977 income tax system

with a flat—rate income tax.19 The flat—rate system that we consider has

a particularly simple form. It completely eliminates any personal exemptions, all currently itemizable deductions other than interest paid, and

the standard deduction. It retains the exempt status of interest on
state and local securities and the preferential treatment of capital

gains. Thus, the tax base becomes adjusted gross income minus interest

paid instead of (what in 1977 was called) taxable income. All of the tax

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

base, starting from the first dollar, is subject to a constant propor-

tional tax rate. The tax rate is chosen so that the same amount of revenue is raised under the flat—rate system as is raised under the 1977
individual income tax system.2°

Under this flat—rate income tax system, all households with
positive adjusted gross income face the same marginal and average tax

rate. The impact effect (before any general equilibrium considerations)
of such a tax change is to shift the burden of taxation from the wealthy

to the lower— and middle—income groups. However, because the extent to
which households under the current system take deductions varies widely,

impact within income groups is not uniform. Households that took
extraordinary advantage of deductions under the old system may pay more
the

tax even though their average tax rate declines, because the base on which

tax is assessed goes up so much. This detailed look at the distributional
impact of taxation is the virtue of a micro—unit data base.

V.B The general equilibrium response
The general equilibrium effects of the switch to a flat-rate
tax are substantial, and tracing their impact provides some important

insights. The policy change induces large portfolio shifts. For those
high—income households that formerly had high marginal tax rates, the
lower tax rate makes tax—favored assets such as tax—exempt bonds and equi-

ties relatively less attractive. The relative attractiveness of taxable
debt and real estate increases. The marginal opportunity cost of owner—
occupied housing increases dramatically, causing a flight from this asset.
For those low—income households that face a higher marginal tax rate under
the flat—rate system, the financial response may

also

be large. These

households are not usually real estate owners or holders of tax—exempt
securities, so their portfolio reallocation is away from nominal debt

holdings toward owner—occupied housing and equity holdings. These shifts
in asset demand cause changes in the assets' pre—tax rates of return and
the cost of housing which, in turn, induce behavioral response. In this
paper we consider only the situation when the system comes to rest at a

new equilibrium position. Table 5.1 presents some summary statistics of
the two equilibria.

The flat—tax rate which generates the same revenue as the

baseline tax system is 0.152. With this tax rate, the tax disadvantage
of holding

taxable bonds (and the tax advantage of borrowing) declines;

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

Table 5.1 Characteristics of the Baseline and Flat—Rate Tax Equilibria

Baseline

Flat—Rate

Expected rate of return to taxable bonds

0.0900

0.0800

Expected rate of return to tax—exempt bonds

0.0580

0.0731

Expected rate of return to equity

0.1200

0.1221

Expected rate of return to real estate

0.1000

0.0898

Rental price of housing

0.0850

0.0748

1388.3

1409.2

1320.0

1303.1

395.0

391.0

184.4

184.4

billion)
Owner—occupied housing stock ($ billion)
Rental housing stock ($ billion)
Individual income tax revenue ($ billion)
Corporate capital stock ($

(Fraction Held by Low_Income* Households)
Total wealth

0.40

0.40

Taxable bonds

1.10

0.72

Tax—exempt bonds

0.02

0.40

Equity

0.09

0.33

Real estate

0.65

0.67

Owner—occupied housing

0.21

0.25

*Low_jncome is defined as having a real income in the baseline case of
$20,000 or less.

Slejnrod: A GE Model of Taxation

the increased demand for this asset forces down its equilibrium nominal

rate of return from 0.0900 to 0.0800. Conversely, the tax advantage
derived from holding tax—exempt bonds drastically declines, inducing an

increase in its expected nominal return from 0.0580 to 0.0731. Note that
the premium earned by taxable bonds compared to tax—exempt bonds falls

from 35.6% of the taxable bond yield to just 8.6%. The equilibrium
expected return to equity, the income from which is partially tax—favored
but not tax—exempt, does not change substantially.

The impact on the allocation of capital is not particularly

large. As Table 5.1 indicates, the corporate capital stock increases by
1.4%, the owner—occupied housing stock decreases by 1.3%, and the rental

stock decreases by 1.0%. That the change in capital allocation
is not larger may seem surprising at first glance, because the opportunity
cost of housing presumably increases greatly as a result of the decreased
housing

marginal tax rate. Two factors work against this intuition. First, the
change to this flat—rate system does not reduce the marginal tax rate of

all

homeowners. In fact, it increases the marginal tax rate from zero to

0.152 for a large number of low—income homeowners, thus reducing their

user cost. Second, the before—tax user cost of housing for all households
declines as a result of the drop in the riskiess rate of return from

0.0900 to 0.0800. This implies that the critical tax rate is 0.246:
households that, in the baseline equilibrium, had a marginal tax rate
lower than this experience a lower user cost; those households that had
a tax rate above this face a higher cost under the flat—rate equilibrium.
Though the aggregate owner—occupied housing

under

stock

is only slightly smaller

the flat—rate equilibrium, it is certainly more efficiently allo-

cated because all households face the same user cost, while in the baseline equilibrium the price varied widely across households due to differences in marginal tax rates.21 The fact that the rental housing stock
declines even though its relative price falls is due to the decline in
real income of the low—income households who tend to be renters of housing
services.

Although the allocation of capital among sectors is not greatly altered, the distribution of asset ownership is very different. Table
5.1 documents the fact that, under the flat—rate system, asset ownership

is much less segmented. Households with incomes less than $20,000 expand

share of equity ownership from 9% to 33%, and of tax—exempt bonds
from 2% to 40%. High—income households that in the baseline equilibrium

their

Sleinrod; A GE Model of Taxation

held negative amounts of taxable bonds, own 28% of taxable bonds in the

flat—rate equilibrium. The low—income households expand their share of
owner—occupied housing from 21% to 25%.

V.C The differential incidence of the flat—rate tax system
In this section we investigate the distributional impact of

instituting the flat—rate income tax system. For two important reasons,
this is not identical to simply investigating how the pattern of tax

liabilities changes. First, there are distributional implications to the
change in the pattern of rates of return and relative prices. For example, high—income households, which were previously induced to hold the
low—yielding but tax—exempt bonds, may now hold a portfolio with a higher

before—tax expected return but with a higher tax liability.22 The second
reason arises because households in this economy are risk averse. A
change in the tax system may induce them to hold more or less risky port-

folios. Thus, any change in tax paid may be offset by the change in the
amount of risk borne. For example, a portfolio shift away from tax—
preferred equity toward fully taxable bonds may be accompanied by larger
expected tax payments, but may be a preferred position due to the diminished riskiness of the income stream.

As is well known, there is no unambiguously superior measure

of change in welfare. In what follows, the measure used is the amount of
certain real income that would have to be given to the household in the
baseline equilibrium to provide a change in welfare equivalent to the

change caused by the switch to the flat—rate tax system. This amount is
expressed as a percentage of the household's certainty equivalent real
income in the baseline equilibrium.

The second column of Table 5.2 shows the average percentage
change in welfare by real income class.23 As expected, the higher—income
households experience a welfare increase, while the lower—income house-

holds are, on average, worse off. The average percentage welfare gain
increases monotonically with real income. It should be kept in mind that
this is a comparative equilibrium analysis. Thus it does not account for
the capital gains and losses on existing assets that would undoubtedly

arise in the event of a move to a flat—rate income tax. For example, tax—
exempt bonds would decline in value, and their predominantly high—income
owners would suffer a capital loss.

+59.2

+35.1

+18.3

+1.6

0

0

0

4.1

23.2

Than —10%
_________

Welfare
__________

0

0

neg.

0

24.2

2.1

0

5.5

15.9

35.0

1.1

0

11.6

66.3

14.1

0

0.7

15.4

11.5

0

0.5

8.5

6.4

1.8

0

0.5

15,4

23.2

neg.

0

Percentage of households Whose Change in Welfare is:
—5% to
—5% to
0 to
+5% to
+10% to
+15% to
0
—10%
+57.
+10%
+15%
+20%
______
______
____

95.7

75.3

37.8

0.4

3.5

More
Than
+20%
_________

neg. =

negligible.

*This figure
does not include
a small number of households whose baseline income was close to zero,
yielding very large percentage changes in welfare.

More Than
$200,000

$200,000

$100,000—

$100,000

$50,000—

$50,000

$20,000—

$0— $20,000

Less

Average
Percentage
Change in

Average Percentage Welfare Change and Distribution of Welfare Change, by Real Income Class

Real Income
___________

Table 5.2

3
r?

t-t

H
0

CD

0El

01

'1

CD

H

(I,

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

The last several columns of Table 5.2 provide informntjon
about the dispersion of the distributional impact within real income

groups. For the $0—$20,000 income group, more than 80% of the households
are made worse off, though the extent of the welfare decline varies quite

a bit. Almost two—thirds of the households in the $20,000—$50,000 group
experience a slight (less than 5%) gain in welfare, although the other

one—third experience a wide range of impact. The dispersion among the
$50,000—$100,000 group is also very large, with nontrivial numbers of

households experiencing a welfare decline and also welfare increases in

excess of 20%. Above $100,000, the fraction of households with a welfare
increase less than 20% decreases, although even in the highest income
group some households would be worse off under this flat—rate system.

Because these simulation results rest on a very simple model
of the economy, which has neither labor supply nor savings responsiveness,

and also rest on a particular data imputation procedure and parameteriza—
tion, the, results should certainly not be taken literally as a guide to

policy decisions. Nevertheless, they do indicate the additional insights
that can be provided by using micro—unit data in the context of an explic-

it general equilibrium framework. The micro—unit data base certainly
allows a more disaggregated view of the impact of a policy change, and
the general equilibrium framework picks up the effect of changing prices
on the distributional impact of the switch to a flat—rate tax.

VI CONCLUSIONS
The purpose of this section is to assess the potential value
of a general equilibrium policy analysis that uses micro—unit data.

Because this paper is only a first step in the direction of a full—

fledged modeling effort, some of what is said will be speculation. As
it turns out, some of the speculation could have been made before this

research was begun. Hopefully, though, grappling with building such a
model has produced some additional insights of value.

As of this writing, the computational cost associated with
calculating an equilibrium with several thousand agents is not trivial.
However, within a few years, the computational cost will likely not be an

important constraint on the investigator. The enduring question, then,

is whether it is worth bothering with at all, whatever the cost. The
answer to this question, I think, depends on two factors:

(i) the quality

Sleinrod: A GE Model of Taxation

of the micro—unit data base and (ii) the amount of confidence we can. have

in the specification of the households' utility functions.
The issue of the quality of the data base is central to any

use of micro—unit data, be it general equilibrium or not. The investigator is using differences in household data to make predictions about the

differential impact of a policy change. The predicted dispersion in impact will be overestimated to the extent that the variations in data are

due to errors in measurement. This problem is especially relevant to this
study where several household variables of interest had to be imputed.

Clearly, the results stated here about the differential impact of policy

rest to some degree on the accuracy of these procedures. This concern,
though, also applies to the numerical general equilibrium models without
financial behavior, where among the key data needed are expenditures by

type of good. In highly disaggregated models which feature many different
goods, individual household expenditure data is the likely data base and
is undoubtedly subject to substantial measurement error problems.

The other critical factor in my assessment of the potential
of the technique explored in this paper has to do with the specification

of households' utility functions. The standard procedure for recovering
preference is to assume a particular functional form for the utility
function and also a critical parameter, which is assumed not to vary

across households. Then, the observed decisions of a household force the
remaining parameters to take certain values. In this paper, the constant
elasticity of substitution utility function is assumed to prevail with a

given elasticity of substitution. Observed decisions of households then
determine the remaining free pcirameter of the utility function. Similarly, a constant relative risk—aversion expected utility function is
assumed and the risk aversion parameter is determined by observed equity

holdings. The choice of different functional forms or the choice of a
different set of free parameters would clearly imply a different picture

about how tastes differ between individuals. For example, an alternative
assumption about how preferences vary is that all households have the
same share parameter (ci.) but differ in their elasticity of substitution

(c.) between housing services and the composite corporate good. The

values of .

could,

as before, be recovered from observed consumption

decisions. The implications of the distribution of taste parameters for
the efficiency costs and the incidence of a tax change could, conceivably,

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

be quite different from the implications obtained using the other proce-

dure for determining household utility functions. Because the detailed
incidence conclusions rest so heavily on the way in which household utility functions differ, the reliability of any predictions depends on reducing the arbitrariness of the specification of utility.

In spite of these caveats, the usefulness of the marriage of
micro—unit data sets with computable general equilibrium clearly is

unquestionable. The combination allows the analyst to trace the effects
of policy on the complete range of households in the economy and at the
same time can incorporate in a rigorous way the response of the economy
to policy changes.

NOTES

1. See the survey by Fullerton et al. (1983).

2. Although, see Piggott & Whalley (forthcoming), where 100
different consumer types are represented in the model.

3. King (1981, 1983) has stressed the importance to policy
decisions of disaggregatad welfare analysis.

4. Note that no adjustment is made for the fact that dividend/price ratios actually differ among households within an income class,
nor have we tried to account for any systematic underreporting of divi-

dends. Details of this procedure are available from the author.

5. These data were obtained from the Advisory Commission of
Intergovernmental Relations (1974).

6. Details of this procedure are available from the author.

7. This procedure is a more general version of the approach
adopted in Hendershott & Slemrod (1983). Details are available from the
author.

8. Potential itemizable deductions may exceed the standard
deduction for a nonitemizing household if the household is unwilling to
spend the effort required to document the deductions.

9. A more accurate measure of labor supply would include
some portion of the net return to business, profession, farm, and partnership activities as an approximation to the labor input share in self—
employment, plus employer contributions for social insurance programs and
other fringe benefits.

10. This regression equation is not included in the published
version of Rosen's paper, and wasgraciously provided by the author.

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

11. See, among others, Tobin (1958), Mossin (1969), and
Feldstein (1969), for discussion concerning the mean—variance framework
for portfolio choice.

12. Equation (3.5) is an approximation because it ignores
the fact that in a progressive tax system with less than perfect loss

offset provisions, the after—tax variance depends not just on the marginal tax rate, but on, in general, the entire schedule of tax rates.

13. See Slemrod (1982) for the derivation of this expression.
14. See Hendershott & Slemrod (1983) for a detailed discussion of the tax components of the relative price of owning, versus renting, housing.

15. Although, see Gordon & Sleinrod (1983), for a numerical
general equilibrium model where the fraction of households that own housing is determined endogenously.

16. The theory predicts that as long as each risky asset
earns an expected premium over the riskiess asset, all households should
hold some of each risky asset (in the case of zero covariances among
returns).

17. It would also seem applicable to capital in unincorporated enterprises, which is not treated in this study.

18. The method of "backwards" solution to obtain parameters
is discussed in Mansur & Whalley (1983).

19. The parameter values for this simulation experiment are

= 0.009, b = 0.4,
0.015,
= 0.035, S = 0.036, ô = 0.004,
= 0.05, g = 0.15624, t = o.'+
M = 3.566 x lou, K = 3.65 x io12, 3G = 1.904 x 1011, f = 1.2181 x io12.
as follows: y

0.625,

=

0.0304,

=

Space constraints do not allow a discussion here of the choice of these
values. See, though, Sleinrod (1980) and also Gordon & Slemrod (1983) for
a treatment of related parameter choice issues.

20. In the new equilibrium, the revenue raised by the corpo—
ration income tax may, though, be different from that in the baseline
equilibrium.

21. See Slemrod (1982) for a discussion of the efficiency
cost of differing user costs for owner—occupied housing.

22. The low return earned on tax—preferred assets may be
thought of as an implicit tax. This point has been stressed by Galper &
Toder (1982).

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

23. The classification variable is real income in the baseline equilibrium situation.

REFERENCES

Advisory

Commission on Intergovernmental Relations (1974). The Property
Tax in a Changing Environment. Washington, D.C.

Blume, N., Crockett, J., & Friend, I. (1974). Stockownership in the
United States: Characteristics and trends. Survey of Current
Business.

Feldstein, N. (1969). The effects of taxation on risk—taking. J. of
Political Economy, 77.
Fullerton, D., Shoven, J., & Whalley, J. (1983). General equilibrium
analysis of U.S. taxation policy. In 1978 Compendium of Tax
Research. Washington, D.C.: Office of Tax Analysis, U.S.
Treasury.
Fullerton, D., Henderson, Y., & Shoven, 3. (1983). A comparison of methodologies in empirical general equilibrium models of taxation.
In Applied General Equilibrium Analysis, eds., H. Scarf &
J. Shoven. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Galper, H. & Toder, E. (1982). Transfer elements in the taxation of
income from capital. Presented at a National Bureau of
Economic Research Conference on Income and Wealth, Madison,
Wisconsin, May 14—15.
Gordon, R. & Slemrod, 3. (1983). A general equilibrium simulation study
of subsidies to municipal expenditures. J. of Finance, 38.

Harberger, A. (1962). The incidence of the corporation income tax. 3.
of Political Economy, 70.
Harberger, A. (1966). Efficiency effects of taxes on income from capital.
In Effects of Corporation Income Tax, ed., N. Krzyzaniak.
Detroit, Mich.: Wayne State University Press.
Hendershott, P. & Shilling, 3. (1982). Capital allocation and the economic recovery tax act of 1981. Public Finance Quarterly, 10.

Hendershott, P. & Slemrod, 3. (1983). Taxes and the user cost of capital
for owner—occupied housing. AREUEA 3., 10.

King,

N. (1981). Welfare analysis of tax reforms using household data.
National Bureau of Economic Research Technical Working Paper
#16.

King, M. (1983). The distribution of gains and losses from changes in
the tax treatment of housing. In Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, ad., M. Feldstein. Chicago, Ill.:
University of Chicago Press.

Slemrod: A GE Model of Taxation

Mansur, A. & Whalley, 3. (1983). Numerical specification of applied general equilibrium models: Estimation, calibration, and data.
In Applied General Equilibrium Analysis, eds., H. Scarf &
3. Shaven. New York: Cambridge University Press.

McLure, C. (1975). General equilibrium analysis: The Harberger model
after ten years. 3. of Public Economics, 4.
Mossin, 3. (1968). Taxation and risk—taking: An expected utility
approach. Economica, 35.

Musgrave, 3. (1981). Fixed capital stock in the United States: Revised
estimates. Survey of Current Business.
Pechman, J. & Okner, B. (1974). Who Bears the Tax Burden? Washington,
D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Piggott, 3. & Whalley, 3. (forthcoming). Economic Effects of U.K. Tax—
Subsidy Policies: A General Equilibrium Appraisal. New York:
Macmillan Press.
Projector, D. & Weiss, G. (1966). Survey of Financial Characteristics of
Consumers. Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Rosen, H. (1979). Owner—occupied housing and the federal income tax:
Estimates and simulations. 3. of Urban Economics, 6.

Rosen, H. (1979). Housing decisions and the U.S. income tax: An econometric analysis. 3. of Public Economics, 8.
Shoven, 3. (1976). The incidence and efficiency effects of taxes on
income from capital. 3. of Political Economy, 84.
Shoven, 3. & Whalley, J. (1972). A general equilibrium calculation of
the effects of differential taxation of income from capital
in the U.S. 3. of Public Economics, 1.
Sleinrod, 3. (1980). A general equilibrium model of capital income taxation. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University.

Slemrod, 3. (1982). The allocation of capital among sectors and among
individuals: A portfolio approach. NBER Working Paper #951.
Slemrod, 3. (1983). A general equilibrium model of taxation with endoge—
nous financial behavior. In Behavioral simulation methods in
tax policy analysis, ed., M. Feldstein. Chicago, Ill.:
University of Chicago Press.

Tobin, 3. (1958). Liquidity preference as behavior toward risk. Review
of Economic Studies, 25.

