NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECTS OF CAPACITY ON SALES UNDER ALTERNATIVE VERTICAL
CONTRACTS
Ioannis Ioannou
Julie Holland Mortimer
Richard Mortimer
Working Paper 14611
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14611

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

We thank James Dana, Guido Imbens and Phillip Leslie for helpful discussions on an earlier version
of this paper. The data for this study were generously provided by Rentrak Corporation, and we thank
Robert Liuag, Ellen Dannenberg, and Amir Yazdani for their help in collecting the data. Any remaining
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Ioannis Ioannou, Julie Holland Mortimer, and Richard Mortimer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effects of Capacity on Sales Under Alternative Vertical Contracts
Ioannis Ioannou, Julie Holland Mortimer, and Richard Mortimer
NBER Working Paper No. 14611
December 2008, Revised April 2009
JEL No. L0
ABSTRACT
Retailer capacity decisions can impact sales for products by affecting, for example, availability and
visibility. Using data from the U.S. video rental industry, we report estimates of the effect of capacity
on sales. New monitoring technologies facilitated new supply contracts in this industry, which lowered
the upfront costs of capacity and required minimum capacity purchases, strongly impacting stocking
decisions. Under the traditional supply contract, capacity costs $44 per tape (avg) and the marginal
tape produces 10.4 to 18.0 additional rentals. Under the new contract, capacity costs $7 per tape (avg)
and the marginal tape produces 0 to 4.9 additional rentals.

Ioannis Ioannou
Harvard University
Harvard Business School - Strategy Unit
Cambridge, MA 02138
iioannou@hbs.edu
Julie Holland Mortimer
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mortimer@fas.harvard.edu

Richard Mortimer
Analysis Group
111 Huntington Ave - 10th floor
Boston, MA 02199
rmortimer@analysisgroup.com

1

Introduction

Advances in monitoring technology, particularly in the retail sector, are improving firms’
abilities to manage capacity strategically in order to impact sales. Capacity choice is a
critical decision for firms that face storage costs (e.g., retailers, event venues, airlines). Capacity constraints affect many types of firms, and may be complicated by vertical ownership
structures, the nature of supply contracts, and product characteristics. Although higher capacity can lead to fewer stock-outs and greater sales, additional capacity may also increase
costs, cannibalize sales of available substitutes, and affect local competition in the shortand long-run.
In this paper we study the video rental industry, which is a prime example of an industry
where technological advances have contributed to dramatic changes in capacity decisions
and related vertical contracts in recent years. We find that larger capacity, measured in
terms of more tapes for a given title, can substantially increase rentals of that title. We also
find that alternative vertical contractual forms for distributing tapes from studios to rental
stores (retailers) can have a large impact on the relationship between capacity and rentals.
In particular, we investigate the effect of capacity on rentals under traditional contractual
forms for distributing tapes from studios to retailers, and compare this to the capacity effect
under a new contractual form, widely adopted in the late 1990s, that distributes tapes at a
substantially lower upfront cost. We analyze a panel dataset on video retailers in the U.S.
that contains detailed information on stores’ capacity decisions and subsequent rentals on
a title-by-title basis.
Products in this industry are distributed on three different types of vertical contracts,
which have different implications for the cost to the retailer of acquiring capacity. One of
these contracts is characterized by a high upfront per-tape cost (roughly $44 per tape) for
the first few months following a title’s video release, followed by a large price reduction after
5 months in order to encourage sales directly to consumers.1 We refer to this contractual
form as a “linear pricing” contract. A second contractual form also has a linear-pricing
structure, but with a much lower upfront per-tape cost (roughly $15 per tape). We refer
to this contractual form as a “sell-through pricing” contract, and it is typically meant to
encourage simultaneous sales to both consumers and retailers. New monitoring technologies
1

The $44 per-tape cost is the cost for retailers following substantial but common rebates. The price for
direct consumer purchases is typically even higher in the first 5 months.

1

implemented in the late 1990s allowed for a third contractual form, “revenue sharing”
contracts. Under revenue-sharing contracts, tapes are distributed at a very low upfront
per-tape cost (roughly $7 per tape), but subsequent rental revenues are shared between the
studio and the retailer, in contrast to tapes distributed on linear and sell-through pricing
contracts where the retailer keeps all of the rental revenue. Totaling the upfront per-tape
cost and the revenue-sharing payments, retailers typically pay a little less than $30 per tape
to the studios for titles taken on revenue-sharing contracts. Titles taken on revenue-sharing
contracts are also subject to minimum and maximum quantity requirements imposed by the
studios. As a result, capacity decisions under revenue-sharing contracts do not necessarily
represent the optimal level of capacity for the retailer when those quantity restrictions are
binding.
Due to the fact that a significant minority of retailers do not have the requisite monitoring technology to access revenue-sharing contracts, all titles available under revenue-sharing
contractual terms are also available under linear-pricing terms. In contrast, not all titles
available under linear-pricing contracts are offered under revenue-sharing contracts. Titles
available under sell-through pricing contracts are not available under any other contractual
terms.2
The wide array of contract types offered for different movies and chosen by different
stores creates substantial variation in capacity across stores and titles. We observe details
on the variation in contracts and capacity for 1,019 titles taken by 7,478 retailers, along with
the costs of the capacity, and weekly quantities of rentals and revenues for each store-title
pair. Although the data provide rich detail on retailers’ capacity choices and subsequent
sales, we do not have information on the rental decisions of individual end-consumers, or
exact stock-out times. Thus, we do not explicitly model consumer behavior with respect to
available capacity, and our analyses allow for several potential effects of capacity on sales
without attempting to disentangle the impact of a specific effect such as reduced stockouts,
signals of product quality, or shelf-space coverage.
The studio’s choice of which contractual form(s) to offer for a title, and the contractual form chosen by a retailer (for titles offered on both revenue-sharing and linear-pricing
contracts), are two potential sources of endogeneity. As we discuss in section 3, we believe
that the studios’ choice of contract for a title is largely predetermined and does not impact
2

For more discussion of this point, see Mortimer (2008).

2

our estimates of the effect of capacity on rentals. Retailers have a choice between linearpricing and revenue-sharing contracts for 57% of the titles in our data, and our treatment
of their choice of contract for these titles is discussed in section 4. Given the contractual
form, the remaining central challenge for identifying the effect of capacity on sales is the
fact that retailers endogenously choose capacity in order to maximize profits. To address
this endogeneity concern, we note that several institutional details of the industry motivate
a model of retailer capacity choice that focuses on store-level and title-level decisions. We
discuss these institutional features, and describe the nature of retailer capacity choices. We
take advantage of the panel nature of the dataset by incorporating both store and title fixed
effects, which, due to the nature of the retailer’s capacity decisions, address some important
components of the endogeneity of capacity. We also implement an instrumental variables
approach to address remaining concerns about the endogeneity of capacity at the store-title
level. We instrument for a store’s capacity decision for a title by using the average level
of capacity of that same title at all other similar-sized stores, as in Ho, Ho, and Mortimer
(2008).
After accounting for store and title effects and instrumenting for capacity, we calculate
the impact that capacity choices have on rentals. We show that alternative contractual
forms, some facilitated by the adoption of new monitoring technologies, can greatly impact
the retailers’ choice of capacity relative to sales. Specifically, retailers appear to choose
capacity such that expected revenue approximately equals expected cost, which implies
that capacity is much lower relative to sales under the contractual form with the highest
upfront cost. We find a significant effect of capacity on sales for linear-pricing contracts.
We estimate that for titles on these contracts, which have an upfront cost of around $44
per tape, an additional unit of capacity produces between 10.4 and 18.0 more rentals over
the life of a movie at the average video retail store, depending on the size of the theatrical
box office receipts for the title. For this contractual form, retailers’ capacity choice has a
profound effect on the level of rentals. The sell-through pricing contracts, which have an
upfront cost of around $15, have a smaller estimated impact of capacity on rentals. Titles
taken on these contracts generate between 3.3 and 9.2 more rentals from an additional unit
of capacity. For the revenue-sharing contracts, which have the lowest average upfront cost
per tape, around $7, we find that an additional unit of capacity has very little impact on
rentals, generating 0 to 4.9 additional rentals over the life of the movie. The negligible

3

impact of capacity on rentals for these revenue-sharing contracts may in part reflect high
capacity levels induced not only by the low per-tape costs, but also by minimum quantity
requirements imposed by the studios who may have incentives to encourage higher levels of
capacity than is optimal to the retailer for some store-title combinations.
We refer to the above estimates as the “own” effect of capacity, as it considers the effects
of increasing capacity at a store of one title on the sales for that same title. We also examine
the effect that capacities of other titles have on sales of a particular title, which we call the
“cross-title” effect. We find little or no average cross-title effect in most cases, although
there is some evidence that certain types of titles may have a small positive cross-title effect.
Relationship to Literature
While the importance of capacity choice is well recognized in a wide array of theoretical
literatures, empirical studies of the effect of capacity on sales are sparse. Issues involving
capacity are prominent in the business and marketing literature, as well as the industrial
organization literature. In the business and marketing literature, the attention on capacity
choice has generally addressed capacity as a production input for manufacturers, also focusing on supply-side effects.3 Some have extended the supply-side arguments to incorporate
the effect of capacity choice on sales. For example, Urban (1995) develops a theoretical
rule for optimally replenishing capacity of a single product over an infinite time horizon;
he generalizes several models to incorporate effects of stock-level-dependent demand rates
in profit-maximization models.4 Urban (2005) further reviews two types of models of the
impact of capacity on sales, one where demand is affected by the initial capacity level and
one where it is affected by the instantaneous capacity level.
Our work in this paper is more closely related to the literature that directly examines
sales effects of capacity, such as the “newsboy model”. In this model, retailers purchase
capacity at the beginning of a period in which sales are realized. If a retailer stocks out in
this period, subsequent sales for the period are lost. Narayanan and Raman (2000) extend
this model to allow the retailer to carry goods that are close substitutes, and Dana and
Spier (2001) extend the model to examine the implications of revenue-sharing supply contracts (compared to linear-pricing contracts). The implication of Dana and Spier’s model is
that, in the face of either uncertain demand or demand that declines predictably over time,
3

See Nahmias (1989) for an extensive review of many of these contributions.
Earlier work on the relationship between sales and capacity (or inventory) in retail markets includes
Schary and Becker (1972), Wolfe (1968), and Gupta and Vrat (1986).
4

4

retailers will hold higher levels of capacity under revenue-sharing supply contracts compared to linear-pricing contracts. Consistent with the assumptions of the newsboy model,
an important restriction is that subsequent sales of a product are lost after a stock-out
occurs; consumers do not search across other stores or substitute intertemporally. Finally,
Balachander and Farquhar (1994) provide a theoretical analysis of optimal stock-outs as a
function of local competitive conditions. They find that when consumer search costs are
high, stores choose to stock out in order to maintain price.
The remainder of the paper proceeds with some background information on the video
rental industry and a description of the data in the next section. Section 3 describes
retailer objectives and capacity choice, which motivates the empirical work and identification
strategy in section 4. We present the results in section 5, and section 6 concludes.

2

Industry and Data Description

The home video industry grew quickly throughout the 1980’s to become the largest source
of domestic revenue for movie studios. In 1999, the $16 billion industry accounted for
55% of studios’ domestic revenues, compared to 22% generated by theatrical revenues, and
23% from all other forms of media, such as the sales of pay-per-view, cable, and broadcast
television rights. By 2006, the home video industry had increased to $24 billion in domestic
revenues and generated three times as much revenue as the theatrical channel through
approximately 20,000 home video retailer outlets. These outlets are split evenly between
independently-owned small chains of retailer locations and large chains of several hundred
stores, such as Blockbuster, Inc. and Hollywood Video.
Three primary types of contracts characterize the distribution of tapes in the industry:
linear-pricing contracts charge a high initial wholesale cost per tape (typically around $44 in
the first five months of release then dropping to around $15 to $20), and leave all subsequent
rental revenue with the retailer. Sell-through pricing contracts are similar to linear-pricing
contracts but do not have the high initial per-tape cost, instead being released at a $15
per-tape wholesale price. Retailers keep all subsequent rental revenue. These contracts are
used for particular kinds of movies for which the producer wants to stimulate sales directly
to consumers (e.g., childrens’ movies). Revenue-sharing contracts have a low upfront pertape price (around $7), but the studio keeps a share of the subsequent rental revenue.

5

While some titles are available only on sell-through pricing or linear-pricing contracts, all
titles offered on revenue-sharing contracts are also available under linear-pricing terms. For
movies offered on both linear-pricing and revenue-sharing contracts, retailers have a choice
of the two contract types, although they can only use one contract for any given title.5
Revenue-sharing contracts require extensive monitoring of retailer activities, including
capacity choices and rental activity. Rentrak Corporation provides these monitoring services
to the industry, and we use detailed data from Rentrak in our analyses. Rentrak observes
titles under all three contractual forms. Over 10,000 retailers used Rentrak between 1998
and 2002, accounting for over half of all retailers in the industry. We observe detailed
data on 7,478 of these retailers ranging in size from single-store locations to a chain with
1,652 locations. Blockbuster Video and Hollywood Video comprise an additional 4,000 or
so retailers in the Rentrak system, and we do not observe their transactions.6
For each store in our sample, we observe transaction data for the 210 weeks between
January, 1998 and June, 2002.7 We discard observations for titles released after December
2001, so that rental activity for each title is tracked for at least 6 months. At the store level,
we observe location at the county, zip code, and Designated Market Area (DMA) level.8
We observe total annual and monthly store revenue, and the size of a store’s chain. Total
monthly store revenue is broken out among rentals and sales for adult, game, DVD, and
regular titles. We also observe the date the store joined the Rentrak database, and the date
the store left Rentrak, if applicable. Entry into the database is common over the two-year
period, and typically represents the choice of an existing retailer to join Rentrak, rather
than entry into the industry. The vast majority of store exits (over 90 percent) represent
store closure, or exit from the industry. Finally, Rentrak classifies each store into one of
ten store size groups (“store tiers”) based roughly on the deciles of average monthly store
revenues. Store tiers are used by Rentrak to assign stores’ minimum and maximum quantity
5

Thirty-three out of 61 studios offer at least one title under revenue-sharing terms.
Hollywood Video and Rentrak were involved in a legal dispute over data integrity, for which they
eventually reached a settlement. The nature of BlockBuster Video’s revenue-sharing contracts differed from
that of other retailers, in that they dealt directly with each studio and typically agreed to purchase all of a
studio’s titles under revenue-sharing terms. As a result, BlockBuster only processes selected titles through
Rentrak’s system. Interestingly, industry trade journals cited Blockbuster’s belief that larger capacities
would stimulate demand for video rentals as a reason for adopting the revenue-sharing contracts.
7
If a store entered the database after January, 1998, we observe their data from the date of entry forward.
Similarly, if a store exited the database before June, 2002, we observe their data until the date of exit.
8
Designated Market Areas organize the United States according to the coverage areas of broadcast television.
6

6

requirements for titles taken under revenue-sharing terms.
We observe 1,019 titles in our data, and of those, 326 are offered on linear-pricing
contracts alone, 114 are offered on sell-through pricing contracts alone, and 579 titles are
offered on both linear-pricing and revenue-sharing contracts. For each title, we observe the
number of titles released in the same month, a box-office category, the MPAA rating, genre,
and the contractual forms and terms offered by the studio. The box-office categories are
denoted as A, B, C, or D. Titles in the A category (“A titles”) have theatrical box-office
revenues of more than $40 million, and titles in the B and C categories (“B titles” and
“C titles”) have theatrical box-office revenues of $15 - $40 million and $1 - $15 million,
respectively. Titles in the D category do not have a theatrical release, and are “direct-tovideo” titles, such as instructional or exercise videos. Many of the D titles are only bought
by a single retailer, and we exclude these titles from the analysis.
At the store-title level, we observe the type of contract chosen by the retailer (when
more than one option is available), and the number of tapes purchased for all titles released
during the period covered by our data. We also observe transactions, which are recorded
weekly for each store-title combination, and total weekly quantities of rental transactions
and revenues (and the corresponding average price) for all titles from their release date
(between January 1998 and December 2001) through the end of the data, June 2002. For
the analyses considered in this paper we aggregate the weekly data and calculate total
quantities of rental transactions and revenues at the store-title level.
We also utilize data from the 2000 US Census on the demographic characteristics of each
zip code. Demographic data include the number of people, median income, and marginal
distributions of race, education, age, gender, employment, family status, and the level of
urbanization in each zip code. The Rentrak and Census data are merged by zip code.

3

Retailer Objectives and Capacity Choice

The primary decision faced by retailers when stocking a new title is how many tapes to
purchase (i.e., what level of capacity to carry). For titles offered on both linear-pricing
and revenue-sharing contracts, the retailer also has a choice of contractual form.9 Prior to
9
As discussed later, rental price generally does not vary among new release titles within a store and does
not represent an important title-specific choice variable at the retailer location. Following the rental release
of a title, the retailer may make subsequent decisions such as the timing of moving a movie from new release
to catalogue status, or selling used copies of rental capacity.

7

estimating the impact of capacity decisions on rentals, it is important to understand the
factors affecting the studios’ choice of which contractual form to offer, the retailers’ choice
of contractual form (for those titles where both linear-pricing and revenue-sharing contracts
are offered), and the retailers’ choice of capacity.
For studios, the decision to offer a title on linear-pricing or sell-through pricing terms
is determined by many factors, but the most important factor is the responsiveness of the
consumer sales market to delaying low pricing. For more detail on the nature of this decision
and its welfare impacts, see Mortimer (2007). The decision by a studio to offer retailers the
choice of revenue-sharing or linear-pricing contracts is taken when the studio joins Rentrak’s
system for monitoring revenues, and is not taken on a title-by-title basis. The timing of
this decision is not correlated with any studio observables, such as the number of titles
released or the portfolio of titles produced (i.e., the mix of different genres and ratings of a
studio’s titles). Thus, we take the set of contracts available for a title as predetermined in
our analyses of the effects of capacity on rentals.
For retailers, both the choice of contract and the choice of capacity may be endogenous
to rental demand factors. Section 4 discusses the treatment of these potential sources of
endogeneity when estimating the relationship between capacity and rental demand. This
section outlines key factors related to the retailer’s choice of contract and capacity, and
provides a model of the retailer’s capacity decision. While the estimation strategy does
not explicitly rely on a formal model of retailer capacity choice, the discussion in this
section helps solidify the validity of the identification strategy used to estimate the impact
of capacity on rentals.
Retailers do not have a choice of contractual form for a large number of titles. As noted
in the prior section, we observe 1,019 titles in our data, and of those, 326 are offered on
linear-pricing contracts alone and 114 are offered on sell-through pricing contracts alone.
For the remaining 579 titles (or 57% of titles), retailers have a choice of revenue-sharing or
linear-pricing contracts. The different contractual forms are associated with very different
capacity costs, and the main impact of a contractual form on rental demand is through
its impact on capacity. In choosing a contractual form, the retailer trades off the lower
upfront cost of capacity under the revenue-sharing contract against the fact that the linearpricing contract leaves all of the rental revenue with the retailer. Mortimer (2008) finds that
retailers are more likely to choose linear-pricing contracts for titles with relatively higher

8

rental demand. As discussed in section 4, when estimating the impact of capacity on rentals,
we run separate analyses by contract type. For those titles where the retailer does not have
a choice of contracts, this approach allows us to flexibly accommodate the very different
cost structures associated with each contract type. For those titles where the retailer has a
choice of contracts, we recover the effect of capacity for the store-title observations where
the contract was chosen, which limits our ability to extrapolate to other subpopulations of
store-title combinations.
Retailers choose capacity for each title on a store-by-store basis (even within chains).
The two most important factors affecting the retailer’s choice of capacity for a title are
the title’s theatrical revenues and the capacity costs. Retailers typically choose both the
contractual form and the level of capacity for a title after the theatrical run has largely
concluded and roughly two months prior to the title’s rental release. At the time the capacity
decision is made, the theatrical revenues of the title are known. It is generally accepted
in the industry that aggregate national rental capacity shipments for a title are closely
correlated with the title’s national theatrical revenues. The retailers’ costs of capacity
include those costs we observe in the data, such as upfront per-tape costs and revenuesharing components, as well as costs of holding inventory that we do not observe in the
data, such as ordering and stocking costs.
Retailers typically do not increase their capacity for a title following its rental release.
There are essentially three reasons why capacity for a title is not updated following rental release and the observation of initial rental demand. First, in many cases the title’s theatrical
success provides a relatively accurate benchmark for rental demand, allowing for accurate
capacity decisions prior to rental release. Second, the rapid decay over time that typically
characterizes rental demand means that updating capacity levels following rental release
is generally impractical (i.e., by the time the store would receive the additional capacity,
rental demand is likely to have decayed to the point where the additional capacity is no
longer required). Finally, due to the continual introduction of new titles and the high initial
rental demand associated with new releases, stores tend to focus on capacity decisions for
upcoming new releases rather than titles that are already on the rental market. For these
same reasons, chains generally do not shift capacity across stores within the chain following
a title’s release.10
10

There are a few additional reasons why chains do not generally shift inventories across stores: it can be
difficult for a chain to distinguish between differences in underlying rental demand for a title and random

9

In addition to the capacity decision, the retailer makes several other decisions that are
generally not title specific, but rather are aimed at affecting the perceived overall quality
of the store. For example, retailers may advertise the fact that they carry large levels of
capacity across all new release titles (e.g., Blockbuster’s ‘Guaranteed To Be There’ campaign
in the late 1990s). Advertising carried out by the store for a specific title tends to be limited.
Similarly, cross-store competition tends to be focused on store-level decisions (e.g., a decision
to carry increased capacity on all new releases, or to carry a wide variety of titles), and
does not generally reflect title-specific competition.11
Our estimation and identification strategies consider the features of rental demand described above. Specifically, rental demand for a title at a store is considered to be independent of other titles, and comprised of: (1) store-level features, such as store-level advertising,
store reputation quality, and rental pricing, all of which affect the store’s market size (i.e.,
the size of the store’s customer base), along with the average tastes of the store’s customer
base across all titles; (2) title-level features, such as average rental demand for the title
as reflected through theatrical receipts, genre, rating, or studio-level advertising; and (3)
store-title level features, such as the store’s capacity for the title, and the relative taste of
the store’s customers for that title. As discussed in section 4, the implication for estimation is that store and title fixed effects may appropriately account for a large component
of unobserved factors of rental demand, greatly reducing the impact of the endogeneity of
capacity. Any remaining endogeneity reflecting the relative taste of the store’s customers for
a specific title (not captured through the store and title fixed effects) needs to be addressed
using an instrumental variables approach.
For illustrative purposes, we outline a model of the retailer capacity decision for a specific
functional form of demand. This model is not used in estimation, and is not meant to rule
out alternative, more flexible, demand specifications. In our model, we assume that the
only mechanism through which the capacity decision for a title affects the retailer profits
on a different title is through the impact of capacity on the store’s reputation for quality.
That is, setting too low a capacity for a title, and experiencing multiple stock outs as a
weekly demand shocks across stores based on the first week or so of observed rental activity; the costs of
shipping the tapes between stores is not insignificant (and is time consuming); and revenue-sharing contracts
specifically prohibit the shifting of capacity between stores.
11
One implication is that rental demand for a specific title at a specific store generally does not reflect
cross-store competition, but is dependent on each store’s base of loyal customers. We do believe that the
store’s base of customers is dependent in the long run on cross-store competition. However, in the short-run,
customers are likely to substitute between titles within a store.

10

result, may reduce customers’ expectation regarding the quality of the store in the future,
and potentially cause them to switch to being a customer of a different store. However,
if all other factors affecting the customer base at the store are being chosen optimally
(e.g., advertising, capacity for other titles) then it is unlikely that a marginal change in the
capacity choice for a single title will impact the future customer base of the store. As a
result, we model the retailer’s capacity choice for a title as maximizing the store profits for
that title alone.
Given a chosen contract type, retailer i’s profit on title j can be written as:
πij = γj Pi Qij − Fj Cij

(1)

where γ equals 1 if the title is distributed on linear-pricing or sell-through pricing contracts,
and equals the retailer’s share of the revenue-share component if the title is distributed on
a revenue-sharing contract. Pi is the price of a rental as store i, which is assumed not to
vary across titles within a store. Cij is store i’s capacity of title j, and Fj is the upfront
cost of a tape for title j. Qij is rental demand for title j at store i, and can be expressed
by the function:
β
Qij = Aij Cij

(2)

where
Aij = Miα Tjδ Vij .
Demand is assumed to be comprised of a store-level component (Mi ), a title-level component (Tj ), and a store-title level component (Vij ). Demand is an increasing function of
capacity, but at a decreasing rate, such that 0 < β < 1. Differentiating profits with respect
to capacity, solving for the optimal level of capacity, and taking logs yields:
∗
ln(Cij
)=

1
[ln(γj ) + ln(Pi ) + αln(Mi ) + δln(Tj ) + ln(Vij ) − ln(Fj )].
(1 − β)

(3)

In this specification store and title fixed effects capture many of the factors affecting the
endogeneity of capacity (i.e., γj , Tj , Fj , Pi , and Mi ). The remaining endogeneity is related to
the idiosyncratic tastes of customers at the store for a specific title (i.e., Vij ). As discussed in
section 4.2, we employ an instrumental variables approach to address endogeneity related
to idiosyncratic store/title customer taste. The ability of store and title fixed effects to
11

control for the endogeniety of capacity would be somewhat reduced, and the importance of
the instrumental variables approach increased, if the impact of capacity on demand were
assumed to vary by store and title (i.e., if β were defined as βij instead).

4

Estimation and Identification

4.1

Estimation Framework

Within a store, larger capacities of a title can increase sales through several different mechanisms including: (1) reducing the occurrence of “stock-outs” especially in the early weeks
of the release of a new product; (2) serving as a signal to consumers about the film’s quality;
or (3) increasing consumer awareness of the film by displaying the title over a large shelf
area or in multiple areas within the store. Each of these mechanisms affect sales through
a product’s own capacity. We refer to this effect as the “own” effect. We are interested
in measuring the own effect of capacity on sales without distinguishing among alternative
mechanisms.12
“Cross-title” effects may also exist. While the own effect is likely to be positive (i.e., a
larger capacity for a title is likely to increase sales for that title in the store), cross effects
could be either positive or negative. Relatively larger capacities of titles may increase the
store’s customer base and thus demand for other titles in the future (e.g., by increasing
customer expectations that the store has lower stock-out rates generally). We believe that
larger capacity on a wide range of titles, rather than a marginal increase in capacity for a
single title, would be required to affect demand for rentals on future titles. Alternatively,
larger capacity of one title may displace rentals of other titles because of decreased spillover
demand resulting from stock-outs, or other factors related to perceived relative film qualities
and customer awareness of the films. In this case, we believe that cross-title effects will occur
in the short run (i.e., rentals may shift across weeks), but would not necessarily affect lifetime rentals. We use lifetime rentals in this analysis, and so we expect cross-title effects to
be small.
We begin with a model focused solely on own effects of capacity. In addition, we extend
12
In order to separately estimate the effects of capacity on sales that are attributable to stock-outs versus
alternative mechanisms, for example, one would ideally want to examine detailed records of consumers’ rental
habits across all stores and products, including consumers’ unmet demand for stocked-out titles. These data
are not available.

12

the model to control for possible cross-title effects, and we provide estimates for the size and
direction of these effects. The empirical model is meant to account for important features of
the market for a store-title combination that affect rentals, but does not represent a random
utility maximization model of consumer demand for video rentals.
Consider the demand for title j at store i, given by:
Qij = f (Cij , Pij , Xij ; θ)eij .

(4)

where Qij is the observed number of rentals of title j at store i, Cij denotes the capacity
(number of tapes) of title j at store i, Pij is the price, and Xij is a vector of store-, title-, or
store-title specific variables that affect demand, such as local demographics, time trends, or
the capacities of other titles.13 The parameter vector θ contains three vectors of coefficients:
δ contains coefficients for all terms and interactions that include Cij , α and β contain the
coefficients for the effect of price and Xij on the number of rentals respectively, which are
assumed to enter linearly in f (·). The marginal effect of an additional unit of capacity is
given by evaluating

∂Qij
df

·

∂f
dCij

at the existing level of capacity. In the empirical analyses

that follow, we consider several specifications for f (·). Our baseline model is log-linear;
we represent the log of variables with lower case letters (e.g., ln(Q) = q). We allow for
more flexible specifications of f (·) by including: interaction terms between c and relevant
elements of x, and by estimating the equation separately for each type of contract, which
we denote with superscript t.
The equation for estimation is:

t
qij
=γ t + δ0t cij ∗ I(Boxj ) + δ1t cij ∗ chainsizei ∗ I(Boxj )+

δ2t cij ∗ timetrendj ∗ I(Boxj ) + δ3t cij ∗ storetieri + β t xij − αt pij + tij

(5)

where I(Boxj ) is a dummy variable identifying the box office category of the title (i.e., if
it is an A title, B title, or C title), chainsize is the log of the number of stores comprising
the chain the store belongs to, timetrend is the log of the number of months since January
1998 elapsed when title j was released, and storetier is a dummy variable identifying the
size category of the store. Store, title, and store-title characteristics are captured by xij ,
13

As noted in section 3, the posted rental price for new releases is often constant across titles within a
store, with the exception of non-monetary dimensions such as the length of the rental period. However, in
practice there is variation related to the collection of late fees, and the timing of when a store moves a title
from the New Release to the Catalog section. We discuss price variation in more detail in section 4.2.

13

which may include store and title fixed effects, and β is a vector of coefficients for these
characteristics (and fixed effects). The inclusion of interaction terms with capacity allows
the effect of capacity in equation 5 to vary with observable title and store characteristics,
such as the box office revenues of the title, the release date, and store size.14
Rather than including all types of contracts in a single analysis, we condition on contract
choice ex-ante and run all analyses separately by contractual form. This allows all coefficients to vary across the different supply contracts. For the 43% percent of titles for which
retailers do not have any choice of contract, running the analyses separately by contract
simply allows for flexibility in the predicted effects of capacity. This flexibility is attractive
because the cost structures of the contracts differ substantially. For the 57% percent of titles
for which retailers have a choice of contract, however, this separation also partially addresses
the endogeneity of contractual form, since it determines selection into a given analysis, but
does not affect the coefficients, conditional on that selection.15 This allows us to recover the
effect of capacity for the store-title observations where that contract was chosen. In other
words, we recover the effect of the “treatment on the treated.” The main limitation to this
approach is that one would not want to extrapolate the estimated capacity effects to other
subpopulations of store-title combinations.16 For all of the remaining analyses, we estimate
separate equations for each of the three contract types (linear-pricing, sell-through pricing,
and revenue-sharing), and so we drop the t superscript for ease of notation.
14
We also ran our preferred specification using a logit model based on shares (where a title’s rental share at
a store was calculated as the number of rentals divided by the number of households in the store’s 5-digit zip
code, and a logistic transformation was applied to the share). The results for the marginal effect of capacity
on rentals were slightly higher, but similar, using the logit compared to the log of rentals for the preferred
specification. We rely on the log of rentals specification because it provides a more conservative estimate of
the capacity effect, is a more direct measure of the effect we are estimating, and because it allows for a more
direct comparison to using the log of revenues as an alternative left-hand side variable, as discussed in the
remainder of the paper.
15
An alternative approach to account for different contractual forms would be to combine the population
of all store-title pairs and interact capacity with contractual form. When retailers have a choice of linearpricing and revenue-sharing contracts (which occurs for 579 of the 1,019 titles we observe), it would also be
appropriate in such a model to instrument for the choice of revenue-sharing to address potential endogeneity
in the retailers’ choice of contract. However, the effect on rentals of the revenue-sharing versus linear-pricing
decision is likely to be different for each store-title pair, requiring a random coefficient on contract choice,
which will not be recovered from a single instrumental variable.
16
As a sensitivity test for the importance of this selection effect, we broke up the sample of store-title
pairs on linear-pricing titles into two subgroups: those for which retailers could have chosen revenue-sharing
instead, and those for which retailers could not. We find very similar effects of capacity in both groups.

14

4.2

Identification

If retailers choose capacity optimally in order to maximize profits, then positive demand
shocks (unobservable to the econometrician) lead to higher capacity levels. Thus, capacity
levels are endogenously chosen, resulting in a potential upward bias for OLS estimates of
the effect of capacity. In addition to the endogeneity of the capacity choice, one might also
worry about the usual endogeneity of price in the demand equation (i.e., stores may charge
a higher price for titles with rental demand that is unobservably higher). We discuss these
two issues separately.
Capacity Choice
Unobserved components of demand likely affect retailers’ choice of capacity such that
E(cij ij ) 6= 0 in equation 5. In this case, estimates of δ may be biased. The inclusion
of store fixed effects eliminates bias from correlations between cij and ij that may result
if unobserved, time- and title-invariant store characteristics lead to consistently larger or
smaller demand effects of capacity for all titles. For example, local preferences that affect
consumers’ patience for video rentals (i.e., willingness to wait until the movie is in stock), or
store characteristics like location or reservation policies may impact the effect of additional
capacity. As discussed in section 3, the store fixed effect would also account for endogenteity
related to store-level advertising and capacity decisions affected by cross-store competition.
The inclusion of title fixed effects eliminates bias resulting from correlations between cij
and ij that result from unobserved characteristics of a title (i.e., studio advertising or
promotions surrounding the title’s video release, and relative overall demand for the title
not captured by observed factors) that may raise or lower the capacity effect for that title,
and which are store invariant.
However, even after accounting for store and title fixed effects, one might be concerned
about correlation between capacity choices and ij . Under these conditions, optimal retailer behavior will reflect their knowledge of their customers’ idiosyncratic tastes for the
title (unobserved in the data) and imply a positive covariance between cij and ij . As
a result, estimates of δ will overstate the effect of capacity on sales. To investigate this
remaining source of endogeneity, we implement an instrumental variables approach. Appropriate instruments in this context are variables that affect a store’s capacity choice, but
do not directly affect consumer demand for a title. We instrument for capacity using the
average capacity of the same title across stores of the same tier, as in Ho, Ho, and Mortimer
15

(2008). The instrument is meant to reflect unobserved capacity costs, such as ordering costs
and stocking costs that vary by title and store size. In all cases we take advantage of the
full variation in the data by taking averages over all stores that take the title, regardless of
the contract type, if a choice of contract type is offered for the title. The validity of this
instrument relies on two assumptions: first, that the unobserved costs of taking a particular
title are correlated across stores within a store tier, implying that similar-sized stores make
similar capacity choices; second that demand shocks, except those that are captured by the
store and title fixed effects, are not correlated across markets.
Price
In our data we observe revenues (including late fees) and rentals for each title at each
video retailer, and use this information to calculate an average price for each title at each
store. Based on our calculated average price, we observe relatively little within- and acrossstore price variation in our data.
We investigated a number of instruments for price in equation 5, including measures of
average prices of other similar titles. None of the instruments were successful. The issue is
that, after including store and title fixed effects, the only unobservable we need to instrument
for is at the store-title level. Price variation at this level exists primarily due to re-shelving
titles across various menu prices at different rates. For example, after a title has been
stocked at a store for several weeks, the store may remove the “new release” sticker from
the tape and either drop the price or increase the rental period (implying lower collected
late fees and a lower observed price). We believe this source of price variation is primarily
determined exogenously because of the use of rule-of-thumb policies by video retailers in
how they instruct employees to move tapes and update stickers on rental inventory. To the
extent that such activities are endogenously determined, however, estimates of the price
coefficient will be biased upwards.
As our primary approach, we estimate equation 5 without including price as an independent variable. We also report results in which rental revenue, rather than transactions, is
used as the left-hand-side variable. The implications of these revenue regressions are almost
identical to those of the rental transaction regressions.17
17

Note that if strong price effects exist and endogeneity of price introduces large biases, then excluding price
from the transaction regression should bias the estimates of all coefficients that are potentially correlated
with price. In particular, our estimated capacity effect, which is the measure of interest for this paper, would
be impacted by the exclusion of the price variable. In robustness checks (not reported), we find almost no
effect on any of the coefficients of interest from the inclusion of prices on the right-hand side.

16

5

Results

We categorize each store-title observation based on the supply contract under which the
title was taken (i.e., linear pricing, sell-through pricing, or revenue sharing). Recall that
linear-pricing is associated with the highest upfront cost per tape, and that the retailer
keeps all subsequent rental revenue; sell-through pricing contracts are similar to linearpricing contracts, but with a lower upfront cost per tape; and, revenue-sharing contracts
are associated with the lowest upfront cost per tape, but the studio shares in the rental
revenues. We estimate equation 5 separately for each contract type, allowing the impact of
all right-hand-side variables to vary by contract type. For each specification, we allow the
impact of capacity to vary by theatrical box office category.
Before discussing the regression results, we present the distribution of the ratio of rentals
to capacity (Qij /Cij ) for A titles under each of the three contract types in figure 1. The
results for B and C titles are similar, though differences across contract types are slightly
less pronounced (see figures 2 and 3).18 These figures give some indication of potential
differences in how intensely capacity is used to generate rentals across contract types. Titles
taken on linear-pricing contracts have the largest average number of rentals per unit of
capacity, with each unit producing 27 rentals on average. The average unit of capacity
produces only 17 and 18 rentals for A titles taken on sell-through pricing and revenue-sharing
contracts, respectively. The fact that tapes taken on linear-pricing contracts are used more
intensively is consistent with the higher per-tape costs paid by the retailer for those tapes.
In the next section, we describe the explanatory variables included in the regression models
and we summarize the regression results. Section 5.2 provides the implications for the
marginal impact of capacity on rental transactions and revenues. In order to account for
the potential differences in capacity effects across rental contracts and box-office categories,
we present estimates of the marginal impact of capacity on sales separately for each of the
nine contract/box-office category combinations.
18
We do not report a small number of observations with ratios of Qij /Cij that are greater than 100, and
we exclude these observations from the regression analyses. The majority of these observations reflect an
obvious error in the coding of either tapes or rentals (i.e., they have unreasonably high average number of
rentals per tape) and their exclusion has virtually no effect on the regression results.

17

5.1

Regression Specifications

Table 1 presents results of estimating equation 5 under various restrictions for titles taken
under linear-pricing contracts; results for titles taken on sell-through pricing and revenuesharing contracts are presented in tables 2 and 3, respectively. The results in these tables
are from estimating equation 5 for transaction regressions excluding price from the righthand side; we report results from the revenue regressions after discussing the transaction
based specifications. The implications of both models are very similar.19 In all regressions
the t-stats are calculated using robust standard errors with clustering by both store and
title.20
The first column in all three tables provides results under the most restrictive specification of f (cij , Xij ; δ, β). This specification contains capacity interacted with box-office
category, a time trend, and store characteristics, which are store size, the size of a store’s
chain, the total number of titles carried by the store, and demographic information from a
store’s zip code, such as population, median age, and the percentage of the population in
various race, education, marital status, gender, employment, and urban status groupings.
In the specification of column one, these characteristics affect the level of rentals, but do
not interact with the capacity effect. As mentioned above, the effect of capacity is allowed
to vary by box office category. We explain approximately 78 percent of the variation in the
data with this specification for linear-pricing titles, and find similar R-squares for the other
two contracts (0.82 and 0.79).
The second column in tables 1 - 3 allows for interaction terms between capacity and
store and title characteristics. Specifically we allow for interactions of capacity and chain
size; a time trend; and each of ten store-size dummies (store tier 1 through store tier 10).
The effects of capacity interacted with chain size and the time trend are further allowed to
vary by box office category. The R-squareds from these regressions are similar to those in
column 1. To simplify reporting, we do not report coefficients for the interaction of capacity
with store tiers. The coefficients on capacity interactions with the store tier dummies tend
to be smallest for store tiers 1 through 4, and increase slightly for larger store tiers. In other
words, additional capacity for a given title is more valuable at larger stores.
19

Transaction regressions that include price without an IV yield similar implied capacity effects.
For all specifications of the reported regressions we rely on robust standard errors with two-way clustering
at the store level and at the title level. For the instrumental variables specification the instrumented capacity
measure is treated as data.
20

18

In the third column, we add a number of variables that describe the stocking of other
titles at the store, based on a count of the other titles and the capacity taken for those
titles. For new titles taken in the same month as the focal title, we calculate the total
number of other titles taken by the store separately for A, B, and C titles. We then interact
each of these three variables with three box category dummies for the focal title.21 We
make the same calculation for the total number of tapes taken by the store separately
for other A, B, and C titles, and interact this with the three box category dummies for
the focal title. Finally, we make these same calculations for titles released in the month
prior to, and the month following, the release month of the focal title. We lose about
five to 10 percent of observations due to missing values for prior month and subsequent
month other title variables in the first and last month a store is in the Rentrak data. The
coefficients on these other title/tape variables are typically very small and often individually
statistically insignificant; however, they are jointly significant and improve the fit of the
model considerably (i.e., R-squareds increase from 0.79 to 0.81, 0.83 to 0.85, and 0.79 to
0.81 for linear-pricing, sell-through pricing, and revenue-sharing contracts respectively).
Below we discuss the estimated marginal impact of other-title tapes on own-title rentals
and find it to be close to zero in most cases.22
We expect a positive bias on the capacity variable in the models investigated in the
first three columns because capacity is chosen endogenously by the retailer; conditioning on
the other-title variables and other observable demand shifters should reduce some of this
bias. To further reduce this bias, we include a full array of store and title fixed effects in
the model reported in column four. The fixed effects further improve the fit of the model
(i.e., R-squareds increase to 0.88, 0.90, and 0.87 for linear-pricing, sell-through pricing, and
revenue-sharing contracts respectively). In column five we also implement an instrumental
variables approach. We instrument for each store’s capacity on a title using the average
21

For example, consider a store that stocked 3 new A titles (A1 , A2 , and A3 ) and 1 new B (B1 ) title in
a given month, and suppose that we are looking at the observation for title A1 at that store. We calculate
an “other A title” variable equal to 2, an “other B title” variable equal to 1, and an “other C title” variable
equal to 0. Because the focal title is an A title, we would also have an A title dummy equal to 1, and B and
C title dummies equal to zero. We then interact each of the three “other title” variables with the three box
dummy variables.
22
One might also want to check the effects of higher capacity levels for the same title at competing stores.
Unfortunately, we do not observe all stores in the U.S. (we observe approximately 30 percent of all stores),
and we typically do not observe the capacity levels of competing stores in the local market. However, one
expects that cross-effects of titles in the same store are likely to be stronger than effects of capacity across
stores for a particular title in the short run.

19

capacity for that title held by stores in other markets in the same store tier. As expected,
the R-squareds decline slightly for this specification.
Changes in the coefficients on the log of capacity, as reported in tables 1 - 3, from one
specification to another are discussed below, and may be informative with respect to the
mechanisms by which capacity contributes to rentals. However, the individual coefficients do
not capture the overall impact of capacity on rentals, nor are the changes in these coefficients
necessarily comparable across model specifications due to the inclusion of different sets of
interaction terms. For the overall capacity impact it is necessary to consider all of the
capacity interaction terms with box office category and store-title characteristic variables,
as well as the log transformation of these variables, which we do in the next section.
For linear-pricing contracts (table 1), the coefficient on the log of capacity increases
slightly between columns 1 and 2 (from 0.97 to 1.07). In column 3, with the addition of
cross-title stocking variables, the coefficient on the log of capacity declines substantially
to 0.62, and it further declines to 0.54 with the addition of store and title fixed effects in
column 4. The T-stat for this coefficient also declines substantially between columns 1 and
4, though in every case the coefficient on the log of capacity is highly significant. In column
5, with the addition of an IV approach, the coefficient on the log of capacity further declines
to 0.52 and while it remains statistically significant, the T-stat drops substantially (from
10.37 in column 4 to 3.27 in column 5). The coefficients on the interaction terms of the
log of capacity with chain size and a time trend also change substantially when going from
column 4 to column 5.
For both the sell-through pricing (table 2) and the revenue-sharing contracts (table 3),
the coefficient on the log of capacity drops monotonically and substantially from column
1 to column 4 (0.82 down to 0.31 for sell-through pricing contracts, and 0.96 to 0.36 for
revenue-sharing contracts). In contrast to the linear-pricing contracts, estimates of the
coefficient on the log of capacity for both sell-through pricing and revenue-sharing contracts
are negative in column 5 (-0.23 and -0.31 respectively). This change in the log of capacity
coefficient appears to be somewhat off-set by a substantial increase in the coefficients for
the interactions of the log of capacity with chain size and a time trend.
All of the analyses undertaken in tables 1 through 3 were also implemented using the
log of rental revenue as the left-hand-side variable. The results for the revenue regressions
are reported in tables 4 through 6. As discussed in the next section, the implied capacity

20

effects based on the rental revenue and the transaction regressions are very similar.

5.2

Implications

In this section, we report the implied marginal effect on rental transactions from a one unit
increase in the level of capacity in order to provide a more meaningful interpretation of the
regression results. We report the results separately for each regression specification and
box office category. Taking the derivative of equation 5 with respect to Cij and solving for
d
dQ
ij /dCij yields:
d
dij /dCij = Qij (δ0 ∗I(Boxj )+δ1 chainsizei ∗I(Boxj )+δ2 timetrendj ∗I(Boxj )+δ3 storetieri )
dQ
Cij
(6)
Where d
Qij is the predicted value of rentals based on the regression specification. Table 7
reports the marginal own-capacity effects when the equation is evaluated at the average level
of right-hand side variables for store tier 5, which contains medium-sized stores. The table
contains three panels corresponding to linear-pricing, sell-through pricing, and revenuesharing respectively.
Column 1 of table 7 reports the implied marginal effect of capacity based on the specification in column 1 of tables 1 - 3. This provides an upper bound on the marginal benefit one
might expect from increasing capacity levels for a title because it controls only for contract
type, box office category, time trend, and store characteristics. Focusing on results in the
top panel for titles taken on linear-pricing contracts, the implied marginal effect of a store
holding one additional tape for an A title under model specification 1 is an additional 23.90
rentals (for that title, at that store). We find a lower effect of own-title capacity after conditioning on capacity interaction effects (in specification 2) with an effect of 23.06, and the
stocking of other titles taken in the same or adjacent release months (specification 3) with
an effect of 16.06. After the inclusion of store and title fixed effects (specification 4), the
estimate of the own-title capacity effect for A titles taken on linear-pricing contracts falls
further to 14.06 rentals. The decline in the estimated own-title capacity effect is consistent
with the notion that the models are doing an increasingly better job of controlling for bias
resulting from the endogeneity of store capacity choices. Finally, using the instrumental
variables approach combined with the store and title fixed effects to further control for any
remaining bias results in a marginal capacity effect of 10.42 (specification 5). The last two
21

columns in table 7 report the percentage increase in rentals and the elasticity of rentals
with respect to capacity, using the marginal capacity effect calculated for specification 5.
For A titles taken on linear-pricing contracts, the 10.42 additional rentals corresponds to a
2.0 percent increase in rentals and an elasticity of rentals with respect to capacity of 0.44.
Generally, across all contract types and box office categories, our estimate of the marginal
impact of an additional unit of capacity on rentals gets progressively smaller when moving
from specification 1 to specification 5.23 Within each contract type, an additional unit of
capacity for B and C titles is estimated to have a slightly larger effect on rentals than A
titles (again using the instrumental variables specification from column 5). For example,
the marginal effects for B and C titles taken on linear-pricing contracts are 18.01 and
17.01 respectively, compared to 10.42 for A titles. In percentage terms, B and C titles are
estimated to have 6.9 and 17.8 percent increases in rentals (compared to 2.0 percent for A
titles).24
We estimate substantial differences in the marginal effect of an additional unit of capacity across contract types. Based on the results for specification 5, we find that the marginal
effect of capacity on rentals was highest for titles taken on linear-pricing contracts, considerably lower for titles taken on sell-through pricing contracts, and lower still for titles
taken on revenue-sharing contracts. For A titles, we estimate that an additional unit of capacity results in 10.42 additional rentals for linear-pricing contracts, 3.29 additional rentals
for sell-through pricing contracts, and -0.08 change in rentals for revenue-sharing contracts.
For B titles, the estimated effects of an additional unit of capacity on rentals are 18.01, 9.18,
and 2.47 for linear-pricing, sell-through pricing, and revenue-sharing contracts respectively.
Finally, for C titles, the effects are 17.01, 5.10, and 4.85 for linear-pricing, sell-through
pricing, and revenue-sharing contracts respectively. Marginal capacity effects in terms of
percentage changes in rentals and the elasticity of rentals with respect to capacity follow
the same pattern across contract types, as reported in table 7 (for specification 5).
Our estimates for the marginal effect of capacity on rentals suggest that the relationship
between capacity and sales is substantially impacted by the adoption of contracts that
23

There are two exceptions: B titles under linear-pricing and sell-through pricing contracts show a very
small increase moving from specification 4 to 5, when the instrumental variables are used; and the effect for
C titles increases slightly from specification 1 to specification 3 for all three contract types.
24
The coefficients for the interaction of capacity and store characteristics/title characteristics from tables
1 - 3 (specification 5) indicate that the marginal effect of an additional unit is: relatively constant over time,
larger for the largest store tiers (tiers 8 through 10), and increasing with respect to chain size.

22

lower the cost of capacity. Until the late 1990s, titles were typically made available only
on linear-pricing and sell-through pricing contracts. Our findings that the marginal impact
of capacity on rentals is far lower on sell-through pricing contracts compared to linearpricing contracts is consistent with lower upfront per-tape costs, and consequently, higher
relative capacity levels for sell-through pricing compared to linear-pricing contracts. The
introduction of revenue-sharing contracts in the late 1990s allowed studios to make titles
available at an even lower upfront per-tape cost, close to the studios’ incremental costs of
producing the tapes, while still recovering substantial revenues through the revenue-sharing
component.25 Studios also set minimum capacity requirements for titles taken on revenuesharing contracts. We find even lower estimates for the marginal impact of capacity on
rentals for titles taken on revenue-sharing contracts, suggesting that the low upfront pertape costs and minimum capacity requirements of this contract type encourages even higher
relative levels of capacity.
Our estimated own-title marginal capacity effects are consistent with marginal costs by
contract type and title. That is, the dollar benefit to the video retail store of taking the
last unit of capacity for a title is roughly equal to the cost of obtaining that last unit of
capacity. Using the marginal capacity effects from table 7 (specification 5) and applying
average prices, we estimate the marginal benefit to the store of an additional tape.26 For A
titles taken on linear-pricing contracts at tier 5 stores the implied marginal benefit is $30.43
(average price times marginal effect = $2.92 x 10.42), plus any salvage value the retailer
receives from selling the used tape. The average cost of A-title tapes taken on linear-pricing
contracts is approximately $44 (after volume discounts). While this exceeds our estimated
marginal benefit of one additional tape, some of the difference may be reduced based on
the salvage value from the sale of used tapes (around $9 on average), and other benefits
associated with higher copy-depth for blockbuster titles not measured in our analysis such
as the ability of A titles to draw consumers into the store.27 For B and C titles on linearpricing contracts, the estimate of marginal benefit is $51.34 ($2.85 x 18.01) and $45.09
($2.65 x 17.01). The corresponding average costs-per-tape are approximately $43 for B
25

Studios typically recover a little less than $30 per tape between the upfront fee and the revenue-sharing
component combined.
26
Table 8 presents the corresponding results for the revenue regressions, but in that table the marginal
effects are already in terms of dollars.
27
Using the results for the store and title fixed effects without IV (specification 4) yields a result very
similar to cost. The marginal capacity effect in that case is 14.06, corresponding to a marginal benefit of
$41.06.

23

titles and $42 for C titles.
For titles taken on sell-through pricing contracts, the estimated benefit for A titles is
$9.72 ($2.95 x 3.29), and the average cost of an A-title tape on sell-through pricing contracts
is $15.54. The estimated benefit for B titles is $26.09 ($2.84 x 9.18), and the average cost of
a B-title tape is $15.15. Finally, for C titles the estimated benefit is $13.73 ($2.69 x 5.10),
and the average cost of a C-title tape is $12.53.
For titles taken on revenue-sharing contracts, the estimated benefit is even lower. The
estimated marginal benefit accruing to both the retail store and the studio for A titlesis
-$0.22 ($2.90 x -0.08), and this estimate is not significantly different from 0. The average
cost of an A-title tape taken on a revenue-sharing contract is $7.21. Tapes under this
contract also have a salvage value of roughly $9, which is split between the retailer and the
studio. The estimated marginal benefit accruing to both the retail store and studio for B
titles is $7.00 ($2.83 x 2.47); of this benefit, the retail store keeps on average $3.31 after
implementing the revenue-sharing component. The average cost of a B-title tape is $7.28.
Finally, for C titles the estimated total benefit is $13.40 ($2.76 x 4.85), with the retail store
keeping $6.71 and the average cost of a C-title tape on a revenue-sharing contract is $6.41.
Table 8 presents the same information for the revenue regressions, allowing for a direct
calculation of the monetary benefit of additional tapes. As expected, due to the limited
amount of price variability, estimates of the marginal capacity effect are almost identical
whether one uses the revenue regressions or the quantity regressions (multiplied by average
price).
As discussed earlier in the paper, a positive bias on the capacity coefficients may exist if
retailers choose capacity on the basis of unobservable rental demand characteristics. Given
that in most cases our estimated marginal benefit to the retailer of taking an additional
tape is somewhat lower than the cost of the tape, we believe that this endogeneity is
not a major issue for our results using store and title fixed effects and IVs. Figure 4
extends our discussion of results for store tier 5 by plotting the marginal own-title benefit
for linear-priced A titles by store tier against the cost of acquiring an additional tape
(which does not vary by store tier). Figures 5 and 6 report the exercise for titles taken
on sell-through pricing and revenue-sharing contracts respectively. Marginal benefits are
estimated using specifications 4 and 5 for both the transaction and revenue regressions. The
cost measure does not account for the cost of stocking the tape, the cost of shelf-space, or

24

other considerations. The estimated benefit does not account for disposal value of the tape
and other potential benefits of carrying greater levels of capacity, such as increased traffic
to the store. The marginal benefit of an additional tape tends to increase slightly with store
size. For specification 5, the marginal benefit is somewhat lower than the upfront per-tape
cost for all three contract types and all store tiers, while under specification 4 the benefit
is similar to, or slightly higher than upfront per-tape costs.
Table 9 summarizes the own- and selected cross-title marginal effects under specification
5 based on the rental transaction regressions. The table contains three panels corresponding
to focal titles that are A titles, B titles and C titles, and each panel contains results for all
three contract types. A-title own-effects (reported in table 7) are referenced in the top row
of the top panel, and are 10.42, 3.29, and -0.08; B- and C-title own effects are also reported
in the first row of the second and third panels respectively. For cross-title impacts of the
number of other titles, one could report up to 9 different effects for each box-office category
and contract type: the cross-effects of other titles released in the same (or preceding, or
subsequent) month, and other titles in the same (or 2 different) box categories. These effects
are further allowed to vary based on a title’s own box-office category, which yields a total
of 27 different effects. The same calculation can be done using the capacities of other titles
rather than the count of other titles.
In table 9 we report three such cross-title results for each contract type and each boxoffice category; the cross effect of the capacity of other titles in each of the three box office
categories released in the same month as the focal title.28 For focal titles that are A titles,
the estimated cross effects are all positive, though generally small and not significantly
different from zero. However, when the focal title is an A title distributed on a revenuesharing contract, a one unit increase in the capacity of other A titles released in the same
month is estimated to result in 1.85 additional rentals for the focal title (a statistically
significant increase). This result suggests that higher capacity levels of some A titles may
be associated with additional consumer traffic to the store, and increased sales for other A
titles. For focal titles that are A titles, the estimated impact of an additional tape taken
for other A titles released in the same month is 0.56, 0.48, and 1.85 for linear-pricing,
sell-through pricing, and revenue-sharing titles respectively. The estimated impact of an
additional tape taken for B titles released in the same month is 2.76, 0.03, and 0.34 for linear28

Unreported capacity results are cross-effects of the capacity of other titles released in the previous or
subsequent month from the focal titles.

25

pricing, sell-through pricing, and revenue-sharing titles respectively; none are statistically
significant. Similarly, there is no statistically significant impact of an additional tape taken
for C titles, with the estimates being 3.65, 0.48, and 0.75 for linear-pricing, sell-through
pricing, and revenue-sharing titles respectively.29
While all of the estimated cross-effects are positive for focal titles that are A titles, many
of the cross-effects for focal titles that are B titles and C titles are negative. For focal titles
that are B titles, most of the cross-effects are negative. In general, an additional unit of
capacity for other titles is estimated to have an impact of less than one rental for focal titles
that are B titles, and the effect is not statistically different from zero. However, similar
to focal titles that are A titles, when the focal title is a B title distributed on a revenuesharing contract, an additional unit of capacity for A titles released in the same month is
estimated to result in 1.32 additional rentals for the focal title (a statistically significant
increase). This effect is smaller than that estimated for the case where the focal title is an
A title distributed on a revenue-sharing contract (1.85 additional rentals); and, unlike with
focal titles that are A titles, the estimated impact of additional capacity for A titles on
rentals of B titles distributed through linear-pricing and sell-through pricing contracts are
both negative (though not statistically different from zero). As a result, while we find some
limited evidence that additional capacity of other titles is associated with slightly higher
rentals for A titles, this positive effect (if any) is even weaker for rentals of B titles, and
restricted to B titles distributed on revenue-sharing contracts. For focal titles that are C
titles there is no evidence of cross effects. All of the cross-effects estimates are very small
(some positive, some negative) and not significantly different from zero.

6

Conclusion

In conclusion, we have identified strong empirical evidence that greater capacity can substantially impact sales. In particular, we find that the effect of additional capacity on sales
can be very large in situations where maintaining high levels of capacity is particularly
costly (e.g., under linear-pricing contracts in our empirical investigation). The adoption of
29

Table 10 presents the same information as Table 9, but for the revenue regressions (i.e., where the log of
rentals revenues is on the left-hand-side rather than the log of rentals). In this table the marginal own effect
of capacity is on revenue rather than rentals. For A titles on all three contract types the revenue estimates
are approximately three times higher than the rental transaction estimates, reflecting an average rental price
of a little less than $3.

26

new monitoring technologies may facilitate new contractual forms and other changes that
greatly reduce the costs of maintaining additional capacity. As a result, retailers may maintain higher levels of capacity relative to sales, mitigating any impact of a marginal increase
in capacity on sales (e.g., under revenue-sharing contracts in our empirical investigation).
The theoretical literature has addressed this possible link between capacity and sales, but
empirical evidence has been largely lacking. This paper provides both empirical evidence of
a strong link between capacity and sales, and evidence that the nature of this relationship
can be greatly impacted by new monitoring technologies and supply contracts.
A central challenge for empirically identifying the effect of capacity on sales is the fact
that retailers endogenously choose capacity to maximize profits. In order to address the endogeneity concerns, we take advantage of the panel nature of the dataset to incorporate both
store and title fixed effects in addition to using an instrumental variables approach. The
inclusion of both fixed effects along with an instrumental variables approach significantly
reduces the bias resulting from the endogeneity of capacity.
Our main focus in this paper is to identify evidence of capacity effects on sales and
measure the size of that effect in a specific industry, video rentals. As such, we allow for
several mechanisms through which capacity may affect sales for video rentals, but do not
attempt to identify the impact of any individual mechanism. Larger capacities may reduce
stock-outs, serve as a signal to consumers about product quality, or simply increase sales by
garnering more shelf space. On the other hand, consumers may substitute intertemporally
during stock-outs, mitigating the effect of additional capacity on total sales. For example,
although video rentals tend to peak within a few weeks for a newly released title, consumers
continue to actively rent the title over a period of about four to five months on average. In
industries with more time-sensitive demand, such as newspaper sales or automobile rentals,
the effect of capacity on sales could be larger.

27

.05

A − Titles

0

.01

Density
.02
.03

.04

Linear Pricing
Sell−Through Pricing
Revenue Sharing

0

20

40
60
Rentals−per−tape

80

100

Figure 1: “Rentals-per-tape,” A Titles

.04

B − Titles

0

.01

Density
.02

.03

Linear Pricing
Sell−Through Pricing
Revenue Sharing

0

20

40
60
Rentals−per−tape

Figure 2: “Rentals-per-tape,” B Titles
28

80

100

.04

C − Titles

0

.01

Density
.02

.03

Linear Pricing
Sell−Through Pricing
Revenue Sharing

0

20

40
60
Rentals−per−tape

Figure 3: “Rentals-per-tape,” C Titles

29

80

100

Table 1: The Capacity Effect for Linear-Pricing Titles
Quantity Regression, Dependent Variable ln(Qij )

log of Capacity (ln(C))
ln(C)*Box B
ln(C)*Box C

1

2

3

4

5

0.97
[96.98]
0.01
[0.51]
-0.09
[-7.01]

1.07
[23.56]
0.07
[1.02]
0.04
[0.63]

0.62
[10.86]
0.12
[1.58]
0.55
[7.07]

0.54
[10.37]
0.13
[2.06]
0.26
[4.65]

0.52
[3.27]
0.11
[0.77]
-0.52
[-2.69]

-0.01
[-6.89]
0.01
[3.61]
0.01
[4.98]

-0.01
[-6.52]
0.00
[0.21]
-0.00
[-1.64]

-0.01
[-5.17]
0.00
[0.59]
0.00
[1.19]

0.03
[12.22]
0.01
[3.13]
0.05
[9.79]

-0.01
[-0.88]
-0.03
[-1.62]
-0.05
[-3.25]

0.03
[2.87]
-0.03
[-1.80]
-0.05
[-3.48]

0.02
[1.24]
-0.03
[-1.46]
-0.03
[-1.70]

-0.05
[-2.97]
0.02
[1.06]
0.12
[3.48]

Y
Y
N
N
N
0.78
1,606,583

Y
Y
Y
N
N
0.81
1,535,472

N
Y
Y
Y
N
0.88
1,535,472

N
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.79
1,535,385

ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)
ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)*Box B
ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)*Box C

ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)
ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)*Box B
ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)*Box C

Store/Title/Time Char?
Capacity*Store Tier Interactions?
Cross-Title Stocking?
Title/Store FE?
Instrument?
R-squared
Observations

Y
N
N
N
N
0.78
1,606,583

T-stats are in brackets and all T-stats reflect robust standard errors with clustering by both title
and store.
In the first-stage regression for column 5, the instrument for capacity is the average level of capacity
for the same title held at other stores of the same tier level. The coefficient on the instrument is
0.02 with a T-stat of 14.4. The first-stage regression has an R-squared of 0.71.

30

Table 2: The Capacity Effect for Sell-Through Pricing Titles
Quantity Regression, Dependent Variable ln(Qij )

log of Capacity (ln(C))
ln(C)*Box B
ln(C)*Box C

1

2

3

4

5

0.82
[33.23]
-0.06
[-1.89]
-0.13
[-4.57]

0.65
[5.96]
-0.08
[-0.42]
-0.21
[-2.26]

0.55
[6.34]
-0.10
[-0.63]
-0.61
[-3.71]

0.31
[5.88]
-0.09
[-0.94]
-0.11
[-0.99]

-0.23
[-1.17]
0.15
[0.60]
-0.34
[-1.34]

0.01
[1.89]
0.01
[1.41]
0.01
[2.40]

0.00
[1.94]
0.00
[0.65]
0.01
[1.19]

0.00
[0.03]
0.00
[0.54]
0.00
[0.42]

0.02
[4.55]
0.01
[3.04]
0.03
[3.29]

0.03
[1.38]
-0.00
[-0.01]
0.00
[0.21]

0.06
[3.05]
-0.01
[-0.23]
0.11
[3.40]

0.04
[3.47]
0.03
[1.48]
0.04
[1.49]

0.07
[4.52]
0.04
[1.24]
0.06
[1.46]

Y
Y
N
N
N
0.83
343,116

Y
Y
Y
N
N
0.85
316,269

N
Y
Y
Y
N
0.90
316,269

N
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.85
316,260

ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)
ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)*Box B
ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)*Box C

ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)
ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)*Box B
ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)*Box C

Store/Title/Time Char?
Capacity*Store Tier Interactions?
Cross-Title Stocking?
Title/Store FE?
Instrument?
R-squared
Observations

Y
N
N
N
N
0.82
343,116

T-stats are in brackets and all T-stats reflect robust standard errors with clustering by both title
and store.
In the first-stage regression for column 5, the instrument for capacity is the average level of capacity
for the same title held at other stores of the same tier level. The coefficient on the instrument is
0.01 with a T-stat of 7.7. The first-stage regression has an R-squared of 0.78.

31

Table 3: The Capacity Effect for Revenue Sharing Titles
Quantity Regression, Dependent Variable ln(Qij )

log of Capacity (ln(C))
ln(C)*Box B
ln(C)*Box C

1

2

3

4

5

0.96
[47.61]
0.03
[2.01]
-0.05
[-2.73]

0.94
[13.53]
0.09
[1.14]
0.00
[0.03]

0.69
[8.91]
0.11
[1.19]
0.34
[3.58]

0.36
[6.33]
0.06
[0.89]
0.19
[2.69]

-0.31
[-2.52]
0.13
[1.66]
0.27
[2.20]

-0.02
[-2.65]
0.01
[1.97]
0.00
[0.57]

0.00
[0.47]
0.01
[4.87]
0.02
[5.25]

0.00
[1.39]
0.01
[2.74]
0.01
[3.25]

0.03
[5.67]
0.01
[2.24]
0.03
[4.43]

0.01
[0.86]
-0.02
[-1.21]
-0.02
[-0.84]

-0.00
[-0.02]
-0.05
[-2.52]
-0.03
[-1.34]

0.01
[0.94]
0.00
[0.00]
0.01
[0.68]

0.04
[3.10]
0.01
[0.64]
-0.00
[-0.09]

Y
Y
N
N
N
0.79
428,501

Y
Y
Y
N
N
0.81
409,113

N
Y
Y
Y
N
0.87
409,113

N
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.84
408,812

ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)
ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)*Box B
ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)*Box C

ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)
ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)*Box B
ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)*Box C

Store/Title/Time Char?
Capacity*Store Tier Interactions?
Cross-Title Stocking?
Title/Store FE?
Instrument?
R-squared
Observations

Y
N
N
N
N
0.79
428,501

T-stats are in brackets and all T-stats reflect robust standard errors with clustering by both title
and store.
In the first-stage regression for column 5, the instrument for capacity is the average level of capacity
for the same title held at other stores of the same tier level. The coefficient on the instrument is
0.01 with a T-stat of 9.5. The first-stage regression has an R-squared of 0.85.

32

Table 4: The Capacity Effect for Linear-Pricing Titles
Revenue Regression, Dependent Variable ln(Revenueij )

log of Capacity (ln(C))
ln(C)*Box B
ln(C)*Box C

1

2

3

4

5

1.00
[95.65]
0.01
[1.00]
-0.09
[-7.07]

1.09
[24.52]
0.08
[1.19]
0.05
[0.79]

0.61
[10.43]
0.13
[1.66]
0.60
[7.63]

0.49
[9.26]
0.12
[1.99]
0.25
[4.40]

0.39
[2.43]
0.10
[0.70]
-0.61
[-3.13]

-0.01
[-6.02]
0.01
[3.67]
0.01
[3.99]

-0.01
[-5.46]
0.00
[0.11]
-0.01
[-2.62]

-0.00
[-1.47]
0.00
[1.02]
0.00
[0.91]

0.04
[14.51]
0.01
[3.74]
0.05
[10.07]

-0.01
[-0.68]
-0.03
[-1.80]
-0.05
[-3.38]

0.04
[3.47]
-0.03
[-1.85]
-0.05
[-3.76]

0.03
[1.67]
-0.03
[-1.36]
-0.02
[-1.32]

-0.04
[-2.04]
0.02
[1.15]
0.14
[4.14]

Y
Y
N
N
N
0.77
1,606,583

Y
Y
Y
N
N
0.81
1,535,472

N
Y
Y
Y
N
0.88
1,535,472

N
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.78
1,535,385

ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)
ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)*Box B
ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)*Box C

ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)
ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)*Box B
ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)*Box C

Store/Title/Time Char?
Capacity*Store Tier Interactions?
Cross-Title Stocking?
Title/Store FE?
Instrument?
R-squared
Observations

Y
N
N
N
N
0.77
1,606,583

T-stats are in brackets and all T-stats reflect robust standard errors with clustering by both title
and store.
In the first-stage regression for column 5, the instrument for capacity is the average level of capacity
for the same title held at other stores of the same tier level. The coefficient on the instrument is
0.02 with a T-stat of 14.4. The first-stage regression has an R-squared of 0.71.

33

Table 5: The Capacity Effect for Sell-Through Pricing Titles
Revenue Regression, Dependent Variable ln(Revenueij )

log of Capacity (ln(C))
ln(C)*Box B
ln(C)*Box C

1

2

3

4

5

0.86
[32.78]
-0.06
[-2.04]
-0.14
[-4.46]

0.69
[6.27]
-0.09
[-0.51]
-0.17
[-1.82]

0.58
[6.28]
-0.10
[-0.66]
-0.61
[-3.32]

0.31
[5.87]
-0.05
[-0.50]
0.01
[0.09]

-0.33
[-1.60]
0.08
[0.33]
-0.36
[-1.29]

0.01
[1.47]
0.01
[1.37]
0.01
[2.03]

0.00
[3.20]
0.00
[0.56]
0.01
[0.98]

-0.00
[-0.12]
0.00
[0.36]
0.00
[0.13]

0.03
[5.14]
0.01
[3.25]
0.03
[3.35]

0.03
[1.42]
0.00
[0.08]
-0.00
[-0.21]

0.06
[2.77]
-0.01
[-0.19]
0.11
[3.07]

0.04
[4.07]
0.03
[0.98]
0.02
[0.69]

0.09
[5.18]
0.06
[1.86]
0.06
[1.36]

Y
Y
N
N
N
0.83
343,116

Y
Y
Y
N
N
0.85
316,269

N
Y
Y
Y
N
0.90
316,269

N
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.84
316,260

ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)
ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)*Box B
ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)*Box C

ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)
ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)*Box B
ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)*Box C

Store/Title/Time Char?
Capacity*Store Tier Interactions?
Cross-Title Stocking?
Title/Store FE?
Instrument?
R-squared
Observations

Y
N
N
N
N
0.83
343,116

T-stats are in brackets and all T-stats reflect robust standard errors with clustering by both title
and store.
In the first-stage regression for column 5, the instrument for capacity is the average level of capacity
for the same title held at other stores of the same tier level. The coefficient on the instrument is
0.01 with a T-stat of 7.7. The first-stage regression has an R-squared of 0.78.

34

Table 6: The Capacity Effect for Revenue Sharing Titles
Revenue Regression, Dependent Variable ln(Revenueij )

log of Capacity (ln(C))
ln(C)*Box B
ln(C)*Box C

1

2

3

4

5

0.98
[47.69]
0.03
[1.99]
-0.05
[-2.48]

0.95
[13.34]
0.09
[1.04]
0.00
[0.00]

0.69
[8.52]
0.10
[1.08]
0.35
[3.50]

0.31
[5.83]
0.05
[0.82]
0.18
[2.66]

-0.39
[-3.18]
0.12
[1.56]
0.27
[2.14]

-0.01
[-1.96]
0.01
[2.43]
0.00
[0.62]

0.00
[2.12]
0.02
[5.03]
0.02
[5.07]

0.01
[2.57]
0.01
[2.67]
0.01
[3.01]

0.04
[6.15]
0.01
[2.15]
0.03
[4.25]

0.02
[0.99]
-0.02
[-1.16]
-0.01
[-0.76]

0.00
[0.15]
-0.05
[-2.40]
-0.03
[-1.25]

0.02
[1.90]
0.00
[0.01]
0.01
[0.81]

0.05
[4.16]
0.01
[0.67]
0.00
[0.10]

Y
Y
N
N
N
0.79
428,501

Y
Y
Y
N
N
0.81
409,113

N
Y
Y
Y
N
0.87
409,113

N
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.85
408,812

ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)
ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)*Box B
ln(C)*ln(Chain Size)*Box C

ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)
ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)*Box B
ln(C)*ln(Time Trend)*Box C

Store/Title/Time Char?
Capacity*Store Tier Interactions?
Cross-Title Stocking?
Title/Store FE?
Instrument?
R-squared
Observations

Y
N
N
N
N
0.79
428,501

T-stats are in brackets and all T-stats reflect robust standard errors with clustering by both title
and store.
In the first-stage regression for column 5, the instrument for capacity is the average level of capacity
for the same title held at other stores of the same tier level. The coefficient on the instrument is
0.01 with a T-stat of 9.5. The first-stage regression has an R-squared of 0.85.

35

Table 7: Marginal Capacity Effects, Quantity Regressions

dQ/dC
Box A (avg. p=$2.92)
Box B (avg. p=$2.85)
Box C (avg. p=$2.65)

dQ/dC
Box A (avg. p=$2.95)
Box B (avg. p=$2.84)
Box C (avg. p=$2.69)

dQ/dC
Box A (avg. p=$2.90)
Box B (avg. p=$2.83)
Box C (avg. p=$2.76)

Titles Taken on Linear-Pricing Contracts
Table 1, Model Specification
% Increase in
Rentals
1
2
3
4
5
(Spec. 5)
23.90
[96.98]
25.07
[73.63]
20.83
[58.97]

23.06
[82.39]
25.01
[63.58]
21.14
[53.10]

16.06
[18.64]
18.13
[39.27]
24.07
[57.84]

14.06
[13.89]
16.11
[44.13]
18.98
[64.67]

10.42
[4.77]
18.01
[7.39]
17.01
[7.41]

2.0%

0.44

6.9%

0.66

17.8%

0.63

Titles Taken on Sell-Through Pricing Contracts
Table 2, Model Specification
% Increase in
Rentals
1
2
3
4
5
(Spec. 5)
11.86
[33.23]
11.41
[19.64]
10.48
[17.12]

12.18
[28.71]
11.70
[18.18]
10.89
[14.64]

11.78
[18.97]
10.41
[11.17]
12.07
[19.70]

7.08
[26.78]
8.40
[9.81]
9.24
[23.94]

3.29
[1.32]
9.18
[2.69]
5.10
[1.63]

14.60
[32.24]
16.94
[36.34]
13.51
[25.71]

10.50
[19.83]
10.69
[14.92]
15.48
[32.02]

6.59
[28.36]
8.87
[23.64]
11.63
[36.03]

-0.08
[-0.05]
2.47
[1.21]
4.85
[2.50]

Elasticity
(Spec. 5)

0.8%

0.22

5.1%

0.55

6.2%

0.30

Titles Taken on Revenue-Sharing Contracts
Table 3, Model Specification
% Increase in
Rentals
1
2
3
4
5
(Spec. 5)
15.45
[47.61]
17.04
[43.87]
13.49
[29.53]

Elasticity
(Spec. 5)

Elasticity
(Spec. 5)

-0.0%

-0.00

0.7%

0.13

4.2%

0.26

Marginal effects are based on coefficient estimates summarized in tables 1 through 3, and are calculated for the average values for tier 5 stores (a medium store size).
T-stats in brackets.

36

Table 8: Marginal Capacity Effects, Revenue Regressions

dRev/dC

1

Box A

71.33
[95.65]
74.26
[74.49]
58.25
[58.53]

Box B
Box C

dRev/dC
Box A
Box B
Box C

36.98
[32.78]
33.65
[20.15]
29.88
[16.72]

1

Box A

45.82
[47.69]
48.98
[44.62]
38.43
[30.20]

Box C

69.05
[80.11]
74.20
[63.53]
58.97
[52.37]

47.88
[18.14]
53.40
[38.86]
67.27
[57.50]

41.47
[13.50]
47.05
[42.88]
53.02
[62.77]

28.75
[4.42]
50.34
[7.17]
45.04
[7.17]

37.60
[27.40]
34.31
[18.10]
30.75
[13.91]

36.24
[17.78]
30.63
[10.70]
34.41
[19.17]

22.05
[25.76]
25.14
[10.82]
27.00
[25.45]

8.48
[1.08]
24.83
[2.49]
12.11
[1.29]

0.42

6.7%

0.65

17.3%

0.61

31.26
[19.43]
30.78
[15.34]
43.96
[32.83]

19.85
[28.38]
25.14
[22.35]
33.09
[34.94]

-0.80
[-0.18]
5.65
[0.96]
13.30
[2.43]

Elasticity
(Spec. 5)

0.7%

0.19

4.9%

0.53

5.4%

0.26

Titles Taken on Revenue-Sharing Contracts
Table 6, Model Specification
% Increase in
Revenue
2
3
4
5
(Spec. 5)
43.34
[31.67]
48.46
[36.31]
38.31
[25.89]

Elasticity
(Spec. 5)

1.9%

Titles Taken on Sell-Through Pricing Contracts
Table 5, Model Specification
% Increase in
Revenue
1
2
3
4
5
(Spec. 5)

dRev/dC

Box B

Titles Taken on Linear-Pricing Contracts
Table 4, Model Specification
% Increase in
Revenue
2
3
4
5
(Spec. 5)

Elasticity
(Spec. 5)

-0.0%

-0.02

0.6%

0.11

4.1%

0.26

Marginal effects are based on coefficient estimates summarized in tables 4 through 6, and are calculated for the average values for tier 5 stores (the median store size).
T-stats in brackets.

37

Table 9: Marginal Own- and Cross-Title Capacity Effects on Rentals for A Titles
Quantity Regressions, Specification 5
Effects on Rentals (Q)
Contract Type
Linear Price Sell-Through Price
A-Title Marginal Own Effect

Revenue Share

10.42
[4.77]

3.29
[1.32]

-0.08
[-0.05]

0.56
[0.53]
2.76
[0.99]
3.65
[1.20]

0.45
[1.49]
0.03
[0.05]
0.48
[0.86]

1.85
[4.21]
0.34
[0.45]
0.75
[0.48]

18.01
[7.39]

9.18
[2.69]

2.47
[1.21]

-0.13
[-0.66]
-0.39
[-0.64]
-0.15
[-0.15]

-0.93
[-1.83]
-0.65
[-0.55]
0.24
[0.17]

1.32
[2.79]
0.15
[0.16]
-0.67
[-0.40]

17.01
[7.41]

5.10
[1.63]

4.85
[2.50]

0.02
[1.69]
-0.02
[-0.56]
-0.02
[-0.27]

0.05
[1.89]
0.12
[1.39]
0.09
[0.74]

0.01
[0.60]
0.04
[0.90]
0.13
[1.51]

A-Title Marginal Cross Effects:
Other A-Title Capacity
B-Title Capacity
C-Title Capacity

B-Title Marginal Own Effect
B-Title Marginal Cross Effects:
A-Title Inventory
Other B-Title Inventory
C-Title Inventory

C-Title Marginal Own Effect
C-Title Marginal Cross Effects:
A-Title Inventory
B-Title Inventory
Other C-Title Inventory

Cross effects based on the count of tapes taken on other titles for titles released in the same release
month as the observation title, and are calculated for the average values for tier 5 stores (a medium
store size).
T-stats in brackets.

38

Table 10: Marginal Own- and Cross-Title Capacity Effects on Rentals for A Titles
Revenue Regressions, Specification 5
Effects on Revenues (Rev)
Contract Type

A-Title Marginal Own Effect

Revenue Share
Effect Store Share

Linear Price

Sell-Through Price

28.75
[4.42]

8.48
[1.08]

-0.80
[-0.18]

-0.38

2.30
[0.74]
6.67
[0.80]
7.38
[0.82]

1.60
[1.76]
0.18
[0.11]
1.01
[0.60]

5.28
[4.03]
0.92
[0.40]
1.78
[0.40]

2.54

50.34
[7.17]

24.83
[2.49]

5.65
[0.96]

2.67

-0.30
[-0.50]
-1.42
[-0.82]
-1.01
[-0.36]

-2.28
[-1.54]
-1.80
[-0.51]
0.49
[0.12]

4.01
[2.98]
0.47
[0.18]
-2.63
[-0.53]

1.90

45.04
[7.17]

12.11
[1.29]

13.30
[2.43]

6.66

0.06
[1.82]
-0.04
[-0.41]
-0.03
[-0.14]

0.13
[1.85]
0.36
[1.36]
0.16
[0.45]

0.04
[0.57]
0.13
[0.97]
0.37
[1.57]

0.02

A-Title Marginal Cross Effects:
Other A-Title Inventory
B-Title Inventory
C-Title Inventory

B-Title Marginal Own Effect

0.44
0.85

B-Title Marginal Cross Effects:
A-Title Inventory
Other B-Title Inventory
C-Title Inventory

C-Title Marginal Own Effect

0.22
-1.24

C-Title Marginal Cross Effects:
A-Title Inventory
B-Title Inventory
Other C-Title Inventory

0.07
0.19

Cross effects based on the count of tapes taken on other titles for titles released in the same release
month as the observation title, and are calculated for the average values for tier 5 stores (a medium
store size).
T-stats in brackets.

39

Figure 4: Linear-Pricing Marginal Effect, A Titles

Figure 5: Sell-Through Pricing Marginal Effect, A Titles

40

Figure 6: Revenue-Sharing Marginal Effect, A Titles

41

References
Anupindi, R., Dada, M., and Gupta, S., (1998), “Estimation of Consumer Demand with
Stock-Out Based Substitution: An Application to Vending Machine Products,” Marketing Science, Vol. 17, No. 4, pp. 406-423.
Balachander, S., and Farquhar, P., (1994), “Gaining More by Stocking Less: A Competitive
Analysis of Product Availability,” Marketing Science, Vol. 13, No. 1, pp. 3-22.
Carlton, D., (1978), “Market Behavior with Demand Uncertainty and Price Inflexibility,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 68, pp. 571-87.
Dana, J., and Spier, K., (2001), “Revenue Sharing, Demand Uncertainty, and Vertical
Control of Competing Firms,” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. 49, No. 3, pp
223-45.
Dana, J., (2001), “Competition in Price and Availability When Availability is Unobservable,” Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 32, No. 3, pp 497-513.
Deneckere, R. and J. Peck, (1995), “Competition Over Price and Service Rate When
Demand Is Stochastic: A Strategic Analysis,” Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 26,
No. 1, pp 148-62.
Gupta, R., and Vrat, P., (1986), “Inventory Model for Stock Dependent Consumption
Rate,” Opsearch, Vol. 23, pp. 19-24.
Ho, K., Ho, J., and Mortimer, J., (2008), “The Effects of Full-line Forcing Contracts,”
mimeo, September, 2008.
Mortimer, J., (2007), “Price Discrimination, Copyright Law and Technological Innovation:
Evidence from the Introduction of DVDs,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
122, pp. 1307-50.
Mortimer, J., (2008), “Vertical Contracts in the Video Rental Industry,” The Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. 75, pp. 165-199.
Nahmias, S., (1989), Production and Operations Analysis, Homewood, IL: Irwin Publishers.
Narayanan, V. and Raman, A., (2000), “Assignment of Stocking Decision Rights under
Incomplete Contracting,” mimeo.
Schary, P. and Becker, B., (1972), “Distribution and Final Demand: The Influence of
Availability,” Mississippi Valley Journal of Business Economics, Vol. 8, pp. 17-26.
Urban, T., (1995), “Inventory Models with the Demand Rate Dependent on Stock and
Shortage Levels,” International Journal of Production Economics, Vol. 40, No. 1, pp.
21-28.
42

Urban, T., (2005), “Inventory Models with Inventory-level-dependent Demand: A Comprehensive Review and Unifying Theory,” European Journal of Operational Research,
Vol. 162, No. 3, pp. 792-804.
Wolfe, H., (1968), “A Model for Control of Style Merchandise,” Industrial Management
Review, Vol. 9, pp. 69-82.

43

