                                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   UNEMPLOYMENT DYNAMICS IN THE OECD

                                                               Michael Elsby
                                                                Bart Hobijn
                                                               Aysegul Sahin

                                                      Working Paper 14617
                                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w14617


                                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                              December 2008




We would like to thank Shigeru Fujita, Wilbert van der Klaauw, Emi Nakamura, Simon Potter, Gary
Solon, and participants at the December 2008 New York/Philadelphia Workshop on Quantitative Macroeconomics
for their helpful comments and suggestions, and Joseph Song for his outstanding research assistance.
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. An Excel spreadsheet with all the data, calculations,
and results presented in this paper is available for download at http://www.frbsf.org/economics/economists/bhobijn/UnemploymentDynamicsInTheOECD.xls.
E-mail addresses for correspondence: elsby@umich.edu; bart.hobijn@sf.frb.org; aysegul.sahin@ny.frb.org.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Unemployment Dynamics in the OECD
Michael Elsby, Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin
NBER Working Paper No. 14617
December 2008
JEL No. E24,J6

                                             ABSTRACT

We provide a set of comparable estimates for the rates of inflow to and outflow from unemployment
for fourteen OECD economies using publicly available data. We then devise a method to decompose
changes in unemployment into contributions accounted for by changes in inflow and outflow rates
for cases where unemployment deviates from its flow steady state, as it does in many countries. Our
decomposition reveals that fluctuations in both inflow and outflow rates contribute substantially to
unemployment variation within countries. For Anglo-Saxon economies we find approximately a 20:80
inflow/outflow split to unemployment variation, while for Continental European countries, we observe
much closer to a 50:50 split. Using the estimated flow rates we compute gross worker flows into and
out of unemployment. In all economies we observe that increases in inflows lead increases in unemployment,
whereas outflows lag a ramp up in unemployment.


Michael Elsby                                       Aysegul Sahin
University of Michigan                              Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Department of Economics                             Research & Statistics Group
238 Lorch Hall                                      33 Liberty Street
611 Tappan Street                                   New York, NY 10045
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                            Aysegul.Sahin@ny.frb.org
and NBER
elsby@umich.edu

Bart Hobijn
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Economic Research Department, Mailstop 1130
101 Market Street, 11th floor
San Francisco, CA 94105
bart.hobijn@sf.frb.org
1         Introduction
Unemployment rates among developed economies have varied substantially both across time
and across countries over the last 40 years. This variation in unemployment may occur as a
result of variation in the rate at which workers ‡ow into the unemployment pool, variation
in the rate at which unemployed workers exit the unemployment pool, or a combination
of the two. The relative contributions of changes in in‡ow and out‡ow rates to changes
in unemployment have been abundantly documented for the U.S.1 Less is known, however,
about the driving forces of unemployment variation in other countries. Such a question is
of interest because of the considerable variation in unemployment that has been observed
in developed economies in recent decades, notably in Continental Europe. In this paper, we
provide a detailed analysis of unemployment ‡ows for fourteen developed economies using
publicly available data.
        In the …rst part of our analysis we describe how it is possible to derive measures of the
rates of in‡ow2 to and out‡ow from the unemployment pool using annual data from the
OECD. To do this, we generalize the method developed by Shimer (2007), which makes use
of time series for the number employed, the number unemployed, and the number unem-
ployed less than …ve weeks to infer ‡ow hazard rates for the U.S. A limitation that arises
when applying this methodology outside the U.S. is that series on short duration unemploy-
ment can be noisy for countries in which short durations account for a small proportion
of overall unemployment, such as in Continental Europe. To address this, we develop a
method that exploits additional data on unemployment at higher durations to construct a
set of comparable time series for the unemployment in‡ow and out‡ow rates across countries.
        Our measures allow us to document a set of stylized facts on unemployment ‡ows among
    1
     See Elsby, Michaels, and Solon [2008], Fujita and Ramey [2008], Hall [2005a,b], Shimer [2007], and
Yashiv [2007].
   2
     Some recent literature on unemployment ‡ows has referred to the rate of in‡ow into unemployment as
the “separation rate” (Shimer, 2005a, b; Fujita and Ramey, 2008). We refer to it as the in‡ow rate for
two reasons. First, a separation is typically taken to mean a quit or a layo¤ from an employer. In the
presence of job-to-job transitions, such separations need not lead to an unemployment spell. Second, some
unemployment spells originate from non-participation rather than a separation from employment.



                                                   2
developed economies. First, the average level of unemployment in‡ow and out‡ow rates
varies substantially across countries. Interestingly, the results suggest a natural partition-
ing of economies into Anglo-Saxon, Nordic and Continental European. Anglo-Saxon and
Nordic economies display high exit rates from unemployment, with monthly hazards that
exceed 20 percent. In stark contrast, out‡ow rates among Continental European economies
are much lower— typically less than 10 percent at a monthly frequency. Symmetrically, un-
employment in‡ow rates also vary considerably across countries. Anglo-Saxon and Nordic
countries exhibit in‡ow hazards that exceed 1.5 percent at a monthly frequency. However, as
with the observed levels of out‡ow rates, monthly in‡ow rates among Continental European
economies are again much lower at around 0.5 to 1 percent.3
      In the second part of our analysis, we pose the question of how much of the observed vari-
ation in unemployment within each country can be accounted for by variation in the in‡ow
rate into unemployment and variation in the out‡ow rate from unemployment respectively.
To answer this, we provide a method for decomposing changes in the unemployment rate
into contributions due to changes in the ‡ow hazards that can be applied in countries with
very di¤erent unemployment dynamics. Recent literature (Elsby, Michaels, and Solon [2008],
Fujita and Ramey [2008], Petrongolo and Pissarides [2008]) has evaluated these contributions
under the assumption that the unemployment rate is closely approximated by its ‡ow steady
state value. Under this assumption, contemporaneous unemployment variation may be de-
composed into contributions related to contemporaneous logarithmic variation in in‡ow and
out‡ow hazards. While this steady state assumption holds as a reasonable approximation
in the U.S., we show that it can be very inaccurate in other developed economies, notably
those of Continental Europe.
      Reacting to this we show that, in cases where unemployment deviates from steady state,
current variation in unemployment can be decomposed recursively into contributions due
to current and past logarithmic changes in the in‡ow and out‡ow hazards.                  Intuitively,
  3
    These observations con…rm the diagnosis that European labor markets are sclerotic in the sense that
they display much lower rates of reallocation of labor, as documented in Blanchard and Summers (1986),
Bertola and Rogerson (1997), Blanchard and Wolfers (2000), and Blanchard and Portugal (2001).



                                                  3
when unemployment is out of steady state, it can vary as a result of contemporaneous
changes in the in‡ow and out‡ow rates, or as a result of dynamics driven by past changes in
these ‡ow hazards. Using our alternative decomposition, we obtain a much more accurate
characterization of changes in unemployment rates across countries.
    Application of our decomposition to our estimated time series for the ‡ow hazard rates
provides us with a second stylized fact on unemployment ‡ows. Among all countries that we
consider, ‡uctuations in both in‡ow and out‡ow rates contribute substantially to unemploy-
ment variations within countries. The relative contribution of each di¤ers across countries,
however. Among Anglo-Saxon economies we …nd approximately a 20:80 in‡ow/out‡ow split
of unemployment variation, a result that echoes recent …ndings for the U.S. over the same
sample period. For Continental European and Nordic countries, however, we observe much
closer to a 50:50 in‡ow/out‡ow split. Thus, a complete understanding of unemployment
variation among our large sample of developed economies requires an understanding of the
determinants of both the in‡ow rate as well as the out‡ow rate.
    The …nal part of our analysis uses the estimated ‡ow hazard rates to compute measures
of the number of workers ‡owing in and out of the unemployment pool (as opposed to the
hazard rates for these ‡ows).4 A third stylized fact that emerges from these results is that a
geographical partitioning also applies to average worker ‡ows across countries. Anglo-Saxon
and Nordic countries exhibit annual worker ‡ows in and out of unemployment that comprise
more than 15 percent of the labor force. Among Continental European economies, on the
other hand, worker ‡ows typically involve less than 9 percent of the labor force.5
    We then analyze the dynamic relationship between these worker ‡ows and unemployment
   4
     Our analysis is not the …rst to estimate worker ‡ows across countries. Other studies that examine worker
‡ows for a subset of European countries include Albaek and Sørensen (1998) for Denmark; Bauer and Bender
(2004) and Bachmann (2005) for Germany; Bertola and Rogerson (1997) for Canada, Germany, Italy, the
U.K., and the U.S.; Burda and Wyplosz (1994) for France, Germany, Spain, and the U.K.; Petrongolo and
Pissarides (2008) for France, Spain and the U.K.; and Pissarides (1986), Bell and Smith (2002), and Gomes
(2008) for the U.K. Reichling (2005) reports estimates of the separation rate for a set of countries (see his
Table 5) and also emphasizes that the separation rate is lower in European countries than in the U.S.
   5
     This result echoes the …ndings of Blanchard and Portugal (2001) and Bertola and Rogerson (1997) who
show that, although levels of annual job ‡ows are often similar between European countries and the U.S.,
worker ‡ows are much lower.



                                                     4
within each country. Using a simple correlation analysis, we document a fourth stylized fact
on unemployment ‡ows among developed economies: The timing of the contributions of
in‡ows and out‡ows to unemployment variation displays a remarkable uniformity across
countries. In all economies we observe that increases in in‡ows lead increases in unemploy-
ment, whereas out‡ows lag a ramp up in unemployment.6
       Our …ndings that variation in unemployment in‡ows accounts both for a substantial
fraction of unemployment variation, as well as being an important leading indicator for
changes in unemployment dovetails with a recent literature on U.S. unemployment ‡ows. A
growing trend in modern macroeconomic models of the aggregate labor market has been to
assume that the in‡ow rate into unemployment is acyclical (Hall [2005a,b], Shimer [2005]
among others). Reacting to this, a number of recent studies has cautioned against this
trend by documenting evidence for systematic countercyclical movements in unemployment
in‡ows in U.S. data.7 Our …ndings show that this caution resonates all the more if we wish
to understand the considerable variation in unemployment rates observed outside the U.S.
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we summarize the OECD
data that we use throughout our analysis. In section 3, we describe our methodology for
inferring the rates of in‡ow to and out‡ow from the unemployment pool using the OECD
data. Application of this methodology provides individual time series for the unemployment
‡ow hazards for each of the fourteen countries in our sample. In section 4, we pose the
question of how much of the variation in unemployment within countries can be accounted
for by changes in the in‡ow and out‡ow rates respectively. To answer this question, we
derive a decomposition of unemployment variation that allows for unemployment to deviate
from steady state. We show that allowing for such deviations is critical for understanding
unemployment ‡uctuations outside the U.S. Section 5 presents evidence on the number of
   6
     This observation has been highlighted for the U.S. in earlier studies. See Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant
[1985, 1986], Blanchard and Diamond [1990], Davis [2006], Fujita and Ramey [2008].
   7
     Recent studies that have emphasized this fact include Braun, De Bock, and DiCecio (2006); Davis (2006);
Elsby, Michaels, and Solon (2008); Fujita and Ramey (2008); Kennan (2006); and Yashiv (2008). Older
studies that have documented this include Perry (1972); Marston (1976); Blanchard and Diamond (1990);
and Baker (1992).




                                                     5
workers ‡owing in and out of unemployment, and documents stylized facts on the timing
of the impact of worker ‡ows on unemployment changes. Section 6 summarizes and o¤ers
conclusions.



2         Data
Since a large part of our analysis is informed by the available data, we start by discussing
the OECD samples that we use. These are taken from two di¤erent sources. First, we
use annual measures of the unemployment stock by duration, taken from OECD (2008a).8
We then supplement these data with quarterly measures of the aggregate unemployment
rate, taken from OECD (2008b). Both slices of data are based on the labor force surveys
conducted in each of the countries in our sample.
        The fourteen economies that we focus on are: Australia, Canada, France, Germany,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom,
and the United States. For all countries relatively long historical quarterly time series are
available for the unemployment rate. Our focus on these economies is primarily driven by
the length of the available requisite series for unemployment by duration. Throughout, we
denote the fraction of the labor force in an unemployment spell of less than d months in
month t by u<d 9                                                <1   <3   <6       <12
            t . For our analysis we use annual time series for ut , ut , ut , and ut   .
Note that we de…ne these categories inclusively, in the sense that u<3
                                                                    t  includes u<1
                                                                                 t , and so

on. The starting year for the available series varies between 1968 (for the U.S.) and 1986
(for New Zealand and Portugal).10 For all countries, the data end in 2007.
        An important advantage of using data from the OECD is that, even though the La-
bor Force Surveys of these countries have di¤erent structures, the OECD data have been
standardized to adhere to the same structure. This aids cross-country comparisons of our
    8
     The data are also publicly available on the web from http://stats.oecd.org.
    9
     For many countries, data on unemployment duration initially were collected only once a year. More
recently, mainly due to the standardization of Labor Force Surveys in the European Union, countries are
collecting these data at a quarterly frequency. Because our aim is to construct historical time series that are
as long as possible, we focus on annual time series.
  10
     The initial year in the sample for each country is listed in Table 2.


                                                      6
results.11



3       The Ins and Outs of Unemployment in the OECD
At the heart of our analysis is a set of estimated annual time series of ‡ow hazard rates into
and out of unemployment for fourteen OECD countries. These times series are estimated us-
ing an extension of the method that Shimer (2007) developed for the United States. Shimer’s
method cannot be applied directly to other OECD countries because the required data are
not available. The extension that we introduce allows us to overcome this limitation and to
produce annual time series for the rates of in‡ow to and out‡ow from the unemployment
pool for a large subset of OECD countries.


3.1     Analytical Framework

The evolution over time of the unemployment rate, which we denote by ut , can be written
as:12
                                       dut
                                           = st (1       ut )   ft ut ;                                (1)
                                       dt
where st is monthly the rate of in‡ow into unemployment, ft is the monthly out‡ow rate
from unemployment, and t indexes months.13 As mentioned above, the data that we use in
the remainder of the paper allow us to infer unemployment ‡ows at an annual frequency.
Thus, we would like to relate the continuous time evolution of unemployment in equation (1)
to the unemployment rates that we observe at discrete annual intervals. Assuming that the
  11
     While the OECD goes to some lengths to standardize their unemployment measures, their procedures
may not be perfect. For example, it is possible that workers who de…ne themselves as out of the labor force
in e.g. the U.S. might de…ne themselves as unemployed in Europe. Addressing these important issues of
standardization is beyond the scope of this paper.
  12
     It is important to note that equation (1) implicitly assumes that all of the in‡ow into unemployment
originates from employment. We have calculated a set of results taking into account non-participation.
Except for the level of the average in‡ow rate, these results were very similar to those we present here.
Details of these results, as well as an explanation of why this is the case are provided in the Appendix.
  13
     We de…ne the ‡ow hazards st and ft in monthly terms to aid comparison with estimates reported in
U.S. studies of unemployment ‡ows.




                                                     7
‡ow hazards are constant within years,14 and solving equation (1) forward one year allows
us to do this:
                                     ut =       t ut   + (1        t )ut 12 ,                        (2)

where
                                                            st
                                                ut =                                                 (3)
                                                         st + ft
denotes the ‡ow steady-state unemployment rate, and

                                                              12(st +ft )
                                            t   =1       e                                           (4)


is the annual rate of convergence to steady state. In this way we can relate variation in
the unemployment stock ut in a given country over the course of a year to variation in the
underlying ‡ow hazards, st and ft . To implement this, however, we need to obtain estimates
of these ‡ow hazards, to which we now turn.
       Our method for estimating the out‡ow rate ft is an extension of the method popularized
by Shimer (2007). In his study of U.S. unemployment ‡ows, he infers the monthly out‡ow
probability Ft using the identity that the monthly change in the unemployment stock is given
by
                                      ut+1        ut = u<1
                                                        t+1          Ft ut .                         (5)

Here u<1
      t+1 denotes the stock of unemployed workers with duration less than one month, and

hence re‡ects the ‡ows into unemployment; Ft ut re‡ects the ‡ows out of unemployment.
  14
     This assumption does lead to some smoothing out of high frequency variation in the ‡ow hazards that
we estimate. As many U.S. studies of unemployment ‡ows have shown, and as we will con…rm in our cross–
country estimates, it is predominantly the in‡ow rate st that displays such high frequency variation. It
follows that annual smoothing is likely to lead to an overstatement of the contribution of changes in the
out‡ow rate ft to unemployment variation. This works against a key …nding of this paper that variation in
the in‡ow rate st accounts for a substantial fraction of unemployment variation.




                                                         8
Solving for the monthly out‡ow probability, one obtains15

                                                 ut+1         u<1
                                                               t+1
                                       Ft = 1                         .                           (6)
                                                         ut

The monthly out‡ow probability is then related to the associated monthly out‡ow hazard
rate, ft<1 , through
                                        ft<1 =    ln(1        Ft ).                               (7)


3.2       Estimation of Flow Hazard Rates

In what follows we will see that the estimate of the out‡ow rate implied by equation (6)
works well for countries in which the out‡ow rate from unemployment is relatively high, such
as the U.S. However, in countries that exhibit low exit rates, such as those of Continental
Europe, estimates based on equation (6) can be substantially noisy. The simple reason is
that low out‡ow rates imply that very few unemployed workers at a point in time are in
their …rst month of unemployment, which increases the sampling variance of the estimate of
u<1
 t+1 , and in turn leads to noisy estimates of ft .

       Our approach to this problem is to use the additional unemployment duration data
available from the OECD to increase the precision of our estimate of ft in countries where
the out‡ow rate is low. To see how this may be done recall that the OECD data also report
the unemployment stock at durations higher than one month. It follows that, analogous to
the method detailed above, it is possible to write the probability that an unemployed worker
exits unemployment within d months as

                                                  ut+d        u<d
                                                               t+d
                                     Ft<d = 1                             .                       (8)
                                                         ut
  15
    Since the OECD database reports only quarterly data on the aggregate unemployment rate, we compute
ut by interpolating quarterly data.




                                                  9
As before, this can be mapped into an out‡ow rate estimate given by


                                       ft<d =    ln(1    Ft<d )=d:                                    (9)


Given the available data, we can estimate ft<d for d = 1; 3; 6; 12.16
       It is important to clarify the interpretation of the out‡ow rate measures ft<d . It is
tempting to interpret ft<d as the out‡ow rate for unemployed workers of duration d. However,
that is not an accurate interpretation. Rather, it is the hazard rate associated with the
probability that an unemployed worker at time t completes her spell within the subsequent
d months.
       These four measures, ft<1 ; ft<3 ; ft<6 ; and ft<12 , are not necessarily estimates of the same
out‡ow rate. Only in the case where the out‡ow hazard is unrelated to the duration of an
unemployment spell, i.e. if there is no duration dependence in out‡ow rates, are all four
measures consistent estimates of the aggregate out‡ow rate from unemployment, de…ned
as the average out‡ow rate among the entire unemployed population.17 However, if there
is duration dependence in unemployment out‡ow rates in a given country, then estimates
based on durations of unemployment greater than one month, ft<3 ; ft<6 ; and ft<12 , will not
yield consistent estimates of the average out‡ow rate among the unemployed.
       For example, imagine that there exists negative duration dependence whereby the out‡ow
rate declines with duration.18 In such an environment, we would expect to observe ft<1 >
ft<3 > ft<6 > ft<12 . To see why, consider the version of equation (8) which expresses the
fraction of the unemployment stock in month t that exits within the next three months.
  16
     The appendix contains a detailed description on how we estimate these rates combining the annual and
quarterly data available.
  17
     As has been emphasized since Kaitz (1970), duration dependence can arise through two channels. “True”
duration dependence refers to the case where unemployment duration has a causal e¤ect on the out‡ow
rates of individual workers. In contrast, “spurious” duration dependence refers to the process of dynamic
selection whereby workers with high exit rates leave unemployment faster than those with low exit rates,
thereby generating a negative correlation between duration and out‡ow rates (Salant, 1977). The duration
dependence that we refer to in this paper could arise from either of these two channels.
  18
     In the U.S., for example, the …nding of substantial negative duration dependence in unemployment exit
rates has been widely documented since Kaitz (1970). Most recently, Shimer (2008) has emphasized this
stylized fact for the U.S.



                                                   10
The remaining unemployed workers that do not exit over these subsequent three months
increasingly will be comprised of unemployed workers with low out‡ow rates, i.e. the high
duration unemployed. This process of dynamic selection will imply that excessive weight
will be placed on the low out‡ow rates of high duration unemployed workers in the estimate
of ft<3 , generating a downward bias in its estimate of ft . This argument applies even more
strongly to the estimates of ft<6 and ft<12 .19
       In light of this, we formally test for the presence of duration dependence in out‡ow rates
by testing the hypothesis that ft<1 = ft<3 = ft<6 = ft<12 . The formal details are described
in the Appendix, but our general approach is as follows. First, we derive the asymptotic
distribution of the unemployment rates by duration as well as for the unemployment rates.
We then apply the Delta method to compute the joint asymptotic distribution of the out‡ow
rate estimates ft<d with d = 1; 3; 6; 12. This allows us to formulate a simple Chi-squared test
of the hypothesis of no duration dependence.
       For those countries for which we reject the hypothesis of no duration dependence, we
follow the recent U.S. literature in using ft<1 as our estimate of the unemployment out‡ow
rate. For countries with weak evidence for duration dependence for which we do not reject
the null, we make use of all the additional information on the out‡ow rate contained in
ft<3 ; ft<6 ; and ft<12 in order to obtain a more precise estimate of ft . Speci…cally, we use
our estimates of the asymptotic distribution of the out‡ow rate estimates, ft<1 ; ft<3 ; ft<6 ; and
ft<12 to compute an optimally weighted estimate of the out‡ow rate that minimizes the mean
squared error of the estimate.20
       The results of the hypothesis test are reported in Table 2. While we …nd signi…cant
evidence of duration dependence in Anglo-Saxon and Nordic countries and Japan, we do
not observe signi…cant evidence among the Continental European countries in our sample.21
  19
     By the same token, the estimate of ft<1 that has been widely used in recent literature is also subject to
this drawback, just to a lesser degree than the other three measures.
  20
     The construction of these optimal weights is detailed in the Appendix.
  21
     While our hypothesis test provides a natural rule of thumb, we implicitly rule in favor of the null when
the hypothesis of no duration dependence cannot be rejected. This raises the question of the power of the
test. In results that can be replicated in the spreadsheet that accompanies this paper, we observe that the
test does indeed have high power among the Continental European economies for which we fail to reject the


                                                     11
These results are consistent with other work that has estimated duration dependence across
countries. Machin and Manning (1999) …t a Weibull duration model to the duration struc-
ture of unemployment across countries. They report weak negative duration dependence
in France and Spain in the 1990s, but strong negative duration dependence in Australia,
the U.K. and the U.S. in the 1980s and 1990s. Using a similar approach on OECD data,
Hobijn and Şahin (2007) also …nd little evidence of duration dependence among Continental
European economies, but substantial evidence among economies with high unemployment
out‡ow rates.22 The result of our hypothesis test is that we use ft<1 as our estimate of the
out‡ow rate for the Anglo-Saxon countries in our sample and the optimally weighted average
of ft<1 ; ft<3 ; ft<6 ; and ft<12 for the remaining countries.
    Given our estimate of the out‡ow rate, we compute the in‡ow rate st using the method
pioneered by Shimer (2007). In particular, note that the expression for the annual unem-
ployment rate in equation (2) is simply a nonlinear equation in the unemployment rates,
ut+12 and ut , and the ‡ow hazard rates, st and ft . We can thus solve equation (2) for the
in‡ow rate. As emphasized by Shimer (2007) and subsequent work based on his method,
this estimate of the in‡ow rate is robust to temporal aggregation bias in the measurement
of unemployment in‡ows.


3.3     Evidence from OECD Data

The average unemployment in‡ow and out‡ow hazards over the sample periods for the whole
sample of countries are reported in Table 2. A striking observation from these results is the
substantial cross-country variation in both st and ft . A particularly useful illustration of
this point is in Figure 1, which displays the average values of st and ft from Table 2 in graph
form. Interestingly, one can discern a natural partition of developed economies between
Anglo-Saxon, Nordic and Continental European economies.
null, in the sense that the estimates of ft<d are similar for all durations d.
  22
     Hobijn and Şahin use GMM to estimate the steady-state job-…nding and separation rates for a broad
sample of countries. Their analysis covers a broader set of countries but is restricted to the estimation of
the average job-…nding and separation rates. Since they focus on average ‡ow hazards, their analysis does
not address the dynamic properties of the evolution of unemployment in these countries.


                                                    12
       Figure 1 reveals very high out‡ow rates among the Anglo-Saxon and Nordic economies.
Among these countries the average monthly unemployment out‡ow hazard exceeds 20 per-
cent. The economies of Continental Europe stand in stark contrast. Unemployment out‡ow
rates in these economies lie below 10 percent at a monthly frequency. A similar picture
develops for the estimates of the in‡ow rates in Figure 1. We observe high unemployment
in‡ow hazards among the Anglo-Saxon and Nordic economies, which typically lie above 1.5
percent on a monthly basis. Likewise, in‡ow rates among the European economies are again
much lower at around 0.5 to 1 percent per month.
       Figure 1 also shows that there are both extremes and intermediate cases that are un-
derstated in this Anglo-Saxon/Nordic/Continental Europe taxonomy. For Japan, while the
average unemployment out‡ow rate of 19 percent is similar to those in Anglo-Saxon and
Nordic economies, its in‡ow rate is more comparable to those of Continental Europe. An-
other intermediate case is the U.K., which displays unemployment ‡ows that lie halfway be-
tween the Anglo-Saxon and the Continental European models.23 Perhaps the most striking
observation, however, is the outlier status of the U.S. With an average monthly unemploy-
ment out‡ow rate of nearly 60 percent and an average in‡ow rate of 3.5 percent, it exhibits
transition rates at least 50 percent larger than the remainder of our sample of countries.24
       Figures 2 and 3 display the time series for the in‡ow and out‡ow hazards for each country
in our sample. The transition rates are plotted on log scales since, as emphasized in the
literature on unemployment ‡ows and as we will con…rm in what follows, it is the logarithmic
variation in st and ft that places them on an equal footing with respect to ‡uctuations in
the unemployment rate.
       Figures 2 and 3 reveal that, in addition to signi…cant cross-country variation in unem-
ployment ‡ows, there is also substantial variation in unemployment ‡ow hazards over time
  23
     For a detailed analysis of the labor market reforms in the U.K. see Pissarides (2003).
  24
     The depiction of unemployment ‡ows in Figure 1 is consistent with received wisdom on the structural
di¤erences between European and U.S. labor markets. European labor markets display much lower rates of
reallocation of labor as documented in Blanchard and Summers (1986), Bertola and Rogerson (1997) and
Blanchard and Portugal (2001). These authors have emphasized di¤erences in labor market institutions such
as employment protection legislation in driving these di¤erences in unemployment ‡ows.




                                                   13
within countries. Although there is a great deal of information contained in these …gures, a
number of observations come to light. First, there are important di¤erences in the frequency
of ‡uctuations in unemployment ‡ows across economies. Among the Anglo-Saxon economies,
a clear cyclical pattern can be discerned, suggesting a substantial high frequency component
to unemployment ‡uctuations in these countries. Among other economies, however, the
variation in st and ft occurs at a much lower frequency, and it is hard to di¤erentiate cycle
from trend.
   A reassuring aspect of our …ndings in Figures 2 and 3 is that they are qualitatively
similar to those in previous literature that has estimated gross worker ‡ows among labor
market states using microdata for individual countries. Our estimates for the U.K. are
consistent with the declining employment to unemployment (E–U) and rising unemployment
to employment (U–E) transition rates estimated using U.K. Labour Force Survey data from
the early 1990s on (Bell and Smith, 2002; Gomes 2008; Petrongolo and Pissarides, 2008).
The trends we …nd for Germany are consistent with Bachmann (2005) who uses German
social security data to estimate a sharp rise in the E–U transition rate and a decline in the
U–E hazard in the early 1990s. In addition, the estimated time series for Spain correspond
very closely to those reported in Petrongolo and Pissarides (2008) using Spanish Labor Force
Survey data.
   Figures 2 and 3 are also indicative of how the relative contributions of variation in the
in‡ow and out‡ow rates di¤er across countries. Speci…cally, the Anglo-Saxon economies
appear to display relatively more variation in the out‡ow rate from unemployment, a point
that has been emphasized in recent literature for the U.S. However, inspection of the time
series for the Nordic and European economies reveals greater variation in the in‡ow rate,
suggesting about an equal contribution of the ins and the outs to unemployment variation
in these countries. Of course, this visual impression is only suggestive of the relative con-
tributions of the in‡ow and out‡ow hazards to unemployment variation; in the next section
we address this issue more formally.




                                             14
4       Decomposing Unemployment Fluctuations
In this section, we formulate and apply a formal decomposition of changes in unemployment
into parts due to changes in the in‡ow and out‡ow rates for each country. In contrast to
the decomposition applied to U.S. data by Elsby, Michaels, and Solon (2008) and Fujita and
Ramey (2008), our decomposition allows for deviations of the actual unemployment rate
from its ‡ow steady-state value. We show that allowing for such deviations is important
for understanding unemployment ‡uctuations in many, especially European, countries. We
use the annual time series on in‡ow and out‡ow rates, presented above, to conduct this
decomposition. Because we use annual data in what follows, time, t, is denoted in years
rather than months in the remainder of this paper.


4.1       Analytical Framework

As mentioned above, an important aim of this paper is to understand the proximate driving
forces behind variation in unemployment rates across countries. As previous literature has
shown, such a task is relatively straightforward for the U.S.25 The reason is that unem-
ployment dynamics are uncommonly rapid in the U.S.— that is, st + ft is a relatively large
number in the U.S. The formal implication of this is that the rate of convergence of the
                                                                                                12(st +ft )
unemployment rate to its ‡ow steady state value in equation (2),                  t   = 1   e                 , is
very close to one in the U.S. In this case, the unemployment rate can be approximated very
closely by its ‡ow steady state value,

                                                       st
                                    ut       ut =           , and    t    1:                             (10)
                                                    st + ft

As emphasized in Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2008), log di¤erentiation of the latter implies


                                   d ln ut     (1     ut )[d ln st   d ln ft ]:                          (11)
 25
      See Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2008), Fujita and Ramey (2008) and Pissarides (2007), among others.




                                                       15
Thus, in countries with labor markets characterized by fast unemployment dynamics, a
simple decomposition of unemployment variation presents itself: The relative contributions
of the in‡ow and out‡ow rates to unemployment variation can be gleaned from comparing
the contemporaneous logarithmic variation in the two ‡ow hazard rates.
   Based on the evidence we found above, one might anticipate that the approximations
that underlie the decomposition of unemployment variation based on (11) work well among
the Anglo-Saxon and Nordic economies, which display relatively high rates of in‡ow and
out‡ow. However, the evidence also suggests that there is good reason to hesitate in applying
equation (11) as a decomposition of unemployment variation in Continental Europe. The
reason is that the unemployment ‡ow hazards in these economies are very low, especially
relative to the U.S. Inspection of equation (2) reveals that, for Continental Europe, the ‡ow
steady-state unemployment rate is therefore likely to be a poor approximation to the actual
unemployment rate.
   Reacting to this, we devise a decomposition of unemployment changes that holds even
when unemployment is out of steady state. Our approach uses equation (2) as its starting
point. We show in the Appendix that a log-linear approximation to (2) allows us to express
the log change in the unemployment rate recursively as

                                                                  1     t 2
               ln ut   t 1    1   ut   1   [ ln st    ln ft ] +               ln ut   1   .           (12)
                                                                      t 2


This decomposition distinguishes between changes in the steady state due to current changes
in the in‡ow and out‡ow rates, and changes in the unemployment rate due to deviations
from the steady state caused by past changes in the ‡ow rates.
   A number of aspects are worth noting about equation (12). First, if unemployment
dynamics are very fast, so that st + ft is high and    t   is close to one for all t, then equation
equation (12) reduces to the steady state decomposition implied by (11). In addition, a
particularly intuitive way of understanding (12) is to consider the case where                t   =    for
all t. In that case, the log change in the unemployment rate in (12) is a distributed lag of
contemporaneous and past log changes in the in‡ow rate st and the ft . This highlights a

                                                16
potential pitfall of applying the steady state decomposition in (11) to unemployment ‡ows
in economies, such as those of Continental Europe, with slow unemployment dynamics:
Out of steady state, contemporaneous variation in the unemployment rate is driven both
by contemporaneous as well as lagged variation in the ‡ow hazards. We will see that, by
ignoring these lag e¤ects, the steady-state decomposition can lead to misleading conclusions
on the relative contributions of the in‡ow and out‡ow rate to changes in unemployment.
      In principle, the non steady-state decomposition in equation (12) can be used to assess the
relative contributions of in‡ow and out‡ow rates for any given change in the unemployment
rate at any time for any given country. Clearly, however, given the wealth of information in
our dataset, performing such a decomposition for every unemployment episode in every coun-
try would be excessive. Thus, we need a method of summarizing the relative contributions
of the ins and outs of unemployment.
      Fujita and Ramey (2008) formulate such a summary method for the U.S. using the
steady-state decomposition. Speci…cally, they compute the following                                    values:

                 cov( ln ut ; (1 ut 1 ) ln ft )                                 cov( ln ut ; (1 ut 1 ) ln st )
         f   =                                  and                     s   =                                  ;         (13)
                          var( ln ut )                                                 var( ln ut )

where a superscript                indicates that these are based on the assumption that observed un-
employment is closely approximated by its steady-state value. If this assumption holds,                                    f
                                                              26
and     s    should approximately sum to one.
      We extend Fujita and Ramey’s s to the decomposition of unemployment changes out
of steady state based on equation (12). In particular, for each country in our sample we
compute

                         cov ( ln ut ; Cf t )             cov ( ln ut ; Cst )                    cov ( ln ut ; C0t )
                 f   =                        ,   s   =                       , and      0   =                       ,   (14)
                           var( ln ut )                     var( ln ut )                           var( ln ut )

where Cf t , Cst , and C0t respectively denote the cumulative contributions of contemporaneous
and past variation in the in‡ow rate, the out‡ow rate, as well as the initial deviation from
 26
      Fujita and Ramey (2008) con…rm that this is approximately the case for the U.S.


                                                                   17
steady state at time t = 0. Consistent with (12), they are de…ned recursively by

                                                             1         t 2
               Cf t =   t 1     (1       ut 1 ) ln ft +                      Cf t   1     with Cf 0 = 0,         (15)
                                                                   t 2
                                                         1         t 2
               Cst =    t 1   (1     ut 1 ) ln st +                      Cst    1       with Cs0 = 0,            (16)
                                                                 t 2


and
                                   t 1   (1     t 2)
                        C0t =                          C0t   1   with C00 =              ln u0 .                 (17)
                                          t 2

If the decomposition fully captures ‡uctuations in the unemployment rate then                              s+ f + 0   =
1.


4.2     Accounting for Unemployment Fluctuations in the OECD

In order to illustrate why it is important to take into account deviations from steady state
for many countries, consider Figure 4. This plots the actual unemployment rate, ut , as well
as the ‡ow steady state unemployment rate, ut , for the four countries that are studied by
Petrongolo and Pissarides (2008), namely France, Spain, the U.K., and the U.S. As has been
emphasized in the recent literature, for the U.S. the actual unemployment rate is virtually
identical to the steady state unemployment rate. However, we observe that this is not the
case for the other three countries.
     Another way of seeing this is to look at the second column of Table 3. This lists the
standard deviation of the logarithmic deviation of unemployment from steady state for each
of the countries in our sample. Table 3 reveals that these deviations tend to be small among
Anglo-Saxon economies which have high in‡ow and out‡ow rates, with the exception of the
U.K. All other countries exhibit substantial deviations of unemployment from its ‡ow steady
state value.
     To see what happens when one applies the decomposition based on the steady-state
assumption to a country that substantially deviates from steady state, consider the top panel
of Figure 5. It depicts the steady-state decomposition of                           ln ut into parts due to changes


                                                       18
in the in‡ow rate, the out‡ow rate, and a residual part that due to approximation error for
France. As can be seen from this …gure, the residuals from the steady-state decomposition
are very large. In fact, in this case we observe that         f   +   s   = 1:20 rather than 1. Thus, if one
calculates     s   and imputes      f   =1    s,   then one would underestimate        f   by 0:20 because of
the approximation error induced by deviations from steady state.27
       The bottom panel of Figure 5 depicts the non-steady-state decomposition for France.
As this …gure shows, the residuals are very small and the magnitudes of the parts due to
the ‡ow rates decrease relative to the steady-state decomposition. In the …rst …ve years of
the sample a non-trivial part of unemployment ‡uctuations in France was due to the labor
market not being in steady state in 1976. This is re‡ected by the contribution of the initial
value to the changes in the unemployment rate.
       The results of our non steady-state decomposition based on equations (12), (14) and (15)
for each country are presented in Table 3. For purposes of comparison, we also include the
results from applying the steady-state decomposition. The results in Table 3 are notable
from a number of perspectives. First, as anticipated above, we observe that the steady state
decomposition in equation (13) works quite well for economies with fast unemployment
dynamics, such as the Anglo-Saxon and Nordic economies, in the sense that the                       s   and   f

approximately sum to one for these economies. In contrast, the steady state decomposition
performs very poorly among economies with slow unemployment dynamics: The sum of the
estimated      s   and   f   consistently lies above one for these countries, rendering the steady-state
decomposition uninformative in determining the driving forces of unemployment variation.28
       As anticipated by the results for France in Figure 5, the results of our non steady-state
decomposition reveal that this problem is substantially reduced when we take account of
the lag structure of the e¤ects of changes in in‡ow and out‡ow rates on unemployment:
  27
     In their analysis, Petrongolo and Pissarides (2008) implicitly acknowledge this drawback by eliminating
the periods for which the deviation of the unemployment rate from its ‡ow steady state value is large.
  28
     The main reason that the steady-state decomposition consistently explains more than 100% of unem-
ployment variation is that contemporaneous changes in log ‡ow hazards in reality have only a partial con-
temporanous e¤ect on current unemployment, determined by t 1 < 1 (see equation (12)). The steady-state
decomposition erroneously attributes their full e¤ect contemporaneously.




                                                       19
The residual variance of log changes in unemployment is closer zero for all countries, and
especially so among economies with slow unemployment dynamics. Thus, taking account of
the dynamic e¤ects of changes in the unemployment ‡ow hazards on the unemployment rate
is important for inferring the proximate driving forces of unemployment ‡uctuations. In this
way, the non steady-state decomposition summarized in equations (12), (14) and (15) is a
useful contribution to the analysis of unemployment ‡ows across countries.
   The formal results of the non steady-state decomposition in Table 3 in many ways con…rm
the suggestive picture that one can discern from the time series in Figure 2 and 3. Among the
Anglo-Saxon economies of Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the U.S., we observe that
variation in the out‡ow rate accounts for the majority (though not all) of the variation in the
unemployment rate over the respective sample periods. In particular, we …nd something like
a 20:80 in‡ow/out‡ow accounting for unemployment variation for these economies.                  This
result echoes the results of the recent literature on unemployment ‡ows in the U.S. Over a
similar sample period, Shimer (2007) reports a very similar decomposition of unemployment
variation for the U.S.
   However, variation in the in‡ow rate plays a much larger role among other economies.
In fact, we …nd much closer to a 50:50 in‡ow/out‡ow split for the Continental European,
U.K., Nordic and Japanese economies. These observations are an interesting addition to the
debate that has progressed in recent literature for the U.S. Recent studies in that literature
have cautioned against the neglect of variation in unemployment in‡ows as an important
driving force for changes in unemployment in the U.S. context.29 The results summarized in
Table 3 show that this caution resonates louder still if we wish to understand the considerable
variation in unemployment rates outside of the U.S.
   The latter point is important for our understanding of the economics of unemployment.
The relative abundance and ease of access to relevant data for the U.S. have led to a wealth of
research that documents the proximate driving forces for variation in the U.S. unemployment
rate. However, the variation in unemployment in the U.S., though substantially cyclical, is
  29
     See Braun, De Bock and DiCecio (2006), Elsby, Michaels and Solon (2008), Fujita and Ramey (2008),
and Yashiv (2008).


                                                 20
dwarfed by the unemployment experiences among many European economies. A prominent
example is Spain, which faced unemployment rates that varied from below 5 percent in
the 1970s to 25 percent in the 1990s (see Figure 4). Our results suggest that, in order to
understand the substantial variation in unemployment rates among European economies, it
is necessary to understand both the variation in the out‡ow rate from unemployment as well
as the in‡ow rate.



5     Worker Flows
So far we have focused on the ‡ow hazard rates for worker transitions in and out of unemploy-
ment. These ‡ow rates, in turn, generate actual worker ‡ows into and out of unemployment.
Worker ‡ows in the U.S. labor market have been well documented (Blanchard and Diamond
[1990], Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant [1985, 1986]). In this …nal part of our analysis, we
construct annual time series of worker ‡ows for the fourteen OECD countries in our sample.
We use these time series to uncover a very robust stylized fact across countries: In‡ows lead
changes in unemployment, while out‡ows lag.


5.1    Analytical Framework

The annual ‡ow hazard rates that we presented before can be used to compute the total
out‡ows out of unemployment and in‡ows into unemployment. Let Ft be the total number
of workers that ‡ows out of the unemployment pool in year t as a fraction of the labor force,
and let St be the total in‡ows into unemployment.
    Given (1), these ‡ows can be written as


      Ft = 12ft ut +   t   (1   ut ) (ut   ut ) , and St = 12st (1   ut )   t ut   (ut   ut ) .   (18)


By construction, the ‡ows are such that the increase in the unemployment rate is the di¤er-




                                                   21
ence between the in‡ows and the out‡ows, i.e.


                                              ut = St    Ft .                                       (19)


       A large number of studies (Darby, Haltiwanger, and Plant [1986], Davis [1987, 2006],
Blanchard and Diamond [1990], Merz [1999], and Fujita and Ramey [2006]) has noted two
key stylized facts about worker ‡ows in the U.S. The …rst is that gross ‡ows increase when
unemployment increases. The second is that changes in in‡ows,             St , tend to lead the changes
in out‡ows,       Ft , as well as changes in the unemployment rate,          ut . In what follows, we
con…rm that these stylized facts for the U.S. also hold for many other developed economies.


5.2       Evidence on Worker Flows in the OECD

Figures 6 and 7 depict the time series for our estimates of the number of workers ‡owing into
unemployment, St , and the number ‡owing out, Ft , together with the unemployment rate
for each country in our sample. In line with the di¤erences in the ‡ow hazard rates st and
ft between Anglo-Saxon Countries and Continental Europe, we …nd very large di¤erences
in average worker ‡ows between these groups of countries as well. The second column of
Table 4 contains the average worker ‡ows for all countries in our sample. This echoes the
stark geographical partitioning of labor market ‡ows that we detailed above for the ‡ow
hazard rates across countries. Anglo-Saxon countries exhibit annual worker ‡ows in and out
of unemployment that comprise more than 15 percent of the labor force. The U.S. is again
a conspicuous outlier with average annual worker ‡ows of 40 percent of the labor force. At
the opposite end of the spectrum again lie the economies of Continental Europe with worker
‡ows that typically account for less than 9 percent of the labor force.30
       In addition, one can discern a prominent visual pattern to the timing of changes in these
‡ows in Figures 6 and 7. It can be seen that increases in the unemployment rate are often
  30
    The biggest di¤erence is between the U.S. and Portugal, a point that has been emphasized by Blanchard
and Portugal (2001). Bertola and Rogerson (1997) and Balakrishnan and Michelacci (2001) also highlight
these di¤erences in worker ‡ows.



                                                   22
preceded by rises in the number of workers ‡owing into the unemployment pool, followed
by a commensurate rise in the out‡ow. Thus, in most countries we observe that gross ‡ows
increase when unemployment rises, and that in‡ows tend to lead out‡ows, just as observed
in U.S. data.31
   This observation can be seen more formally using a simple correlation analysis. The
last six columns of Table 4 report the contemporaneous, lead, and lag correlations between
the changes in the ‡ows and changes in the unemployment rate. These correlations tell the
following story. In the year prior to a rise in unemployment, in‡ows into the unemployment
pool rise— the one year lead correlation between changes in in‡ows and contemporaneous
changes in unemployment is positive in almost all economies. Moreover, in‡ows remain high
in the year that unemployment rises— the contemporaneous correlation between changes in
in‡ows and changes in unemployment are positive for all countries. In the year following an
unemployment ramp up, out‡ows begin to rise— the one year lag correlation between changes
in out‡ows and contemporaneous changes in unemployment is positive in all economies.
   Thus, just like studies that use monthly data for the U.S., we …nd that changes in
in‡ows tend to lead changes in the unemployment rate in the annual data we use. What
emerges from our results on worker ‡ows is that, even though the OECD economies have very
di¤erent levels of ‡ows, the cyclical behavior of worker ‡ows across countries is very similar.
Economic downturns, in which the unemployment rate increases, …rst see an increase in
workers ‡owing into unemployment, rather than a decline in the number of workers ‡owing
out of it. Subsequently, the out‡ows increase as the economy recovers.
   These results have stark implications for popular models of the aggregate labor market.
An important recent trend in these models has been to assume that in‡ow rate st into
unemployment is constant over the business cycle (Hall [2005a,b], Blanchard and Gali [2006],
Gertler and Trigari [2006], Krusell, Mukoyama, and Şahin [2007] among many others). In
the context of these models, increases in unemployment during recessions are driven entirely
by declines in the job …nding hazard, ft . This assumption has important implications for
  31
     Burda and Wyplosz (1994) also emphasize that gross ‡ows increase when unemployment rises using data
for France, Germany, Spain and the U.K.


                                                  23
the dynamic properties of worker ‡ows over the cycle. As emphasized by Davis (2006),
among others, such models imply that increases in the unemployment rate are preceded by
reductions in the number of workers ‡owing out of the unemployment pool, Ft . Consequently,
reductions in out‡ows are predicted to lead increases in the unemployment rate in this class of
models. In addition, because the in‡ow rate st is assumed constant, these models also imply
that the number of workers ‡owing into the unemployment pool St will decline modestly in
the wake of a recession as the employment rate 1              ut falls, so that changes in St lag changes
in the unemployment rate.32 Thus, models that assume a constant in‡ow rate have two
important predictions with regard to worker ‡ows: (i) when unemployment goes up gross
worker ‡ows decline, and (ii) out‡ows lead changes in unemployment, while in‡ows lag.
       The studies of worker ‡ows in the U.S. cited above have established that neither of these
theoretical implications is borne out by the data for the U.S. This has led researchers to
challenge the empirical relevance of such models in the U.S. context (Davis [2006]; Fujita
and Ramey [2008]; Ramey [2008]). Our results reveal that the observation of increased
in‡ows as a leading indicator of increased unemployment, far from being unique to U.S.
data, is something close to a stylized fact for all modern developed labor markets.



6        Conclusion
Our analysis of publicly available data from the OECD provides three contributions to our
understanding of unemployment ‡ows. First, we present a method of estimating the ‡ow
hazard rates for entering and exiting unemployment across fourteen developed economies,
building on the method pioneered by Shimer (2007) for the U.S. An important bene…t of
this methodology is that it can be extended to estimate unemployment ‡ows for additional
economies over longer time periods as more data becomes available.
       Application of this method to fourteen OECD countries uncovers a stark contrast in av-
  32
     This latter e¤ect is not discernible in Figure 2 of Davis [2006] because he simulates the e¤ect of a decline
in the out‡ow rate on unemployment in‡ows due to time aggregation of worker ‡ows. Since our estimates
of the in‡ow rate are robust to time aggregation bias of this sort, this e¤ect is absent in our estimates of St .



                                                       24
erage ‡ow hazard rates between Anglo-Saxon, Nordic, and Continental European countries.
Anglo-Saxon and Nordic labor markets are characterized by high unemployment in‡ow and
out‡ow rates, while these ‡ow hazard rates in Continental European economies are gener-
ally less than half of those in their Anglo-Saxon counterparts. Notably, results for the U.S.
which have received much attention in recent literature are a conspicuous outlier among
developed economies, with in‡ow and out‡ow rates that are at least …fty percent larger than
the remaining economies in our sample.
   Our second contribution is to devise a decomposition of unemployment ‡uctuations into
parts due to changes in in‡ow and changes in out‡ow rates that can be applied to countries
with very di¤erent unemployment dynamics. Conventional decompositions applied to U.S.
data have exploited the fact that unemployment is closely approximated by its steady-state
value in the U.S. (Elsby, Michaels, and Solon [2008]; Fujita and Ramey [2008]). For many
OECD countries outside the U.S., however, we show that unemployment deviates consid-
erably from its steady-state level. Consequently we show that conventional decompositions
lead to misleading results on the relative importance of ‡uctuations in in‡ow and out‡ow
rates for the dynamics of the unemployment rate. The results from applying our alternative
decomposition reveal approximately a 20:80 in‡ow/out‡ow contribution to unemployment
variation among Anglo-Saxon countries, whereas in most European countries the split is
much closer to 50:50.
   Our …nal contribution is based on a simple correlation analysis of changes in worker
‡ows and changes in the unemployment rate over time. For all countries in our sample,
worker ‡ows tend to increase when unemployment increases. Moreover, we …nd that, in
almost all countries in our sample, changes in in‡ows into unemployment lead changes in
the unemployment rate, while changes in out‡ows tend to lag unemployment variation.
   Stepping back, the stylized facts uncovered in our analysis provide an important per-
spective on the theoretical literature on unemployment ‡ows that has evolved in recent
years. Much of this recent literature has assumed the in‡ow rate into unemployment to be
an exogenous constant. As a reaction to this, a number of studies of U.S. unemployment


                                             25
‡ows has cautioned against this trend (Elsby, Michaels, and Solon [2008], Fujita and Ramey
[2008], and Yashiv [2007]). An important implication of the results of this paper is that
the same conclusion extends to the analysis of labor markets in a wide range of developed
economies, and especially so if one is interested in understanding the substantial changes in
unemployment rates in Europe.33




  33
    While our results suggest that models which assume constant in‡ow hazards are potentially misguided,
they are surprisingly consistent with the qualitative implications of an important class of models of the
aggregate labor market, namely those based on the Mortensen and Pissarides [1994] model of endogenous
job destruction. The implied dynamics of unemployment ‡ows are drawn out in Mortensen [1994], who
shows that the model predicts that job destruction (and hence in‡ows into unemployment) spikes upward in
the immediate onset of a recession— i.e. that in‡ows lead changes in unemployment, exactly along the lines
of what is observed in our data.


                                                   26
References
 [1] Albaek, Karsten and Bent E. Sørensen (1998). “Worker Flows and Job Flows in Danish
     Manufacturing, 1980-91,”The Economic Journal, 108 (451): 1750-1771.

 [2] Bachmann, Ronald (2005). “Labour Market Dynamics in Germany: Hirings, Separa-
     tions, and Job-to-job Transitions over the Business Cycle,” SPB 649 Discussion Paper
     2005-045.

 [3] Baker, Michael (1992). “Unemployment Duration: Compositional E¤ects and Cyclical
     Variability.”American Economic Review, 82(1): 313-21.

 [4] Balakrishnan Ravi, and Claudio Michelacci (2001). “Unemployment Dynamics across
     OECD Countries,”European Economic Review, 45, 135-165.

 [5] Bauer, Thomas and Stefan Bender (2004). “Technological Change, Organizational
     Change, and Job Turnover,” Labour Economics 11, 265–291.

 [6] Bell, Brian and James Smith (2002). “On Gross Flows in the United Kingdom: Evidence
     from the Labour Market Survey,”Bank of England Working Paper No.160.

 [7] Bertola, Giuseppe and Richard Rogerson (1997). “Institutions and Labor Reallocation,”
     European Economic Review, 41(6), 1147-1171.

 [8] Blanchard, Olivier and Jordi Gali (2006). “A New Keynesian Model with Unemploy-
     ment,”mimeo. MIT and CREI.

 [9] Blanchard, Olivier J. and Peter Diamond (1990). “The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross
     Flows of U.S. Workers,”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1990-2, 85-155.

[10] Blanchard, Olivier J. and Lawrence Summers (1986). “Hysteresis and European Unem-
     ployment,”NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 15-77.

[11] Blanchard, Olivier J. and Justin Wolfers (2000). “The Role of Shocks and Institutions
     In The Rise of European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence,”Economic Journal,
     110:1-33,

[12] Blanchard, Olivier J. and Pedro Portugal (2001). “What Hides Behind an Unemploy-
     ment Rate: Comparing Portuguese and U.S. Labor Markets,”American Economic Re-
     view, 91(1), 187-207.

[13] Braun, Helge, Reinout de Bock, and Ricardo DiCecio (2006). “Aggregate Shocks and
     Labor Market Fluctuations,”Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis working paper 2006-004.

[14] Burda, Michael, and Charles Wyplosz (1994). “Gross Worker and Job Flows in Europe,”
     European Economic Review, 38, 1287-1315.


                                           27
[15] Darby, Michael R., John C. Haltiwanger, and Mark W. Plant (1985). “Unemployment
     Rate Dynamics and Persistent Unemployment under Rational Expectations,”American
     Economic Review, 75, 614-637.

[16] Darby, Michael R., John C. Haltiwanger, and Mark W. Plant (1986). “The Ins and
     Outs of Unemployment: The Ins Win,” Working Paper No. 1997, National Bureau of
     Economic Research.

[17] Davis, Steven J. (1987). “Fluctuations in the Pace of Labor Reallocation,” Carnegie-
     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 27: 335-402.

[18] Davis, Steven J. (2006). “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Econ-
     omy over the Past Fifty Years: Comment,”in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, ed.
     Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogo¤, 139-57. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[19] Elsby, Michael, Ryan Michaels, and Gary Solon (2008). “The Ins and Outs of Cyclical
     Unemployment,”American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1:1, 84–110.

[20] Fujita, Shigeru and Garey Ramey (2008). “The Cyclicality of Job Loss and Hiring,”
     International Economic Review, forthcoming.

[21] Gertler, Mark and Antonella Trigari (2006). “Unemployment Fluctuations with Stag-
     gered Nash Wage Bargaining,”Working Paper No. 12498, National Bureau of Economic
     Research.

[22] Gomes, Pedro (2008). “Labour Market Flows: Facts from the UK,” mimeo. London
     School of Economics.

[23] Hall, Robert E. (2005a). “Job Loss, Job-…nding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Econ-
     omy over the Past Fifty Years,”NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 101-137.

[24] Hall, Robert E. (2005b). “Employment E¢ ciency and Sticky Wages: Evidence from
     Flows in the Labor Market,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(3): 397-407.

[25] Hobijn, Bart and Ayşegül Şahin (2007). “Job-Finding and Separation Rates in the
     OECD,”Federal Reserve Bank of New York Sta¤ Report No. 298.

[26] Kaitz, Hyman (1970). “Analyzing the Length of Spells of Unemployment,” Monthly
     Labor Review, 93(11): 11-20.

[27] Kennan, John (2006). “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy
     over the Past Fifty Years: Comment,”In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, ed. Mark
     Gertler and Kenneth Rogo¤, 159-64. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[28] Krusell, Per, Toshihiko Mukoyama, and Ayşegül Şahin (2007). “Labor-Market Matching
     with Precautionary Savings and Aggregate Fluctuations,”mimeo. Princeton University,
     University of Virginia and Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

                                           28
[29] Machin, Stephen and Alan Manning (1999). “The Causes and Consequences of
     Longterm Unemployment in Europe,” in: O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (ed.), Handbook
     of Labor Economics, 3, 3085-3139, Elsevier.
[30] Marston, Stephen T. (1976). “Employment Instability and High Unemployment Rates,”
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1976-1, 169-210.
[31] Merz, Monika, (1999). “Heterogeneous Job-matches and the Cyclical Behavior of Labor
     Turnover,”Journal of Monetary Economics 91-124.
[32] Mortensen, Dale T. (1994). “The Cyclical Behavior of Job and Worker Flows,”Journal
     of Economic Dynamics and Control 18, 1121-1142.
[33] Mortensen, Dale T., and Christopher A. Pissarides (1994). “Job Creation and Job De-
     struction in the Theory of Unemployment,”Review of Economic Studies, 61(3): 397-415.
[34] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2008a). Employ-
     ment and Labour Market Statistics: Labour force status by sex and age.
[35] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2008b). Main Eco-
     nomic Indicators.
[36] Perry, George L. (1972). “Unemployment Flows in the U.S. Labor Market,” Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity, 1972(2): 245-78.
[37] Petrongolo, Barbara, and Christopher A. Pissarides (2008). “The Ins and Outs of Eu-
     ropean Unemployment,”American Economic Review 98(2): 256-262.
[38] Pissarides, Christopher A. (1986). “Unemployment and Vacancies in Britain,”Economic
     Policy, 1(3): 499–541.
[39] Pissarides, Christopher A. (2003). “Unemployment in Britain: A European Success
     Story,”CESifo Working Paper 981.
[40] Pissarides, Christopher A. (2007). “The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage Stick-
     iness the Answer?”mimeo. London School of Economics.
[41] Ramey, Garey (2008). “Exogenous vs. Endogenous Separation,” mimeo. University of
     California at San Diego.
[42] Reichling, Felix (2005). “Retraining the Unemployed in a Matching Model with Turbu-
     lance,”mimeo. Stanford University.
[43] Salant, Stephen W. (1977). “Search Theory and Duration Data: A Theory of Sorts,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 91(1): 39-57.
[44] Shimer, Robert (2005). “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Va-
     cancies,”American Economic Review, 95(1): 25-49.

                                            29
[45] Shimer, Robert (2007). “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment,”mimeo. Uni-
     versity of Chicago.

[46] Shimer, Robert (2008). “The Probability of Finding a Job,”American Economic Review,
     98(2): 268-273.

[47] Yashiv, Eran (2007). “U.S. Labor Market Dynamics Revisited,” Scandinavian Journal
     of Economics, 109(4), 779-806.




                                          30
A        Mathematical details
Estimation of Out‡ow Rates. De…ne the fraction of the labor force that has been unemployed
in month t for less than a month as u1;t , more than one but less than three months as u3;t , more
than three but less than six months as u6;t , more than six but less than twelve months u12;t , and
more than 12 months as u1;t . Then u<1           <3
                                    t = u1;t , ut = u1;t +u3;t , etc. Given this data and quarterly
data for the unemployment rate, the four estimates of the out‡ow rate are

                                                                2                                          1
  ft<1 =       ln (u3;t + u6;t + u12;t + u1;t ) +                 ln (u1;t + u3;t + u6;t + u12;t + u1;t ) + ln ut         3     ,
                                                                3                                          3
  ft<3 =       (ln (u6;t + u12;t + u1;t )             ln ut   3 ) =3,
  ft<6   =     (ln (u12;t + u1;t )         ln ut   6 ) =6,    and
 ft<12   =     (ln (u1;t )     ln ut      12 ) =12.                                                                           (20)

    In practice, we have annualized data for the duration distribution of unemployment for which
we do not know in which month of the year they are measures. Therefore, for our estimates of the
out‡ow rates average the lagged unemployment rates, ut 3 , ut 6 , and ut 12 over the four quarters
in the year for which the out‡ow rate is estimated.

Asymptotic Distribution of Out‡ow Rate Estimates. We do not observe the u1;t , u3;t ,
u6;t , u12;t , and u1;t . Instead we observe their sample approximations based on the labor force
surveys of the di¤erent countries. Let the sample size of the labor force survey be nt and let u      bd;t
d = 1; 3; 6; 12; 1 be the estimated fractions from the labor market survey. Moreover, we also observe
the estimated unemployment rate u     bt , not only at t but also at u
                                                                     bt 3 , u
                                                                            bt 6 , and u
                                                                                       bt 12 . We assume
that the sample of individuals in the labor force survey is independent across these realizations of
the unemployment rate and is of the same size nt = nt s where s = 3; 6; 12 and the sample sizes
are as given in Table 1.
     These sample approximations have a joint multinomial distribution, such that

                          E (b
                             ud;t ) = ud;t and E (b
                                                  ut                 s)   = ut   s   for s = 0; 3; 6; 12.                     (21)

and
                                            1                                                           1
                         var (b
                              ud;t ) =        ud;t (1         ud ) and cov (b    bd0 ) =
                                                                            ud ; u                        bd u
                                                                                                          u  bd0              (22)
                                            n                                                           n
as well as
                                   1
               var (b
                    ut    s)   =     ut    s (1    ut    s)    and cov (b      bt
                                                                        ud;t ; u             s)   = 0 for s = 3; 6; 12,       (23)
                                   n
and
                                              cov (b    bt
                                                   ut ; u       s)   = 0 for s 6= 0.                                          (24)
    De…ne the vector
                                                                                                                   0
                      ut =         u1;t u3;t u6;t u12;t u1;t ut                          3    ut    6   ut   12               (25)

and the covariance matrix                                 "                          #
                                                                  (d)
                                                               Vt          05 3
                                                   Vt =                      (u)         ,                                    (26)
                                                               03     5    Vt

                                                                  31
where
            2                                                                                                                   3
                u1;t (1 u1;t )      u1;t u3;t      u1;t u6;t      u1;t u12;t      u1;t u1;t
           6         u1;t u3;t u3;t (1 u3;t )      u3;t u6;t      u3;t u12;t      u3;t u1;t                                     7
  (d)      6                                                                                                                    7
 Vt       =6
           6         u1;t u6;t      u3;t u6;t u6;t (1 u6;t )      u6;t u12;t      u6;t u1;t                                     7 , (27)
                                                                                                                                7
           4        u1;t u12;t     u3;t u12;t     u6;t u12;t u12;t (1 u12;t )     u12;t u1;t                                    5
                    u1;t u1;t      u3;t u1;t      u6;t u1;t       u12;t u1;t  u1;t (1 u1;t )

and                           2                                                                                             3
                                  ut   3 (1        ut     3)                0                               0
                       (u)
                     Vt      =4               0                 ut   6 (1       ut    6)                    0               5       (28)
                                              0                             0              ut       12 (1       ut   12 )

and the o¤-diagonal zero matrices re‡ect that we assume independence of di¤erent samples in the
labor force surveys.
   Assuming a relatively large sample of the labor force survey, nt , we can approximate
                                                  p                       D
                                                       nt (b
                                                           ut    ut ) ! N (0; Vt )                                                  (29)

such that
                                                                              1
                                                        bt
                                                        u       N    ut ;        Vt                                                 (30)
                                                                              nt
We are not interested in this distribution. Instead, we are interested in three estimates of the out‡ow
rate, each of which is a consistent estimate if there is no duration dependence in the out‡ow rate
during the …rst year of unemployment. De…ne the vector
                                                                                                0
                                         ft =            ft<1 ft<3 ft<6 ft<12                                                       (31)

then we will use the Delta-method to derive the asymptotic distribution of b  f for n ! 1.34 In order
to do so, we consider the following gradient.
                            2         2
                                                                                         30
                                     3ut             0              0            0
                            6 2           1
                                                     0              0            0       7
                            6 3ut ut u<1                                                 7
                            6 2           1
                                             t
                                                       1                                 7
                            6 3u                                    0            0       7
                            6 t ut u<1       t  3(ut u<3   t )                           7
                            6 2           1            1              1                  7
                   @ft      6  3u            <1            <3             <6     0       7
           Df;t =       = 6       t   u t  u t  3 ( t t )
                                                   u     u     6 ( t t )
                                                                  u     u                7       (32)
                   @ut0     6   2         1            1              1            1     7
                            6 3ut ut u<1        3(ut ut )  <3
                                                               6(ut ut )  <6         <12
                                                                             12(ut ut ) 77
                            6                t
                            6         1              1
                                                                    0            0       7
                            6       3ut 3         3ut 3                                  7
                            6                                       1                    7
                            4         0              0           6ut 6           0       5
                                                                                 1
                                      0              0              0         12ut 12


This allows us to write the approximate distribution of b
                                                        ft as

                                                  b                 1
                                                  ft      N     ft ; Df;t Vt D0f;t                                                  (33)
                                                                    n
  34
       Note that we assume that the level of unemployment, ut , is measured without any measurement error.


                                                                     32
It is this distribution that we are going to use for the derivation of our hypothesis test as well as for
the calculation of the "optimal" weighting of the di¤erent out‡ow rate estimates for our estimated
out‡ow rate.

Hypothesis Test for No Duration Dependence. If there is no duration dependence, then it
is the case that
                 H0 : ft = f , where f is scalar and is a vector with ones        (34)
which is the null-hypothesis of interest. For our          test, we de…ne the matrix
                                             2                         3
                                               1            0 0      1
                                      Mf = 4 0              1 0      1 5                            (35)
                                               0            0 1      1

Under the null-hypothesis, it is the case that

                                                   1
                                 Mf b
                                    ft       N   0; Mf Df;t Vt D0f;t M0f                            (36)
                                                   n

De…ne the Choleski-decomposition matrix C as

                                      Mf Df;t Vt D0f;t M0f = Ct C0t                                 (37)

Then                                     p
                                             nCt 1 Mf b
                                                      ft          N (0; I3 )                        (38)
Remember that the sum of squares of 3 independent standard normally distributed random variables
is chi-squared distributed with 3 degrees of freedom. Hence, when we de…ne

                             gt = nb
                                   ft0 M0f C0t         1
                                                            Ct 1 Mf b
                                                                    f                               (39)
                                                                               1
                                 = nb
                                    ft0 M0f Mf Df;t Vt D0f;t M0f                   Mf b
                                                                                      ft

then, under the null it is the case that
                                                            2
                                                 gt             (3) .                               (40)



Optimal Weighting of Estimated Out‡ow Rates. For those countries for which we do not
reject the null-hypothesis for reasonably large sample sizes and for the majority of the years, we
then have to decide on the optimal weighting of the estimated …nding rates. That is, we want to
…nd vector with weights, w, and estimate

                                                  fbt = wt0 b
                                                            ft                                      (41)

such that
                                                      wt0 = 1                                       (42)




                                                        33
and that, given this constraint, w minimizes

                                                    Vf;t = wt0 Df;t Vt D0f;t wt                                                                   (43)

Let us …rst take care of the restriction. For this purpose, de…ne
                                                                                                  0
                                                et =
                                                w            wt<1 wt<3 wt<6                                                                       (44)

such that
                                                     2
                                                     3 2                                            3
                                                   0                      1            0         0
                                                6 0 7 6                   0            1         0 7
                                        wt    = 6    7 6
                                                4 0 5+4
                                                                                                    7we                                           (45)
                                                                          0            0         1 5 t
                                                   1                       1            1         1
                                                        et
                                              = e1 + Mw w                                                                                         (46)

Then the objective function can be written as

               Vf;t = e01 Df;t Vt D0f;t e1 + 2e01 Df;t Vt D0f;t Mw w    e t0 M0w Df;t Vt D0f;t Mw w
                                                                   et + w                         et                                              (47)

which yields that the set of optimal weights is
                                                                                   1
                                 et =
                                 w           M0w Df;t Vt D0f;t Mw                      M0w Df;t Vt D0f;t e1                                       (48)

and thus
                                                                                            1
                            wt = e1      Mw M0w Df;t Vt D0f;t Mw                                M0w Df;t VD0f;t e1                                (49)
Note, this only imposes that the weights add up to one but not that they are positive.

Dynamic Decomposition of Changes in Unemployment. Note that the unemployment rate
at the end of year t evolves according to

                                                ut = (1              t ) ut   +        t ut 1 ;                                                   (50)

where t     e 12(st +ft ) is the annual rate of convergence to steady state, ut st = (st + ft ) is the
steady state unemployment rate, and st and ft are respectively the monthly unemployment in‡ow
and out‡ow hazard rates in year t. A log–linear approximation to (50) around st = st 1 , ft = ft 1 ,
and ut 1 = ut 1 is given by

       ln ut        ln ut    1   + (1        t 1)   ln ut        ln ut    1    +        t 1       ln ut     1     ln ut   1                       (51)
                    ln ut    1   + (1        t 1)   1       ut   1   [    ln st                 ln ft ] +       t 1   ln ut   1   ln ut   1   :   (52)

If unemployment is always in steady state, then

                                    ln ut =         ln ut        1       ut    1   [        ln st           ln ft ]                               (53)

However, if unemployment deviates from steady state, then this approximation is not appropriate.



                                                                     34
In that case, it is worthwhile to realize that

ln ut   ln ut   1   = (1         t 1)   ln ut       ln ut       1             (1       t 1)    ln ut    1      ln ut     1                                 (54)
                    = (1         t 1)   ln ut       ln ut       1             (1       t 1)    ln ut        ln ut   1    + (1        t 1 ) (ln ut     ln ut   1)
                    =       (1     t 1 ) (ln ut       ln ut ) + (1                    t 1 ) (ln ut          ln ut   1)

such that
                                                          1               t 1
                                            ln ut                                  (ln ut     ln ut )                                               (55)
                                                                        t 1
and thus
                                                                                    t 1
                                          (ln ut      ln ut ) =                                 ln ut                                               (56)
                                                                              1        t 1

    Substituting this into (51) we can write

                                                                                                             t 2
                    ln ut   (1     t 1)         1    ut     1       [     ln st             ln ft ] +                    ln ut   1   :              (57)
                                                                                                        1       t 2

Which allows us to do the decomposition out of steady state.

E¤ect of Inclusion of Non-Participants. Equation (1) does not take into account ‡ows that
stem from people that are not-in-the-labor-force (NILF) that start looking for a job and become
unemployed. It also does not include persons that ‡ow out of unemployment as well as out of the
labor force. In addition, it normalizes the size of the labor force to one, thus not taking into account
labor force growth. We have actually calculated a set of results that allow for these things, but for
the sake of clarity have abstracted from them in the analytical framework applied here. It turns
out that including these things does not a¤ect the results much. Below we explain why.
    The …rst thing to note is that our estimates of the out‡ow rate out of unemployment solely
use unemployment data and are not a¤ected by the simplifying assumptions described above. The
out‡ow rate basically determines the total out‡ows out of unemployment. Since the change in the
number of unemployed persons is the di¤erence between the in‡ows and the out‡ows, this implies
that the total in‡ows into unemployment are also not sensitive to these simplifying assumptions.
The only thing that is a¤ected is the in‡ow rate. In our framework, the in‡ow rate re‡ects the
fraction of employed persons that ‡ows into unemployment. Without the simplifying assumption
the in‡ow rate would re‡ect the fraction of persons that are either employed or NILF that ‡ow
into unemployment. In e¤ect, if one would drop our simplifying assumption one would …nd a lower
in‡ow rate that is scaled down by the labor force participation rate. For all countries in the sample,
labor force growth is so small that it is swamped by the magnitude of worker ‡ows. Hence, the
results presented here turn out to be almost identical to the ones that take into account labor force
growth.




                                                                         35
                                              Table 1: Approximate sample sizes of Labor Force Surveys
     Australia: Survey covers about 0.5% of Australia’s population. (We use n = 57; 000.)

     Canada: Approximately 56,000 households since 1976. (We use n = 135; 000.)

     France: Data are compiled from various sources including the Labor Force Survey (“Employment Survey”). Since 2003, the Survey is quarterly and continuous.
     Previously, the Survey was annual. In March 2001, 75,000 households responded to the survey covering 150,000 persons which includes armed forces. (We use
     n = 150; 000.)

     Germany: The average quarterly sample in 2005 comprises about 165,000 respondents. (We use n = 165; 000.)

     Ireland: Sample of 39,000 households is surveyed each quarter. Includes career military living in private households. (We use n = 97; 500.)

     Italy: The sample was doubled in April 1990 from 12,000 to 24,000 households. (We use n = 60; 000.)

     Japan: The survey covers a sample of 40,000 households. (We use n = 100; 000.)

     New Zealand: Obtained from 16,000 private dwellings (approximately 32,000 persons) each quarter. From 2nd quarter of 1995, residents in non-private households




36
     are excluded from the sample. (We use n = 40; 000.)

     Norway: Sample size is 12,000 households (24,000 persons). Includes all armed forces.(We use n = 24; 000.)

     Portugal: Sample size approximately 21,000 households. (We use n = 52; 500.)

     Spain: Sample includes 74,000 households; however in practice only about 65,000 households (i.e. approximately 185,000 persons) are interviewed. (We use
     n = 185; 000.)

     Sweden: Participation is voluntary. Every month about 20,000 persons are included in the sample. (We use n = 20; 000.)

     United Kingdom: Survey is conducted continuously throughout the year. In any three-month period, 57,000 households are interviewed (120,000 persons). (We
     use n = 120; 000.)

     United States: Data comes from the monthly CPS. Each month about 60,000 households are interviewed for the survey. (We use n = 130; 000.)


                  Note: Sample sizes include non-labor force members. Information based on metadata for OECD (2008b), available at
                                                    http://stats.oecd.org/mei/default.asp?lang=e&subject=10.
                     Table 2: Test for no duration dependence and summary statistics on unemployment and ‡ow rates

                                                               Test for no duration dependence                                     Sample averages
                                    Start of             P-value            P-value                  H0            Unemployment            Out‡ow        In‡ow
             Country
                                    sample            f <1   included    f <1   excluded      Rejected?                rate (u)             rate (f )   rate (s)

             Australia                   1978                0%                  0%                                      7.3%                22.3%       1.7%
             Canada                      1976                0%                  0%                                      8.6%                25.8%       2.3%
             France                      1975                0%                  9%                                      9.1%                7.8%        0.8%
             Germany                     1983                4%                  4%                                      7.9%                6.0%        0.5%
             Ireland                     1983                2%                  6%                                      10.9%               5.8%        0.6%
             Italy                       1983                10%                13%                                      10.1%               4.1%        0.4%
             Japan                       1977                0%                  0%                                      3.2%                19.3%       0.6%




37
             New Zealand                 1986                0%                  0%                                      6.3%                27.9%       1.7%
             Norway                      1983                0%                  0%                                      4.2%                38.3%       1.6%
             Portugal                    1986                7%                 14%                                      6.1%                6.5%        0.4%
             Spain                       1977                0%                  5%                                      15.3%               6.2%        1.0%
             Sweden                      1976                0%                  0%                                      4.9%                28.9%       1.3%
             United Kingdom              1983                0%                  0%                                      7.7%                13.3%       1.0%
             United States               1968                0%                  0%                                      6.0%                57.5%       3.6%

      Note: Reported P-values are sample averages for the test for no duration dependence over the sample period, based on the application of
     the sample size reported in Table 1. The hypothesis ‘f <1 included’refers to              H0 : ft<1 = ft<3 = ft<6 = ft<12 :   The hypothesis ‘f <1 excluded’refers
       to   H0 : ft<3 = ft<6 = ft<12 :   The rejection of the null of no duration dependence is based on the second hypothesis and determined at a 1%
                                                                                signi…cance level.
                        Table 3: Decompositions of unemployment ‡uctuations

                                       Steady-state decomposition   Non-steady-state decomposition
                       std. dev. of
     Country                              f        s     residual     f       s       0     residual
                      % dev. from ss

     Australia             1.4%         0.94     0.14     -0.08     0.91    0.12    0.00     -0.03
     Canada                0.7%         0.75     0.30     -0.05     0.74    0.29    0.00     -0.02
     France                4.6%         0.61     0.59     -0.21     0.49    0.48    0.04      0.00
     Germany               9.2%         0.76     0.82     -0.58     0.45    0.60    -0.04     0.00
     Ireland              11.5%         1.46     0.51     -0.97     0.77    0.29    -0.03    -0.02




38
     Italy                 8.9%         1.19     0.19     -0.37     0.90    0.65    0.06     -0.02
     Japan                 1.0%         0.56     0.50     -0.06     0.52    0.48    0.00      0.00
     New Zealand           1.1%         0.86     0.18     -0.04     0.84    0.17    0.00     -0.01
     Norway                0.4%         0.45     0.55      0.00     0.45    0.55    0.01      0.00
     Portugal             10.9%         0.69     0.50     -0.19     0.51    0.44    0.02      0.04
     Spain                 9.5%         0.81     0.40     -0.21     0.62    0.36    0.02      0.00
     Sweden                1.6%         0.46     0.58     -0.03     0.45    0.55    0.00     -0.01
     United Kingdom        3.0%         0.54     0.58     -0.12     0.57    0.42    0.01      0.01
     United States         0.0%         0.82     0.18     -0.01     0.82    0.18    0.00     -0.01
     Table 4: Average worker ‡ows and correlations with changes in the unemployment rate

                                                          corr ( ut ;    Ft+k )      corr ( ut ;     St+k )
                                          1
                Country                   2
                                              (F + S)   k=     1   k=0      k=1     k=     1   k=0      k=1

                Australia                     18.6%      -.6       -.3        .5     -.3        .2        .0
                Canada                        25.7%      -.2        .0        .6     .0         .4        .3
                France                        8.2%       .1         .2        .5     .4         .6        .1
                Germany                       5.6%       -.1       -.2        .6     .5         .6        .2
                Ireland                       6.2%       .0        -.5        .8     .1         .1        .2
                Italy                         4.8%       -.2       -.2        .5     .0         .1        .1




39
                Japan                         7.0%       .2         .2        .1     .3         .3        -.2
                New Zealand                   18.8%      .0        -.1        .2     .2         .2        -.1
                Norway                        18.1%      .1         .4        -.1    .2         .4        -.3
                Portugal                      4.5%       .0         .0        .6     .4         .4        .2
                Spain                         10.2%      .1        -.1        .5     .6         .5        .1
                Sweden                        14.3%      .0         .6        .9     .3         .8        .7
                United Kingdom                11.2%      -.5        .1        .6     -.2        .5        .3
                United States                 40.0%      .2         .0        .3     .5         .4        -.2

                          1
     Note: The column     2
                              (F + S)   list the average of the average in and out‡ow rates over the sample period.
Figure 1: Average in- and out‡ow rates across countries.




                          40
Figure 2: In- and out‡ow rates (log-scale in percentages) for Anglo-Saxon and Nordic coun-
tries, and Japan




                                           41
Figure 3: In- and outlfow rates (log-scale in percentages) for Continental European countries.




                                             42
Figure 4: Actual versus steady state unemployment in four illustrative countries.




                                       43
Figure 5: Steady-state versus non-steady-state decomposition of unemployment ‡uctuations
for France.




                                          44
Figure 6: Unemployment rate and worker ‡ows, Anglo-Saxon and Nordic countries, and
Japan.



                                       45
Figure 7: Unemployment rate and workers ‡ows, Continental European countries.




                                     46
