                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE VALUE OF RISK:
          MEASURING THE SERVICE OUTPUT OF U.S. COMMERCIAL BANKS

                                              Susanto Basu
                                             Robert Inklaar
                                           J. Christina Wang

                                         Working Paper 14615
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14615


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    December 2008




We would like to thank Barry Bosworth, Erwin Diewert, John Fernald, Alice Nakamura, Marshall
Reinsdorf, Paul Schreyer, Kevin Stiroh, Jack Triplett, Frank Wykoff and participants at the 2006 NBER/CRIW
Summer Institute workshop, for helpful conversations and comments on the issues addressed in this
paper. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and are not those of the Federal
Reserve System or the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Susanto Basu, Robert Inklaar, and J. Christina Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Risk: Measuring the Service Output of U.S. Commercial Banks
Susanto Basu, Robert Inklaar, and J. Christina Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 14615
December 2008
JEL No. E01,E44,G21,G32

                                              ABSTRACT

Rather than charging direct fees, banks often charge implicitly for their services via interest spreads.
As a result, much of bank output has to be estimated indirectly. In contrast to current statistical practice,
dynamic optimizing models of banks argue that compensation for bearing systematic risk is not part
of bank output. We apply these models and find that between 1997 and 2007, in the U.S. National
Accounts, on average, bank output is overestimated by 21 percent and GDP is overestimated by 0.3
percent. Moreover, compared with current methods, our new estimates imply more plausible estimates
of the share of capital in income and the return on fixed capital.


Susanto Basu                                          J. Christina Wang
Department of Economics                               Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Boston College                                        Christina.Wang@bos.frb.org
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
susanto.basu@bc.edu

Robert Inklaar
University of Groningen
Faculty of Economics
PO Box 800
9700 AV Groningen
The Netherlands
R.C.Inklaar@rug.nl
I. Introduction

Services are an increasingly important part of modern economies, both in terms of size

and for their contribution to economic growth. However, the output data for many of

these services is notoriously weak, and this is particularly the case for banking. 1 This

makes it hard to determine the sources of economic growth and even the size of the

economy. A major barrier to progress in this area has been the inadequacy of production

models for banks. Wang, Basu, and Fernald (2004, WBF henceforth) propose a general‐

equilibrium model of interactions between banks, firms, and consumers to remedy this

problem. In this paper we estimate the value of output of U.S. banks, following the

prescriptions of the WBF model for the period 1997–2007. We find that these new

estimates differ considerably from those based on current National Accounts methods:

bank output is reduced by 21 percent and GDP is reduced by 0.3 percent. We argue that

these new output estimates imply a more plausible capital share in income and internal

rate of return on fixed capital than current estimates.

      Measuring the value of bank output is challenging, since much of bank service

output is not explicitly priced. Instead, the implicit charges for financial services are

bundled with interest flows between banks and their customers, chiefly borrowers and

depositors. WBF show how implicit service revenue can be unbundled from gross

interest flows by applying the established theory of financial intermediation that the

main service provided by banks in making loans is reducing asymmetric information

between borrowers and lenders through screening and monitoring. Instead of receiving

an upfront fee for the services, an optimizing bank can charge a higher interest rate than

the rate available on a market security with otherwise the same risk attributes.

      These models thus make clear the role of risk in inferring banks’ income from

services. The implicit revenue from screening and monitoring services should equal the

spread of the gross loan interest rate over the yield on an equally risky fixed‐income



1 See, for example, Griliches (1992, 1994), Triplett and Bosworth (2004), Diewert (2008), and
Inklaar, Timmer, and van Ark (2008).



                                                 1
security, not a risk‐free security such as a Treasury bill or bond. This accounting method

in essence treats the risk premium (i.e., the return differential between a risk‐free and the

equally risky fixed‐income security) as part of the borrowing firms’ cost of capital and

hence as part of households’ capital income—their compensation for bearing risk. That is,

the risk premium on loans is only a transfer, through banks, of property income from

borrowers to savers, and is not part of banks’ value added.

         A key advantage of this method is that it leads to a uniform treatment of risk

premia on all debt instruments, so that nonfinancial firms’ output is invariant to their

source of debt finance—markets or banks. The risk premium on market debt (for

example, corporate bonds) has always been accounted for as part of the producing firms’

cost of capital, and hence households’ capital income. The risk premium on bank loans

should be treated in the same way.

         This contrasts with the typical statistical practice in OECD countries. According to

current national accounts guidelines, banks’ implicit revenue from lending services (per

unit of loan balance) equals the spread between the gross loan interest rate and a risk‐free

rate. 2 This in effect treats loan risk premia as part of banks’—instead of as the borrowing

firms’—value added. A producing firm’s measured output will thus fall if it switches

from market debt to bank loans, or will appear to rise if it starts issuing bonds rather than

borrowing from banks.

         The contrast with the current practice can also be seen from the “user‐cost”

perspective. This model‐implied accounting method is shown to be an extension of the

“user cost of capital” framework that takes explicit account of uncertainty. 3 The yield on

the equally risky debt can be regarded as the “user cost of funds,” the so‐called reference

rate. In contrast, typical national accounts currently use a risk‐free reference rate.

         In this paper, we implement the new model‐implied measure of bank output for

U.S. commercial banks. To highlight the role of risk, this paper focuses on new estimates

of the nominal value of services associated with loans. This is where our risk‐based user‐


2   See SNA (1993, 6.128).




                                                  2
cost approach differs substantially from current practice. Despite our conservative

estimate of risk premia, we show that imputed bank output is overstated by 45 percent

on average in the U.S. national income and product accounts (NIPA). This translates into

an overstatement of total bank output of 21 percent, since services associated with

originating loans that remain on bank balance sheets comprise only part of bank output.

Netting out the lending services to nonfinancial firms, which are counted as intermediate

input, this finding implies that U.S. GDP would have been 0.3 percent lower on average

over our sample period of 1997 to 2007.

      A number of plausibility checks also argue in favor of our output measure. First,

we compare the share of capital in banks’ value added with the share of capital in the

total private economy and other industries. Under current practice, banks show up as

more (fixed) capital‐intensive than petroleum refining, whereas our estimates suggest a

capital share closer to the share of capital in the overall private sector. In addition,

current practice implies an internal rate of return on fixed assets that is 8 percentage

points higher than the rate in the private sector as a whole. 4 Our new estimates imply an

internal rate that is, on average, slightly lower than the rate in the overall private sector.

This is more consistent with the basic principle that the internal rate of return on fixed

assets should not vary much across industries as long as capital is mobile.

      The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. We begin with a brief review of the

theory‐implied new output measure, focusing on the role of risk. We then discuss data

and present our results. We conclude with a summary, and discuss directions for future

research.


II. The Model for Implicit Bank Service Output

        This section reviews briefly the formulae, as implied by dynamic stochastic

optimizing models in Wang (2003) and WBF (2004), for imputing the value of bank


3 Diewert (1974) was one of the first to introduce this framework. Barnett (1978) first applies it to
financial assets. The previous studies, however, do not explicitly model risk.




                                                     3
services provided but not explicitly charged for. 5 To this end, the key onclusion of these

studies is that, to impute the pure cost of funds on a risky credit instrument generated by

a bank, one should use the rate of return on debt securities subject to the same risk, but

without any services attached. The pure cost of funds is then netted out of a bank’s total

income to arrive at the value of bank services implicitly charged for.

        In short, the nominal value of bank services implicitly charged for can, on

average, be imputed as 6

                                      Yt A = rt S At = ( rt A − rt M ) At .                           (1)

rt A is the rate of return expected by a bank on a loan or pool of loans, while rt M is the

expected rate of return required on market debt with the same risk characteristics. The

difference between the two rates equals what we shall call the service spread rt S . It is the

extra interest (normalized by the balance of loans) that must be charged to compensate

the bank for processing the loans, that is, it is the implicit service charge.

        According to the nomenclature of the 1993 System of National Accounts (SNA93),

rt M is the reference rate. As made clear in Wang (2003) and WBF (2004), the reference rate

varies across different categories of bank services, depending on risk characteristics of

the financial security or portfolio of securities associated with the services considered.

        However, the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) currently

impute bank services to borrowers using a nearly risk‐free rate as the reference rate:

                                       (r
                                        t
                                            A
                                                − rt F ) At = ( rt P + rt S ) At = Yt A + rt P At .   (2)

The value of output imputed according to (2) will overstate the actual value of service

output. The informal justification for (2) is that rt P At is regarded as compensation for



4 Differences in systematic risk between industries can explain differences in the internal rate of
return; see Section II. However, our loan risk premium estimates and stock market betas suggest
that a 8 percent risk premium is extreme.
5 WBF (2004) extend Wang’s partial equilibrium model to a general equilibrium setting, and

demonstrate that all the qualitative results in Wang (2003) continue to hold. Interested readers
who wish to pursue the theoretical issues in greater detail are referred to those studies.
6 See WBF (2004) for a detailed discussion of how the actual value in each period deviates from

this average.



                                                            4
rendering a so‐called “risk‐bearing” service. Wang and Basu (2007, section 3.4) discuss at

length why risk‐bearing is not a productive service according to the conceptual

framework of SNA93 and, more importantly, why the NIPA’s imputation results in

inconsistent accounting of the fund‐using firms’ output, by making it depend on their

source of funding (that is, the public debt market versus banks), even given identical

underlying true output.

      The value of implicit depositor services can be imputed in a similar manner to the

new way we imputed the value of implicit lending services. Let Dt denote the deposit

balance, rt D the interest rate paid, and rt m the corresponding reference rate (that is, the

return on a market security with the same risk). Then nominal output of depositor

services is

                                     Yt D = ( rt m − rt D ) Dt .                            (3)

      For insured deposits in the United States (up to $100,000 per individual per bank),

the relevant market rate is the risk‐free (Treasury) rate, rt m = rt F . For the remaining,

uninsured, deposits rt m > rt F , because the holders are exposed to some risk in bank asset

portfolios.

      Note that equation (1) implies that there are zero implicit services provided to asset

issuers (that is, YA = 0), if a bank passively holds market securities in its investment

portfolio, since rA = rM. Likewise, (3) implies zero implicit services (that is, YD = 0)

provided to holders of bank term liabilities (commercial paper, market bonds, and

privately placed bonds), since the interest rate paid equals the reference rate ( r D = r m ).

Also note that under virtually all circumstances (that is, whenever there are equity

holders), rM in (1) is greater than rt m in (3), because bank assets are typically riskier than

bank liabilities. In other words, the reference rates for imputing lending and depositor

services almost always differ by a positive margin.

      Figure 1 illustrates the imputed nominal output value of implicit bank services.

Note that only part of a bank’s net interest income constitutes nominal output of bank




                                                      5
                                                                   (        )
services; the remainder—corresponding to the risk premium, r M − r F A —is excluded. 7

This is precisely because the reference rate for lending services generally exceeds that for

depositor services. The risk premium, along with actual interest expenses on bank

liabilities, constitutes a pure transfer of capital income. It is part of the factor income

generated by the capital used in the borrowing firms’ production or in the consumption

of consumers. This factor income is then transferred from the end users of funds to the

ultimate suppliers of funds—the bank shareholders. Only when all investors are risk

neutral or all risk is idiosyncratic will this risk premium disappear. Figure 1 illuminates

how our model‐based output measure differs from the NIPA’s current measure, which

uses a (nearly) risk‐free rate as the single reference rate (see Fixler, Reinsdorf, and Smith,

2003). As we have argued, the NIPA’s measure overstates bank output by the amount of

the risk premium. In the remainder of this paper, we discuss how to estimate the risk

premium and its quantitative impact on the measured output of the U.S. commercial

banking industry.




III. Data and Empirical Estimates of Bank Service Income

III.A Data Sources
Accounting data for individual commercial banks come from the Consolidated Reports

of Condition and Income (the Call Reports). 8 These are quarterly financial statements

filed by banks to their regulators and made available by the Federal Reserve Bank of

Chicago. Our empirical estimates use data from the second quarter of 1997 to the fourth

quarter of 2007, mostly because some of the necessary variables are not available for

earlier years.




7  As is shown, the balance of loans exceeds that of deposits, with bank equity making up the
difference. Also note that this figure is a simplified version of Figure 1 in Wang (2003), as it
ignores risk premia on deposits due to deposit insurance or uninsured deposits. That is, it sets
 r m = r F , and overstates depositor services.
8 These correspond to the forms FFIEC 031‐041; see www.ffiec.gov for details.




                                                  6
      The Call Reports data are used to estimate the average interest rate earned by

banks on each category of loans and deposits. The Call Reports also provide data on the

repricing period of various categories of loans. Yields on U.S. Treasury securities of

varying maturities are from the Federal Reserve Board, 9 as are yields on commercial

paper of the top two tiers of ratings; yields on the remaining tiers are from Bloomberg.

Yields on mortgage‐ and asset‐backed securities are based on indices constructed by

Citigroup Global Markets and Merrill Lynch. Finally, interest rates charged on

commercial and industrial (C&I) loans for clients with various risk profiles come from

the Federal Reserve Survey of Terms of Business Lending. 10


III.B Implementation—Overview

The Call Reports afford no direct observation of the expected rate of return ( rt A ), which

should equal RtA − dt A , where RtA is the promised yield on loans set at the beginning of

period t while dt A is the expected rate of loan default. What can be computed is the

average interest rate actually received by banks on each individual category of loans and

securities. This equals RtA − dtA+1 , where dtA+1 is the realized default rate (indexed t+1

because it becomes known only at the end of period t). 11 So we express rt S in (1) as 12

                       rt S = ⎡⎣ ( RtA − dtA+1 ) − ( RtM − dtM ) ⎤⎦ + ( dtA+1 − dt A ) .         (4)

RtM is the promised yield on the reference market securities while dtM is the expected

default rate on those securities. As will be shown below, dtM is mostly lower than 1%,

often significantly so, for the market securities we use. Therefore, the service spread can


9  Release H.15; see http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h15/. We use the constant‐maturity
series.
10 Release E.2; see http://federalreserve.gov/releases/e2/. For more information on banks’ internal

risk rating, see data reported in Form FR2028a/s, available from 1997 onward (see Appendix A for
further details):
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/reportforms/ReportDetail.cfm?WhichFormId=FR_2028
a/s.
11 This expression is strictly correct only for one‐period bonds, otherwise the realized return also

includes a term reflecting the change in bond price due to fluctuations in yield. See further
discussion below and chapter 10 of Campbell, Lo, and MacKinlay (1997).




                                                              7
be inferred from the realized loan interest rate and the matched market yield, after

correcting for the deviation of the actual from the expected rate of loan default. This is

our basic formula for imputing the value of implicitly priced services to borrowers. The

empirical estimate of each term will be discussed in detail.

           The Call Reports data dictate that we can match loans with market securities in

only a few broad categories: residential mortgages with mortgage‐backed securities

(MBS), consumer loans with asset‐backed securities (ABS), and C&I loans with

commercial paper. So, the reference rate ( rt M = RtM − d tM ) used for each category is a

(noisy) proxy for the true risk‐matched reference rate, as we observe none of the risk

composition and only limited information about the maturity of the loans and thus

cannot assess the accuracy of the match. Nevertheless, using market debt returns almost

surely underestimate the true risk premium on loans, since market securities on average

have much lower realized default rates and are therefore likely to command lower risk

premia as well (see details in the next subsection). 13

           Another issue is that in each period we observe only the average interest rate

earned by a bank on its portfolio of a given type of loans, regardless of when the loans

were priced. In particular, for loans with long periods of fixed rates, like mortgages, this

loan portfolio will also include loans that were priced years ago. Comparing this average

rate with current market rates to impute the service spread is obviously not correct.

Unfortunately, the data necessary for a proper matching—gross flows of new loans

originated and old loans paid off or reset at a new interest rate in each period—are not

available. So, rather than trying to make rough assumptions about the composition of

the loan portfolios, we compare the average interest rate to the current market reference

rates in our baseline estimates. 14 The one exception is C&I loans, because we can use data

from the Survey of Terms of Business Lending, which provides data on the interest rate



12
     This is because rt S = rt A − rt M = ( RtA − dt A ) − ( RtM − dtM ) .
13 It is possible, but unlikely, that the systematic component of risk, which determines the risk
premium, is still the same for loans and the matched securities.
14 This means that we estimate a market rate that would be the theoretically correct reference rate

if all the loans in the portfolio had been (re)priced during the current period.



                                                                             8
charged on new C&I loans originated by commercial banks in the survey week. In this

case, we can match the timing of bank loan interest rates and the market rate. While still

not perfect, this matching likely provides a more accurate estimate of actual service

spreads than could be obtained by using the difference between average bank loan rates

earned and current market reference rates.

         Estimating depositor services according to equation (3) is straightforward,

especially once we assume r m = r F . This assumption is necessary, because the Call

Reports do not provide adequate data for estimating the risk premium on uninsured

deposits, whose share is, fortunately, modest. The following subsections detail the

estimation of implicit incomes from bank services.


III.C Estimates of Risk Premia
To facilitate comparison with the NIPAs’ current measure of bank output, we estimate

separately the two components—the risk‐free rate and the risk premium—of the

reference rate for each category of loans. The risk premium on a reference security is

                                          rt P = rt M − rt F = RtM − rt F − dtM .                  (5)

Data indicate that the unconditional estimate of dtM , equal to the long‐term average of

realized dtM ’s, is extremely low for certain categories of market debt, such as commercial

paper. 15 For example, according to Moody’s, the historical average default rates of

commercial paper with the top two rating grades (P‐1 and P‐2) are basically nil. 16 So, for

certain categories of loans, when such corporate debt is used as the reference securities, a

reasonable estimate of rt P is simply the yield spread between such debt and the maturity‐

matched Treasury securities (that is, RtM − rt F ); the upward bias from ignoring dtM

should be negligible.




15   The conditional estimate of dtM , such as KMV’s EDF, is procyclical.
16“For a 180‐day period, these risks are estimated to be 0.00 percent for P‐1, 0.02 percent for P‐2,
0.12 percent for P‐3, and 0.43 percent for Not Prime (NP).”
www.moodyskmv.com/research/whitepaper/60917.pdf.



                                                         9
      We compute the respective risk premium on C&I loans and consumer loans, as

follows: First, to gauge the default risk and maturity composition of C&I loans and find

the best match of market securities, we rely on the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Terms of

Business Lending (STBL). 17 Data from this survey indicate that about 70 percent of C&I

loans are repriced in less than a month and over 90 percent less than a year. This suggests

that commercial paper is a more appropriate type of reference security than corporate

bonds. On the other hand, using the yields on commercial paper likely results in

conservative estimates of the risk premium on C&I loans, since C&I loans tend to have

both longer average maturities and greater default risk than commercial paper. 18

        Among the four risk categories reported in the STBL, two have readily available

reference market securities. First, the “minimal risk” classification explicitly requires that

the loans be to customers with a bond rating of AA or higher; such firms generally also

carry a P‐1 short‐term rating by Moody’s. Second, the “low risk” category requires

customers to have a BBB bond rating, which maps into a P‐2 rating by Moody’s. 19

However, the reference securities for the other two, relatively higher, risk categories,

“moderate risk” and “other,” are not as clear. So we assume that the higher interest rate

relative to the “low risk” category is entirely due to greater risk but not to extra implicit

service revenue. 20 With estimates of the risk premium for each of the four categories of

C&I loans, we calculate a weighted average premium using the volume of new loans in

each category, and we subtract this from the overall C&I loan interest rate obtained from

the STBL.


17 It is possible that the loans covered in the survey are still not representative of the banking
industry as a whole, or at all times. But this is the best micro data source available, and there is no
reason to suspect systematic bias.
18 It does not improve the match to use asset‐backed commercial‐paper (ABCP) as the reference for

those bank loans that are secured. The yields on ABCP and on regular nonfinancial CP are
virtually the same until July, 2007, when the subprime‐induced financial turmoil broke out in the
United States.
19 AA and BBB are bond ratings by S&P, equivalent to ratings of Aa2 and Baa2 by Moody’s. The

 mapping between long‐ and short‐term ratings can be found at
http://federalreserve.gov/releases/cp/about.htm.




                                                     10
        The risk premia of consumer installment and credit card loans are estimated

using Merrill Lynch’s (ML) asset‐backed securities (ABS) indices for fixed‐rate auto and

credit‐card loans, respectively. A weighted average yield is computed based on the share

of credit cards versus all other loans in the portfolio. The average rating of the ABS

underlying the two indices should be between BBB and AA, since both these indices are

components of ML’s ABS master index. 21 Following this procedure almost certainly

yields a rather conservative estimate of the average risk premium on the consumer loans

held on the books of banks because to receive investment‐grade ratings, the ABS

invariably must obtain credit enhancement to ensure that their holders will be subject to

minimal credit risk. 22 Moreover, even at the original loan level, the loans kept on banks’

books may be riskier than the ones that are securitized. 23 In terms of maturity, however,

no data are available to gauge how well on average the indices’ constituent bonds match

consumer loans held by banks. 24

        To estimate the risk premium on residential mortgage loans, we use the maturity‐

weighted redemption yields on MBS issued by government‐sponsored enterprises (GSEs,

such as Fannie Mae and Freddy Mac) as the reference rate. The maturity data are

available in the Call Reports (schedule RC‐C) since the second quarter of 1997. Again,

this reference rate likely gives a conservative estimate of the risk premium on these loans,

since agency MBS are not subject to default risk but only to prepayment risk: mortgage


20 This will likely overstate the risk premium, since common sense suggests that riskier loans
require more screening and monitoring, and the cost of servicing these riskier loans must be
recouped.
21 We choose not to use a general index for the ABS market because, between 2003 and the first

half of 2007, a rapidly growing share of the market comprised securities backed by subprime and
Alt‐A mortgage loans—from less than 20 percent in 2003 to over 30 percent in 2006, according to
the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association.
22 Credit enhancement can be obtained in a variety of ways. It can be purchased from third parties

such as insurance companies, or created “internally” by forming a sufficient loss‐absorbing
cushion of junior claims within the tranche structure “wrapped” around a pool of assets in a
manner that enables the issued ABS can obtain senior ratings.
23 Using securitization to save on capital requirements is a form of regulatory arbitrage. This may

not be a major concern; for example, Calomiris and Mason (2004) find little evidence of this
motivation in banks that securitize credit card loans.
24 Since these are indices for fixed‐rate ABS, their average maturity may exceed that of the

underlying consumer loans, some of which carry floating rates.



                                                   11
holders may repay their loans in part or in full ahead of schedule. 25 More importantly, for

this reference rate to be a good proxy for the pure (risky) return in the loan rates, a

substantial fraction of the mortgage portfolio must be repriced in the period of

consideration. This timing requirement is made clear in equation (4): the reference rate

should be for the period when a loan’s interest rate was set or last reset. 26

      To gauge the extent to which the above baseline estimates are affected by the

interest‐rate timing mismatch, a problem that we suspect is particularly acute for long‐

term, fixed‐rate loans, such as many residential mortgages, we also compute the risk

premium on mortgage loans using a series of moving averages of current and past (up to

five years) market rates. For the period 2002–2007, the average service spread on

mortgage loans using current market rates is 0.80 percent, while that using the 5‐year

moving average rates is 0.69 percent. Service spreads estimated using shorter moving

averages lie in between. A maximum effect of 0.11 percentage points seems modest

compared to the size of the service spreads. It therefore seems that the problem of timing

mismatch between bank loan rates and the market reference rates is not a major concern.

        For each category of loans, we now have an estimate of the risk premium,

namely, the difference between the reference market rate and Treasury yield of the same

maturity. 27 The spread between the latter and the 3‐month Treasury yield is the usual

term premium. We use the 3‐month Treasury yield as the reference rate on transaction

deposits —short‐term and largely default‐risk‐free claims—and refer to it as the risk‐free

rate in the subsection below on the empirical results. The reference rate for savings and

time deposits, on the other hand, includes the pertinent average term risk premium. So,




25 All conforming residential mortgages that back the agency MBS carry no prepayment penalties.
This, in essence, grants the borrowers an implicit call option that allows a borrower to buy back
(that is, to pay off) the loan at face value. The option is most likely to be exercised when a loan’s
market value exceeds its face value, that is, when the current period mortgage rate falls below the
loan’s contractual interest rate. See, for example, Dunn and McConnell (1981) or Kau et al. (1992)
for the magnitude and determinants of prepayment risk.
26 There are, of course, timing issues regarding when the screening or monitoring is done versus

when the implicit revenue is recognized. See WBF (2004) for an in‐depth discussion.
27 The data in Call Reports refer to the amount of time until maturity or next repricing of the loans,

which is the economically relevant information for comparing with market securities.



                                                     12
by and large, the gap, in terms of the reference rate, between loans and deposits includes

both risk and term premia.


III.D New Estimates of the Value of Borrower and Depositor Services
Given the reference rate for each category of loans, we now estimate borrower and

depositor services. Table 1 is a detailed exposition using the estimates for the fourth

quarter of 2007, comparing our model‐based, service‐flow measure of bank output with

the measure according to NIPA’s current methodology. In total, it lists five types of

services—to holders of two types of deposit accounts and borrowers of three types of

loans. 28 Other categories of assets and liabilities, such as investment securities and

subordinated debt, are excluded because, as explained in Section II, their holders do not

receive financial services created by banks.

      Table 1 shows that for 2007:Q4, the risk‐adjusted reference rates on the three types

of loans are at least one percentage point higher than the risk‐free rate. Using the risk‐

adjusted reference rates lowers the imputed value of borrower services by $116.8 billion

(from $205 to $88.2 billion). To gauge the impact on GDP, we net out the value of

borrower services to businesses (that is, services related to commercial real estate loans

and C&I loans). 29 Accordingly, GDP in 2007:Q4 would be $52.9 billion, or 0.4 percent

points, lower using our risk‐adjusted bank output measure. We suspect that this figure is

on the low end because, as detailed above, we have adopted conservative estimates of

risk premia to adjust the reference rates for risk.

      Figure 2 plots the respective average risk‐adjusted reference rates for deposits and

loans from 1997:Q2 to 2007:Q4. Throughout the sample period, the risk plus term

premium stays positive, so the average reference rate for loans consistently exceeds that



28 Among the loan categories covered in the Call Reports, we consider only those for which
reasonably similar reference securities can be found in the market. So, lease financing receivables
are excluded. Moreover, we include only loans and deposits made in banks’ domestic offices,
since activities in foreign offices do not contribute to U.S. GDP. In sum, the four categories in
Table 1 account for 90 percent of the total balance of loans and leases in 2007.
29 We infer the former from total services related to real estate loans, based on the simplifying

assumption that the share of services to commercial customers is proportional to the share of
commercial loan balances in total real estate loans.



                                                   13
for deposits. For comparison, Figure 2 also plots the actual average interest rate paid on

deposits and received on loans, respectively. The quarterly average rate is calculated as

the interest received or paid during a quarter over the average balance of the

corresponding instruments for the quarter. 30 It is clear that the interest rates paid on

deposits are, on average, more inertial than the risk‐free reference rate, a well

documented, stylized fact in empirical banking studies (for example, Berger and Hannan,

1989). Likewise, the interest rates received on loans are on average less volatile than the

reference market rates.

      Figure 2 also shows that the average loan rate consistently exceeds the average loan

reference rate, implying a positive service spread on average. By contrast, between late

2001 and early 2004, the average deposit rate, in fact, rose above the deposit reference

rate. Flannery (1982) explains such occurrences as reflecting the quasi‐fixed nature of

deposit relationships. That is, depositors are to some degree “locked” into a bank account

because of the transaction cost that they would incur to switch banks; in return, banks

implicitly commit to smoothing deposit interest rates. There may also be substitutions

between “headline” interest rates and various direct charges and fees on deposit

accounts at such times.

      In Figure 3 we plot the service spreads for deposits and loans directly. Not

surprisingly, the two spreads frequently move in opposite directions, since their

formulae carry negative signs (see (1) and (3)), while both actual rates are more inertial

than the respective reference rate. Furthermore, the spreads appear to comove with the

business cycle: the deposit‐service spread narrows, while the loan‐service spread widens

following monetary easing in economic downturns, and vice versa. Variations in the

loan‐service spread can mostly be traced to C&I and consumer loans, as the service

spread on real estate loans remains fairly stable throughout the period. One explanation

for this pattern is that bank C&I loans become riskier relative to commercial paper in



30Table A.1 in the Appendix lists the specific data items used in calculating the average interest
rate on each category of securities, loans, and deposits. Table A.2 summarizes major changes, in
terms of reporting requirements and variable definitions, in the Call Reports between 1997 and
2007 and the way they are handled to arrive at harmonized time series.



                                                   14
periods of economic weakness, possibly because smaller or riskier firms are more likely

to draw on their credit lines in bad times. If this is the case, then our empirical results

underestimate the risk premium on C&I loans in such periods.

        Figure 4 depicts the imputed bank service income and the compensation for

risk. 31 Compensation for term risk and for the risk of default represents the difference

between our new model‐implied measure of bank output and the NIPA’s current

measure. Variations across time in income from the two services echo those in the two

service spreads depicted in Figure 3. The term‐risk compensation is time‐varying as well;

it rises as the yield curve steepens, and falls as the yield curve becomes less steep. In

comparison, the default risk compensation is more stable over time. Especially worth

noting are the last two quarters of 2007. Both the default and the term risk compensation

increased sharply because of the turmoil in financial markets and the monetary easing

that followed in response.


III.E Plausibility Checks
So far, we have made the case for using our measure of bank output on theoretical

grounds, that is, we have explained why the reference rate used to impute the value of

bank service output should be adjusted for the risk of the associated financial instrument.

By removing the risk premium, this new measure of output reduces banks’ operating

surplus. 32 We now examine whether or not the lower surplus is “implausibly small,” as

Fixler and Reinsdorf (2006, footnote 6) have asserted in arguing against risk‐adjusted

reference rates. We focus on two indicators, the capital share in value added and the

internal rate of return on fixed capital, since the range of values of each indicator in other

industries can be viewed, under certain conditions, as the plausible benchmark for

comparison. The capital share, defined as the share of operating surplus in industry


31 “Loan services” in the figure corresponds to YA in equation (1) , and “Deposit services” to YD in
(3). “Default risk compensation” corresponds to the term rAA in equation (2). “Term risk
compensation” denotes the return due to maturities longer than three months.
32 Operating surplus is defined as value added net of labor compensation and indirect taxes. As

explained above, part of the “excess” bank operating surplus should be reallocated to nonfinancial




                                                    15
value added, gives an indication of the capital intensity of production in that industry.

The internal rate of return (IRR) is the return an industry or a firm would need to earn on

its fixed capital assets, such as buildings and computers, to exactly cover the rental cost

of fixed capital.

      We must note the close link between the IRR and the user cost of funds. The latter

is, in fact, simply the former net of depreciation (consisting of both obsolescence and

physical wear and tear). The concept of a risk‐adjusted user cost in the case of fixed

capital has long been an integral part of investment theories. The IRR in some industries

is consistently higher than in others, even after controlling for depreciation and expected

changes in the price of capital goods—precisely because investing in those industries

incurs greater systematic risk. Investors thus demand a higher rate of payoff on average,

so long as capital is mobile and the no‐arbitrage condition holds. The risk‐based user cost

measure is also routinely used in industry‐level growth accounting studies. 33 We

calculate the IRR using the standard Jorgensonian framework (for example, Jorgenson,

Gollop, and Fraumeni, 1987), and capital includes fixed reproducible assets, such as

buildings and machinery, as well as land and inventories.

        The first step is to gauge by how much our new measure would revise downward

total nominal output of all depository institutions. Total output equals the sum of explicit

bank service charges (comprising the bulk of non‐interest income) and implicit revenue

from services (that is, our estimate of borrower and depositor service output in Table 1

and Figure 3). 34 While imputed bank output is overstated by 45 percent on average, total

banking output is overstated by only 21 percent on average over the sample period

1997:Q2–2007:Q4. Next, we obtain a new output estimate for all depository institutions

(that is, the credit intermediation industry as defined in the NIPA Industry Account) by

assuming that output of the rest of the industry is overstated by the same percentage as



firms that purchase bank services, while the remainder should be reallocated to interest payments
and receipts of households.
33 See, for example,. Jorgenson, Gollop, and Fraumeni (1987).

34 Note that we exclude the trading‐income elements of non‐interest income, since we argue that it

is also not output but transfer of property income; see Inklaar and Wang (2007) for further
discussion.



                                                   16
that of commercial banks in each year. 35 Obviously it would be preferable to have direct

estimates of the overstatement for both savings banks and credit unions, but that is

beyond the scope of this paper.

        Table 2 shows the results of our plausibility exercise comparing capital shares and

internal rates of return according to the current NIPA measure versus our new measure

of output. Under the NIPA output measure, the banking industry’s capital share

averages 59 percent, which ranks it higher than the capital share of the petroleum

refining industry and similar to the share of coal mining. This seems an implausibly high

capital share, since the other industries with similar shares are generally regarded as

intensive users of large‐scale machinery. The implication is that the operating surplus

may be implausibly large under the NIPA measure. The new output measure, by

excluding the risk premium, decreases the capital share of the industry to 42 percent on

average—the same as the share of private industries as a whole. 36 This is also close to the

capital share of retail trade but higher than that of business services.

        The internal rate of return of the banking industry, based on the NIPA measure of

output, also seems implausibly high, at 17.8 percent, on average, over the period. In

comparison, the IRR for the private sector as a whole is only 9.3 percent. The premium of

8 percentage points seems unwarranted by the systematic risk of the credit

intermediaries, since many of those with publicly traded shares have a beta around one.

Once the new measure of bank output is used, the resulting lower operating surplus

reduces the IRR of the industry to a level close to that of the overall private sector.

        Mismeasured capital assets are a far less plausible reason for the observed gap

between the IRR of the overall private sector and the financial intermediation industry. It


35 This industry (NAICS 521 and 522) comprises commercial banks, the Federal Reserve, savings
banks, and credit unions. Commercial banks account for more than half of the employment.
Savings banks, the second largest category, tend to have a larger share of real estate loans than
commercial banks. Although the risk premium on real estate loans tends to be somewhat lower
than on other loans, a robustness check that applies the same interest rate margin by loan category
to savings banks leads to similar estimates of overstatement.
36 Lower bank operating surplus also means lower operating surplus for the overall private sector.

But taking this into account has only a minimal effect on the values reported in Table 2 for the




                                                   17
may be argued that credit intermediaries have built up more intangible assets than the

average    private   industry,    for   example,    through    business    reorganization     that

complements the investment in information technology (IT). 37                     However,     the

intermediation industry would need to have an investment share of intangibles nine

times higher than that of the average private industry to account for the difference in the

IRR. This seems unlikely, since the IT investment share of banks is only 30 percent higher

than that of the overall private sector. 38

        The decrease in the capital share and the internal rate of return on fixed capital

toward a more reasonable level is an indirect effect of excluding the risk premium in our

new measure of bank output. We therefore view the results reported in Table 2 as

empirical support for the new measure, complementing the theoretical argument for risk‐

adjusted reference rates.


IV. Conclusions

Banks provide important services to both borrowers and depositors. They reduce the

information asymmetries that impede borrowers’ access to credit, and provide

transaction services to depositors. However, banks generally do not charge explicit fees

for these services; instead, they bundle the fees with loan and deposit interest flows. As a

result, the output value of both borrower and depositor services must be imputed. In the

statistical and research community, it is generally agreed that the value of such implicit

bank services is most appropriately imputed as the difference between the interest paid

on loans (and interest received on deposits) and the opportunity cost of the associated

funds as determined by a reference rate. The choice of this reference rate, however, is

more contentious. Under the current System of National Accounts (1993) and in the U.S.




private sector. It is also important to note that we are in all likelihood underestimating the risk
premium, and this means the true capital share of the banking industry is lower than 42 percent.
37 The BEA counts only software and a few intangibles as capital. Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel

(2006), among others, argue that the scope of capital should be expanded to cover organizational
capital, brand capital, etc.
38 Specifically, 34 percent versus 26 percent of total investment.




                                                   18
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA), this reference rate is stipulated to be a

single, risk‐free rate.

        In contrast, Wang (2003) and WBF (2004) show that, in a world with risk‐averse

investors, each reference rate should take account of the non‐diversifiable risk of the

associated financial instrument. 39 Specifically, the opportunity cost of a risky loan is not

the return on a risk‐free investment, but rather the return on an investment of

comparable risk. The model in WBF (2004) is, of course, an abstract representation of

reality, assuming, for example, (nearly) complete and efficient financial markets.

Relaxing these assumptions would likely affect the exact risk premium concept that

should be incorporated into the reference rates, but the core message of the model should

continue to hold: bearing risk that is priced in the market is not a productive activity.

        In this paper, we show that the output measure implied by the banking model of

WBF (2004) can be implemented for U.S. commercial banks from 1997 onward. In

particular, diverse financial markets provide adequate data of yields on debt instruments

comparable to those held on banks’ balance sheets to enable the derivation of risk‐

adjusted reference rates. We show that removing the risk premium, the return between

the risk‐adjusted reference rate and the risk‐free rate, is quantitatively important.

Comparing bank output calculated using our risk‐adjusted reference rate with output

computed using the risk‐free reference rate according to the current NIPA method, we

show that the latter overstates, on average, imputed bank output by 45 percent, total

bank output by 21 percent, and U.S. GDP by 0.3 percent.

        Our risk‐adjusted reference rates are far from perfect, since the bank loan

categories for which interest rates are reported separately are quite broad. As a result, the

matching of risk characteristics between bank loans and comparable publicly traded debt

instruments is imprecise. Nonetheless, we would argue that we have captured some of

the risk premium by using relatively conservative estimates, and that accounting for

some of the risk premium is an improvement over not accounting for it at all.




                                                19
Furthermore, estimates of the share of capital in banks’ value added, and the internal rate

of return on fixed capital of the banking industry also suggest that our measure of bank

output is more plausible than the current NIPA measure.

        We conclude by drawing two important implications of our paper. First, we find

no convincing theoretical or practical reasons for using risk‐free reference rates in

estimating bank output. Instead, we show that it is feasible to use risk‐adjusted reference

rates and that doing so is quantitatively significant. The fact that our risk‐adjusted

measure of bank output is both conceptually preferable and leads to more plausible

outcomes argues strongly for changing current statistical practice to remove the

compensation for risk‐bearing in general from bank output. Second, information about

loan risk rating and the attendant interest rates charged by U.S. commercial banks is

scarce, despite the central role of risk rating in measuring bank output, as well as in

studying other important banking issues such as competition in credit supply. We,

therefore, urge the statistical agencies to improve data collection in this important area.




39 The argument is the same for deposits, but less relevant due to the existence of deposit
insurance. However, not all deposits are insured, and some countries (for example., Switzerland)
do not insure deposits at all. In such cases, the need for risk adjustment applies to deposits as well.




                                                     20
Table 1, The Effect of Risk Adjustment: Imputed Output of U.S. Commercial Banks at Current Prices in 2007:Q4 ($billions)
                                         Average         Interest    Annualized                      Reference rate                               Imputed output
                                         Balance          Flow       interest rate       risk-free    term     default & term         risk-free     term     default & term
Deposits in domestic offices              5,504            152           2.8%              3.5%       3.5%          3.5%                 39.0       42.5          42.5
 Demand deposits                           486             0.0           0.0%              3.5%       3.5%          3.5%                 16.9       16.9          16.9
 Time and savings deposits                5,018           152.2          3.0%              3.5%       3.5%          3.5%                 22.1       25.6          25.6

Loans in domestic offices                 5,471           395           7.2%              3.5%        4.0%           5.6%              205.0        177.0            88.2
 Real estate loans                        3,545          235.3           6.6%             3.5%        4.3%           5.8%              112.2         84.3            31.5
 Consumer loans                            804            80.9          10.1%             3.5%        3.5%           4.4%               53.0         52.9            45.7
 Commercial & industrial loans            1,123           78.8          7.0%              3.5%        3.5%           6.0%               39.8        39.8             11.1

Total                                     10,975          547           6.6%              3.5%        3.8%           4.6%              244.0        219.5           130.7
Notes: “Average Balance” is the average of the balance reported on December 31, 2007 and September 30, 2007. “Interest Flow” is the actual interest received or paid within
the quarter. “Annualized interest rate” is the interest flow divided by the average balance and then annualized. The risk-free reference rate is the average 3-month Treasury
yield, the term-adjusted reference rate is the Treasury yield corresponding to the average maturity of the loans or deposits, and the default- & term-adjusted rate also includes
the default risk premium. See Tables A.1 and A.2 in the Appendix for details of the Call report data items used in constructing these variables.



Table 2. The Impact of Risk Adjustment on Labor Share and Internal Rate of Return, 1997–2006 Average
                                      Capital share in       Internal rate of return
                                       value added               on fixed assets
Financial intermedation
  Risk-free                                  59                       17.8
  Risk-adjusted                              41                       6.8
Private economy                              42                       9.3
Notes: “Financial intermediation” refers to NAICS industries 521 and 522 in the BEA’s GDP by Industry Account. “Risk-free” and “Risk-adjusted” denote the two measures
of bank output that use the risk-free and the risk-adjusted reference rates (corresponding to the “risk-free” and “default & term” output columns in Table 1), respectively.
“Private economy” is as defined in the GDP by Industry Account. The “capital share in value added” includes an estimate of the labor compensation of self-employed,
assuming they earn the same average wage as employees. The “internal rate of return on fixed assets” is the shadow rental rate on the gross capital stock at current prices that
would generate the actual capital compensation (defined as value added minus labor compensation). All fixed assets as covered by the BLS are included, that is, fixed
reproducible assets, land and inventories. The industry-level capital and income data are available annually for the 1997–2006 period.


                                                                                          21
Figure 1. Decomposition of a bank’s interest flows (A simplified version)
               Loan balance (A )

   rA

                         YA
   rM
                  risk premium

  rF

                        YD

   rD
                 interest expense
       0
              Deposit balance (D )
Notes:
rA: (Average) interest rate received on loans
rM: Expected rate of return required on market securities with the same (systematic) risk characteristics as the loans
rF: Risk-free rate
rD: Interest rate paid on deposits
YA: Nominal output of bank services to borrowers
YD: Nominal output of bank services to depositors
For a more detailed decomposition, see Wang (2003).




                                                                                           22
                        Figure 2. Average interest rates on loans and deposits,
                        and corresponding reference rates, 1997:Q2-2007:Q3
10%

9%

8%

7%

6%

5%

4%

3%

2%

1%

0%
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      1997   1998     1999       2000      2001         2002     2003       2004       2005       2006   2007

                Weighted average Deposit rate                  Weighted average Deposit reference rate
                Weighted average Loan reference rate           Weighted average Loan rate



                                                   23
          Figure 3, Weighted average service spread for loans and deposits, 1997:Q2-2007:Q4

3.5%

3.0%

2.5%

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0%
        Q2
        Q3
        Q4
        Q1
        Q2
        Q3
        Q4
        Q1
        Q2
        Q3
        Q4
        Q1
        Q2
        Q3
        Q4
        Q1
        Q2
        Q3
        Q4
        Q1
        Q2
        Q3
        Q4
        Q1
        Q2
        Q3
        Q4
        Q1
        Q2
        Q3
        Q4
        Q1
        Q2
        Q3
        Q4
        Q1
        Q2
        Q3
        Q4
        Q1
        Q2
        Q3
        Q4
        1997   1998     1999     2000    2001        2002    2003         2004   2005   2006   2007

                                           Deposit spread   Loan spread



                                                24
           Figure 4, Imputed output of U.S. commercial banks and risk compensation at
                       current prices, 1997:Q2-2007:Q4 (billions of dollars)

300

250

200

150

100

 50

  0

-50
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      Q1
      Q2
      Q3
      Q4
      1997       1998         1999        2000         2001         2002        2003         2004         2005         2006        2007

              Depositor services         Borrower services         Term risk compensation            Default risk compensation

      Notes: “Deposit services” equals the deposit service spread (cf. Figure 3) times the quarterly average deposit balance (see equation
      (3)). “Loan services” equals the loan service spread (cf. Figure 3) times the quarterly average loan balance at all banks (following
      equation (1)); “Term risk compensation” denotes the value of the return on loans and deposits due to maturities longer than 3 months.
      “Default risk compensation” denotes the value of pure default risk-based return on loans.

                                                                    25
Appendix. Details of Data and Estimation Procedures

Table A.1. Call report data items used in the analysis
                                                                           1997Q2-2000Q4                            2001Q1-2007Q4
Interest income and expenses
Income on real estate loans                                         RIAD4011+RIAD4246              RIAD4011
Income on consumer loans                                        RIAD4013+RIAD4247+RIAD4248         RIAD4013
Income on commercial and industrial loans                                             RIAD4012
Expenses on time and savings deposits                                       RIAD0093+RIADA517+RIADA518

Loan/deposit balance
Real estate loans                                                                                RCON1410
Credit card loans                                                             RCON2008                             RCONB538
Other consumer loans                                                          RCON2011                         RCONB539+RCON2011
Commercial and industrial loans                                                                  RCON1766
Time and savings deposits                                                                        RCON2385
Demand deposits                                                                                  RCON2210

Maturity data
Real estate loans (1-4 family)                                                           RCONA564-RCONA569
Loans except 1-4 family real estate loans                                                RCFDA570-RCONA575
Time deposits of less than $100 000                                                      RCONA579-RCONA582
Time deposits of $100 000 or more                                                        RCONA584-RCONA587
Notes: Entries reference the mnemonics in the Call report data, listed under the relevant period(s). The shaded rows refer to variable names that remain the same throughout
the sample years. Data are downloaded from the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (http://www.chicagofed.org/economic_research_and_data/commercial_bank_data.cfm).
All data items (balances as of December 31st) are from the fourth-quarter report of each year. Using the Entity Type Code variable (RSSD9331), only data of commercial
banks are selected. A bank is included in the loan-interest-rate calculation only when data on both interest income and loan balance are available. This requirement mostly
affects banks with less than $25mln in assets, which before 2001 did not have to provide a breakdown of total interest income by loan category. In 2004, this category of
banks represented around 0.1 percent of total commercial bank assets.




                                                                                        26
Table A.2. Notes on changes in variable definitions in the Call Reports, 1997–2007
Code/Item               Note
RIAD4246, RIAD4247,     Up to 2000, small and medium-sized banks used these variables to report their interest
RIAD4248                income for the different loan categories. RIAD4249 covers interest income on
                        Commercial & Industrial loans, but also on all other loans, so this variable was
                        omitted at the cost of coverage of the industry loan totals. Banks with fewer than
                        $25mln in assets did not have to report any of these variables.
RCON2008, RCON2011      Up to 2000, banks with domestic and foreign offices only had to distinguish between
                        credit card loans and consumer installment loans for the consolidated bank. Total
                        loans to individuals are available for the bank's domestic offices. To increase
                        coverage, the share of credit card loans and of consumer installment loans was
                        calculated based on the consolidated totals (codes RCFD2008 and RCFD2011) and
                        applied to the total for the bank's domestic offices.
RCONB538, RCONB539      From 2001 onwards, credit card loans (RCONB538) do not include other revolving
                        loans (RCONB539) anymore.




                                                                          27
References

Barnett, W. A. (1978). “The User Cost of Money,” Economic Letters 1(2), pp. 145–49.
Berger, A. N. and T. H. Hannan (1989). “The Price‐Concentration Relationship in Banking,”
   Review of Economics and Statistics 71(2), pp. 291–99.
Calomiris, Charles W. and Joseph R. Mason (2004). “Credit Card Securitization and
   Regulatory Arbitrage,” Journal of Financial Services Research 26(1), pp. 5–27.
Campbell, J. Y., A. W. Lo, and A. C. MacKinlay (1997). The Econometrics of Financial Markets,
  Princeton University Press.
Corrado, Carol A., Charles R. Hulten, and Daniel E. Sichel (2006). “Intangible Capital and
   Economic Growth” NBER Working Papers, no. 11948.
Diewert, W. E. (1974). “Intertemporal Consumer Theory and the Demand for Durables,”
   Econometrica 42(3), pp. 497–516.
Diewert, W. E. (2008). “What is to be done for better productivity measurement”
   International Productivity Monitor 16, pp. 40–52.
Duffie, Darrell and Kenneth J. Singleton (2003). Credit Risk: Pricing, Measurement, and
   Management, Princeton University Press.
Dunn, Kenneth and John McConnell (1981). “Valuation of GNMA Mortgage Backed
  Securities” Journal of Finance 36, pp. 599–616.
Fama, E. F. (1985). “Whatʹs Different About Banks?” Journal of Monetary Economics 15(1), pp.
   29–39.
Fixler, D. J. (2004). Comments, in “Productivity in the U.S. Services Sector: New Sources of
    Economic Growth,” by Jack E. Triplett and Barry P. Bosworth, Brookings Institution
    Press.
Fixler, D. J., M. B. Reinsdorf, and G. M. Smith. (2003). “Measuring the Services of
    Commercial Banks in the NIPA: Changes in Concepts and Methods.” Survey of Current
    Business 83(9), pp. 33–44.
Fixler, D. J. and M. B. Reinsdorf (2006). “Computing Real Bank Services” paper presented at
    the NBER/CRIW Summer Institute Workshop, downloadable at
    http://www.nber.org/~confer/2006/si2006/prcr/reinsdorf.pdf.
Flannery, M. J. (1982). “Retail Bank Deposits as Quasi‐Fixed Factors of Production,”
   American Economic Review 72(3), pp. 527–36.
Griliches, Z. (1992, ed.). Output Measurement in the Service Sectors, NBER Studies in Income
    and Wealth no. 56, University of Chicago: Chicago.



                                                28
Griliches, Z. (1994). “Productivity, R&D, and the Data Constraint” American Economic Review
    84(1), pp. 1–23.
Gropp, R. and J. Vesala (2001). “Deposit Insurance and Moral Hazard: Does the
   Counterfactual Matter?” ECB Working Paper, no. 47.
Inklaar, R., M. P. Timmer, and B. van Ark (2008). “Market services productivity across
   Europe and the US” Economic Policy 23(53), pp. 139–194.
Inklaar, R., and J.C. Wang (2007). “Not Your Grandfather’s Bank Any More? Consistent
    Measurement of Non‐Traditional Bank Output” mimeo University of Groningen and
    Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
Jarrow, Robert, David Lando, and Fan Yu (2005). “Default Risk and Diversification: Theory
    and Empirical Implications,” Mathematical Finance 15(1), pp. 1–26.
Jorgenson, D. W., F. Gollop, and B. Fraumeni (1987). Productivity and U.S. Economic Growth.
    Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kau, James, Donald Keenan, Walter Muller, and James Epperson (1992). “A Generalized
   Valuation Model for Fixed‐Rate Residential Mortgages” Journal of Money, Credit and
   Banking 24, pp. 279–299.
Kimball, Ralph C. and William T. Gregor (1995). “How Distribution Is Transforming Retail
   Banking: Changes Leading Banks Are Making.” Journal of Retail Banking Services 17(3).
Radecki, Lawrence (1999). “Banks’ Payments‐Driven Revenues.” Federal Reserve Bank of
   New York Economic Policy Review 4(2), pp. 53–70.
SNA (1993). System of National Accounts 1993, United Nations: New York.
Triplett, Jack E. and Bosworth, Barry P. (2004). Productivity in the U.S. Services Sector:
    New Sources of Economic Growth. Washington DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Wang, J. C. (2003). “Loanable Funds, Risk, and Bank Service Output,” Federal Reserve Bank of
  Boston, Working Paper Series, no. 03‐4. Available at
  http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/wp/wp2003/wp034.htm.
Wang, J. C. and Basu, S. (2007). “Risk Bearing, Implicit Financial Services, and Specialization
  in the Financial Industry.” Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. Available at
  http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/ppdp/2006/ppdp063.pdf.
Wang, J. C., S. Basu, and J. G. Fernald (2004). “A General‐Equilibrium Asset‐Pricing
  Approach to the Measurement of Nominal and Real Bank Output.” Invited for
  conference volume on Price Index Concepts and Measurement, Conference on Research on
  Income and Wealth (CRIW). Available at
  http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/wp/wp2004/wp047.htm.




                                                 29
