                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   DO CHILD TAX BENEFITS AFFECT THE WELLBEING OF CHILDREN? EVIDENCE
               FROM CANADIAN CHILD BENEFIT EXPANSIONS

                                              Kevin Milligan
                                               Mark Stabile

                                          Working Paper 14624
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14624


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     December 2008




This research has been supported by a CLSRN grant. We thank Josh Lewis for excellent research assistance.
We also thank seminar participants at Alberta, Cornell, McGill, RAND, and Simon Fraser, as well
as lunch workshop participants at UBC and several conference participants and discussants for many
very helpful suggestions. This paper represents the views of the authors and does not necessarily reflect
the views of Statistics Canada. The data used in his article can be obtained through application to Statistics
Canada’s Research Data Centre program at http://www.statcan.ca/english/rdc/index.htm. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Kevin Milligan and Mark Stabile. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Do Child Tax Benefits Affect the Wellbeing of Children? Evidence from Canadian Child
Benefit Expansions
Kevin Milligan and Mark Stabile
NBER Working Paper No. 14624
December 2008
JEL No. I1,I2

                                                ABSTRACT

¸

A vast literature has examined the impact of family income on the health and development outcomes
of children. One channel through which increased income may operate is an improvement in a family’s
ability to provide food, shelter, clothing, books, and other expenditure-related inputs to a child’s development.
 In addition to this channel, many scholars have investigated the relationship between income and
the psychological wellbeing of the family. By reducing stress and conflict, more income helps to foster
an environment more conducive to healthy child development. In this paper, we exploit changes in
child benefits in Canada to study these questions. Importantly, our approach allows us to make stronger
causal inferences than has been possible with the existing, mostly correlational, evidence. Using variation
in child benefits across province, time, and family type, we study outcomes spanning test scores, mental
health, physical health, and deprivation measures. The findings suggest that child benefit programs
in Canada had significant positive effects on test scores, as has been featured in the existing literature.
However, we also find that several measures of both child and maternal mental health and well-being
show marked improvement with higher child benefits. We find strong and interesting differences in
the effects of benefits by sex of the child: benefits have stronger effects on educational outcomes and
physical health for boys, and on mental health outcomes for girls. Our findings also provide some
support for the hypothesis that income transfers operate through measures of family emotional well-being.


Kevin Milligan
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C.
CANADA V6T1Z1
and NBER
kevin.milligan@ubc.ca

Mark Stabile
School of Public Policy and Governance
University of Toronto
Canadiana Building, 3rd Floor
14 Queen's Park Cres. W.
Toronto, ON M5S 3K9
CANADA
and NBER
mark.stabile@utoronto.ca
Introduction




       A primary tool for addressing child poverty and increasing the chances for children

to succeed in school, and subsequently the labor market, is income transfers to families

with children. Almost all developed countries either have direct child benefits or target

welfare/social assistance benefits at families with children. These benefits are meant to

help achieve several goals. First, by investing in children of lesser means, society aims to

provide these children with opportunities to be well-adjusted and productive members of

society, with improved educational, and later, labor market outcomes. Second, benefit

programs allow society to help achieve distributional and equity goals regardless of the

future returns of these transfer programs.

       Child benefit programs, as well as social assistance programs that target groups

such as single parents with young families, transfer income to expand the budget set of

qualifying families. There are several potential mechanisms through which this expansion

of family budgets may improve outcomes for children. On the one hand, families may

simply use the income to purchase more goods and services, including those goods that are

valuable in maintaining basic child welfare and also for enhanced child development (food,

clothing, books, etc). On the other hand, income transfers may have indirect effects such as

reducing stress and improving household relations, increasing the chance and opportunities

for employment, and others, which, while not goods and services purchased with the extra

income, may benefit family members, including children, and therefore improve their

ability to function, learn, and improve themselves.

                                                                                      1
       These two channels are explored in Mayer (1997) and Yeung et al (2002), among

others, and we borrow terminology from the previous literature here. Direct purchases of

resources useful for child development is called the ‘resources’ channel. Improved family

relations and emotional well-being is called the ‘family process’ channel. While the

majority of the economic literature has focused on the resources channel, our paper instead

examines the effects of benefit programs on a wide range of child outcomes which fall

naturally under the family process channel. Recent research (Currie and Stabile, 2008;

Currie, Stabile, Manivong and Roos, 2008) has documented a strong relationship between

early child mental health and not only short term educational achievement, but longer-term

economic outcomes such as welfare take-up.

        The paper offers two main contributions to the previous work in this area. First, it

uses an exogenous source of child benefit income based solely on legislative variation

rather than the observed income or other choices made by the family. Second, it uses a

detailed Canadian survey of child well-being that includes several important outcomes of

interest spanning test scores, mental health, physical health, and poverty measures. This

survey allows a more rigorous examination of the family process channel than has been

explored in previous work.

       Our findings suggest that child benefit programs in Canada had significant positive

effects on several measures of both child and maternal mental health and well-being, as

well as a few measures of child physical health. Our findings provide some support for the

hypothesis that income transfers operate through the family process channel, specifically

through measures of emotional well-being and development. We find less evidence of

direct effects of child benefits on test scores. Interestingly, we find strong differences in


                                                                                       2
the outcomes improved by child benefits by the sex of the child. For boys, benefits have

much stronger effects on educational outcomes and physical health measures. For girls,

benefits have much stronger effects on mental health measures. These differences suggest

that the channels through which benefits improve outcomes may be multiple and may

differ by gender.




Previous work



        There is an extensive literature on the broader relationship between income and

child health and development.1 Several difficulties make the study of this relationship

complex, including measuring income, distinguishing between permanent or transitory

effects, finding exogenous ways to measure income, capturing the effects of other inputs

into this production relationship, and finding the proper outcomes to capture the potential

effects. Further, documenting a relationship between family income and child outcomes

does not in itself help us understand through which channels income works in order to

achieve any measured effects. Mayer (1997) provides a thorough treatment of the

sociological theory and developed new empirical evidence based on the NLSY, finding that

income was not a strong determinant of long-run outcomes. Blau (1999) presents a

discussion of these issues from an economist’s perspective and reviews much of the

previous literature that does not deal directly with the issue of the endogeneity of income.

Using fixed effects models and the NLSY, Blau concludes that the effects of permanent

family income on test scores are small compared to other family and child characteristics,
1
 See an extensive review of the literature of the determinants of child wellbeing in Haveman and Wolfe
(1995).

                                                                                                    3
leaving income transfers as a poor policy tool to improve the outcomes of low-income

children.

        On the other hand, a more recent study by Dahl and Lochner (2005), also using the

NLSY, finds reasonably substantial effects of income on child test scores. Dahl and

Lochner use changes in the earned income tax credit over several years to exogenously

identify income through fixed-effect IV models. This identification strategy relies on

federal changes in the benefit structure of the EITC and the tax code over time as well as

changes in labor market returns to exogenous maternal characteristics over the same time

period, primarily education. A key identifying assumption for this strategy, then, is that the

educational changes over time are not correlated with other temporal changes that might

also affect the outcomes in question. They also restrict their attention to test scores.

        A study in the child development literature by Yeung, Linver, and Brooks-Gunn

(2002) focuses on understanding the channels through which family income matters for

child development. The authors hypothesize and test the two channels discussed earlier in

the introduction, being resources and family process. The authors use the Panel Study of

Income Dynamics to test these two perspectives. They find stronger evidence in support of

the second hypothesis than the first although these results are primarily based on direct

OLS estimates of this relationship including a wide variety of explanatory variables. So,

while suggestive, it is difficult to draw causal inferences from this evidence.

        In a Canadian study using the National Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth,

Dooley and Stewart (2004) use a variety of OLS and fixed-effects models to estimate the

relationship between family income and test sores. The results from these models are

similar to those found in Blau (1999) in that they find a small relationship between income




                                                                                           4
and test scores. They also find some limited impact of the consumption channel through

measures of children’s activities (day camps, sports, etc.) and housing amenities.

         Our work builds on this literature in a variety of ways. First, we exploit variation

over time, across provinces, and across number of children, to develop an exogenous

measure of benefit income as an instrument for child benefits. Second, we are able to

examine a variety of outcomes, including test scores, but also including a variety of

physical and mental health measures. As a result we are able to provide an exogenous

estimate of the effects of benefit income on a variety of potential pathways for child

development, and on a standard set of test score measures to capture child outcomes.




Policy



    The Canadian child benefit system consists of two main benefits. First, the Canada

Child Tax Benefit (CCTB) is paid to parents of children age 0 to 17. This is a federal

benefit initiated in 1993 that pays the same across the country with two small exceptions. 2

The CCTB is payable for a twelve-month period running from July to June, with the

amount dependent upon the reported net income of the parents in the previous calendar

year.3 So, the July 2005 to June 2006 maximum annual benefit of $1,228 per child was

reduced based on reported family net income from 2004. Benefits do not depend on earned

income specifically, so families with no income still qualify for the benefit. Take-up is high

—in many provinces the application is given to families of newborns and the


2
  In Alberta, the benefit is differentiated by age of the child. For example, in 2005 children age zero to six
received $1,124 while those age 16 to 17 received $1,423. Until 1997, benefits paid to Quebec residents
depended on how many children were in the family, with higher-order children receiving more benefits.
3
  For 2005, the clawback threshold is $36, 378, with a reduction rate of 2.5 percent for income over that
threshold for one-child families, and 5 percent for two or more child families.

                                                                                                          5
administration is well-integrated with the tax system so any tax filer who qualifies will be

made aware of the transfer. The benefit level was constant in nominal dollars between 1993

and 1999, but has been indexed to CPI inflation since 2000. A small supplement ($86

annually in 2005) is available for a third or higher order child, and another supplement

($243 annually in 2005) was available until 2006 for children age zero to six for those not

claiming childcare expenses.

    The second component of the child benefit system is the National Child Benefit

program, begun in 1998. This program is a federal-provincial initiative that features a

federally-paid benefit called the National Child Benefit Supplement (NCBS). Provinces, at

their discretion, could subtract the NCBS from welfare recipients in their province and use

the ‘savings’ to fund different provincial programs and child benefits.       This yielded

substantial differences in benefits across provinces. In addition, the province of Quebec,

while it elected to stay outside the NCB program, instituted major reforms of its child

benefits system in 1997 and 2005. The details of each province’s programs are provided in

the Appendix. In short, two provinces introduced new transfers that weren’t related to

earnings, two provinces introduced earnings-related benefits, and three provinces did both.

Across provinces, there were large differences in the structure of benefits across family

size.

        The net impact of these changes is a large degree of heterogeneity in child benefits

across several dimensions: year, province, number of children, and income. There is no

explicit dependence of benefits on marital status or education, but benefit levels across

those dimensions will vary through differences in family income. Because our empirical

strategy will attempt to exploit only the exogenous components of policy variation, we




                                                                                      6
concentrate primarily on three dimensions of heterogeneity (year, province, number of

children).

   In Figure 1 we trace out the average benefits payable across time and for different

numbers of children in each province. The main differences stem from the 1998

introduction of the NCB program and its provincial counterparts. Some provinces, such as

BC moved a bit earlier. Other provinces, like Prince Edward Island, had no benefit

program and so had no province-specific variation. Across other provinces, the biggest

differences that can be seen are for the three-child families compared to the one child

families. We provide some more information on benefit levels later in Table 1.


Empirical Strategy



       The crucial empirical challenge for estimating the impact of child benefits on

outcomes is unobserved heterogeneity.        The solution we employ extracts plausibly

exogenous legislative variation in benefits to remove the bias of unobserved correlates of

child outcomes. In particular, we use a simulated benefits approach similar to that in

Currie and Gruber (1996). The method involves taking a sample of families and pushing

them through a tax and benefit simulator 400 times—once for each of the ten provinces,

each of the ten years between 1994 and 2003, and of four family sizes (0, 1, 2, or 3

children). We then take the average benefit level for each of these cells. The resulting

benefit levels differ across time periods, years, and family sizes only through differences in

legislated benefit levels and not by income or any unobservables that may be correlated

with income.

       To calculate the benefits, we select a ten percent sample of families with children

from the Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics (described in more detail later) between

                                                                                        7
the years 1999 and 2004. These families are stripped of everything except for marital status

and incomes—they are essentially providing nothing more than a reasonable distribution of

incomes to use for the simulation. The tax and benefit simulator we employ is the CTaCS

package, which is described in detail in Milligan (2007). Importantly, the child benefits

components of the calculator were developed by looking directly at the legislation and

regulations for each province and coding these parameters and program rules into the

calculator. After putting these families through the calculator, we take the mean of the

simulated child benefits by province-year-number of children cell.

        We take these simulated benefits and estimate first-stage equations of the following

type:

BEN pyki = β 0 + β1 X pyki + β 2 SIMBEN pyk + ε pyki .

The indexes on the variables represent provinces (p), years (y), number of children (k), and

families (i). The reported child benefit levels BENpyki are predicted by the set of observable

characteristics Xpyki and the simulated benefit level SIMBENpyk. We include not only the

main effects of province, years, and number of children, but also the 2nd order interactions

of these three factors.

        The predicted values from our first-stage can then be used in a second-stage

regression using child outcomes, taking the following form:

Outcome pyki = α 0 + α1 X pyki + α 2 BEN pyki + η pyki .


The predicted value of the child benefit BEN pyki is used to explain various child outcome

measures Outcomepyki. We include the same Xpyki characteristics in the second stage

regression including all second order interactions. In this way, the identification of the

impact of child benefits comes through the exclusion of the fully saturated third order

interactions of the province, year, and number of children effects. So long as the simulated

                                                                                        8
benefit measure is a good (even if not perfect) predictor of actual benefits and so long as

there are no confounding province-year-number of children trends or policies that

invalidate the exclusion restriction, the simulated benefit represents a valid instrument. For

reasons made clear later, most of our results use a reduced form specification, which

involves inserting the simulated benefit measure directly in the outcome variable

regression. However, we do report some results using the full two-stage procedure.

       An important challenge to this identification strategy might come from other policy

reforms contemporaneous with the changes in child benefits. For example, provincial

spending programs introduced as part of the NCB program could have influenced child

welfare. Similarly, other policy reforms such as the subsidized childcare program in

Quebec studied in Baker, Gruber, and Milligan (2008) might affect the environment.

However, our inclusion of province by year effects adequately controls for most of these

concerns. That is, any impact of new provincial spending programs will be picked up by

the province-year dummies as there is no reason to expect them to have differentially

impacted families with different numbers of children. To our knowledge, the income

benefits are the only aspect of the program that is differentiated by the number of children.

       Another problem could arise from different labor market cycles across provinces.

However, because our identification relies on differences across families of different sizes,

this problem only affects our strategy if province-year labor market shocks had a

differential impact on families with one versus two versus three children.




Data

       We use two data sources for the study. Our primary source for data is the National

Longitudinal Study of Children and Youth (NLSCY). This survey focuses on Canadian

                                                                                        9
children, with data currently available for six biannual waves spanning 1994-95 to

2004-05. The content of the survey combines extensive parent-reported health, well-being,

and developmental information on the child and family with detailed labor market and

income information for the parents. The survey initially covered children aged 0 to 11 in

wave 1 and has followed that initial cohort to ages 10 to 21 in wave 6. Young children

were added in each wave to fill in the gap, allowing cross-sectional coverage of all ages.4

          We use all families in each of the NLSCY waves with children ages 10 and under.

The resulting data set comprises approximately 56,000 observations over six cycles.

However, for many of the outcomes we examine, the variables are limited to explicit age

ranges, making the sample sizes for the analysis considerably smaller that the full data set.

Finally, because there is some over-sampling of children in smaller provinces, we use the

provided weights to recover population-level results.

          The NLSCY contains several variables spanning achievement measures, physical,

and mental health including having repeated a grade, a math score, a PPVT score, having

been diagnosed with a learning disability, measures of hyperactivity, emotional and anxiety

disorders, physical aggression, suffering from hunger, height and weight, and mother’s

health status. Means and age ranges for the variables presented in each of the results

tables.

          Questions are asked of the person most knowledgeable about the child (in 92% of

cases this is the mother) about whether the child repeated a grade in past two years. The

Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test is administered to children ages 4-6 and is a widely used

measure of cognition for preschoolers. In the NLSCY, mathematics tests were administered

to children in grades two through ten (beyond the age limits of our sample) and are based

4
  For wave 5, cross-sectional child observations were only added in the age range 0-5. Because the
longitudinal cohort was ages 8-19 in wave 5, this left an unfilled gap at ages 6-7for wave 5. Similarly, there
is an age gap in the range 6 to 9 for wave 6.

                                                                                                      10
on the Canadian Achievement Tests. Response rates for the Math tests are slightly low and

various researchers have investigated how these low response rates might bias analysis

using the test scores5 and have concluded that the low response is random, for the most

part. The question on learning disabilities asks about whether the child has been diagnosed

and is answered by the person most knowledgeable about the child. The questions on

mental and emotional health are asked of parents of all children aged 4 through 11 (we list

the questions in the data appendix). The responses to these questions are categorized by

disorder, and then added together to determine a hyperactivity score (8 questions), an

emotional behavior score (8 questions), an aggressive behavior score (6 questions) an

indirect aggression score (5 questions), and a prosocial behavior score (10 questions) for

the child. The mother’s depression score is again based on a series of twelve questions

asked to the child’s mother about her feelings and behavior over the past week.

         The child and mother health questions are self-reported based on a 5 point scale for

self-assessed health of excellent to poor. We combine the bottom three measures for the

child as very few parents report their child to be in poor health. Height and weight

measures are also self-reported by the parent as are measures of injuries in the past twelve

months, and reports of the child experiencing hunger because of lack of resources to buy

food.

         Parent reports about their children are sometimes thought less reliable. Parents may

hold a more optimistic opinion of their child’s abilities and activities than a disinterested

observer. Beyond any bias in their true assessments, parents might also be reluctant to


5
 In cycle 5 the response rate for the mathematics test was 81%. Currie and Stabile (2006) discuss an
analysis of the non-responses to the NLSCY math tests for previous cycles performed by Statistics Canada
which reports little difference between responders and non-responders at that time. In the cycle 5 codebook,
Statistics Canada notes that the response rate is lower in higher grades, and higher among students who
performed well on previous cycle math tests.


                                                                                                    11
report low achievements out of shame or embarrassment. On the other hand, differences in

parent versus expert reports may lie in differences in information—parents may be better

informed and thus make more accurate reports. Evidence suggests that parent reports can

be reliable in the spheres of motor milestones (Bodnarchuk and Eaton 2004), child health

(Spencer and Coe 1996), and behavior and temperament (Clarke-Stewart et al. 2000).

However, the validity of the particular measures in the NLSCY may differ from the

measures in those studies. A common finding in the literature on validity of parent-reported

measures is that the validity of parent-reports for acute events (such as an illness or the

reaching of a milestone) is higher than for more general and broad questions.6

        The other survey we use is the Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics (SLID),

stacking together the public-use cross sections for the years 1996 to 2004. We use this

survey both to populate our simulation sample used to generate the simulated child benefits

and also for validation of the predictive power of the simulated benefits. The SLID is

conducted annually by Statistics Canada with a stratified random sampling of Canadians.

With survey weights, the data are potentially nationally representative. The SLID provides

detailed information on demographics, and more precise information on income and

benefits received over the past year than the NLSCY which allows us to provide more

complete income and benefit information to the tax calculator. In particular, the income

measures available on the SLID are attached from the respondent’s income tax records,

which makes them quite relevant for the tax calculator. The sample size per year is around

35 thousand census families made up of 60 thousand individuals aged 15 and higher.




6
 Baker, Gruber, and Milligan (2008) have an extensive discussion of the measures in the NLSCY in their
Appendix B.

                                                                                                 12
Results

        The first set of results we present shows the mean benefit levels federally,

provincially, and in total. We next explore the first stage relationship between our

simulated child benefits and actual reported child benefits. Following the discussion of the

first stage results, we turn to our analysis of child and family outcomes from the NLSCY.

Our main specifications use the predicted benefits in reduced form regressions, for reasons

made clear below. We consider the entire sample of children, as well as samples by sex of

the child and also present results for children of mothers with lower levels of education, as

these families are more likely to be eligible for child benefits ( as shown below). We show

our analysis in three groups of outcome variables: education, mental and emotional

wellbeing, and health and nutrition. We then present some results that exploit the panel

features of the NLSCY, looking at the persistence of any effects through time. Finally, we

present specification checks that instrument for actual benefits using the predicted benefits

as well as uses alternate sub-samples7.

        For all continuous variables, we have normalized the variables using the mean and

standard deviation, so that the coefficients can be interpreted in terms of changes in

standard deviations. The key independent variable is the dollar value of child benefits,

expressed in thousands of dollars. All dollar values in the paper are transformed to 2004

constant dollars.



        Benefit levels

        Table 1 presents the mean and standard deviation of benefit levels at the federal and

provincial level, as well as the total. We show the results across all observations and
7
  The models estimates here all include multiple children from the same household due to the sampling in
the NLSCY. We have re-estimated all the models using only a single child from each family and find very
similar results with little change in the P-values.

                                                                                                  13
broken down by mother’s education. This is important to understand where our variation is

coming from and to motivate our sample choices and robustness checks. The data used for

this table is the 2004 SLID for families with a child under or at age 10, with all results in

2004 dollars.

        The first row indicates that 85 percent of Canadian families receive some child

benefits, with an average amount of $2,174—this includes those with zero in the average.

Not shown in the table, a breakdown by income shows that the proportion of families with

income under $60,000 receiving some child benefits is almost 1—in the SLID takeup

appears close to universal. Only 28.8 percent of families receive any provincial benefits,

reflecting both more narrow income targeting and also that several provinces have no

provincial benefit. The average benefit is only $222, but among those receiving any benefit

it is $769.

        The last four rows break down the sample into groups by maternal highest level of

education. For high school graduates and drop-outs, over 90 percent are receiving benefits.

This reflects low income levels for these families, not an education-related takeup rate.

While the proportion receiving benefits remains relatively high across all education groups,

the average benefit does decline sharply, reflecting the phase out of benefits at higher

income levels. The provincial benefits are positive for only 14.6 percent of families, with a

much lower average amount. This is important because our identifying variation comes not

from province (and family size) level variation. For higher education families, the

provincial benefits are not sizeable.



         First stage results




                                                                                      14
        We begin with an analysis of the relationship between our simulated child benefits

and actual reported child benefits. This analysis allows us to validate the use of the

simulated benefits in reduced form regressions (where we look for the direct effect of the

simulated benefits on outcomes). These first stage results are performed using the person

files of the SLID for the years 1996 to 2004. The SLID includes a much larger sample than

the NLSCY, is specifically designed as an income survey, and can be applied to all of the

years over our time span of interest. These three reasons make it a preferable data source

for validation and estimation of our first-stage relationship.

        The results appear in Table 2. Each result in the table comes from a separate

regression of reported child benefits on simulated benefits with a set of standard control

variables.8 A clustered standard error is reported beneath in parentheses. The different

rows of the table show results from different subsamples of the SLID data. The columns

show results using different formulations of the policy variable. The first column shows

results using a difference-in-differences specification that exploits only province-year

variation. The second column uses a triple-difference specification with simulated benefits

varying on a province-year-number of children basis. The third column is also a triple

difference specification, but uses a measure of child benefits that adjusts for the reduction

of welfare benefits resulting from the NCB clawback. That is, it accounts for the net

change in income.9

        The first result is a regression using only families with a child age 0 to 17, which

captures any families potentially eligible for child benefits. The reported coefficient of 941

indicates that an extra $1000 of simulated benefits is predicted to increase reported child

8
  The controls include year dummies, province dummies, number of children dummies, respondent and
spouse education and age group dummies, a marital status indicator, and age of youngest child dummies.
9
  For these simulations, families in the simulation sample who had social assistance income and were in a
‘clawback’ province had their benefit level adjusted to account for the clawback. See Milligan and Stabile
(2007) for details on the clawback.

                                                                                                    15
benefits by $941. The result is highly significant and indicates that the simulated benefits

are a very precise and accurate predictor of reported child benefits. The coefficient is little-

changed in the triple difference specifications in columns two and three. The next row

restricts the sample to children age 0 to 10, which is the age range we use for the NLSCY

analysis to follow. In this sample, the province-year specification shows an increase in

actual benefits of $1,354 for every $1,000 of simulated benefits. In the second and third

columns, the estimated coefficient falls back under $1,000. In the subsample containing

only those observations where the respondent has high school education or less, the point

estimates in the triple-difference specifications are slightly lower at $860 and $868, but

remain highly significant. In the sample containing only two-parent families, the results

look very similar to the base age 0 to 10 results in the second row. In contrast, the results in

the sample of single parents show coefficients more than twice as high, indicating that

simulated benefits substantially underpredict actual benefits. This may be driven by the

fact that single-parent families have lower family income and therefore get more benefits

than two-parent families. Because of the preponderance of two-parent families in the whole

sample, the province-year-number of children cell averages for the simulated benefits are

dominated by the two-parent families.

        Overall, the analysis of the first stage in the SLID allows for firm confidence that

the simulated benefits are good predictors of actual benefits. Because the coefficients are in

most specifications relatively close to $1 for $1, reduced form estimates using the

simulated benefits will yield results very similar to two-stage estimates using these results

as a first stage. This diminishes the motivation for using an IV estimator over the reduced

form specification. As a result we focus our analysis on the reduced form results using

predicted benefits, although estimates using IV are presented for comparison.


                                                                                         16
Educational Outcomes

        Table 3 contains the results for education outcomes. For each dependent variable,

we report the number of observations, the age range covered by the variable, the mean and

standard deviation, and finally the coefficient on the benefit variable in four different

specifications. The number of observations varies primarily because of differing age ranges

for the dependent variables. For example, the PPVT scores are available only for children

between ages 4 and 6.

        The first row reports whether the child has ever repeated a grade. In the full sample,

the significant coefficient of 0.013 suggests that an increase of $1,000 in simulated benefits

leads to a 1.3 percentage point increase in the probability of having repeated a grade. This

result does not persist in the lower education sample including both sexes, and for the

lower education sample broken down by sex. This leaves the result inconclusive.

        The math and PPVT scores show a positive, but insignificant, relationship between

benefits and test outcomes for the entire sample. However, the results in the low education

sample show positive and significant relationships in both scores. For the math score, the

coefficient is 0.074, indicating an increase of 7.4 percent of a standard deviation for an

increase in $1,000 of benefits. The PPVT score yields a similar increase of 6.8 percent of a

standard deviation. When compared to other results in the literature finding in the range of

25 percent of a standard deviation for ten thousand dollars more income, the effect

observable here is relatively large. When the lower education sample is broken down by

sex we find that the result is being driven by boys where the coefficients more than double.

The effect for girls, on the other hand, is negative and insignificant.




                                                                                       17
       The final row of Table 3 displays the result for a binary variable describing whether

the child has been diagnosed with a learning disability, as answered by the parent. The

mean of this variable is 0.969, reflecting the fact that very few children have been

diagnosed with a learning disability. The estimated coefficient in the full sample is not

statistically distinguishable from zero, but in the high school or less sample the estimated

coefficient is a significant 1.5 percentage points. Once again, once the sample is broken

down by sex we see that this result is driven by boys with a significant coefficient of 2.3

percentage points, and a small and insignificant coefficient for girls.

       Overall, the evidence shows some positive impact on educational outcomes. These

results appear to be concentrated among boys of families from lower education households

(as measured by the educational status of mother). However, since the full sample includes

many families who were not recipients of child benefits, we would expect any impact to be

diluted. So, the stronger effects in the lower education sample are consistent with

expectations.



Mental and Emotional Wellbeing

       We now turn to indicators of mental and emotional wellbeing. Recent literature has

highlighted the importance of early mental health problems for long-term educational and

labour market success (Currie et al, 2008). These dependent variables take the form of

scores, aggregated up from responses to individual questions. We report the questions from

the questionnaire in the appendix. These scores have been developed in accordance with

established practices in developmental psychology. Baker, Gruber, and Milligan (2008)

provide some detail on studies of the validity of these measures. For the regressions, we

have again scaled the variables by the mean and standard deviation so that coefficients


                                                                                     18
estimates reflect the proportion of a standard deviation resulting from a $1,000 change in

benefits.

        The first row of Table 4 shows the results for the hyperactivity-inattention score.

There are negative coefficients of -0.03 and -0.044 in the full and low education samples,

respectively. While the coefficient in the low education sample is larger, the standard error

grows by even more, rendering the estimate insignificant. The second row of the table

studies the pro-social behavior score. As can be seen in the appendix, these questions

reflect how much the child helps other children. The coefficients here are negative, with

significance in two out of the four columns. The coefficient in the high school or less

sample specification is -0.082, which is relatively large, and even larger for girls in the

sample. These results indicate that the behavior of children deteriorated with respect to

helping other children when child benefits increased.

        For emotional disorder-anxiety, the point estimates are uniformly negative, but not

statistically significant providing little evidence of an effect here.

        The next row shows the results for conduct disorder-physical aggression, measuring

violent acts towards others. The impact with the full sample is negative and statistically

significant and is practically identical for the sample from lower education households.

Once again, when we break the sample down by education it appears that this result is

driven by the girls in the sample. The final outcome for the child’s emotional wellbeing is

the indirect aggression score, which measures social rather than violent conflict with other

children. The results here show little significance except for the girls in the lower education

sample.

        We close this analysis with an examination of the depression score of the mother.

The depression questions are asked of the person most knowledgeable, so to keep the


                                                                                        19
responses consistent we selected only the mothers who were the respondent. The results for

this dependent variable are negative and very strong, indicating a significant improvement

on maternal depression of increased child benefits. The coefficient on simulated benefits in

the reduced form model is -0.116, which suggests a decrease of 11.6 percent of a standard

deviation with a $1,000 increase in benefits.

       To summarize, several indicators of emotional and behavioral wellbeing indicate

that increased child benefits improve the outcomes of children and their mothers. The

results are particularly strong for physical aggression and for maternal depression. Pro-

social behavior, on the other hand, appears to get worse. Unlike the test score results where

it appears that the effects are strongest for the boys from lower education households, the

effects on mental well-being are concentrated among girls from lower education

households in three of the five measures of mental health, and among the mothers of girls

from lower education families for our measure of maternal mental health.



Health and Nutrition

       The final set of variables we analyze looks at the health outcomes of children and

their mothers. These results are reported in Table 5, following the same format as the

previous two tables. In the first row is a dummy variable for never having experienced

hunger. The mean of this variable is 0.987, reflecting the fact that very few children in the

NLSCY have ever experienced hunger. The results in the full sample show no change in

this variable when simulated benefits increase, but in the low education sample the

coefficient is 0.011, indicating a small improvement. In this case the result is much

stronger among boys than girls.




                                                                                      20
       Parent assessments of the child’s general health level show no change in the

reduced form specifications for both sexes together, but show a negative results for boys

only (for this variable, the positive coefficients indicate a worsening of health). For height

and weight, there are a few significant results but not overwhelming evidence of a large

effect here. There is no significant change in injuries sustained over the previous 12 months

or in maternal health indicators.

       Overall, the health results show some indication that hunger is reduced, but this

appears to have little impact on the general health of the child, although there is some

improvement in height but not weight.        For the subsample of just boys from lower

education household, the effects are much more pronounced with an increase in the number

of boys who never experience hunger and improved height and overall health status.



Persistence and lags of effects

       While we observe some immediate effects of benefit income on both educational

and health related outcomes, there may also be lags and persistence to the effects of

income. Some benefits may require time to emerge. Others may drop off over a few years,

suggesting that the effect of benefits on long-term outcomes would be more limited. To

study the persistence/lags of the estimated impacts of child benefits, we regressed several

of the measures found in the previous tables on lags of the benefit measures by exploiting

the panel nature of the NLSCY. Specifically, we use the 1997 values of the dependent

variables and the 1993 and 1995 benefit measures. For this exercise, we use only the full

sample to maximize sample size as the NLSCY panel is considerably smaller than the

complete survey.




                                                                                       21
         The results appear in Table 6. The coefficients reported in the full sample with only

1993 benefits are in the fourth column of the table. Here, both the math and the PPVT

scores show magnitudes very similar to what was uncovered in the contemporaneous

analysis in Table 3. This suggests that, over a four year period, the impact of child benefits

is similar to the contemporaneous impact. In the last two columns we include both the 1993

and 1995 benefits in the same model. Here, for the math score it is the 1993 benefits that

have the larger impact, with no additional gain for the 1995 benefits. In contrast, for the

PPVT score, the impact of the 1993 benefits is estimated to be 14.4 percent of a standard

deviation, but 10.6 percentage points of this is taken away if 1995 benefits increase. Taken

together, this evidence suggests that the impact of child benefits on test scores is persistent.

         The next three rows show the results from a selection of the behavioral scores. The

hyperactivity result is negative and persistent when looking at the effect of 1993 benefits

on the 1997 outcomes, even when controlling for the 1995 benefit level. For aggression,

there is a positive impact of lagged benefits when only 1993 benefits are included, but a

mixed result when both 1993 and 1995 are included. The maternal depression score shows

a negative and significant impact when the 1993 benefit levels are related to the 1997

depression scores. The impacts here remain strong and significant.

         Finally, we look at the persistence of the hunger measure. The estimated impacts

are positive, and significant for the 1993 benefits. The magnitudes here, however, are

small.



Specification Checks:




                                                                                         22
       Table 7 presents two specification checks for our analysis. The first check uses the

simulated benefit as an instrument for actual reported benefits where the first stage is also

performed using the NLSCY data (and not the SLID as reported in Table 2). The results

are presented in the second column, with the reduced form results in the first column for

reference purposes. The first stage fit is weaker in the NLSCY, likely reflecting the fact

that this survey has weaker income data than the SLID. However, we continue to get

strongly significant predictions, with $1000 of simulated benefits predicting $327 of actual

child benefits. The IV results are considerably different from the reduced form results.

While most coefficients have similar signs, only a handful has similar levels of statistical

significance. Further, the IV results are considerably larger than the OLS results. This may

be a function of measurement error, or a somewhat poorer fit of the first stage in the

NLSCY. Nonetheless, some results are consistent with the reduced form results including

not being diagnosed with a learning disability, the mother’s depression score, and height.



       The second specification check examines the effects of child benefits on the

population least likely to receive benefits and least likely to benefit from the income –

children of university graduates. We expect that among this sub-sample, our results should

be much weaker. While there still may be examples of university graduates who receive

child benefits, the impact should be substantially reduced if we are estimating the true

effect of the child benefits on outcomes. Our findings confirm this hypothesis. While we do

find a few positive effects of the benefits (on hyperactivity, mother’s depression and

mother’s health status) we find many fewer and smaller effects in this sub-sample,

providing us with some additional comfort about our main findings.




                                                                                      23
Conclusions

       In this paper, we study the impact of child benefits on measures of education,

emotional and behavioral wellbeing, and health. We find indications that increased child

benefits led to improved test scores, decreased aggression and maternal depression, and a

reduction in hunger. We test for the persistence (or lagged impact) of child benefits and

find that the effects of benefits on educational outcomes and emotional well-being of

children persist four years after the benefit income was received. Our empirical approach

based on exogenous policy changes makes us more confident these results are causal than

has been possible with the existing, mostly correlational, literature.

       A particularly striking finding in our results is the large difference between the

effects of benefit income on boys versus girls. Further, these differences depend on the type

of outcome being examined, although they are quite consistent within type of outcome

(various health measures versus various education measures). On many of our education

and physical health measures we find considerably larger effects for boys. For many of our

mental health variables we find considerably larger effects for girls. Finding such

differences between sexes is consistent with evidence from other studies examining the

impact of various programs on children of various ages (see, for example, Angrist et al

(2006), Dynarski 2005 for differences at the college level, and Anderson (2006) for

differences at the pre-school level.

       Most of the economics research on child benefits has focused on the labor market,

educational, and direct-consumption aspects of increased child benefits. We take our

findings as evidence that a broader set of outcomes should be included in any assessment

of the costs and benefits of expanded transfer payments to families with children.




                                                                                        24
References

Anderson, Michael (2006) “Uncovering Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
      Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early
      Training Projects,” MIT Department of Economics, Ph.D. Thesis.

Angrist, Josh, Lang, Daniel, and Phil Oreopoulos (2006), “Lead them to Water and Pay
       them to Drink: An experiment with services and incentives for college
       achievement.” NBER Working Paper 12790.

Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan (2008), “Universal Childcare,
       Maternal Labor Supply, and Family Well-being,” Journal of Political Economy,
       Vol. 116, No. 4, pp. 709-745.

Blau, David M. (1999), “The effect of income on child development,” The Review of
       Income and Statistics, Vol. 81, No. 2, pp. 261-276.

Bodnarchuk, J.L. and W.O. Eaton (2004), “Can Parent Reports be Trusted?” Journal of
      Applied Developmental Psychology, Vol. 25, No. 4, pp. 481-490.

Clarke-Stewart, K.A., Fitzpatrick, M.J., Allhusen, V.D. and Goldberg, W.A., (2000),
       “Measuring difficult temperament the easy way,” Journal of Developmental and
Behavioral Pediatrics Vol. 21, No. 3, pp. 207–220.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber (1996), “Health insurance eligibility, utilization of
        medical care, and child health,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, No. 2,
        pp. 431-466.

Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile (2006), “Child Mental Health and Human Capital
        Accumulation: The Case of ADHD,” Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 25, No.
        6, pp. 1094-1118.

Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile (2008), “Mental Health in Childhood and Human
        Capital,” forthcoming in An Economic Perspective on the Problems of
        Disadvantaged Youth, Jonathan Gruber (ed.) (Chicago: University of Chicago
                for NBER).


Currie, Janet, Stabile, Mark, Manivong, Phongsack and Leslie L Roos, (2008) “Child
                Health and Young Adult Outcomes” NBER Working Paper No.
        14482.

Dahl, Gordon B. and Lance Lochner.(2005), “The Impact of Family Income on Child
       Achievement,” NBER Working Paper No. 11,279.

Dooley, Martin and Jennifer Stewart (2004), “Family income and child outcomes in
      Canada,” Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 37, No. 4, pp. 898-917.

                                                                                     25
Dynarski, Susan (2005), “Building the Stock of College-Educated Labor,” NBER
      Working Paper no. 11604.

Haveman, Robert and Barbara Wolfe (1995), “The Determinants of Children’s
     Attainments: A Review of Methods and Findings,” Journal of Economic
     Literature, Vol. 33, No. 4, pp. 1829-1878.

Mayer, Susan E. (1997), What Money Can’t Buy. Cambridge MA and London: Harvard
       University Press.

Milligan, Kevin (2007), Canadian Tax and Credit Simulator. Database, software and
       documentation, Version 2007-2.

Milligan, Kevin and Mark Stabile (2007), “The integration of child tax credits and
       welfare: Evidence from the Canadian National Child Benefit program,” Journal of
       Public Economics, Vol. 91, No. 1-2, pp. 305-326.

Seifer, R., Sameroff, A. J Dickstein S., Schiller M., L.C. Hayden (2004), “Your own
        children are special: clues to the sources of reporting bias in temperament
        assessments” Infant Behavior and Development, Vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 323–341.


Spencer N.J. and C. Coe (1996), “The development and validation of a measure of
       parent-reported child health and morbidity: the Warwick Child Health and
       Morbidity Profile,” Child: Care, Health and Development, Vol. 22, No. 6, pp.
       367-379.

Yeung, W. Jean, Miriam Linver, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (2002), “How Money Matters
       for Young Children’s Development: Parental Investment and Family Processes,”
       Child Development, Vol. 73, No. 6, pp. 1861-1879.




                                                                                  26
                       Table 1: Benefit levels by education group



                                         Federal Benefits           Provincial benefits            Total benefits
                                       Greater                     Greater                     Greater
                       Observations   than zero    Amount         than zero     Amount        than zero     Amount
All observations          5134          0.850        2174           0.288          222          0.850         2396
                                       (0.357)      (2418)         (0.453)        (556)        (0.357)       (2778)

High school dropout        484          0.978        3651           0.493          403          0.978         4054
                                       (0.146)      (2821)         (0.500)        (733)        (0.146)       (3259)

High school graduate       763          0.933        2835           0.361          326          0.978         3161
                                       (0.249)      (2445)         (0.481)        (651)        (0.249)       (2870)

Some post-high school      2835         0.884        2199           0.294          211          0.884         2411
                                       (0.320)      (2369)         (0.456)        (527)        (0.320)       (2710)

University degree          1052         0.672        1103           0.146          106          0.672         1209
                                       (0.470)      (1756)         (0.353)        (423)        (0.470)       (2033)


Notes: Data come from the 2004 SLID.The table shows the proportion of observatios with child benefits greater than
zero and the average child benefits (including those with zero). This is repeated for federal benefits, provincial
benefits, and total benefits. Beneath each mean is the standard deviation in parentheses. Each row represents a
different sample.




                                                                             27
          Table 2: First stage results in the SLID




                            Nobs.              (1)             (2)              (3)

Type of variation                          Province-       Province-        Province-
in policy varible                            year         year-number      year-number
                                                            children         children,
                                                                           net measure

All kids age 0-17           85396             941              905              884
                                             (104)            (105)            (102)

Just kids age 0-10          55959            1354              979              966
                                             (141)            (135)            (131)

Kids age 0-10               17704             980              860              868
Just highschool or less                      (260)            (177)            (179)

Kids age 0-10               45958            1373              906              889
Two parent                                   (169)            (140)            (136)

Kids age 0-10               10001            1481             1947             1925
Single                                       (559)            (168)            (159)
 Notes: Regressions using the Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics. Regressors
 include year dummies, province dummies, respondent and spouse age group dummies,
 respondent and spouse education group dummies, age of youngest child dummies,
 and a marital status indicator. The second and third columns also include interaction
 terms for province*year, year*number of children, and province*number of children.




                                                                                         28
                                   Table 3: Educational Outcomes


                                                                                                      Regression coefficients
                                             All Education groups sample                            High School or Less sample
                                   Number of       Age        Mean      Regression                Both         Just         Just
                                  Observations    Range     (Std. Dev.) coefficient               Sexes       boys          girls

Child has ever repeated a grade         40093         4-10          0.029          0.013         -0.005        -0.011         0.001
                                                                   [0.169]       [0.005]*        [0.007]       [0.010]       [0.007]

Scaled math score                       17766         6-10         387.15          0.021           0.074       0.196         -0.004
                                                                   [89.27]        [0.019]        [0.042]*    [0.073]**       [0.040]

Scaled PPVT score                       31407          4-6          99.90          0.015           0.068       0.166         -0.037
                                                                   [15.35]        [0.026]        [0.041]*    [0.061]**       [0.060]

NOT been diagnosed with                    55899        6-10           0.969       0.004         0.015          0.023          0.006
learning disability                                                   [0.173]     [0.004]     [0.004]**       [0.009]**       [0.006]
Notes: Da ta is the NLSCY.Ta ble shows the number of observations, a ge ra nge, mean, a nd sta nda rd devia tion for ea ch
dependent va ria ble in the first three columns. The la st four columns report coefficients on simula ted benefits for a
regression with the indica ted va ria ble a s the dependent va ria ble. Regressions include full set of control va ria bles indicated
in text. Sta ndard errors are reported benea th the estimates, with one star for results significa nt a t the 10 percent level and
two sta rs for those significa nt a t the 1 percent level of significa nce.




                                                                                            29
                 Table 4: Mental and Emotional Wellbeing Outcomes
                                                                                                     Regression coefficients
                                              All Education groups sample                          High School or Less sample
                                    Number of       Age         Mean     Regression              Both         Just         Just
                                   Observations    Range     (Std. Dev.) coefficient             Sexes       boys          girls

Hyperactivity-inattention score, 4-11 62671            4-10          4.364         -0.030         -0.044        -0.042        -0.041
                                                                    [3.373]       [0.014] *      [0.029]       [0.047]        [0.044]

Prosocial behaviour score - 4-11        44977          4-10         13.068         -0.028        -0.082         -0.051        -0.104
                                                                    [3.887]        [0.025]      [0.048]*       [0.061]       [0.055]*

Emotional disorder - Anxiety score, 4-11
                                     62758             4-10          2.426         -0.043         -0.028        -0.011        -0.048
                                                                    [2.411]        [0.026]       [0.029]       [0.045]        [0.039]

Conduct disorder - physical aggression
                                    62732
                                       score           4-10          1.421         -0.051        -0.052         -0.018        -0.114
                                                                    [1.868]      [0.019]**      [0.028]*       [0.038]      [0.037]**

Indirect aggression score               60238          4-10          0.994         -0.003         -0.045        -0.003        -0.100
                                                                    [1.562]        [0.016]       [0.032]       [0.033]       [0.055]*

Mother's Depression Score              103722          0-10          4.568         -0.043         -0.116        -0.073        -0.150
                                                                    [5.348]      [0.014]**      [0.023]**      [0.034]*     [0.032]**
Notes: Da ta is the NLSCY.Ta ble shows the number of observa tions, a ge ra nge, mea n, a nd sta nda rd devia tion for ea ch
dependent va ria ble in the first three columns. The la st four columns report coefficients on simula ted benefits for a
regression with the indica ted va ria ble a s the dependent va ria ble. Regressions include full set of control va ria bles indica ted
in text. Sta nda rd errors a re reported benea th the estima tes, with one sta for results significa nt a t the 10 percent level a nd
two sta rs for those significa nt a t the 1 percent level of significa nce.




                                                                                         30
                               Table 5: Health and Nutrition Outcomes
                                                                                                       Regression coefficients
                                              All Education groups sample                            High School or Less sample
                                    Number of       Age         Mean     Regression                Both         Just         Just
                                   Observations    Range     (Std. Dev.) coefficient               Sexes       boys          girls

Never experienced hunger because of87072
                                    lack of money
                                                2-10
                                                  to buy food
                                                            0.987                   0.001           0.011       0.022          0.002
                                                           [0.111]                 [0.002]        [0.004]**   [0.007]**       [0.005]

In general, child is in good/fair/poor 115910
                                       health          0-10          0.118          0.003           0.006       0.020          -0.011
                                                                    [0.323]        [0.003]         [0.006]    [0.007]**       [0.010]

Current height in metres and centimetres
                                     96824             0-10          1.086          -0.004          0.023       0.051          -0.008
                                                                    [0.245]        [0.007]        [0.011]*    [0.015]**       [0.021]

Current weight of child in kilograms.108796            0-10         21.225          -0.008         -0.010       -0.009         -0.011
                                                                    [9.752]        [0.006]         0.0130      [0.025]        [0.013]

injured in last 12 months              115855          0-10          0.094          0.005           0.000       -0.012         0.009
                                                                    [0.292]        [0.004]         [0.010]     [0.013]        [0.011]

Mother health status is excellent      113803          0-10          0.354          0.008           0.003       0.015          -0.004
                                                                    [0.478]        [0.008]         [0.011]     [0.017]        [0.011]
Notes: Da ta is the NLSCY.Ta ble shows the number of observa tions, a ge ra nge, mea n, a nd sta nda rd devia tion for ea ch
dependent va ria ble in the first three columns. The la st four columns report coefficients on simula ted benefits for a
regression with the indica ted va ria ble a s the dependent va ria ble. Regressions include full set of control va ria bles indica ted
in text. Sta nda rd errors a re reported benea th the estima tes, with one sta r for results significa nt a t the 10 percent level and
two sta rs for those significa nt a t the 1 percent level of significa nce.




                                                                                             31
                                                      Table 6: Persistence of effects

                                                                                              Full sample                     Full sample
                                               Number of
                                              Observations      Age          Mean          1993 Benefits        1993 Benefits           1995 Benefits
Scaled math score(1997)                              4603       6-10         445.20            0.057                0.058                   0.005
                                                                           [108.609]         [0.005]**            [0.014]**                [0.017]

Scaled PPVT score(1997)                              4052       4-6           98.72            0.052                0.144                     -0.106
                                                                            [15.618]         [0.017]**            [0.072]*                   [0.075]

Hyperactivity-inattention score, 4-11(1997)          9891       4-10         4.635             -0.019               -0.072                    0.003
                                                                            [3.591]          [0.004]**            [0.023]**                  [0.025]

Conduct disorder - physical aggression score(1997) 9908         4-10         1.387             0.018                -0.098                    0.111
                                                                            [1.819]          [0.005]**            [0.019]**                 [0.019]**

Mother's Depression Score(1997)                     12389       0-10         4.577             -0.046               -0.064                     0.008
                                                                            [5.385]          [0.009]**            [0.021]**                   [0.022]
Never experienced hunger because of lack            12845       2-10         0.986              0.004                0.010                     -0.005
of money to buy food(1997)                                                  [0.117]          [0.001]**            [0.001]**                 [0.001]**

Notes: Data is the NLSCY.Table shows the number of observations, age range, mean, and standard deviation for each dependent variable in the
first three columns. The next column shows the results from regressions using the 1997 value of the dependent variable and the 1993 benefit
measure. The last two columns show the results from a regression using the 1997 dependent variable and both the 1993 and 1995 benefit measure
in the same specification. Regressions include full set of control variables indicated in text. Standard errors are reported beneath the estimates,
with one star for results significant at the 10 percent level and two starts for those significant at the 1 percent level of significance.




                                                                                                     32
                                    Table 7: Robustness Checks
                                                              High School or Less            University graduates
                                                           Reduced                                Reduced
                                                            form              IV                     form
Reported Child Benefits                                       --             327                       --
                                                                           [116]**
Child has ever repeated a grade                             -0.005            -0.055                 0.012
                                                            [0.007]          [0.025]*               [0.008]
Scaled math score                                            0.074             0.458                -0.071
                                                           [0.042]*           [0.348]              [0.036]*
Scaled PPVT score                                           0.068*            -0.416                 0.008
                                                            [0.041]           [0.559]               [0.055]
NOT been diagnosed with learning disability                  0.015            0.071                  0.014
                                                           [0.004]**        [0.026]**               [0.010]
Hyperactivity-inattention score, 4-11                       -0.044             0.105                -0.072
                                                            [0.029]           [0.190]              [0.034]*
Prosocial behaviour score - 4-11                            -0.082            -0.162                -0.016
                                                           [0.048]*           [0.107]               [0.036]
Emotional disorder - Anxiety score, 4-11                    -0.028            -0.088                -0.033
                                                            [0.029]           [0.110]               [0.042]
Conduct disorder - physical aggression score                -0.052             0.044                -0.054
                                                           [0.028]*           [0.122]               [0.044]
Indirect aggression score                                   -0.045             0.273                 0.039
                                                            [0.032]           [0.221]               [0.050]
Mother's Depression Score                                    -0.116           -0.600                -0.047
                                                           [0.023]**          [0.409]              [0.021]*
Never experienced hunger because of lack of money            0.011            0.031                 -0.006
to buy food.                                               [0.004]**         [0.014]*               [0.004]
In general, child is in good/fair/poor health                0.006            0.080                 -0.001
                                                            [0.006]          [0.036]*               [0.026]
Current height in metres and centimetres                     0.023            0.138                  0.036
                                                           [0.011]*         [0.052]**               [0.040]
Current weight of child in kilograms.                       -0.010            -0.124                 0.004
                                                            0.0130           [0.069]*               [0.027]
injured in last 12 months                                    0.000            -0.058                -0.030
                                                            [0.010]           [0.050]               [0.024]
Mother health status is excellent                            0.003             0.004                0.068
                                                            [0.011]           [0.032]              [0.027]*
Notes: Data is the NLSCY.The table shows in the frst two columns regression coefficients for reduced form
and instrumental variables using the less than high school sample. The third column repeats the analysis for
the university graduate sample. Regressions include full set of control variables indicated in text. Standard
errors are reported beneath the estimates, with one star for results significant at the 10 percent level and two
stars for those significant at the 1 percent level of significance.




                                                                                                         33
                    Figure 1: Policy differences across province, time, and
                                           family size

                                                 10                               11                               12                             13

                              60
                         00
                              40
                            00
                         20
                            0
                         0 0


                                                 24                               35                               46                             47

                              60
                         00
                              40
                            00
                         20
                            0
                         0 0

                                                                                                     1990   1995        2000   2005 1990   1995        2000   2005


pre                                              48                               59
   dic                        60
       t ed              00
            be                40
              ne            00
                f it s   20
                            0
                         0 0

                                   1990   1995        2000   2005 1990     1995        2000   2005

                                                                                              year

                                          Average Variation by Prov Year and Num Kids
                                                                         one child                                      two children
                                                                         three children
                         Graphs by prov




                                                                                                                                                                     34
Appendix A: National Child Benefit and Provincial Programs

Federal:
The National Child Benefit Supplement began in 1998. The rates for 2005-06 were $1,722
annually for a first child, $1,502 for the second, and $1,420 for a third child. These rates
are approximately triple what was in place in 1998. The family income threshold for the
clawback of these benefits in 2005 was $21,480. The clawback rates were 12.2% for one
child families, 22.8% for two child families, and 32.9% for three or more child families.

Unless otherwise mentioned, the provincial benefits described below were administered by
the Canada Revenue Agency and integrated in one monthly payment with the federal
CCTB and NCBS.

Several provinces reduced provincial social assistance payments dollar for dollar with the
NCBS payments. Other provinces adjusted their social assistance payment schedule. These
details are noted for each province below.

Newfoundland and Labrador:
The Newfoundland Child Benefit was introduced in 1999. In 2005, the annual rate for a
first child was $250, $326 for a second child, $350 for a third child, and $375 for a fourth
child. The clawback of these benefits was in the income range $17,397 to $21,480. An
additional supplement for children age zero was added in 2001. This paid $540 annually in
2005.

Social assistance payments were not clawed back, but the adjustment for family size in
social assistance payments was changed in 1999 when the Newfoundland Child benefit was
introduced..

Prince Edward Island:
No child benefit program. Full reduction of NCBS payment on provincial social assistance
payments.

Nova Scotia:
The Nova Scotia Child Benefit started in 1998. Families with 1 to 3 children receive
different payments. Initially in 1998, the payments ranged from $250 for the first child to
$136 for a third (or higher) child. In 2001, the payments for third and higher children
increased substantially. In 2005, the payment rates were $445 annually for a first child,
$645 for a second, and $720 for a third. These benefits are clawed back at high clawback
rates for incomes over $16,000.

Full reduction of social assistance payments until 2001. After 2001, the social assistance
payment structure for family size was adjusted instead.




                                                                                      35
New Brunswick:
The New Brunswick Child Tax Benefit was introduced in 1997, before the national NCB
program reached its start. The benefit is $250 per child annually, and has not changed since
1997. The benefit is clawed back at 2.5% or 5% for family net income over $20,000. In
addition, there is a Working Income Supplement of $250 annually that is phased in at 4%
for earned income over $3,750 and clawed back at a rate of 5% for family net income over
$20,921.

New Brunswick never reduced social assistance payments.

Quebec:
Until 1997, residents of Quebec were eligible for a family allowance, an allowance for
young children, and an allowance for newborn children. These amounts increased with the
number of children in the family and did not depend on family income. In 1997, these were
combined into a new family allowance. The rates for the new family allowance were
$2,275 per child for a single parent family and $975 per child for a two-parent family.
These amounts were clawed back starting at incomes of $15,332 for singles and $21,825
for two-parent families. However, the clawback only took benefits down to a minimum
benefit level that was $80 annually for one and two child families and $975 for three child
families. But, for those with family net incomes higher than $50,000 these ‘minimum’
benefits were clawed back at a rate of 5%. In Quebec there was also an earned income
benefit called APPORT in place from 1988 to 2004. In 2004, this benefit was phased in for
earnings over $1,200 at a rate of 35% until an earnings level of $11,370 (two-parent) or
$7,790 (one-parent), and then clawed back at 43% after that. At the peak benefit level the
benefit amount was quite large, but take-up of this benefit was not high.

In 2005 a new Child Assistance program replaced the family allowance and a new Work
Premium replaced APPORT.

There was no reduction in social assistance payments for NCBS income, but social
assistance and other child benefits were reformed in 1997.

Ontario:
Ontario introduced the Ontario Child Care Supplement for Working Parents in 1997. The
initial rates were $400 per child age 0 to 6, clawed back at 4% for net family income over
$20,000. In 1998, the amounts were revamped and largely stayed the same until 2005.
From 1998, the amount was phased in with earned income over $5000, at a rate of 20% for
1998 and 21% from 1999 to 2005. The 2005 benefit amount was $1,100 per child age 0 to
6 for a one-parent family and $1310 for a two-parent family. The clawback rate was 8% for
incomes over $20,000.

Full reduction of social assistance for NCBS payments until July 2004. From 2004, the
increments to NCBS were protected from the reduction.




                                                                                      36
Manitoba:
There was no new benefit specifically part of the NCB program in Manitoba, but a pre-
existing benefit called CRISP was in existence since the 1980s. It required a separate
provincial application and social assistance recipients were not eligible. In 2005, CRISP
paid $360 annually per child, with a clawback rate of 2.083% for incomes over $12,384.
These amounts had not changed in nominal terms since the 1980s.

Full reduction of social assistance payments for NCBS benefits until 2001. From 2001, no
reduction for children under age 7. From 2003, no reduction for children under age 12.

Saskatchewan:
The Saskatchewan Child Benefit was introduced in 1998. In the first year, it paid $900
annually to a one child family, $1,104 for a second child, and $1,176 for a third. As the
NCBS increased in the following years, the Saskatchewan Child Benefit was decreased
downward dollar for dollar, so that by 2005 it paid only $7 annually for a 2nd child and
$86 for a third. It is clawed back at high rates for family net incomes over $15,921.
Additionally, there is a working income supplement in Saskatchewan. In 2005 the amount
ranges from $2,385 for a one child family to $4,293 for a five child family. It is phased in
for earnings over $1,500 at rates between 25% and 45% and clawed back at a 20% rate for
incomes over $14,640. There is a supplement for children under age 13 that pays an extra
25% on top of the regular employment supplement.

There was no reduction in social assistance payments, but as noted above the Saskatchewan
Child Benefit shrank dollar for dollar with NCBS increases through time.

Alberta:
Alberta has an employment-related child benefit. It was introduced in 1997 with a phase-in
rate of 8% for earnings over $6,500 up to a maximum of $250 for one child and $500 for
two or more. The benefit is clawed back at a rate of 4% for incomes over $25,000.
Between 1998 and 2004, the benefit maximum was set at $500 for one child and $1000 for
two ore more children, but was otherwise similar to 1997. The benefit changed again for
the 2005 year.

There is full reduction of social assistance payments for the NCBS benefits.

British Columbia:
The BC Family Bonus was introduced in 1996, two years before the NCB program. The
Bonus rate was $1,236 per child and was clawed back at a rate of 8% for one child and
16% for two or more for incomes higher than $18,000. These amounts were increased to
$1,332, 9%, 18%, and $20,500 in 2001 and have remained constant since. However, the
NCBS is subtracted from the BC Family Bonus, rendering it to zero by 2005 since the
NCBS is now larger than the prescribed BC Family Bonus payments. There is also a BC
Earned Income Benefit that was introduced in 1998. It pays differing amounts for each
child and is phased in between earnings levels of $3,750 and $10,000. It is clawed back for
incomes higher than $20,921 at high rates. The amounts for 2005 are $365 for the first
child, $370 for the second, and $372 for the third or higher. Until 2003, the amount for the
first child was $605, with $405 for the second and $330 for the third.


                                                                                      37
There is no reduction of social assistance for the NCBS payments, but the NCBS payments
reduced the BC Family Bonus as described above.

Appendix B: Questionnaire extracts

Mental Health Variables

     1.   Hyperactivity Score in Cycle 1 (1994). Variable ABECS06. Questions:
a) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Can't sit still, is restless or hyperactive?
b)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is distractible, has trouble sticking to any
                                        activity?
c)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Fidgets?
d)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Can't concentrate, can't pay attention for long?
e)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is impulsive, acts without thinking?
f) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Has difficulty awaiting turn in games or
                                        groups?
g)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Cannot settle to anything for more than a few
                                                                              moments?
h) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is inattentive?

2. Emotional Disorder Score in Cycle 1 (1994). Variable ABECS08. Questions:

a)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Seems to be unhappy, sad or depressed?
b)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is not as happy as other children?
c)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is worried?
d)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Cries a lot?
e)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Appears miserable, unhappy, tearful, or
                                       distressed?
f)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is nervous, highstrung or tense?
g)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Has trouble enjoying %him/her%self?
h) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is too fearful or anxious?

     3.   Aggression Score in Cycle 1 (1994). Variable ABECS09. Questions:
a)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Gets into many fights?
b)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: When another child accidentally hurts
%him/her% (such as by bumping into %him/her%), assumes that the other child meant to do it, and then
reacts with anger and fighting?
c)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Physically attacks people?
d)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Threatens people?
e)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is cruel, bullies or is mean to others?
f)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Kicks, bites, hits other children?

     4.   Prosocial Behvaiour Score in Cycle 1 (Variable:ABECS07 ) ages 4-11

The total score varies from 0 to 20, a high score indicating prosocial behavior
a)  Using the answers never or not true, sometimes or somewhat true, or often or very true, how often would you
    say that %fname%: shows sympathy to someone who has made a mistake?
b) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Will try to help someone who has been hurt?
c) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Volunteers to help clear up a mess someone else
has made?
d) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: If there is a quarrel or dispute, will try to stop it?



                                                                                                       38
e) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Offers to help other children (friend, brother or
sister) who are having difficulty with a task?
f) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Comforts a child (friend, brother, or sister) who is
crying or upset?
g) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Spontaneously helps to pick up objects which
another child has dropped (e.g. pencils, books, etc.)?
h) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Will invite bystanders to join in a game?
i) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Helps other children (friends, brother or sister) who
are feeling sick?
j) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Takes the opportunity to praise the work of less able
children?

5. Indirect Aggression Score in Cycle 1 ages 4-11
The total score varies from 0 to 10, a high score indicating behavior associated with indirect
aggression.
a) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: When mad at someone, tries to get others to dislike
that person?
b) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: When mad at someone, becomes friends with
another as revenge?
c) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: When mad at someone, says bad things behind the
other's back?
d) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: When mad at someone, says to others: let's not be
with him/her?
e) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: When mad at someone, tells the other one's secrets
to a third person?

6. Adult Health Depression Score
a) HOW OFTEN YOU HAVE FELT OR BEHAVED THIS WAY DURING THE PAST WEEK: I did not
feel like eating; my appetite was poor.
1 RARELY OR NONE OF THE TIME (LESS THAN 1 DAY)
2 SOME OR A LITTLE OF THE TIME (1-2 DAYS)
3 OCCASIONALLY OR A MODERATE AMOUNT OF TIME (3-4 DAYS)
4 MOST OR ALL OF THE TIME (5-7 DAYS)

b) HOW OFTEN YOU HAVE FELT OR BEHAVED THIS WAY DURING THE PAST WEEK: I felt that
I could not shake off the blues even with help from my family or friends.

c) HOW OFTEN YOU HAVE FELT OR BEHAVED THIS WAY DURING THE PAST WEEK: I had
trouble keeping my mind on what I was doing.

d) HOW OFTEN YOU HAVE FELT OR BEHAVED THIS WAY DURING THE PAST WEEK: I felt
depressed.

e)HOW OFTEN YOU HAVE FELT OR BEHAVED THIS WAY DURING THE PAST WEEK: I felt that
everything I did was an effort.

f) HOW OFTEN YOU HAVE FELT OR BEHAVED THIS WAY DURING THE PAST WEEK: I felt
hopeful about the future.

g) HOW OFTEN YOU HAVE FELT OR BEHAVED THIS WAY DURING THE PAST WEEK: My sleep
was restless.

h)HOW OFTEN YOU HAVE FELT OR BEHAVED THIS WAY DURING THE PAST WEEK: I was
happy.


                                                                                       39
i)HOW OFTEN YOU HAVE FELT OR BEHAVED THIS WAY DURING THE PAST WEEK: I felt
lonely.
FREQ WTD

j)HOW OFTEN YOU HAVE FELT OR BEHAVED THIS WAY DURING THE PAST WEEK: I enjoyed
life.

k)HOW OFTEN YOU HAVE FELT OR BEHAVED THIS WAY DURING THE PAST WEEK: I had
crying spells.

l) HOW OFTEN YOU HAVE FELT OR BEHAVED THIS WAY DURING THE PAST WEEK: I felt that
people disliked me.




                                                                          40
