NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEW EVIDENCE ON THE FORMATION OF TRADE POLICY PREFERENCES
Bruce Blonigen
Working Paper 14627
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14627

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

This paper has benefited from the comments of seminar participants at the University of Alberta and
University of Calgary. I thank Nathan Yoder for excellent research assistance. Any errors or omissions
are completely my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Bruce Blonigen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

New Evidence on the Formation of Trade Policy Preferences
Bruce Blonigen
NBER Working Paper No. 14627
December 2008
JEL No. D72,D83,F13,F16
ABSTRACT
This paper revisits the issue of people’s preferences for international trade protection examining survey
data from the American National Election Studies. I first show that both an individual’s skills and
the international trade characteristics of their employment industry affects their trade policy preferences,
in contrast to previous analysis using these data. Second, I document that many people do not feel
informed enough to state a preference on trade protection, which is inconsistent with assumptions
of standard political economy models. I examine the factors that correlate with being uninformed,
and show that inferences from actual trade policy outcomes can be incorrect if one does not account
for this uninformed group. Finally, I examine and find that individuals’ retirement decisions have
systematic effects on both their choice to be informed and their trade policy preferences. This highlights
that there are significant life-cycle implications to trade policy preferences.

Bruce Blonigen
Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
bruceb@uoregon.edu

1. Introduction
Trade policy outcomes are fundamentally determined by individuals’ preferences for trade
policies which, in turn, are determined by how trade affects the income and welfare of
individuals. While the majority of empirical previous work on trade policy outcomes has
examined the position taken by political representatives or lobbies, more recent work has begun to
explore individuals’ survey responses or votes on trade policies directly. As Rodrik (1995) points
out, understanding the formation of individual trade policy preferences is a fundamental input into
the modeling of trade policy outcomes.
The recent literature analyzing individual responses has examined whether standard trade
models’ predictions of who gains and loses from trade protection correspond with individuals’
stated preferences regarding trade policies. The almost exclusive focus has been on whether
individuals’ endowments (primarily their human capital skills) or their current industry of
employment are correlated with their trade policy preferences. If workers are (perfectly) mobile
across sectors, then their skill endowment matters for trade policy preferences, not their industry
of employment. This corresponds to a two-factor Heckscher-Ohlin framework with associated
Stolper-Samuelson effects, whereby workers with less (more) skill residing in a skill-abundant
(skill-deficient) country will experience real income declines from freer trade and, thus, favor
trade protection. In contrast, if workers cannot move between industries, then industry
characteristics, not the workers’ skill levels will determine how their income varies with trade and
their resulting trade preferences. This corresponds to a sector-specific model or what Scheve and
Slaughter (2001) call a Ricardo-Viner framework.
Earlier studies of these competing hypotheses do not examine data at the individual level
and generally conclude in favor of industry characteristics, not human capital endowments, in

2

determining trade policies. These include Magee (1980) which examines the position taken by
political lobbying groups on a 1973 U.S. trade bill, and Irwin (1994, 1996) which analyze county
voting patterns of 1906 and 1923 British general elections and are argued to be essentially
referenda about trade policies. However, Kaempfer and Marks (1993), Baldwin and Magee
(1998), and Beaulieu (2002b) find some evidence for both human capital endowments and
industry composition of representative districts determining votes on trade bills by US and
Canadian political representatives.1
A smaller recent literature has begun to examine these hypotheses using individuals’ votes
or stated preferences on surveys about free trade and trade protection. Balistreri (1997) and
Beaulieu (2002a) explore survey data on individual Canadians preferences regarding the 1988
Canadian-US Free Trade Agreement (CUSFTA) and find that human capital endowments
(proxied by education level or occupation) significantly affect whether an individual supported
the CUSFTA. Likewise, Scheve and Slaughter (2001) use U.S. individual responses to a 1992
American National Election Survey (ANES) question about general import restrictions and find
that human capital endowments affect an individuals’ position on trade protection. Finally,
Mayda and Rodrik (2006) find strong support in international survey data that highly-skilled
individuals favor open trade in skill-abundant countries, but do not favor (or even oppose) open
trade in skill-poor less-developed countries.
In contrast, the effect of the trade characteristics of the individuals’ current employment
industry is ambiguous across these studies. Beaulieu (2002a) and Mayda and Rodrik (2006) find
that employment industry also matters, while Scheve and Slaughter (2001) find that the export

1

As Beaulieu (2002b) points out, most studies of determinants of trade votes by legislators do not even control for
human capital (or other) endowments of the legislators constituents, but simply assume that industry characteristics
and composition of the representatives “district” are primary determinants.

3

exposure of an individuals’ employment industry does not matter. Balistreri’s (1997) analysis
does not control for individuals’ employment industry.
In this paper, I revisit the data on individuals’ preferences for trade protection. Like
Scheve and Slaughter (2001), I use data on individual’s responses to a question posed by the
ANES about whether the US should increase or decrease import restrictions. These data have
much more detailed data on individual characteristics than other surveys used, including direct
information on individuals’ employment industry. These data also have a number of features that
are unexploited by the Scheve and Slaughter (2001) study. First, the identical question was asked
not only in a 1992 survey (the one used by Scheve and Slaughter), but also asked in 1986, 1988,
1996, and 1998. This provides a lengthy time series of data to examine the robustness of the
empirical relationships. Second, the posed question also asks respondents whether they feel they
know enough about the issue to have an opinion on the matter of import restrictions. Almost 30
percent of respondents answer that they do not know enough to express a stance on import
protection and these observations are not included in the Scheve and Slaughter (2001) study. In
this paper, I estimate the factors that make an individual “uninformed” on the trade policy issue,
as well as control for sample selection on this criterion when examining the factors that affect the
opinion of the “informed” respondents.
My analysis uncovers a number of new results that have important theoretical
implications. First, I show that the Scheve and Slaughter (2001) result that the import exposure of
an individuals’ occupation does not affect trade policy preferences is sensitive to expanding the
sample beyond 1992. Once other years are added to the sample both skills and the trade exposure
of an individuals’ industry matter for trade policy preferences. This result is robust to a wide

4

variety of specifications and control variables, and suggests that, in practice, models with either
complete mobility or complete immobility of labor are incorrect representations.
A second finding of this paper’s analysis is that a large group of individuals are
“uninformed” – almost 30% of the sample – and one can easily find factors that explain which
individuals fall into this group. In fact, less-skilled individuals, as well as poor individuals and
females, are more likely to feel “uninformed” on the issue of trade protection. Controlling for this
systematic selection of individuals affects statistical inferences about which factors make an
average “informed” individual more likely to support trade protection. This evidence of
uninformed individuals among the population suggests that political economy trade models
should consider the effect of systematic “costs” of various populations to inform themselves.
Modeling these effects may translate into quite different implications for the economy-wide
support for various trade policies.
This point directly relates to a third main finding regarding the non-linearity of trade
protection preferences with respect to skills. Recent theoretical work by Blanchard and Willmann
(2008) and Costinot and Vogel (2008) endogenize individuals’ choices of skill acquisition in
general equilibrium models of trade. Their models allow for non-linearities in observed skill and
effects of trade liberalization. In particular, Blanchard and Willmann focus on equilibria where
“middle-skilled” workers’ wages in a skill-abundant country face pressure from trade
liberalization, whereas both low- and high-skilled workers potentially gain from trade
liberalization. This is consistent with recent work by Bradford (2008) that finds import protection
levels across US industries are non-linear in this same manner with respect to the skill
composition of the industry. Low- and high-skill industries have low levels of import protection,
while industries with medium skill compositions have the highest levels of import protection.

5

Using data on stated trade policy preferences, I find in my data this same non-linear relationship
when examining who supports trade protection across all individuals (both informed and noninformed), however no such relationship across only informed individuals. This suggests that
actual trade policy decisions may be non-linear in skills, not because trade liberalization would
not hurt low-skill workers, but because a disproportionate number of them are not informed on
the issue.
Finally, I find large effects of a life-cycle change, retirement, on an individual’s trade
policy preferences. Retirement may affect both an individual’s decision to inform themselves and
their trade policy preference once they are informed. Importantly, retirement means that the
individual is no longer in the workforce which likely means a significant change in their source of
income. For example, individuals who were in trade sensitive industries are now likely have
income sources that are less trade-sensitive. In addition, non-participation in the workforce may
make it more costly for an individual to inform themselves. My empirical estimates show that
retired individuals are much more likely to be uninformed about trade policy, and that neither
their skills nor the trade exposure of their former occupation industry matter anymore for their
trade policy preferences. These results have obvious implications in the coming years as the baby
boomer generation hits retirement age.

2. Hypotheses
2.1. Skills, occupation industry, and trade preferences
Trade-focused political economy models either assume that labor is freely mobile across
sectors within a country or that agents (laborers or capitalists) have endowments that are specific
to their own industry and cannot be transferred across industries/sectors. An example of the

6

former model is the standard Heckscher-Ohlin 2×2×2 framework which yields the well-known
Stolper-Samuelson result -- a rise in the price of one of the two goods will increase the real return
of the factor endowment that the good uses relatively intensely, and lower the real return of the
other factor. Thus, for example, in a model with skilled and unskilled labor as the two factors of
production, a rise in the price of the good employing relatively more unskilled labor will benefit
all unskilled laborers (regardless of sector). And by the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem, a country with
a relatively greater proportion of skilled labor in its workforce (i.e., a developed country) would
be exporting the skilled-labor-intensive good and importing the unskilled-labor-intensive good.
Thus, if you ask workers in a developed country, such as the US, whether they prefer new import
limits, a model with freely mobile workers across sectors predicts that unskilled workers will
favor such limits (which would raise the domestic relative price of the unskilled-intensive
product), while skilled workers will oppose new import limits.
This is in contrast with a model where factors are sector-specific, not mobile across
sectors. In these models, workers and/or capital owners will only lobby for import protection
when their sector faces greater imports from other countries. If they are successful, price
increases from the import limits will provide benefits to only the factors of production being
employed in the sector at the expense of factors in other sectors. In contrast, factor owners (either
labor or capital) in exporting sectors will oppose limits on imports. In these models then, whether
an individual’s occupation industry faces competitive pressure from imports will determine their
stance on import limits.
In summary, correlation between trade policy preferences and individuals’ skills (or
human capital endowment), with no correlation between the individual’s industry of occupation
(and the import competition it faces), rejects the sector-specific model in favor of a model with

7

freely mobile labor. Alternatively, evidence that industry of occupation, not skills, correlates with
individuals’ trade policy preferences supports sector-specific models and rejects models of freelymobile factors. Evidence for both suggests that mobility of factors across sectors is only partially
true in some manner, and calls for further investigation.2 No evidence for either skills or
occupation industry correlating with trade policy preferences would suggest that trade policy
models need to begin anew in their assumptions.

2.2. Costly information
Current political economy models used to address trade policy issues almost invariably
assume that individuals have full information about the state of the world. In reality, this means
that an individual knows, depending on the assumed underlying model, their relative skill type
and their countries relative factor endowment differences, or the nature of import competition for
their occupation industry. In practice, however, obtaining this information may involve nontrivial costs and may lead an individual to choose to be uninformed on the issue. The decision to
become informed then depends on expected costs and benefits of information acquisition.
For simplification, assume the ex ante expected benefits of acquiring information are
identical across individuals, but costs of information acquisition may vary. I hypothesize that a
number of observed individual characteristics will correlate with higher costs of information
acquisition. First, lower education levels will increase the personal cost of an individual to obtain
and understand the relevant information. Second, controlling for education levels, lower income
will make individuals less likely to inform themselves. In other words, these two hypotheses
simply follow from the idea that both intellectual and financial resources are necessary to inform

2

The sector-specific model can be seen as a short-run version of the Heckscher-Ohlin framework. Thus, Mayda and
Rodrik (2006) suggest that evidence for both is consistent with a world where some voters have a short-run

8

one self. These predictions are in line with a recent political economy literature on the role of
information and individuals’ decisions to vote in an election.3
It is now straightforward to see that costly information acquisition can lead to a much
different mapping of welfare effects of trade policy outcomes to expressed trade policy
preferences, particularly if skills drive individual welfare effects, than a world where everyone is
fully informed. For example, suppose that there is sufficient labor mobility that skills matter for
individuals’ trade policy outcomes and that individuals’ differing skills are distributed
continuously over an interval of finite length. Further, assume that in a skilled abundant country
such as the United States, the net costs of eliminating import restrictions and adopting free trade
(changes in wage income plus changes in consumer prices) are continuously decreasing in skill –
the costs of free trade are highest for the least-skilled. This is depicted in the top panel of Figure
1, which graphs the net cost of free trade by skill level.4 This graph represents the extent to which
an individual of a certain skill level will favor or oppose import restrictions, assuming all agents
are informed about this relationship. The individual with the skill level associated with a zero
personal cost of free trade is indifferent to trade protection.
Now assume that the costs of information acquisition about free trade costs are decreasing
in skill, while benefits are constant, as discussed above. This is depicted graphically in the lower
panel of Figure 1. Individuals with skill levels below s* will choose to not inform themselves
and, by default, have an expected net cost of free trade equal to zero. This creates a non-linearity
in expected net costs of free trade, which is shown by the wider lines in the upper panel of Figure
1. If the critical s* occurs before the skill level where actual net costs of import protection are

perspective, whereas others have a longer-run perspective.
3
Such papers include Larcinese (2007a; 2007b) which examine voter’s use of information and turnout in Britain.
There are other papers that explore information acquisition and voter turnout (see, for example, Fedderson and

9

zero, we get a pattern whereby the medium-skill individuals (ones who are high-skilled enough to
be informed, but low-skilled enough to have a net cost of free trade) will be opposed to free trade,
whereas the low- and high-skilled individuals will not oppose (or even favor) free trade. If lessskilled individuals are more likely to be hurt by trade, but less likely to inform themselves on the
issue, they may not be any more likely to vote for trade protection than skilled workers.
Translating this into a representative democracy setting, legislators representing less-skilled
workers may not be more likely to vote for trade protection even if freer trade would hurt lessskilled workers.
This is obviously a very particular example to show just one way in which information
acquisition can affect the expected costs of free trade and, ultimately, trade policy outcomes. As
mentioned, prior literature has constructed trade models with perfect information where net costs
of free trade may not be a continuously decreasing function of skill. However, as we will show
below, our data are consistent with the model depicted in Figure 1, where stated preferences for
trade protection are decreasing in skill for fully informed individuals, but the overall sample of
stated preferences by individuals take this specific non-linear shape because so many low-skill
individuals in the sample are uninformed.

2.3. Life-cycle considerations: Retirement
Standard political economy models assume that agents have a consistent source of labor
(or capital) income. However, retirement represents a real-life event where individuals
significantly reduce or completely stop employment and, hence, their source of income
significantly moves away from employment income to other sources. Statistics calculated by the

Pesendorfer, 1996), but this is the first I am aware of that examines a particular policy question, rather than election
turnout.

10

Employee Benefit Research Institute using data from the 2004 U.S. Consumer Population Survey
shows retirees’ income sources to consist of the following primary components on average: 1)
40% from social security benefits from the federal government, 2) 19.4% from continued
employment, 3) 16.8% from personal asset holdings, 4) 9.3% from public-sector defined-benefit
(i.e., pension) plans, and 5) 9.2% from private-sector defined-benefit plans.5
From these statistics, it is clear that the majority of a retirees’ income source is no longer
tied to an employment industry – it is only important for income coming from continued
employment (19.4%) or from a private-sector defined-benefit plan (9.2%), where presumably the
private sector entity is their former employer. Likewise, their skill would only matter for their
income from employment (19.4%) after retirement. These us, we data suggest that there will be
a significant reduction of skills and employment industry as determinants of an individual’s
income after retirement towards income sources (social security, personal-asset holdings, and
public-sector defined-benefit plans) that should roughly correlate with the overall growth of the
economy. Since trade theories generally suggest that trade protection is harmful for overall
welfare and growth of an economy, I hypothesize that retirement should significantly decrease the
effect of an individual’s skill and/or trade exposure of their (former) employment industry on
their trade policy preferences.
Retirement may also affect whether individuals inform themselves about trade policies.
On one hand, it may be more costly to inform themselves once they are no longer (or significantly
less involved) in the workforce. Relatedly, the expected benefit of informing themselves about
returns to their own skill set or employment industry from certain trade policies will have gone
down considerably. This leads to the hypothesis that retirement will lead individuals to be less

4
5

I thank Scott Taylor for suggesting the construction of this graphical model to better illustrate these concepts.
These calculations can be found at: http://www.ebri.org/pdf/programs/policyforums/may2004/ristats.pdf.

11

likely to acquire information about trade policy impacts, everything else equal. Potentially
mitigating or reversing these effects, is the notion that the opportunity cost of time has declined
for retirees, making them more likely to acquire information on public policy questions.

3. Data and Empirical Specification
To test these various hypotheses, I create a dataset from the ANES surveys that follows
Scheve and Slaughter (2001) as closely as possible, while expanding beyond year 1992 (which is
the only year they examine) to include survey years 1986, 1988, 1996, and 1998. In all these
years the ANES asked the same following question:
‘‘Some people have suggested placing new limits on foreign imports in order to protect
American jobs. Others say that such limits would raise consumer prices and hurt
American exports. Do you favor or oppose placing new limits on imports, or haven’t you
thought much about this?’’6

Scheve and Slaughter (2001) construct a dependent variable for their analysis which assigns a “1”
when the individual responded that they favor new limits on imports, and a “0” when they oppose
new limits. In my analysis below, I begin with this same dependent variable construction. Given
that the dependent variable is binary, Scheve and Slaughter (2001) use a logistic regression as
their empirical specification. I use a probit specification which yields qualitatively identical

6

In 1990, the ANES survey asked a similar, but not identical, question that asked respondents to rank their
preferences for new import limits over a range from 1 to 7, where “1” indicated “increase limits a lot”, while “7”
indicated “decrease limits a lot.” Since it is not obvious how to correspond these responses into a binary variable in
analogous fashion to my other survey years, I do not include this survey year. In 1986, the ANES survey first asked
respondents if they had thought about import issues, then if they responded that they had, they were asked the same
question about whether they favored or opposed new limits. I include respondents from this year in my sample as it
easy to construct a dependent variable in analogous fashion to my other survey years. Finally, I exclude the year
2000, the final year the question was asked, because the individual’s county of residence is not reported in this
year’s survey. County residence is necessary for construction of a couple key independent variables discussed
below.

12

empirical estimates, but more easily allows a specification extension to address the issue I raise
next.
Constructing a dependent variable in the manner just described leaves out a potentially
important group of respondents – those who do not feel they know enough about the issue to
express a “favor” or “oppose” opinion. I label these individuals as “uninformed” on the issue of
import limits and, in fact, they comprise a significant portion of the overall sample – 27.2%.
Modeling whether an individual is informed or not is important for two reasons. First,
understanding the attributes that correlate with an individual’s choice to be uninformed is
important and has direct implications for models of political economy that invariably assume
informed agents. Second, if there is correlation between the types of individuals who choose to
be uninformed and those that favor or oppose new import limits, then statistical inferences on
only the informed groups (as in Scheve and Slaughter, 2001) will suffer from sample selection
bias. To directly address these issues, I run a probit specification with a Heckman-style sample
selection that first estimates the determinants of whether an individual has thought about new
import restrictions and, second, whether they favor such import restrictions conditional on
whether they have thought about the topic..
I use identical control regressors as those employed by Scheve and Slaughter (2001),
constructing them in analogous fashion to the greatest extent possible. Scheve and Slaughter
(2001) use two alternative measures of an individual’s skill and two alternative measures for the
trade exposure of the industry in which the individual works.
Their measures of skill are years of education and wage levels. Years of education are
directly asked of the individual in the ANES surveys across all years. Wage levels are not asked

13

of ANES respondents, but instead they are asked to identify their occupation.7 Following Scheve
and Slaughter (2001) I take U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data on average weekly wages
by occupation to assign wage levels to individuals in the surveys based on their stated occupation.
Because I have multiple years of surveys in my sample, I construct my wage data as a “Relative
Wage” variable that is an occupation’s average wage relative to the average wage across all
occupations in a given survey year. Scheve and Slaughter (2001) simply used wage levels which
is appropriate (and equivalent to my construction) because they only examine a single survey
year.
Like Scheve and Slaughter (2001), the two measures of industry trade exposure I construct
are the tariff level and net export share of output (or sales) for a survey respondent’s industry of
employment. The ANES asks respondent’s to identify the industry they work in, which are
classified into 3-digit Census of Industry Codes (CIC). For tariff levels, I use the applied tariffs
(duties collected divided by customs value of imports) found in U.S. trade data, available through
the Schott and Feenstra datasets at the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) website. I
construct the weighted average tariff by 4-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes
from the NBER data and then concord to 3-digit CIC codes. Non-traded sectors, as well as all
service sectors, are assigned an import tariff of zero. Net export shares for manufacturing are
straightforward to construct using the NBER data for the trade flows (exports and imports by
sector), and U.S. Census data for value of shipments. These data are constructed by SIC codes
and then concorded to the CIC codes. Constructing net export shares for non-manufacturing
sectors relied on a variety of sources, primarily U.S. Census data for shipments, NBER trade data
for tradeable agriculture and mining sectors, and BEA data for tradeable service sectors. A data

7

Retired and unemployed persons in the sample are asked to identify the occupation of their last job. I get
qualitatively identical results throughout my analysis whether I sample all individuals or sample only working

14

appendix describes the construction of this variable (and all my variables) in more detail. Nontradeable sectors were assigned a net export share of zero. I expect a positive correlation between
average tariffs in an individual’s employment industry and their preference for import protection,
and a negative correlation between their employment industry’s net export share and their
preference for import protection.
Scheve and Slaughter (2001) have a secondary focus of their paper which examines the
hypothesis that home owners in trade-sensitive locations will be more likely to prefer trade
protection. This is because houses are often an important asset for individuals and home values
depend on economic activity in the immediate location. Following Scheve and Slaughter (2001) I
then use Census data to calculate the share of the individual’s county’s employment in two-digit
SIC sectors with above-median tariffs (called County 1 Exposure) or with net-import balances
(County 2 Exposure).8 I then interact these two county exposure share variables with a binary
variable indicating whether the individual owns a house, which is asked directly by the ANES
survey in all my sample years. This creates two alternative interaction variables - County 1
Exposure × House and County 2 Exposure × House. By the hypotheses developed in Scheve and
Slaughter, I expect a positive correlation between these variables and the likelihood that an
individual prefers new import limits.
Finally, after initial estimates, I will also include other individual characteristics in my
regression specifications, including age, gender, race, political party affiliation, and union
membership which come directly from the ANES survey questions. Table 1 provides summary
statistics of all the variables used in this study’s analysis.

individuals.
8
The county location of an individual is identified by the ANES survey. I use the same 2-digit SIC industries as
used by Scheve and Slaughter (2001) for these variables which are based 1992 data.

15

4. Empirical Results
In this section, I present my statistical results. I begin with estimates that stem from
identical specifications as those in Scheve and Slaughter (2001) using only 1992 data, as in that
paper, and obtain qualitatively identical results to their paper. I then examine the robustness of
these results by first expanding the sample to all available years. I next model the uniformed
individuals, providing evidence of the characteristics that correlate with whether or not an
individual is uninformed or not, as well as exploring the robustness of other results when
accounting for uninformed individuals. I then explore the relationship between skills and trade
policy preferences, allowing for a non-linear relationship. Finally, I examine the impact of
retirement on information acquisition and trade policy preferences.

4.1. Base Results
In columns 1 through 4 of Table 2 I provide probit estimates of the determinants of an
individual’s preference for higher import restrictions using identical specifications to that in
Scheve and Slaughter (2001), where I alternate using education and relative wages as measures of
an individual’s skills and using tariff rates or net imports as a share of sales as measures of the
trade exposure of an individual’s employment industry. For ease of understanding the economic
significance of my regressors on the dependent variable, I show marginal effects and their
associated standard errors in these tables, where the reported marginal effects provide the change
in the dependent variable (probability of favoring new import restrictions in decimal form) for a
one-unit change in the regressor.

16

My results are qualitatively identical to those in Scheve and Slaughter (2001) –
specifically, models 9, 10, 13, and 14 in Table 6 of their paper.9 Both measures of skill are
statistically significant and indicate important effects on trade policy preferences. As found by
Scheve and Slaughter (2001), trade exposure of an individual’s employment industry is not
significant in explaining trade policy preferences. Thus, the evidence is consistent with a model
with intersectoral factor mobility assumed in Heckscher-Ohlin models where skills determine
welfare impacts of trade policy, while inconsistent with a sector-specific (or Ricardo-Viner)
model where factors are not mobile between sectors and trade exposure would affect individual
welfare and, hence their trade policy preferences. As in Scheve and Slaughter (2001), I also find
that individuals who own homes in trade sensitive areas are much more likely to favor new import
restrictions.

4.2. Expanding the sample
I next run the same specification, but this time with the full sample of years available, and
report these estimates in columns 5 through 8 of Table 2. I also add dummy variables for each
year to control for any common year-specific effects on all individuals’ trade policy preferences.
The surprising result is that while the skill variables come in with similar magnitude and
statistical significance, the industry trade exposure variables are now correct sign and generally
statistically significant – the exception is the Sector Tariff variable in the column 7 specification
which has a p-value of 0.168. These findings that both skill and industry matter contrast with
Scheve and Slaughter (2001), but are consistent with Beaulieu’s (2002a) results using Canadian
survey data, and suggest that labor is neither perfectly mobile nor perfectly immobile.

9

I get qualitatively identical results to Scheve and Slaughter for all specifications reported in their paper, but just
show these for the sake of brevity. Full “replication” results are available upon request.

17

The magnitude of the both the skill variables and industry trade exposure variables are
economically significant as well. A one-standard deviation increase in the Relative Occupation
Wage of an individual decreases their likelihood to favor new import limits by 5.8 percentage
points (from a mean of about 55%), while a one-standard deviation increase in Education Years
decreases an individual’s likelihood of favoring trade protection by 10.8 percentage points, ceteris
paribus. Using column 5’s estimates, a one-standard deviation in the Sector Tariff increases an
individual’s likelihood of favoring trade protection by 2.4 percentage points. Using column 6’s
estimates, a one-standard deviation in the Sector Net Export Share decreases an individual’s
preference for trade protection by 4.7 percentage points.10
For the rest of the paper’s analysis, I now only use Education Years as my measure of skill
and the Sector Net Export Share as the industry trade exposure measure. Relative Occupation
Wage and Sector Tariff yield qualitatively identical sign patterns throughout, though sometimes
slightly weaker statistical significance.

4.3. Controlling for information acquisition
To this point, my specification has not controlled for whether an individual has thought
about the issue. In Table 3, I present estimates from a probit regression where the dependent
variable is “1” if the individual has thought about trade protection and “0” if they have not. As
discussed in section 2, I assume that whether an individual has thought about trade protection
depends largely on the costs of information acquisition, which are decreasing in education and
10

I obtain results that are nearly quantitatively identical for the skill and industry trade when using the County 2
Exposure and County 2 Exposure × House variable. This is the case throughout the results reported in this paper
and I, therefore, only show specifications with “County 1” variables throughout. Interestingly, coefficient estimates
on these “County 2” variables are significantly different than the coefficient estimates on the “County 1” variables
when all sample years are included, which contrasts with Scheve and Slaughter (2001) results using only data from
1992. I find that using “County 2” variables suggests that all individuals in a county with significant trade exposure
are more likely to support trade protection, not just those that own homes. Results available upon request.

18

income. To control for income, I use ANES reported household income to construct and include
dummy variables for whether an individual’s household income is in the lower quartile, second
quartile, or third quartile for that sample year.11 As robustness checks, I also include other
variables from the trade policy preference equation, including the Sector Net Export Share and
“County 1 Exposure” variables. These could possibly come in significantly if expected benefits
of information acquisition depend on how individuals are affected by trade policy. Finally, I also
include a number of demographic variables that are readily available from the ANES survey,
including age, gender, ethnicity, political affiliation and labor union participation.12
Table 3 provides results from the probit estimation using the dependent variable indicating
whether an individual has thought about trade protection. The variables used to proxy for
information costs come in with expected signs and are statistically significant. The estimated
marginal effects suggest that each additional year of education adds 2.8 percentage points to the
likelihood that an individual will have thought about trade protection (from a mean around 70%).
Individuals in the lowest household income quartile are 7.7 percentage points less likely to have
thought about trade protection than the highest household-income quartile, while those in the
second quartile are 5.5 percentage points less likely. There is no statistical difference between
those in the third and fourth household-income quartiles. Thus, as hypothesized, low-education
and low-income individuals are less likely to acquire information about trade protection.
The expected benefit variables – the ones that proxy for how trade may affect the welfare
of an individual – do not come in statistically significant. This is consistent with my assumption
that expected benefits of information may be ex ante identical across individuals.

11

I exclude a dummy variable for household income in the top quartile to avoid perfect multicollinearity with an
included constant term in the regression.
12
These are the same demographic variables that Scheve and Slaughter (2001) use for robustness checks in their
work.

19

Finally, the demographic variables provide quite interesting statistical results. First, an
individual is more likely to have thought about trade protection as they age – ten years of age
makes an individual about 2 percentage points more likely to have informed themselves enough
to provide an opinion on new import limits. Ethnicity is estimated to have some impact as well,
with African Americans and Hispanics less likely to have thought about trade protection, ceteris
paribus. Both political affiliation and union membership do not have any statistical impact.
Finally, gender has an unexpectedly large effect, with women almost 15 percentage points lower
in their likelihood of thinking about trade protection than men, ceteris paribus (i.e., after
controlling for age, income, race, and education). Such a large gap brings up the possibility of an
alternative interpretation for my results. Perhaps these estimates are not only uncovering who
becomes informed about trade policies, but also who is confident enough to feel sufficiently
informed to offer an opinion on trade policies.
To examine this further, I collect data on a couple variables from the ANES survey that
may be good proxies of whether individuals inform themselves: 1) whether an individual has
discussed politics with friends or family in the past week, and 2) whether the individual has read a
newspaper in the past week. I then run a probit specification using these two variables separately
as dependent variables on the same regressor matrix used in the specification used to explain
whether an individual has thought about import restrictions. The marginal effects from these
separate probit regressions are reported in with the Columns 2 and 3 of Table 3. I find that all
three dependent variables have many correlates in common. Age, education and income are
positively correlated with all three, while being female means a significantly lower probability for
all three. These results then provide some confirmatory evidence that information acquisition

20

(not simply some other factor such as an individual’s confidence) is a true underlying reason why
some individuals suggest they are not informed enough to offer an opinion on import restrictions.
In summary, variables proxying for information acquisition costs, as well as some
interesting demographic variables, are quite significant in explaining variation in individuals’
likelihoods of being informed about trade policies. I next want to explore how this selection of
individuals affects both my estimates of trade policy preferences, as well as some evidence on
trade outcomes.
Table 4 provides re-estimates of the determinants of individuals’ trade policy preferences
after controlling for sample selection bias due to conditioning on only those who have thought
about trade policy. In technical terms, I re-estimate the same specification as columns 5 through
8 using a two-step Heckman sample selection correction, where the sample selection equation is
the one used in Table 3. While statistical tests confirm that there is a sample selection bias13, I
find that the bias is fairly small in economic magnitude, as I get qualitatively identical results on
the determinants of trade policy preferences with or without a sample selection correction.

4.4. Is there a non-linear relationship between skills and trade policies?
As mentioned in the introduction, Bradford (2008) recently shows that trade policy
outcomes in the U.S. are non-linear in skills, with the lowest- and highest-skilled industries
having significantly lower tariff rates than medium-skilled industries. Are individuals’ trade
policy preferences, like these trade policy outcomes, also non-linear in skills in this same way? In
answering this question with my data, I show that information acquisition is a key factor in
explaining this non-linear pattern and is consistent with the model results depicted in Figure 1.

13

A likelihood ratio test rejects independence of the two equations at the 1% significance level in all specifications.

21

To explore this issue, I first categorize individuals into standard education classifications
that represent progressively higher degrees of education: 1) less than high school, 2) high school
degree, 3) some college, 4) college bachelor’s degree, and 5) graduate or professional degree
beyond college degree.14 I then replace Education Years in my specification with dummy
variables for whether an individual falls into one of these categories (excluding the last category
to avoid perfect multicollinearity with the constant term) and run this on alternative data samples
and dependent variables in Table 5.
Column 1 of Table 5 provides estimates when I estimate this new specification on only
those individuals in my sample who felt sufficiently informed to provide an opinion on whether
they favor new import limits. Column 2 provides estimates when I also include a sampleselection correction when estimating preferences for this informed group. In both sets of
estimates, I see that support for new import limits are simply decreasing in education. There is
not a non-linear relationship in trade policy preferences amongst the informed individuals in my
sample, as found by Bradford (2008) with respect to trade policy outcome patterns.
However, in column 3 of Table 5, I sample all individuals (informed and uninformed) and
create a dependent variable that simply takes the value of “1” if an individual favors new import
limits, and a “0” if they do not, which includes individuals who explicitly say they oppose new
limits, as well as those that simply say they have not thought about trade protection enough to
offer an opinion. Estimates using this sample show the same pattern across skills/education as
Bradford (2008) found for trade policy outcomes. The least skilled group (those with less than
high school education) do not express their preference for new import limits any more than those
with a college (or higher) degree, while the medium-skilled groups (high school education or

14

I get qualitatively identical results by simply adding a term that squares an individual’s Education Years, but find
this construction of education categories is easier for immediate interpretation and presentation.

22

some college) express preference for new import limits in rates that are about 7-8 percentage
points higher than the other skill groups. These results suggest that while low-skill workers are
more likely to want new import limits when they are informed about trade policy outcomes, since
a disproportionately large share of them are not informed, they do explicitly favor trade protection
any more than high-skill workers. To the extent that political representatives only respond to
voiced opinions by their constituents, the low information acquisition by low-skill workers can
explain the non-linear trade policy outcomes across skill levels documented by Bradford (2008).
Importantly, this evidence is not supportive of the recent theory papers by Blanchard and Willman
(2008) and Costinot and Vogel (2008) to the extent that they predict a non-linear relationship
between welfare impacts of trade policies and skills. Informed low-skill individuals in my
sample, who presumably have a reasonable sense of trade protection impacts on their own
welfare, are among the most protectionist individuals in my sample.

4.5. Life-cycle effects: Retirement
A final aspect of my data that I explore is the effect of retirement. Standard political
economy models do not consider life-cycle changes and retirement is a significant life-cycle
change which may affect both whether an individual acquires information on issues such as trade
protection, and whether they favor or impose trade protection with the significant change in the
source of their annual income. The ANES survey asks individuals of their retirement status
allowing us to easily explore this issue.15
I first include a dummy variable indicating whether an individual is retired in the
specification that examines the determinants of whether an individual has thought about trade

23

protection (reported in Table 3). The coefficient on retirement status comes in negative and
highly statistically significant. In fact, retired individuals are about 8 percentage points less likely
to have thought about import limits, ceteris paribus. Thus, just as with low-skill workers, this
suggests that legislators with a higher proportion of retired individuals in their districts are less
likely to have constituents voice their opinion for trade protection.
I next turn to an examination of whether retired individuals who acquire information on
trade policies are more or less likely to favor new import limits. As discussed in section 2,
retirees experience a significant de-linking of their income source from their (former) occupation
industry and workforce skills. Thus, I hypothesize an individual’s skill and trade exposure of
their (former) industry have a much weaker effect an individual’s trade policy preferences once
they are retired.
Importantly, the ANES survey gathers data on retirees’ last occupation industry in which
they were employed. This allows me to interact the skill and industry trade exposure variables
with retirement status to examine the hypothesis that retirement will decrease support for trade
protection from those previously exposed to harm from freer trade. Table 6 presents results when
I add the Retired dummy variable, as well as its interactions with the skill and trade exposure
variables, to the same specifications examining the determinants of support for new import limits
after controlling for sample selection (as reported in Table 4). The results provide support that
retirement leads those that formerly supported new import limits to decrease that support. In
every instance the sign of the coefficient of an interaction term is opposite of the associated skill
or industry trade exposure variable, indicating that retirement mitigates these variables’ effect on
an individual’s trade policy preference. Table 7 shows this more clearly by providing marginal

15

The survey actually gathers information on whether individuals are fully retired or partially retired and still
working part-time. I aggregate these two types into one “retired” category and my estimates are qualitatively

24

effects of the skill and industry occupation variables separately for retired individuals and those
not retired. In virtually every case the effect of a skill or industry trade measure is statistically
insignificant for a retired individual,16 while its independent effect (on all non-retired individuals
in the sample) are generally statistically significant and of the same magnitude as those reported
in Table 4.
In summary, the life-cycle change of retirement has a significant impact on expressed
trade policy preferences. First, retirees are much less likely to be informed on the issue of trade
policy. Second, skill and industry trade exposure variables are generally no longer significant in
explaining their trade policy preferences. This life-cycle change effect on trade policy
preferences is, of course, important for the United States and many other countries as their
population ages.

5. Conclusion
This paper provides new empirical evidence for important features of trade policy
preference formation that current models of political economy rarely, if ever, address. First,
information acquisition by individuals on policy matters is potentially costly and the data suggest
that many do not feel sufficiently informed to state an opinion on trade policy. These
“uninformed” individuals are systematically those with less education and income, and I show
that this can explain why trade policy outcomes may be non-linear in skills (with low-skill and
high-skill have lower preferences for trade protection than medium-skill workers), even though
freer trade may be progressively more harmful to one’s income the lower skill one has. Second, I

identical to when one classifies retired individuals as only those fully retired.
16
The effect of a skill or industry trade exposure for a retired individual is the coefficient on the skill or industry
trade exposure variable plus the coefficient on the interaction term of that variable with the variable Retired. A

25

show that the life-cycle change surrounding retirement has significant impacts on individuals’
stated trade policy preferences, lowering the likelihood that an individual will acquire information
on trade policies, and fully mitigating any effects of skill or industry trade exposure effects on an
individuals’ preferences for trade protection. Thus, the evidence in this paper suggests that future
political economy modeling of trade policy outcomes will need to incorporate these features to
obtain realistic predictions of trade policy formation. Another contribution of the paper is to
show that both an individual’s skills and the trade exposure of their occupation industry matter,
which contrasts with the Scheve and Slaughter (2001) study using these same ANES data, and
which suggests that workers are neither freely mobile nor freely immobile in their ability to
switch occupation industries.
A final result is the puzzlingly large impact of gender on trade policy preferences. This
paper confirms that women are much more likely to favor trade protection, as also found in
Beaulieu and Napier (2008). But it also documents that women are much more likely to be
uninformed about policy matters. Unlike the other results in this paper, there are no clear
theoretical reasons for why such large gender differences exist on the topic of trade policy.

simple Chi-squared test of the sum of these two coefficients determines if it is statistically significant at
conventional levels.

26

References
Baldwin, Robert E. and Christopher S. Magee. (1998) “Is trade policy for sale? Congressional
voting on recent trade bills,” Public Choice, 105(1-2): 79-101.
Balistreri, Edward J. (1997) “The performance of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek model in predicting
endogenous policy forces at the individual level,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 30: 1-18.
Beaulieu, Eugene. (2002a) “Factor or Industry Cleavages in Trade Policy? An Empirical Analysis
of the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem,” Economics and Politics, 14(2): 99-131.
Beaulieu, Eugene. (2002b) “The Stolper-Samuelson Theorem Faces Congress,” Review of
International Economics, 10(2): 343-360.
Beaulieu, Eugene and Michael Napier (2008) “Why Are Women More Protectionist Than Men?”
Mimeo.
Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess (2002) “The Political Economy of Government
Responsiveness: Theory and Evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117: 141552.
Besley, Timothy, and Andrea Prat (2006) “Handcuffs for the Grabbing Hand? Media Capture and
Government Accountability,” American Economic Review, 96(3): 720-36.
Blanchard, Emily, and Gerald Willmann. (2008) “Trade, education, and the shrinking middle
class,” Mimeo.
Bradford, Scott. (2008) “Protection and skills: Does trade policy favor low-skill workers?”
Mimeo.
Costinot, Arnaud, and Jonathan Vogel. (2008) “Matching and inequality in the world economy,”
Mimeo.
Fedderson, Timothy J., and Wolfgang Pesendorfer. (1996) “The Swing Voter’s Curse,” American
Economic Review, 86(3): 408-424.
Irwin, Douglas A. (1994) “The political economy of free trade,” Journal of Law and Economics,
37: 75-108.
Irwin, Douglas A. (1996) “Industry or class cleavages over trade policy? Evidence from the
British general election of 1923,” in Robert C. Feenstra, Gene M. Grossman, and Douglas A.
Irwin (eds.), The Political Economy of Trade Policy: Papers in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati.
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press)

27

Kaempfer, William H. and Stephen V. Marks. (1993) “The expected effects of trade
liberalization: Evidence from US congressional action on fast-track authority,” World Economy,
16: 725-740.
Larcinese, Valentino. (2007a) “The Instrumental Voter Goes to the Newsagent: Demand for
Information, Marginality, and the Media,” Journal of Theoretical Politics, 19(3): 249-276.
Larcinese, Valentino. (2007b) “Information Acquisition, Ideology and Turnout: Theory and
Evidence from Britain,” Mimeo.
Magee, Stephen P. (1980) “Three simple tests of the Stolper-Samuelson theorem,” in Gene M.
Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff (eds.), Issues in International Economics. (Stockfield, UK: Oriel
Press)
Rodrik, Dani. (1995) “Political economy of trade policy,” in Grossman Gene M. and Kenneth A.
Rogoff (eds.), Handbook of International Economics, Volume 3. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
Elsevier Publishing, pp. 1457-1494.
Rodrik, Dani and Anna Maria Mayda. (2005) “Why Are Some Individuals (and Countries) More
Protectionist than Others? European Economic Review, 49(6): 1393-1430.
Scheve, Kenneth F. and Matthew J. Slaughter. (2001) “What determines trade policy
preferences?” Journal of International Economics, 54(2): 267-292.
Scheve, Kenneth F. and Matthew J. Slaughter. (2001) “Labor market competition and individual
preferences over immigration policy,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(1): 133-145.

28

Figure 1: Net costs of import protection and information acquisition
by individuals’ skills.
Net costs of
import protection

0

Net costs of import
protection
Skill

Costs and benefits of
information acquisition
Benefits

Costs

Uninformed

S*

Skill
Informed

29

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Variable
Dependent variables
Thought about import limits?
Want new import limits (conditional on
thought)
Want new import limits (all individuals)

Observations

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Min

Max

10143

0.712

0.453

0.000

1.000

6963
9892

0.579
0.408

0.494
0.491

0.000
0.000

1.000
1.000

Independent variables in trade protection preference regression
Relative Occupation Wage
8344
1.110
Education Years
9454
12.903
Sector Tariff
8299
0.008
Sector Net Export Share
8090
-0.011
County Exposure 1
9887
0.063
County Exposure 1 × House
9564
0.041

0.339
2.802
0.025
0.221
0.064
0.061

0.362
1.000
0.000
-15.642
0.000
0.000

1.599
17.000
0.266
0.534
0.450
0.444

Additional independent variables in thought regression
Age (in years)
9636
45.472
Female
9644
0.479
African American
10143
0.150
Asian
10143
0.063
Hispanic
10143
0.117
Native American
10143
0.087
Democrat
9644
0.371
Republican
9644
0.287
Union Membership in Household
9644
0.178
Household Income - Lowest 25th Percentile
9644
0.225
Household Income - 25th-50th Percentile
9644
0.245
Household Income - 50th-75th Percentile
9644
0.224
Retired
9644
0.155

17.572
0.500
0.358
0.243
0.321
0.281
0.483
0.453
0.383
0.418
0.430
0.417
0.362

17.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

99.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000

30

Variables

Table 2: Re-estimating Scheve and Slaughter - Marginal Effects for 1992 and Full Sample of Years
1992 Sample Only
Full Sample of Years
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)

Relative Occupation Wage

-0.133***
(0.035)

-0.128***
(0.036)
-0.044***
(0.005)
-0.081
(0.687)

Education Years
Sector Tariff

0.471
(0.661)

-0.096
(0.321)
0.911***
(0.330)

-0.057
(0.129)
-0.053
(0.032)
0.987***
(0.333)

No

No

Sector Net Export Share
County Exposure 1
County Exposure 1 × House

Year dummies

-0.171***
(0.020)

-0.173***
(0.020)

-0.042***
(0.005)

-0.038***
(0.003)
0.443
(0.322)

0.970***
(0.323)

-0.392
(0.352)
1.200***
(0.356)

0.025
(0.132)
-0.353
(0.350)
1.253***
(0.358)

No

No

(8)

-0.038***
(0.003)

0.148
(0.159)
0.293*
(0.166)

-0.214***
(0.068)
0.180
(0.159)
0.305*
(0.167)

0.065
(0.162)
0.340**
(0.169)

-0.147**
(0.067)
0.075
(0.162)
0.353**
(0.170)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.014
0.015
0.050
0.049
0.045
0.046
0.064
0.065
Pseudo R2
27.77
27.85
91.48
88.09
324.83
322.48
460.51
457.73
Chi-squared Statistic
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(p-value)
1504
1476
1417
1390
5480
5342
5409
5272
Observations
Notes: Reported results are marginal effects (not coefficient estimates) of the regressors. Standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance
at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels are denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively. Columns 1 through 4 correspond to models 9, 10, 13, and 14,
respectively, in Table 5 of Scheve and Slaughter (2001)

31

Table 3: What Factors Explain Whether People Have Thought about Import
Restrictions, Discussed Politics in the Last Week or Read the Newspaper in the Last
Week? (Marginal Effects)
Thought
Discussed
Read
about import politics in last newspaper in
Variables
restrictions
week
last week
Information Cost Variables
Education Years
Household Income - Lowest 25th
Percentile
Household Income - 25th-50th
Percentile
Household Income - 50th-75th
Percentile

Information Benefit Variables
Sector Net Export Share
County Exposure 1
County Exposure 1 × House

Demographic Variables
Age (in years)
Female
African American
Asian
Hispanic
Native American
Democrat
Republican
Union Membership in Household

0.028***
(0.002)

0.045***
(0.002)

0.024***
(0.002)

-0.077***
(0.017)

-0.060***
(0.018)

-0.061***
(0.015)

-0.054***
(0.015)

-0.031*
(0.016)

-0.025*
(0.013)

0.005
(0.015)

0.018
(0.016)

-0.030**
(0.013)

0.008
(0.040)
-0.106
(0.117)
0.185
(0.126)

0.049
(0.047)
-0.480
(0.133)
0.262*
(0.141)

0.002
(0.036)
-0.052
(0.097)
0.019
(0.104)

0.002***
(0.000)
-0.149***
(0.012)
-0.047***
(0.018)
-0.010
(0.045)
-0.050**
(0.022)
0.033
(0.025)
-0.006
(0.011)
0.012
(0.012)
0.019
(0.014)

0.001**
(0.000)
-0.067***
(0.012)
0.023
(0.019)
-0.113**
(0.049)
-0.079**
(0.024)
0.048*
(0.029)
0.017
(0.012)
0.036***
(0.013)
0.021
(0.015)

0.002***
(0.000)
-0.052***
(0.010)
0.024*
(0.014)
-0.041
(0.041)
0.006
(0.017)
-0.041*
(0.024)
0.018**
(0.009)
0.017*
(0.010)
0.027**
(0.011)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year Dummies

32

0.083
0.072
0.070
Pseudo R2
768.37
745.96
529.72
Chi-squared Statistic
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(p-value)
7715
7715
7715
Observations
Notes: Reported results are marginal effects (not coefficient estimates) of the regressors,
where a one-unit change indicates the percentage point change in the dependent variable.
72.7% of individuals in the sample report they have thought about import restrictions,
61.4% have discussed politics with family or friends in the past week, and 82.4% have read
the newspaper in the past week. Standard errors are in parentheses. Statistical significance
at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels are denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.

33

Table 4: What Determines Trade Policy Preferences after Controlling for Sample
Selection? (Marginal Effects)
Variable
Relative Occupation Wage

(1)

(2)

-0.062**
(0.027)

-0.066**
(0.028)

Education Years
Sector Tariff

0.807***
(0.0311)

County Exposure 1 × House

Year Dummies

(4)

-0.031***
(0.004)
0.481
(0.328)

-0.031***
(0.004)

-0.085
(0.155)
0.552***
(0.161)

-0.169***
(0.066)
-0.051
(0.156)
0.550***
(0.162)

-0.046
(0.168)
0.498***
(0.177)

-0.142**
(0.068)
-0.029
(0.168)
0.501***
(0.178)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Sector Net Export Share
County Exposure 1

(3)

348.45
348.11
387.16
388.20
Chi-squared Statistic
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(p-value)
7797
7606
7697
7509
Observations
Notes: Reported results are marginal effects (not coefficient estimates) of the regressors.
Standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels are
denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.

34

Table 5: Nonlinear Relationship Between Skills and Trade Policy Preferences? The Importance of
Modeling Information (Marginal Effects)
Various dependent variable definitions

Variables
Education – Less Than High School
Education – High School
Education – Some College
Education – College Degree
Sector Net Export Share
County Exposure 1
County Exposure 1 × House

Year Dummies

Want new import
limits?
(Only those that
have thought
about it)

Want new import
limits?
(Full sample
conditioning on
whether one has
thought about it)

Want new import
limits?
(Full sample not
conditioning on
whether one has
thought about it)

0.226***
(0.019)
0.223***
(0.018)
0.148***
(0.019)
-0.015
(0.024)
-0.141**
(0.067)
0.135
(0.159)
0.276
(0.167)

0.216***
(0.029)
0.228***
(0.023)
0.161***
(0.022)
0.012
(0.025)
-0.137**
(0.069)
-0.045
(0.169)
0.525***
(0.178)

0.015
(0.021)
0.087***
(0.019)
0.076***
(0.020)
-0.025
(0.023)
-0.054
(0.046)
-0.239
(0.130)
0.659***
(0.136)

Yes

Yes

Yes

497.58
433.99
439.29
Chi-squared Statistic
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(p-value)
5385
7509
7662
Observations
Notes: Reported results are marginal effects (not coefficient estimates) of the regressors. Standard errors
in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels are denoted by *, **, and ***,
respectively.

35

Table 6: The Role of Retirement in Trade Policy Preferences (Marginal Effects)
Variable
Relative Occupation Wage

(1)

(2)

1.040***
(0.339)

Sector Net Export Share
County Exposure 1
County Exposure 1 × House
Retired
Retired × Relative Occupation Wage

-0.093
(0.156)
0.554***
(0.162)
0.069
(0.061)
0.012
(0.050)

-0.164**
(0.074)
-0.041
(0.156)
0.541***
(0.163)
0.029
(0.061)
0.033
(0.050)

-0.036*** -0.037***
(0.004)
(0.004)
0.883**
(0.382)
-0.147*
(0.081)
-0.051
-0.007
(0.170)
(0.169)
0.489*** 0.473***
(0.178)
(0.178)
-0.260*** -0.310***
(0.078)
(0.073)

0.025***
(0.006)
-1.760**
(0.754)

Retired × Education Years
Retired × Sector Tariff

(4)

-0.075*** -0.081***
(0.023)
(0.023)

Education Years
Sector Tariff

(3)

-2.088***
(0.640)
0.074
(0.127)

Retired × Sector Net Export Share

Yes

Year Dummies

Yes

0.028***
(0.006)

0.010
(0.149)
Yes

Yes

374.11
367.17
407.44
407.99
Chi-squared Statistic
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(p-value)
7468
7468
7509
7509
Observations
Notes: Reported results are marginal effects (not coefficient estimates) of the regressors.
Standard errors in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels are
denoted by *, **, and ***, respectively.

36

Table 7: Differences Between Retired Individuals and Those Not Retired with Respect to
the Effects of Skill and Occupation Industry on Trade Policy Preferences.
(Marginal Effects)
Not Retired
Retired
Column 1, Table 6
Relative Occupation Wages
Sector Tariff

-0.075***
(pval=0.00)
1.040***
(pval=0.00)

-0.063
(pval=0.19)
-1.048*
(pval=0.06)

-0.081***
(pval=0.00)
-0.164**
(pval=0.03)

-0.049
(pval=0.31)
-0.090
(pval=0.40)

-0.036***
(pval=0.00)
0.883**
(pval=0.02)

-0.010*
(pval=0.08)
-0.876
(pval=0.18)

Column 2, Table 6
Relative Occupation Wages
Sector Net Export Share
Column 3, Table 6
Education Years
Sector Tariffs
Column 4, Table 6
-0.037***
-0.009
(pval=0.00)
(pval=0.15)
-0.147*
-0.137
Sector Net Export Share
(pval=0.07)
(pval=0.28)
Notes: Reported results are marginal effects (not coefficient estimates) of the regressors and
come from Table 6 specifications as noted. The “pval” reported in parentheses is the probability
value of a chi-squared statistic that the marginal effect is statistically different from zero.
Statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels are denoted by *, **, and ***,
respectively.
Education Years

37

Data Appendix
Many of the variables used in this study come directly from questions in the ANES survey,
including our dependent variables, as well as the following regressors: Education Years, House,
Age, Female, African American, Asian, Hispanic, Native American, Democrat, Republican,
Union Membership, and Retired. The income variables I use come from household income
questions which had respondents report where the income fell across a number of given ranges. I
use the information on how many in the survey fell into each range, to construct variables
indicating whether an individual’s household income as in the first, second, or third quartile of
income range responses for the given survey year.
A number of the variables used required combining ANES survey responses with other data.
Relative Occupation Wage is constructed by combining individuals’ responses on their
occupation, which are coded according to 1980 Census Occupation Codes and matching that to
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) on average weekly wages by occupation from their
Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. This is identical to the procedure used by Scheve
and Slaughter (2001). However, because we have multiple years in the sample, I normalize these
by dividing each of the occupation wages by the average wage across occupations for a given
year.
To construct the Sector Tariff variable I first obtain data on applied tariff rates at the 4-digit
Standard Industrial Classification (duties divided by customs value of imports) reported in U.S.
trade data. These data, compiled by Robert Feenstra and co-authors from official U.S. Customs
data, can be found at the data page of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER):
www.nber.org/data. I then create a concordance between 4-digit SIC and the 3-digit Census
Industry Code reported in the ANES survey to match tariff data to the survey respondents’
reported industry/sector. (Concordance available upon request) The data construction for this
variable differs from Scheve and Slaughter (2001) in using applied tariff rates, rather then tariff
rate schedules, due to the relative inaccessibility of tariff rate schedules over my sample years.
Like Scheve and Slaughter (2001), I record a “0” tariff for all non-traded goods, as well as traded
service sectors.
Construction of the Net Export Share variable follows Scheve and Slaughter (2001) closely, but
was more involved than any of the other variables and relied on a variety of data sources due to
having to span many years of data. Import and export data by 4-digit SIC sector are available for
traded industries in agriculture, mining, and manufacturing from the NBER data mentioned
above. Data on imports and exports for traded service sectors come from an October 2001 Survey
of Current Business article titled “Cross-border trade in services, 1986-2000.” All other sectors
are considered non-tradeable and are assigned a “0” for their net export share. For the traded
sectors, we also needed a measure of sector size to normalize the net export data in order to create
our measure of Net Export Share. For manufacturing industries, we use the value of shipments of
a sector reported annually in the U.S. Census’ Annual Survey of Manufactures. For nonmanufacturing sectors, the Census has, at best, 5-year censuses which we used to interpolate and
extrapolate shipment values for years corresponding to our sample. These include the Census of
Mining, Census of Construction, and censuses of a variety of service sectors which one can access
at the following U.S. Census webpage: http://www.census.gov/svsd/www/economic.html. Ship-

38

ment value data for our agricultural sectors were proxied by “cash receipts” and were taken from
http://www.ers.usda.gov/Data/FarmIncome/FinfidmuXls.htm.
Finally, our measures of county exposure to trade, primarily County Exposure 1 in this paper,
follows Scheve and Slaughter’s (2001) methodology. I use the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
data provided in their Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages, which provides employment
by U.S. county by SIC sectors covering agriculture, manufacturing and mining. I then calculate
the employment share of the ten 2-digit SIC sectors with the highest tariffs in total county
employment – these ten sectors by Scheve and Slaughter’s calculations are SIC 21, 22, 23, 28, 30,
31, 32, 34, 38, and 39. County Exposure 2 is calculated in the same manner, except using the
fourteen 2-digit SIC sectors that Scheve and Slaughter find have the highest net imports – SIC 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, and 39.

39

