NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRIVATE EQUITY AND LONG-RUN INVESTMENT:
THE CASE OF INNOVATION
Josh Lerner
Morten Sørensen
Per Strömberg
Working Paper 14623
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14623

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2008

We thank Geraldine Kim, Jodi Krakower, Sanjey Sivanesan, and especially Sarah Woolverton for
assistance with this project. The World Economic Forum and Harvard Business School's Division
of Research provided financial support for this research. We are grateful for helpful comments from
participants in the American Economic Association, NBER Summer Institute, and Western Finance
Association meetings, the World Economic Forum "Global Economic Impact of Private Equity" project,
and various seminar participants, especially Bronwyn Hall, Laura Lindsey, Mark Schankerman and
John van Reenen. All errors and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Josh Lerner, Morten Sørensen, and Per Strömberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Private Equity and Long-Run Investment: The Case of Innovation
Josh Lerner, Morten Sørensen, and Per Strömberg
NBER Working Paper No. 14623
December 2008
JEL No. G24,G32,O31
ABSTRACT
A long-standing controversy is whether LBOs relieve managers from short-term pressures from public
shareholders, or whether LBO funds themselves are driven by short-term profit motives and sacrifice
long-term growth to boost short-term performance. We investigate 495 transactions with a focus on
one form of long-term activities, namely investments in innovation as measured by patenting activity.
We find no evidence that LBOs are associated with a decrease in these activities. Relying on standard
measures of patent quality, we find that patents granted to firms involved in private equity transactions
are more cited (a proxy for economic importance), show no significant shifts in the fundamental nature
of the research, and are more concentrated in the most important and prominent areas of companies'
innovative portfolios.

Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu
Morten Sørensen
Columbia University
Columbia Business School
Uris Hall 802
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ms3814@columbia.edu

Per Strömberg
Institute for Financial Research (SIFR)
Drottninggatan 89
SE-113 60 Stockholm
Sweden
and NBER
per.stromberg@sifr.org

1. Introduction
In his influential 1989 paper, “The Eclipse of the Public Corporation,” Michael
Jensen predicted that the leveraged buyout would emerge as the dominant corporate
organizational form. With its emphasis on corporate governance, concentrated ownership
and monitoring by active owners, strong managerial incentives, and efficient capital
structure, he argued that the buyout is superior to the public corporation with its dispersed
shareholders and weak governance. These features enable managers to make long-run
investments without catering to the market’s demands for steadily growing quarterly
profits, which Stein [1988] and others argue can lead firms to myopically sacrifice such
expenditures.
These claims excited much debate in the subsequent years. Critics questioned the
extent to which private equity creates value, suggesting that funds’ profits are instead
driven by favorable tax treatment of corporate debt, inducing senior executives of
publicly traded firms to accept deals that go against the interests of the shareholders, or
abrogating explicit and implicit contracts with workers (e.g., Shleifer and Summers
[1988]). More specifically, they queried whether private equity-backed firms actually
take a longer-run perspective than their public peers, pointing to practices such as special
dividends and “quick flips”—that is, initial public offerings (IPOs) of firms soon after a
private equity investment—that enable private equity groups to extract fees and raise new
funds more quickly. Given their incentives to undertake and exit deals, private equity
funds may well promote policies that boost short-run performance at the expense of more
sustained long-term growth.

2

Ultimately, the nature of the changes in corporate time horizons associated with
private equity transactions is an empirical question. In this paper, we present evidence
about one form of long-run investment, namely changes in innovative investments around
the time of private equity transactions. This presents an attractive arena to examine these
issues for a number of reasons. R&D expenditures have typical features of long-run
investments. Their costs are expensed immediately, yet the benefits are unlikely to be
observed for several years: several studies of managerial “myopia” (e.g., Meulbroek, et
al. [1990]) have examined R&D expenditures for this reason. Second, an extensive body
of work about the economics of technological change documents that patenting activity
and the characteristics of patents reflect the quality and extent of firms’ innovations,
allowing us to measure firms’ innovative output rather than merely R&D expenditures.
Since not all research expenditures are well spent, and some critics of major corporations
(e.g., Jensen [1993]) suggest that many corporate research activities are wasteful and
yield a low return, changes in R&D expenditures are more difficult to interpret. While
the literature acknowledges that patents are not a perfect measures of innovation—for
example, many inventions are protected as trade secrets—the use of patents as a measure
of innovative activity is widely accepted. Moreover, unlike many other measures of
corporate activity, patents are observable for both public and privately-held firms, which
is important when studying private equity transactions.
We examine the changes in patenting behavior of 495 firms with at least one
successful patent application filed in the period from three years before to five years after

3

being part of a private equity transaction.1 Our main finding is that firms pursue more
influential innovations, as measured by patent citations, in the years following private
equity investments. Firms display no deterioration in their research, as measured either by
patent “originality” and “generality,” and the level of patenting does not appear to change
after these transactions. We find some evidence that the patent portfolios become more
focused in the years after private equity investments. The increase in patent quality is
greatest in the patent classes where the firm has been focused historically and in the
classes where the firm increases its patenting activity after the transaction. The patterns
are robust to a variety of specifications and controls. Collectively, these findings are
largely inconsistent with the hypothesis that private equity-backed firms sacrifice longrun investments. Rather, private equity investments appear to be associated with a
beneficial refocusing of firms’ innovative portfolios.2
One limitation is that we cannot formally distinguish whether private equity
investors cause these changes or selectively invest in firms that are ripe for an increase in
innovative activity. We do not have an instrumental variable to help us resolve the
causation question. However, our findings related to the timing of the changes and the

1

Throughout this paper, when we refer to private equity transactions or investments, we are referring to

equity investments by professionally managed partnerships that are leveraged buyouts or other equity
investments with a substantial amount of associated indebtedness.
2

One anecdote consistent with this finding is from a practitioner who described to us a major corporation

where scientists and engineers received badges identifying the number of patent filings they had made.
Having a platinum or gold badge—awarded only to the most prolific inventors—was very prestigious. One
can imagine the effect of this incentive scheme on the filing of infra-marginal patents.

4

predominantly “old economy” nature of the firms in our sample suggest that selection
plays a relatively minor role in our results. Nonetheless, this alternative interpretation
should be kept in mind below.
There are two main related literatures. A number of studies consider the impact of
leverage, which is a prominent feature of private equity investments, on innovation.
These studies typically examine publicly traded firms with differing debt levels and reach
somewhat ambiguous conclusions. There is a clear association between greater leverage
and lower levels of R&D spending, as documented by Hall’s [1992] examination of over
1,200 manufacturing firms and Himmelberg and Petersen’s [1994] more targeted study of
170 small high-technology firms. However, the direction of causality is unclear. It is
difficult to determine whether debt leads to R&D reductions or if struggling firms simply
have more debt and less spending on innovation. Hao and Jaffe [1993], who carefully
grapple with this question, conclude that more debt reduces R&D spending only for the
very smallest firms. For larger firms, the causal relationship is ambiguous.
A second set of papers examines the impact of leveraged buyouts on innovative
activity generally. Focusing on buyouts of manufacturing firms during the 1980s, Hall
[1990] looks at 76 public-to-private transactions, i.e., transactions where a publicly traded
firm is purchased and taken private. She finds that the impact of these transactions on
cumulative innovation is likely slight. While these firms represent four percent of
manufacturing employment in 1982, they only account for one percent of the R&D
spending. Lichtenberg and Siegel [1990] examine 43 LBOs during the 1980s where the
firms participate in the Bureau of the Census’s survey about research activities prior to

5

and after the transaction. They find that these firms increase research spending after the
LBO, both on an absolute basis and relative to their peers.
There are a several reasons to revisit the questions in the earlier studies. The
private equity industry is more substantial today than it was in the 1980s. This growth not
only means that we have a larger sample, but changes in the industry–such as the
increased competition between and greater operational orientation of private equity
groups–suggest that the earlier relationships may no longer hold. In addition, transactions
involving technology-intensive industries have become more common recently. It is also
desirable to look beyond public-to-private transactions, since these transactions represent
a fairly small fraction of the private equity universe.3 Finally, the computerization of
patent records in the past two decades has substantially enhanced our ability to measure
and study the impact on innovation.
The plan of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we describe the construction of
the data-set. Section 3 reviews the methodology employed in the study. We present the
empirical analyses in Section 4. The final section concludes the paper and discusses
future work.

3

Strömberg (2008) shows that public-to-private transactions account for roughly 6% of all private equity-

sponsored LBO activity in terms of numbers, and roughly 27% in terms of total enterprise value of firms
acquired. Moreover, R&D intensive industries such as Information Technology, Telecom, Medical
equipment, and Biotech account for roughly 14% of all LBO activity in 2000-2007 (both on an equal- and
value-weighted basis), compared to around 7% in the pre-1990 period.

6

2. The Sample
To construct the dataset, we identify a comprehensive list of private equity
transactions and match the involved firms to U.S. patent records. This section describes
this process.
A. Identifying Private Equity Transactions
To identify private equity investments, we start from the Capital IQ database.
Since 1999, Capital IQ has been specialized in tracking private equity deals on a worldwide basis. Through extensive research, it attempts to “back fill” information about
investments prior to this period.4
Our starting point is the universe of transactions in Capital IQ that closed between
January 1980 and December 2005. We eliminate two types of transactions. First, Capital
IQ contains some transactions by private equity groups that did not entail the use of
leverage. Capital IQ captures a considerable number of venture capital investments by
traditional venture funds, and many buyout groups made some venture capital
investments in the late 1990s. Hence, we eliminate transactions that are not classified in
the relevant categories (which involve the phrases “going private,” “leveraged buyout,”
“management buyout,” “platform,” or slight variants of these). Second, the data contain a
number of transactions that do not involve a financial sponsor (i.e., a private equity firm),

4

Most data services tracking private equity investments were not established until the late 1990s. The most

geographically comprehensive exception, SDC VentureXpert, was primarily focused on capturing venture
capital investments until the mid-1990s.

7

and we eliminate these deals as well. While transactions in which a management team
takes a firm private using their own resources and/or bank debt are interesting, they are
not the focus of this study. We also remove investments by private equity groups in
companies that remain traded in public markets after the transaction (so called PIPEs).
After these eliminations, the data contain approximately eleven thousand transactions.
We supplement the Capital IQ data with data from Dealogic, another data vendor.
The Dealogic data often contain more comprehensive information about the
characteristics of the transactions, such as the multiple of earnings paid and the capital
structure employed. It also frequently records information about alternative names of the
firms, add-on acquisitions, and exits, which are useful for matching the data to patent
records. Finally, we use a variety of databases, including Capital IQ, SDC VentureXpert,
and compilations of news stories, to identify the characteristics of the transactions and the
nature of the exits.
B. Capturing Patent Data
We restrict our sample to firms with at least one successful patent application
from three years before the transaction to five year afterwards. We match the firms
involved in buyout transactions to their patenting records based on their name and
location. To do this, we employ the Harvard Business School (HBS) patent database.
The HBS data contain all electronic records of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO) through May 2007, but these records have been researched and consolidated,
which is important, since the names of assignees in the original USPTO database are
riddled with misspellings and inconsistencies. We search the HBS database for each of
8

the firms, using both the original name and any alternative names from Dealogic. The
firms’ location is contained in Capital IQ, and the patent data contain the location of both
the inventor(s) and the entity to which the patent is assigned at the time of issue, which is
typically the inventor’s employer. There are ambiguous situations where the names are
similar, but not exactly identical, or where the location of the patentee differs from the
records of Capital IQ. In these cases, we research the potential matches, using historical
editions of the Directory of Corporate Affiliations, Hoover’s Directory, the Factiva
database of news stories, and web searches. An observation is only included when we are
confident of a match. In total, we identify 496 entities with at least one patent grant in
the period from the calendar year starting three years before to the calendar year starting
five years after the year of the private equity transaction.5
The seemingly small number of patentees likely reflects two facts. First, in many
instances the companies are “old economy” firms in which intellectual property is less
central and which have a greater reliance on trade secrets or branding to protect
intellectual property. Second, the acceleration of private equity activity means that many
transactions are undertaken in 2004 and 2005. In cases of divisional buyouts, where new
firms are created, this leaves only a short time for observing any patenting activity. Even
if these new entities filed for patents, they are unlikely to be issued by May 2007, and we
only see patent applications that have been successful granted by the USPTO (not

5

We follow the literature in focusing only on utility patents, rather than other awards, such as design or

reissue awards. Utility patents represent about 99% of all awards (Jaffe and Trajtenberg [2002]).

9

pending applications). An additional concern arises since more than one-quarter (2,440)
of the 8,938 patents we identify are assigned to Seagate Technologies. In contrast, the
second largest patentee accounts for less than 5% of the sample. Since Seagate would
dominate our sample, we do not include it in the analyses. Thus, our final sample consists
of 6,938 patents from 495 firms.
In Table 1, Panel A, we first summarize the annual private equity investments and
exits. The transactions are concentrated in the second half of the 1990s and the first half
of the 2000s. This reflects both the increasing volume of transactions during these years
and the growing representation of technology firms, which have more patents. The
absence of transactions before January 1986 and after December 2005 reflects the
construction of the sample, which only includes buyout transactions completed during
this period. Exits, not surprisingly, lag the transactions by several years.
Panel A also displays the timing of the patent applications and awards. Each
patent is associated with two dates: the application date and the grant date. The
application dates extend from 1983 (three years before the first private equity investment)
to 2006. No applications from 2007 appear because we only examine successful
applications that have already been granted by the USPTO. Moreover, the number of
awards falls sharply in 2007, because we only identify grants through May 2007. The
growth in private equity investments and patent grants is also illustrated in Figure 1.
Panel B shows the distribution across types of transactions. Buyouts of corporate
divisions are most common, followed by private-to-private deals (investments in
independent unquoted entities), secondary deals (firms that were already owned by
10

another a private equity investor), and public-to-private deals. These patterns mirror
private equity investments more generally, as does the preponderance of exits by trade
sales (i.e., acquisitions by non-financial buyers), revealed in Panel C (see also Strömberg
[2008]).
Panel D presents the industry composition of firms and patents. Patents are
assigned to the primary industry of the parent, as reported by Capital IQ. In later
analyses, we use the patent-specific industry classification by the USPTO. Notably, no
single industry dominates and the sample contains a mixture of “old economy” (e.g., auto
parts and building products) and “new economy” (for instance, application software and
healthcare equipment) firms.
Panel E shows the distribution of the lag between the patent applications and the
private equity transactions, and it illustrates one of the challenges faced by our
methodology. The patents we observe are disproportionately applied for in the years
before and immediately after the buyout. This reflects the “back-end loaded” nature of
the sample and the lags associated with the patent granting process. Obviously, we cannot
see successful patents filed five years after a buyout undertaken in 2005, and we do not
yet observe most of the patents filed five years after a buyout in 2000, since patents, on

11

average, take more than 30 months to issue, with a substantial minority taking
considerably longer.6
We capture a variety of information about the patent awards. Over the past two
decades, several quantitative measures of patent quality have become widely adopted
(Jaffe and Trajtenberg [2002]; Lanjouw, Pakes and Putnam [1998]). These measures rely
on the citations either to or by the patent to characterize the nature of the grant (also
called forward and backward citations). Citations are extremely important in patent
filings, since they serve as “property markers” delineating the scope of the granted
claims.
Patents that are more cited are typically interpreted as having more impact or as
being more important than less cited patents. However, the distribution of citations is also
important. Patents that cite other patents in a broader array of technology classes are
often viewed as having more “originality.” Patents that are themselves cited by a more
technologically dispersed array of patents are viewed as having greater “generality.” Both

6

Statistics available at http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/com/annual/2006/50304_table4.html (accessed

October 21, 2007). It is natural to ask why we only examine successful patent applications, rather than all
patent filings. Unfortunately, the USPTO did not publish information on applications for patents filed prior
to November 2000, and even these data are imperfect: not all applications in the U.S. are published and
information on unsuccessful applications is often removed from the database of applications.

12

“originality” and “generality” have been interpreted as measures of the fundamental
importance of the research being patented.7
In addition to the truncation problem delineated above, we also face challenges
around divisional buyouts and cases where the target firm was subsequently acquired by
another corporation. In these instances, the firm’s patents may not be assigned to the
target but rather to the corporate parent. For instance, consider a divisional buyout. Many
of the patents applied for three years before the buyout are likely to be issued before the
private equity investment. In most instances, these will be assigned to the corporate
parent, and even some patents applied for by employees of the bought-out division that
are issued after the buyout may nonetheless be assigned to the corporate parent rather
than to the target corporation.
While we are unable to comprehensively solve this problem, we can partially
address this issue. In unreported analyses, we repeat the analyses, capturing some, though
not all, of the additional patents associated with bought-out firms that are units of larger
concerns during part of the period during the period from three years before to five years
after the investment. We identify all patents assigned to the corporate parent prior to the
private equity investment or assigned to the target’s acquirer after the private equity

7

Each patent is assigned to a primary (three-digit) patent class as well as a subclass using the USPTO’s

classification scheme. These classifications are important to the USPTO as they are used to search
subsequent awards. We follow the literature in computing these measures as one minus the Herfindahl
index of the primary patent class of the cited or citing patents. Thus, a higher measure of originality or
generality means that the patent is drawing on or being drawn upon by a more diverse array of awards.

13

investment that have the same assignee as one of the patents assigned to the target. We
believe that this criterion is conservative. It will lead us to some, though not all, of the
missing patents associated with the target, but identify few “false positives,” or patents
assigned to the parent that are not associated with the target. When we include these
supplemental patents in the analysis, the statistical and economic significance of the
results do not change materially.
3. Methodology
We focus on the quality, size, and structure of the company’s patent portfolios.
These features are characterized in four ways. First, following the literature, we use the
citation count as a measure of the quality, or economic importance, of the patent. The
citation count is the number of times the patent has been cited by other patents in the
calendar year of the patent grant and the three subsequent years (we will refer to this
period below as a “three-year window”). In particular, we examine whether citation
counts change for patents granted before and after the transaction. Second, we examine
whether the nature of the patents change after the transactions, measured by the patents’
“originality” and “generality,” which are computed using the dispersion of the patents
that cite or are cited by the awarded patent. Moreover, we examine variations in the
propensity of firms to file for patent protection before and after private equity
investments. Finally, we explore whether firms alter their patent filing practices after the
transactions. In particular, we examine whether the changes in patent quality can be
explained by firms increasingly patenting in certain areas.

14

These patterns provide some indications of the impact of private equity
transactions on long-run investments. If indeed we observe a higher quality of patent
filings, and a more targeted allocation of innovative activity, the pattern would be
consistent with the arguments postulated by Jensen [1989, 1993] about the salutatory
effects of private equity transactions. If we find a decrease in these measures of
innovative activity, the results would be consistent with the more skeptical views of these
transactions.
4. Analysis
A. Measuring Patent Importance
We begin by examining the quality of the patents in the sample. As noted above,
the most widely used measure in the literature is patent citations. Implementing this
measure requires deciding the number of years over which the citations are counted after
the patent is granted. There is a considerable amount of serial correlation in patent
citations, and patents that are highly cited in their first few years tend to be cited heavily
throughout. Moreover, since our sample is back-end loaded, we prefer a shorter window
to reduce the truncation of the sample at the end. Consequently, we use a three-year
period of citations to construct our citation counts variable, but the serial correlation

15

means that little information is lost by ignoring later citations.8 We examine the
sensitivity of the results to this choice in Section 4C below.
Table 2 presents the first comparison of patents filed for before and after the
transactions. The two panels treat patents filed in the calendar year of the private equity
investment differently. Focusing on Panel B, we observe that, on average, patents issued
before and in the year of the transactions are cited 1.99 times in the first three years after
they are granted. In contrast, patents issued after the transactions are cited 2.49 times over
the three years after the grant date, corresponding to a 25% increase in the number of
citations.
These comparisons are instructive but coarse, since they are based on the raw
citation counts. Figures 2 and 3 plot the number of citations in the year of the patent grant
and the three years thereafter for each of the patents in the sample, as well as the average
number of citations for matching patents. These matching patents are defined as follows.
For each patent in the sample, we determine all U.S. patents granted in the same year and
assigned to the same USPTO technology class.9 We observe a clear increase in the
average number of citations for the patents granted to the private equity-backed firms. In

8

In the USPTO data, patents are typically not cited prior to issuance. This reflects the fact that many

awards are not published prior to issuance and that the USPTO does not update its records of citations to
published patent applications to include the number of the ultimately granted patents. Thus, the grant date
is the beginning of the period when a patent can garner citations.
9

Patents are assigned during the application process to one of approximately one thousand technology

classes, as well as a more detailed subclass. These classifications are important, since they are the primary
way in which the USPTO identifies other relevant patents during the examination process.

16

part, this may reflect the increasing importance of patents in later years, but it may also
reflect two other changes. As the pace of patenting world-wide accelerates, the frequency
of patent citations has increased. Furthermore, as private equity investments in hightechnology industries become more common, the representation of patents in
technologically dynamic industries has grown. Figure 3 captures these trends, and this
figure shows a clear increase in the average number of citations, as well as the dispersion
of citations, for the matching patents. Hence, it is important to control for the timing of
the patent grant and its technology class.
To address this concern, Table 2 also reports the relative citation counts. These
are calculated as the number of citations in the calendar year of the grant and the three
calendar years thereafter (citation count) less the average number of citations during this
period to matching patents, which have the same grant year and primary USPTO class.
When comparing the relative citation counts, both the absolute and percentage increases
in the counts are as great as or greater than the increases for the raw, unadjusted citation
counts. For the measures of “originality” and “generality,” the economical and statistical
magnitudes are smaller when comparing the relative measures to the raw ones.
To provide a more nuanced view of the changes in the patent citations, we turn to
a multivariate analysis. A natural starting point is the Poisson count model. The defining
property of this model is that, for each patent i, the individual citation events are
independently distributed over the three years following the grant of the patent with
intensity λi . This implies that the three-year citation count is distributed according to the
Poisson distribution
17

exp(−λi )λi y
Pr (Yi = y ) =
y!

(1)

and the patent receives on average λi citations over the three years following the grant
date. To compare the citation intensities before and after the transactions, we estimate
the standard Poisson specification
ln ( λi ) = X i′β

(2)

Here Xi contains observed characteristics, including variables capturing whether the
application date is before of after the date of the transaction. Estimates are reported in
Table 3, but before discussing these estimates, a limitation of this model should be noted.
In the Poisson model, the citation intensity is a deterministic function of the observed
characteristics. However, there may be unobserved factors that affect the citation
intensity, and such factors would cause overdispersion of the citation counts relative to
the Poisson model (see Cameron and Trivedi [1998] and Hausman, Hall, and Griliches
[1984]).10 In our sample, when testing for overdispersion, the basic Poisson model is
consistently rejected. The Negative Binomial model is a generalization of the Poisson
model that addresses this problem. It includes an additional error term to capture
unobserved factors, and the distribution of the three-year citation count is a mixture of the

10

Another potential source of overdispersion is a disproportionate number of patents with zero citations

(see Cameron and Trivedi [1998]). We repeat the analysis using zero-inflated Poisson and Negative
Binomial models and find results that are consistently slightly stronger than the reported results.

18

Poisson distribution and the distribution of this error term. Using this model, we estimate
the specification
ln ( λi ) = X i′β + ε i

(3)

where ε i is an i.i.d. random variable with mean zero.

To control for changes in citation behavior and the industry composition of
companies in our sample, we control for the baseline citation intensities, using the
matching patents described above. This is implemented as follows. For each patent, we
calculate the average citation intensity of the matching patents as

γi =

Total Citations
Number of Matching Patents

(4)

where Total Citations is the number of citations received by all matching USPTO patents
during the three years following their grant dates. For patent i, γ i gives the baseline
citation intensity. By including this baseline in the estimation, the estimates control for
technology- and year-specific variations in the citation patterns. Hence, we estimate the
Poisson and Negative Binomial specifications
ln ( λi ) = X i′β + ln ( γ i )

(5)

ln ( λi ) = X i′β + ln ( γ i ) + ε i

(6)

and

19

To interpret the parameters in these specifications, note that when X i′β = 0 , the
citation intensity equals the baseline intensity for the matching group of patents. When

X i′β is greater (or smaller) than zero, the citation intensity is proportionally greater (or
smaller) than the intensity for the matched group. Finally, note that the reported
coefficients are incidence rates, reflecting the proportional effect of an increase in the
underlying characteristic. An incidence rate greater than one corresponds to a positive
coefficient and a positive effect of the characteristic on the intensity. For binary
variables, the reported incidence rate is the proportional increase in citation intensity
following an increase in the variable from zero to one.
The results are reported in Table 3. In the first four regressions, the independent
variables are indicators for the individual years of the patent filing relative to the year of
the private equity transaction. In each case, applications in the second through fifth year
after the transaction are cited significantly more frequently. To illustrate, in the first
regression, the coefficient of 1.786 for patents applied for three years after the transaction
implies that these patents garner 78.6% more citations than those applied for in the year
of the transaction. Except for the first specification, the coefficients in the first three rows
are not significantly different from one. The coefficients may suggest a decline in citation
intensity from years -3 or -2 to the year of the transaction (year 0 is the base year, with a
coefficient normalized to one), but this decline is an order of magnitude smaller than the
subsequent increase and less significant. For the relative citation intensities, this initial
decline largely disappears, meaning that patents filed for before the transaction are cited
about as frequently as the patents in the matching group. However, except for the year

20

immediately after the transaction, the coefficients for subsequent years are greater than
one and consistently significant, showing that patents filed after the private equity
investment are cited significantly more frequently than the patents in the matched group.
This pattern is found both for absolute and relative citation intensities, although it is
slightly more pronounced for the relative intensities that control for the timing and
industry composition of the patents.
In the fifth and sixth columns of Table 3, we use a more parsimonious
specification, in which the dummy variable Post equals one, if the patent was applied for
in the first through fifth year after the private equity investment. Again, this coefficient is
substantially greater than one and statistically highly significant, confirming our finding
that citation count increase following private equity transactions.
One concern is that buyout funds “cherry pick” companies and focus their
investments in companies with stronger innovation potential. In this case, our findings
may reflect this “selection” rather than the investors’ effect on the companies. While we
do not have an instrumental variable that would allow us to definitively resolve this issue,
we believe that this is a small concern for two reasons. As mentioned above, the majority
of the companies in our sample are “old economy” companies where innovation and
intellectual property are less central to their businesses. The innovation potential of these
companies is unlikely to be an important factor for the private equity funds when they
make investment decisions. Moreover, as observed in Table 3, the majority of the
increase in the citation rate comes in the second and third years after the transaction. Hall,
Griliches, and Hausman [1986] study the lag between R&D activities and patent

21

applications and find that they move virtually simultaneously, suggesting that most of the
change in the patent quality does not take place until sometimes after the transaction,
making it less likely to having influenced the investors’ initial decision to undertake the
investment.
The key results are robust to the use of fixed- and random-effects specifications,
as reported in Table 4. In particular, we find that in the four Poisson specifications (with
random and fixed effects, and the controls for individual years and the more
parsimonious specification with the post-investment dummy), the years after the private
equity investment are associated with consistently more significant patents. The
magnitudes of the coefficients do not change appreciably from those in Table 3. The
results are weaker but quantitatively similar when we employ the Negative Binomial
specification with fixed and random effects in columns five and six, due to the additional
flexibility of this model.

B. The Fundamental Nature of the Patents
One possibility is that the patents awarded to the firms are more economically
important, but the firms are sacrificing more basic or fundamental research that will not
yield commercial benefits for some time going forward.
We thus turn to examining the fundamental nature of the patents awarded to these
firms, using the measures of patent originality and generality described above. In Table 2,
we see that when we examine these measures, patents applied for after the private equity
investments are somewhat more general but less original than those applied for

22

beforehand. Once we adjust for the average generality and originality of awards in the
same patent class and with the same grant year, these differences essentially disappear.
A similar conclusion emerges from the regression analyses in Table 5. When we
run regressions akin to those in earlier tables (now employing an ordinary least squares
specification with patentee fixed effects), we find that the awards applied for after the
private equity investments are somewhat more general and less original.11 Once we use
the relative originality and generality by subtracting the averages for patents in the same
class and grant year as independent variables, the significance of these differences
essentially disappears. Thus, private equity investments do not seem to be associated with
a change in the fundamental nature of the (patented) research.

C. Robustness Checks of the Patent Quality Analyses
In undertaking the analyses of patent quality, we needed to make a number of
assumptions. In this section, we summarize the results of unreported supplemental
analyses, where we relax these assumptions.
One issue was posed by private equity investments where there was already an
existing investor. These investments are typically secondary buyouts, where one sponsor
buys out the stake of another. As a result, some patents may be double-counted: they may
be simultaneously prior to one transaction and after another. We repeat the analysis,

11

The sample size is smaller in regressions examining generality because computing this measure requires

that patents are subsequently cited.

23

employing these patents only the first time they appear and then dropping them entirely.
The results are little changed.
A second concern was posed by our measure of patent citations, which only uses
the citation count during the three years after the award. As mentioned above, the
number of citations to a given patent in each year is strongly serially correlated, so we
should identify the same patents as heavily cited ones whatever window we use. Using a
long window to identify citations enhances the accuracy of our identification of important
patents but reduces our sample size. We repeat the analysis, using citations through the
end of the second calendar year after the patent grant, as well as after the fourth year, and
the results are qualitatively similar.
A third concern has to do with what we term “cherry picking” in divisional
buyouts. In particular, we worried that corporate parents, when they determine which
pending patent applications will be assigned to the private equity-backed firm at the time
of the buyout, will select only low quality patents: the best patents, even if very relevant
to the target firm, will be retained by the corporate parent. This tendency might lead to an
apparent increase in quality in the patents applied for after the award, while all we are
really seeing is an unbiased sample of the unit’s patents.
We can partially address this concern by using the enhanced sample described
above. We also address this issue by rerunning the cross-tabulations and regressions
above while excluding the divisional buyouts from our sample. Since the buyouts in the
sub-sample are not “carved out” of firms, but involve the purchase of an entire

24

corporation, this problem should not be present. The key results are little changed as a
result of this shift.
Another robustness check is to examine the impact of the holding periods of the
private equity groups. If private equity groups only affect the companies in their
portfolios gradually, we might expect that firms that have been held by private equity
investors for longer periods would have a more dramatic increase in innovative output. In
unreported regressions analyzing patent citations, we find support for this hypothesis.
The pattern is no longer statistically significant, however, when we add firm fixed effects
to the specification.

D. Analysis of Level of Patenting
In the last three tables, we move from examining the quality of individual patents
to looking at the mixture of the overall patenting activity generated in the years before
and after the private equity investments.
A natural first question is how the level of patenting activity changes around the
time of a private equity investment. If the average number of successful patent filings
falls dramatically, our interpretation of the earlier finding that the importance of the
issued patents rises considerably might be quite different: it would suggest cutbacks of
unproductive innovative activities rather than repositioning of research from lower to
higher impact topics.
The analysis of patenting prior to and after the private equity investment is
problematic, however, for several reasons. While we can adjust for the truncation
25

associated with the timing of the patent applications (the fact that, in many cases, not all
patents in the five years after the private equity investments in our sample have been
applied for, much less awarded), it is very difficult to control for the assignment of
patents to corporate parents and the fact may of our companies are not stand-alone
entities in the years surrounding the transaction. As noted above, we will be able to see
some but not all of patents assigned to targets that were units of larger firms prior to
divisional buyouts or else were ultimately acquired by other concerns. When no patents
are observed in a year, it is difficult to say whether the company did not file for patents or
whether it was not operating as an independent entity. Consequently, we exclude
divisional buyouts for the analysis below. Moreover, we estimate specifications restricted
to buyouts taking place before 1999 and to companies that have patent filings in three
years before the transaction and five years after the transaction, suggesting that these
companies were independent entities during the entire period.
Moreover, the analysis faces an identification problem. As observed previously,
the composition of firms and the citation patterns change during our sample period,
making time controls important. Ideally, the specification would also include individual
company fixed effects as well as separate indicators for the years surrounding the
transactions. However, this specification is not identified, since the company fixed effect
defines the event time, which, together with the indicator for the year surrounding the
event, uniquely determines the year. (See Berndt and Griliches [1993] and Hall,
Mairesse, and Turner [2007] for detailed analyses of this problem). There is no entirely
satisfactory solution. We circumvent this problem by replacing the individual indicators
for the years surrounding the event with a single “Post” dummy. This identifies the
26

regression, but the identifying assumption is that the patenting levels are constant before
and after the transaction (i.e., the full transition takes place in the year of the transaction).
To verify the robustness of this assumption, we also report estimates of specifications
with a dummy that equals one from year two after the transaction (“Post Plus One”),
allowing for a more gradual effect. Note, that this identification problem is not a concern
for our analysis of citation counts, since we could use the citation rates for matching
patents to calculate the relative citation intensities, and in this way avoid including
individual year fixed effects.
Despite these limitations, in Table 6 we undertake an analysis of the level of
patenting. An observation is a target firm-year pair: that is, for each transaction in 2000
and before, we use nine observations for each transaction, from three years prior to five
years after the transaction. (For transactions in subsequent years, we use smaller number
of observations, reflecting our inability to see patent filings made after 2005.) The
dependent variable is the number of ultimately successful patent filings made in the given
calendar year.
The initial analysis, in the first two columns of Table 6, uses the entire sample.
These regressions, like all those reported in this table, include fixed effects for each year
and each firm to control for the differing propensity to patent. In these specifications, we
include a post dummy denoting observations after the buyout (or post plus one, as
explained above). The coefficients smaller than one on the post dummies suggest that
there is a decline in patenting activity following the buyouts.

27

We might worry, however, that this result is an artifact of our sample
construction: in particular, while we observe some successful patent filings in the final
years of the sample, there are likely to be many applications that were filed in these years
that had not been issued as of May 2007. (Recall the average patent pendency today is
about 30 months.) Because observations of patent filings in 2004 and 2005, where this
selection bias will be the worst, are disproportionately likely to be in the years after
private equity transactions, this effect may bias our counts of patent filings.
We thus repeat the analyses restricting the sample in two ways. First, in columns
3 and 4, we limit the analysis to private equity investments prior to 1999. In these
regressions, effects due to not-yet-issued patent applications should be much less severe.
Again, we include both firm and year fixed effects. The trend reverses and we find
significant positive effects of buyouts on patenting activity.
A remaining worry is that these results may be affected by some firms not being
stand-alone firms in the years before or after this transaction, even if the transaction itself
is not a divisional buyout. To ensure we have patenting information about the individual
firms in the years surrounding the transaction, specifications 5 and 6 condition on the
firm having received a patent both in the years three years before and five years after the
transaction: i.e., we require that the firm had received a patent both in Event Year -3 and
in Event Year +5. This reduces the concern that we do not observe patents for the firm in
the entire nine-year window. It also introduces a concern that companies that are standalone entities before and remain stand-alone entities after the transaction are special in
other ways, which may affect our results as well. In the two reported specifications (and

28

other unreported ones), we find that the post-buyout dummy is either weakly negative or
weakly positive.
Taken together, the results do not suggest any clear change in the amount of
patenting. While our conclusions must be somewhat tentative due to the discussed
difficulties in measurement, questions of causation, and the remaining uncertainties, the
absence of a consistent pattern is evident.

E. Analysis of Patent Portfolios
In the final section, we turn to considering the structure of the patent portfolios
constructed by these firms in the years before and after the private equity investments.
Since the previous section shows that the increase in patent importance is not driven by
private equity-backed firms reducing the number of filings, it is natural to wonder about
the dynamics behind the change in quality.
The initial analysis is presented in the final line in Panel A of Table 2. We
compare the Herfindahl index, or concentration measure, of the patent classes in which
firms’ awards are assigned. In this comparison, we restrict the sample to the 70 firms
with at least four patent applications in the sample filed prior to the private equity
investment and at least four patents applied for afterwards, in order to ensure the
computed measures of concentration are meaningful. When we undertake this
comparison, we find that firms after private equity investments are likely to have more
concentrated patent portfolios than beforehand, but the p-value is just above the 10%
threshold.

29

We can gain some additional insights as to how these more concentrated
portfolios emerge from the cross-tabulations in Table 7. In this table, each patent is an
observation, and we examine citations in the years prior to and after the private equity
investment, similar to the analysis in Table 2. We now divide the patents, though, in two
ways. In Panel A, we divide the observations into those whose primary patent class
assignment was more or less well populated prior to the investments: more precisely,
whether the firm, in applications filed in the three years prior to the private equity
transaction, had above or below the median share of patenting in that primary patent
class. In Panel B, we divide the patents by whether the share of patenting in the primary
class increased or decreased after the private equity transaction.
The cross-tabulations provide additional insights into the sources of the increase
in patent importance. First, we see from Panel A that awards in the firms’ focal
technologies—the areas where they had done a disproportionate amount of patenting
prior to the transaction—are more likely to increase in quality, whether raw or adjusted
patent counts are used. Panel B reveals that patent classes that experience an increase in
patenting share are also disproportionately where the increase in patent quality occurred.
These patterns are consistent with the private equity-backed firms focusing their
innovative investments in their core areas of strength and generating higher-impact patent
portfolios as a result.
Consistent results emerge from Table 8, which presents Negative Binomial
regression analyses akin to that in the fifth and sixth columns of Table 3. We now add
controls for the share of patenting in the primary patent class prior to the private equity

30

investment (in the first and second regressions) and for the change in the share of
patenting in that class from before to after the investment (in the third and fourth
regressions), as well as interactions between the patent measure and the dummy denoting
an award filed in the first through fifth years after the private equity investment. Because
the measures of patent shares may be misleading if there are just a handful of patents
assigned to a given firm, we undertake the analysis both using the entire sample (the first
and third columns) and only for patents of firms which had at least four patents prior to
the private equity investments and four after (the second and fourth columns).
The significantly greater than one coefficient for the variable “Share of Firm's
Pre-Investment Patents in Class” suggest that patents in the firms’ “core” areas—the
areas where there was more patenting prior to the private equity investment—are
disproportionately likely to be more cited ones. Moreover, the interaction term is greater
than one. Not only are these patents more important, but their impact appears to increase
substantially after the private equity investment.
The variable “Change in Firm’s Patent in Class Pre- and Post- Investment”
initially presents a more confusing picture. The coefficient is again greater than one—
areas where there is growth are more important ones—but the significance is only
marginal. In column 3, the interaction term is less than one, but when we restrict the
sample to those firms with four patents before and after the transaction (or similar cutoffs), the interaction becomes greater than one and significant. Once we exclude firms
with only modest patenting activity, an increase in patenting is associated with a sharp
(and highly significant) boost in patent quality.

31

Thus, these analyses suggest that private equity-backed firms tend to focus their
patent filings. This focusing process is not indiscriminate, however, but tends to
concentrate on core technologies. Moreover, the very process of focusing seems to lead
the patents in these classes to have greater impact after the private equity investment.
5. Conclusions
This paper examines the changes around the time of investments by private equity
groups on firms’ long-run investments, focusing on innovative activities. We examine
patents filed by 495 firms that received private equity backing between 1986 and 2005.
We find that patents of private equity-backed firms applied for in the years after the
investment are more frequently cited. These firms show no deterioration after the
investments in patent originality and generality, which proxy for the fundamental nature
of the research. The level of patenting does not appear to consistently change, and the
firms’ patent portfolios become more focused in the years after the private equity
investments. Breakdowns of the patenting patterns suggest that the areas where the firms
concentrate their patenting after the private equity investment, and the historical core
strengths of the firm, tend to be the areas where the increase in patent impact is
particularly great.
We see three avenues for future research into the relationship of private equity
and innovation. While each will require additional data collection, they should deepen
our understanding of this important phenomenon: First, is sensitivity of innovative
activity to market changes less for private equity-backed firms? Financial economists
have argued that the public market can give misleading signals to firms regarding
32

appropriate investments, but that managers nonetheless feel pressured to follow the
market’s lead (e.g., Baker, Stein, and Wurgler [2003]). If this argument is right, and
private equity investors provide insulation against these pressures, we might anticipate
that investments in innovation by private equity-backed firms would be less sensitive to
the shifts in market sentiment. To examine this, we will need to link the patent activity to
changes in financial and accounting performance.
Second, do private equity-backed firms differ in their management of patent
portfolios? In the past decade, U.S. patentees have needed to pay renewal fees in order to
keep their patents active. Some large firms appear to have an automatic policy of
renewing patents, even if the bulk of patents have little value. It would be interesting to
observe if private equity-backed firms are less likely to renew patents, particularly lightly
cited ones, than the norm.
Finally, how do sales of divisions affect innovation by the parent firms? Recent
research has suggested that firms that are more reliant on internal capital markets to
reallocate resources across divisions produce both a lesser number of innovations and
also less novel innovations (Seru [2007]). We can examine patenting not just by target
firms, but also of the corporate parents of these targets. Do the changes associated with
the sell-off of the target lead the (presumably more focused) parent firm to pursue a more
effective innovation strategy?

33

References
Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy Stein, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2003, “When Does the Market
Matter? Stock Prices and the Investment of Equity-Dependent Firms,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 118, 969-1006.
Berndt, Ernst R., and Zvi Griliches, 1993, “Price Indices for Microcomputers: An
Exploratory Study,” in Murry Foss, Marylin Manser, and Allan Young, editors,
Price Measurements and their Uses, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cameron, A. Colin and Pravin K. Trivedi, 1998, Regression Analysis of Count Data,
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press
Guo, Shourun, Edie Hotchkiss, and Weihong Song, 2007, “Do Buyouts (Still) Create
Value?” Unpublished Working Paper, Boston College and University of
Cincinnati.
Hall, Bronwyn, 1990, “The Impact of Corporate Restructuring on Industrial Research and
Development,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (1), 85-136.
Hall, Bronwyn, 1992, “Investment and Research and Development at the Firm Level:
Does the Source of Financing Matter?” Working Paper No. 4096, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Zvi Griliches, and Hausman, Jerry, 1986, “Patents and R and D: Is
There a Lag?” International Economic Review, 27, 265-283.
Hall, Bronwyn, Jacques Mairesse, and Laure Turner, 2007, “Identifying Age, Cohort, and
Period Effects in Scientific Research Productivity: Discussion and Illustration
Using Simulated and Actual Data on French Physicists,” Economics of
Innovation and New Technology, 16, 159-177
Hao, Kenneth Y., and Adam B. Jaffe, 1993, “Effect of Liquidity on Firms' R&D
Spending,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 2, 275-282.

34

Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Zvi Griliches, 1984, “Econometric Models for
Count Data with an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship,” Econometrica,
52, 909-938
Himmelberg, Charles P., and Bruce C. Petersen, 1994, “R&D and Internal Finance: A
Panel Study of Small Firms in High-Tech Industries,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 76, 38-51.
Jaffe, Adam B., and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2002, Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A
Window on the Knowledge Economy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jensen, Michael C., 1989, “The Eclipse of the Public Corporation,” Harvard Business
Review, 67 (September-October), 61-74.
Jensen, Michael C., 1993, “The Modern Industrial Revolution, Exit, and the Failure of
Internal Control Systems,” Journal of Finance, 48, 831-880.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Jeremy C. Stein, 1993, “The Evolution of Buyout Pricing and
Financial Structure in the 1980s,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 313-357.
Lanjouw, Jean O., Ariel Pakes, and Jonathan Putnam, 1998, “How to Count Patents and
Value Intellectual Property: The Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data,”
Journal of Industrial Economics, 46, 405-432.
Lichtenberg, Frank R., and Donald Siegel, 1990, “The Effects of Leveraged Buyouts on
Productivity and Related Aspects of Firm Behavior,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 27, 165-194.
Muelbroek, Lisa K., Mark L. Mitchell, J. Harold Mulherin, Jeffry M. Netter, and Annette
B. Poulsen, 1990, “Shark Repellents and Managerial Myopia: An Empirical
Test,” Journal of Political Economy, 98, 1108-1117
Seru, Amit, 2007, “Do Conglomerates Stifle Innovation?” Unpublished Working Paper,
University of Chicago.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Lawrence Summers, 1988, “Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers,”
in Alan J. Auerbach, editor, Corporate Takeovers: Causes and Consequences.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
35

Stein, Jeremy C., 1988, “Takeover Threats and Managerial Myopia,” Journal of Political
Economy, 96, 61-80.
Strömberg, Per, 2008, “The New Demography of Private Equity,” Unpublished Working
Paper, Swedish Institute for Financial Research.

36

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Panel A: Year of Private Equity Investments and Exits with Patenting in [-3,+5] Window
LBOs

Patents

Transactions Exits

Applications Grants

1983

N/A

N/A

52

0

1984

N/A

N/A

52

17

1985

N/A

N/A

56

55

1986

1

0

60

58

1987

0

0

42

54

1988

0

0

37

56

1989

2

0

25

48

1990

0

0

19

23

1991

0

0

17

21

1992

0

0

16

14

1993

3

0

30

19

1994

1

0

64

20

1995

11

0

99

30

1996

17

1

153

57

1997

24

4

313

79

1998

32

3

456

166

1999

53

2

593

309

2000

44

5

805

412

2001

37

3

968

587

2002

49

6

1035

683

2003

70

22

869

680

2004

87

29

462

819

2005

64

41

155

801

2006

N/A

47

20

996

2007

N/A

25

0

394

Panel B: Type of Private Equity Investments with Patenting in [-3,+5] Window
Number of
Investments
64
127
219
81
4

Public-to-Private
Private-to-Private
Divisional
Secondary
Other

37

Panel C: Type of Private Equity Exits with Patenting in [-3,+5] Window
Number of
Investments
191
59
38
150
3
54

No Exit
Secondary
Initial Public Offering
Trade Sale
Bankruptcy
Other/Unknown

Panel D: Industry Distribution of Private Equity Investments with Patenting in [-3,+5] Window and
Associated Patents
Share of Industry
Investments
Patents
9.9%
8.3%
5.2%
11.4%
4.8%
4.8%
4.8%
5.8%
4.2%
1.9%
3.4%
3.2%
3.0%
4.5%
2.6%
3.0%
2.4%
4.8%
2.0%
1.6%

Industrial Machinery
Auto Parts and Equipment
Commodity Chemicals
Electrical Equipment Manufacturers
Building Products
Application Software
Leisure Products
Healthcare Equipment
Specialty Chemicals
Electrical Components and Equipment

Panel E: Lag between Private Equity Investment and Patent Application

Three Years Prior
Two Years Prior
One Year Prior
Year of Investment
One Year After
Two Years After
Three Years After
Four Years After
Five Years After

Number of Applications
1,131
1,163
1,121
925
721
531
360
264
182

NOTE: The sample consists of 6,398 patents awarded through May 2007 to 495 firms that received private
equity backing between 1986 and 2005. Firms are only included in the sample if they applied for patents in
the period between three years before and five years after the private equity investment.

38

Table 2: Univariate Tests of Differences of Patents in Sample
Panel A: Comparing Patents Filed in Years [-3,-1] and [0,5]

Citations
Relative Citations
Generality
Relative Generality
Originality
Relative Originality
Herfindahl Index of
Patent Classes

Mean
[-3, 1]
2.015
0.267
0.691
0.002
0.513
-0.049
0.294

Obs. Mean [0,5] Obs.
[2494]
2.277 [1713]
[2494]
0.530 [1713]
[2033]
0.708 [1383]
[2032]
-0.006 [1381]
[3383]
0.502 [2963]
[3281]
-0.050 [2808]
[70]

0.328

[70]

Diff.
0.262
0.262
0.017
-0.008
-0.011
-0.001

p-val. tTest
0.028
0.028
0.101
0.390
0.110
0.853

0.034

0.113

Panel B: Comparing Patents Filed in Years [-3,0] and [1,5]

Citations
Relative Citations
Generality
Relative Generality
Originality
Relative Originality

Mean
[-3,0]
1.987
0.240
0.695
0.004
0.515
-0.048

Obs. Mean [1,5] Obs.
[3076]
2.486 [1131]
[3076]
0.739 [1131]
[2503]
0.706 [913]
[2501]
-0.016 [912]
[4301]
0.495 [2045]
[4166]
-0.052 [1923]

Diff.
0.499
0.499
0.011
-0.020
-0.020
-0.004

p-val. ttest
0.000
0.000
0.332
0.047
0.007
0.594

NOTE: The sample consists of 6398 patents awarded through May 2007 to 495 firms that received private
equity backing between 1986 and 2005. Citation counts are calculated for the subsample of 4207 patents
awarded before December 2004. Firms are only included in the sample if they applied for patents in the
period between three years before and five years after the private equity investment. The comparisons in
the table above are made at the individual patent level, except for the calculation of the Herfindahl index of
firms’ patent classes, which is done on the firm level. The latter calculations are only undertaken if the firm
had at least four patents applied for before and four patents applied for after the private equity investment.

39

Table 3: Count Models of Citation Intensity
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Absolute Relative Absolute Relative Absolute
Intensity Intensity Intensity Intensity Intensity
Negative Negative Negative
Poisson Poisson
Binomial Binomial Binomial
Event Year -3
1.089** 1.012
1.089
1.035
(0.041)
(0.038)
(0.085)
(0.077)
Event Year -2
1.107*** 1.037
1.107
1.060
(0.043)
(0.040)
(0.090)
(0.082)
Event Year -1
1.029
1.021
1.029
1.024
(0.041)
(0.041)
(0.085)
(0.081)
Event Year 1
1.042
1.064
1.042
1.092
(0.048)
(0.049)
(0.099)
(0.099)
Event Year 2
1.300*** 1.401*** 1.300** 1.375***
(0.062)
(0.067)
(0.135)
(0.135)
Event Year 3
1.786*** 1.942*** 1.786*** 1.919***
(0.088)
(0.095)
(0.210)
(0.213)
Event Year 4
1.574*** 1.750*** 1.574*** 1.714***
(0.093)
(0.104)
(0.219)
(0.225)
Event Year 5
1.473*** 1.805*** 1.473** 1.787***
(0.120)
(0.147)
(0.281)
(0.323)
Post LBO
1.251***
Dummy
(0.064)
Observations
4207
4205
4207
4205
4207
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

(6)
Relative
Intensity
Negative
Binomial

1.381***
(0.067)
4205

NOTE: The sample consists of 4207 patents awarded through December 2004 to 495 firms that received
private equity backing between 1986 and 2005. Firms are only included in the sample if they applied for
patents in the period between three years before and five years after the private equity investment. The unit
of observation is each patent in the sample with at least three years to be cited. The dependent variable is
the number of citations received in the three years after the award. Reported coefficients are incidence
rates. A coefficient greater than one corresponds to a positive relationship between the explanatory variable
and the citation intensity.

40

Table 4: Relative Citation Intensity with Patentee Fixed and Random Effects
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Negative Negative
Poisson
Poisson
Poisson
Poisson
Binomial Binomial
Model
Model
Model
Model
Model
Model
Fixed
Random
Fixed
Random
Fixed
Random
Effects
Effects
Effects
Effects
Effects
Effects
Event Year -3
1.145*** 1.131***
1.107
1.080
(0.048)
(0.046)
(0.072)
(0.068)
Event Year -2
1.192*** 1.185***
1.119*
1.105
(0.050)
(0.049)
(0.073)
(0.070)
Event Year -1
1.080*
1.069
1.027
1.015
(0.045)
(0.045)
(0.068)
(0.066)
Event Year 1
1.045
1.044
0.912
0.924
(0.050)
(0.050)
(0.072)
(0.071)
Event Year 2
1.446*** 1.426***
1.037
1.041
(0.073)
(0.072)
(0.093)
(0.090)
Event Year 3
1.779*** 1.761***
1.210**
1.207**
(0.093)
(0.092)
(0.118)
(0.115)
Event Year 4
1.720*** 1.703***
1.235*
1.242*
(0.110)
(0.108)
(0.144)
(0.140)
Event Year 5
1.689*** 1.704***
1.218
1.246
(0.147)
(0.146)
(0.196)
(0.196)
Post LBO Dummy
1.244*** 1.243***
(0.035)
(0.034)
Observations
4005
4205
4005
4205
4005
4205
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
NOTE: The sample consists of 4207 patents awarded through December 2004 to 495 firms that received
private equity backing between 1980 and 2005. Firms are only included in the sample if they applied for
patents in the period between three years before and five years after the private equity investment The unit
of observation is each patent in the sample with at least three years to be cited. The dependent variable is
the number of citations received in the three years after the award. Reported coefficients are incidence
rates. A coefficient greater than one corresponds to a positive relationship between the explanatory variable
and the citation intensity.

41

Table 5: OLS Estimates of Originality and Generality with Patentee Fixed Effects
•

Event Year -3
Event Year -2
Event Year -1
Event Year 1
Event Year 2
Event Year 3
Event Year 4
Event Year 5
Post LBO Dummy
Constant

(1)
Originality
0.029**
(0.012)
0.002
(0.012)
-0.004
(0.012)
-0.020
(0.013)
-0.021
(0.015)
-0.020
(0.017)
-0.041**
(0.019)
-0.095***
(0.022)

(2)
(3)
Relative
Originality Originality
0.002
(0.012)
-0.011
(0.012)
-0.010
(0.012)
-0.011
(0.013)
-0.001
(0.014)
0.003
(0.017)
0.005
(0.019)
-0.048**
(0.023)
-0.033***
(0.008)
-0.044*** 0.519***
(0.008)
(0.004)
6089
6346

(4)
(5)
Relative
Originality Generality
-0.115***
(0.017)
-0.078***
(0.016)
-0.045***
(0.017)
0.036*
(0.019)
0.029
(0.022)
0.108***
(0.024)
0.120***
(0.029)
0.056
(0.036)
-0.002
(0.008)
-0.049*** 0.731***
(0.004)
(0.012)
6089
3416

0.513***
(0.009)
Observations
6346
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

(6)
(7)
(8)
Relative
Relative
Generality Generality Generality
-0.027*
(0.016)
-0.025
(0.016)
-0.022
(0.016)
0.002
(0.019)
-0.022
(0.021)
0.006
(0.023)
-0.008
(0.028)
-0.108***
(0.035)
0.114*** 0.007
(0.012)
(0.012)
0.017
0.667*** -0.003
(0.012)
(0.005)
(0.005)
3413
3416
3413

NOTE: The sample consists of 6398 patents awarded through May 2007 to 495 firms that received private equity backing between 1980 and 2005.
Firms are only included in the sample if they applied for patents in the period between three years before and five years after the private equity
investment The unit of observation is each patent in the sample for which originality and generality can be computed. The dependent variables are the
originality and generality of the patents. Relative originality and generality are computed by subtracting the average originality and generality for
patents in the same year and class.

42

Table 6: Poisson Model of Patent Counts with Fixed Effects (excluding divisional buyouts)
(1)

(2)

Full Sample

(3)

(4)

Before 1999

Year and Year and
Year and Year and
Firm FEs Firm FEs
Firm FEs Firm FEs
Event Year 0 1.025
1.011
1.407*** 1.417***
(0.046) (0.047)
(0.179)
(0.185)
Event Year 1
0.893*
1.533***
(0.052)
(0.239)
Post
0.883**
1.534***
(0.051)
(0.238)
Post Plus One
0.841**
1.578**
(0.061)
(0.311)
Observations
3468
3468
819
819
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

(5)
(6)
Early and Late
Patenting
Year and
Firm Year and
FEs Firm FEs
0.997
1.039
(0.058) (0.063)
0.841**
(0.068)
0.865*
(0.068)
1.013
(0.103)
1181
1181

NOTE: The sample consists of 6398 patents awarded through May 2007 to 495 firms that received private equity backing between 1980 and 2005.
Firms are only included in the sample if they applied for patents in the period between three years before and five years after the private equity
investment The unit of observation is each patent in the sample for which originality and generality can be computed. The dependent variables are the
originality and generality of the patents. The table reports incidence rate ratios. Reported coefficients are incidence rates. A coefficient greater than one
corresponds to a positive relationship between the explanatory variable and the citation intensity.

43

Table 7: Univariate Tests of Differences in Patent Citations

Panel A: Comparing Patents in Well- and Poorly Populated Patent
Classes Prior to the PE Investment
Mean for Mean for p-Value, t[-3,0]
[+1,+5]
Test
Obs.
Citations in First Three Years
In Well-Populated Classes

2.17

3.60

0.000

2386

In Poorly Populated Classes

1.68

1.69

0.956

1821

0.42

1.86

0.000

2386

-0.06

-0.06

0.956

1821

Relative Citations in First 3 Years
In Well-Populated Classes
In Poorly Populated Classes

Panel B: Comparing Patents in Growing and Shrinking Patent Classes
Around Time of the PE Investment
Mean for Mean for p-Value, t[-3,0]
[+1,+5]
Test
Obs.
Citations in First Three Years
In Growing Classes

2.50

2.76

0.240

1754

In Shrinking Classes

1.77

1.72

0.819

2456

In Growing Classes

0.75

1.01

0.240

1754

In Shrinking Classes

0.02

-0.02

0.819

2456

Relative Citations in First 3 Years

NOTE: The sample consists of 6398 patents awarded through May 2007 to 495 firms that received private
equity backing between 1980 and 2005. Firms are only included in the sample if they applied for patents in
the period between three years before and five years after the private equity investment The comparisons in
the table above are made at the individual patent level. We divide the patents by whether the share of the
firm’s patents prior to the private equity investment in the given patent class was above or below the
median, and by whether the share of the firm’s patents in the class after the buyout was greater or less or
equal to that prior to the transaction.

44

Table 8: Negative Binomial Regressions with Controls for Patent Class share
(1)

(2)
(3)
More
Full
Full
Patenting
Sample
Sample
Sample
Post LBO Dummy
0.989
0.952
1.414***
(0.066)
(0.073)
(0.077)
Share of Firm's Pre-Investment 1.283*** 1.732***
Patents in Class
(0.118)
(0.229)
Post LBO * Share…
3.669*** 4.389***
(0.657)
(0.987)
Change in Firm’s Patent in
1.207**
Class Pre- and PostInvestment
(0.109)
Post LBO * Change…
0.570***
(0.106)
Observations
4063
2883
4063
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

(4)
More
Patenting
Sample
1.327***
(0.081)

1.323

(0.288)
2.666**
(1.214)
2883

NOTE: The sample consists of 6398 patents awarded through May 2007 to 495 firms that received private
equity backing between 1980 and 2005. Firms are only included in the sample if they applied for patents in
the period between three years before and five years after the private equity investment The unit of
observation is each patent class in which a firm received a patent in the three calendar years prior to that of
the investment. The dependent variable is the share of patents in that class after the investment. The table
reports incidence rate ratios.

45

0

0

200

20

40
LBOs

Patents granted
400
600

60

800

80

1000

Figure 1: Number of Private Equity Investments and Patents Granted in Sample

1985

1990

1995
Year
Patents granted

2000

2005
LBOs

NOTE: The sample consists of 6398 patents awarded through May 2007 to 495 firms that received private
equity backing between 1980 and 2005. Firms are only included in the sample if they applied for patents in
the period between three years before and five years after the private equity investment

46

0

3-Year Citation Count
20
40

60

Figure 2: Citations in First Three Years, by Grant Year of Patent

1985

1990

1995
Year

2000

2005

NOTE: The sample consists of 6398 patents awarded through May 2007 to 495 firms that received private
equity backing between 1980 and 2005. Firms are only included in the sample if they applied for patents in
the period between three years before and five years after the private equity investment

47

0

Mean Citations for Patents in Class and Grant Year
2
4
6
8
10

Figure 3: Citations in First Three Years for Patents in Same Class and Grant Year

1985

1990

1995
Grant Year

2000

2005

NOTE: The sample consists of 6398 patents awarded through May 2007 to 495 firms that received private
equity backing between 1980 and 2005. Firms are only included in the sample if they applied for patents in
the period between three years before and five years after the private equity investment

48

1

1.5

2

2.5

Figure 4: Citation Intensities from Negative Binomial Regression

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

Event Year
Confidence Interval

Point Estimate

NOTE: The sample consists of 6398 patents awarded through May 2007 to 495 firms that received private
equity backing between 1980 and 2005. Firms are only included in the sample if they applied for patents in
the period between three years before and five years after the private equity investment The chart presents
the incidence rate ratios and two standard deviation confidence intervals from the patent timing variables in
the fourth regression in Table 3.

49

