NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE PERILS OF THE LEARNING MODEL FOR MODELING ENDOGENOUS TECHNOLOGICAL
CHANGE
William D. Nordhaus
Working Paper 14638
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14638

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2009

This study expands on earlier presentations at the Energy Modeling Forum, the Santa Fe Institute,
and the National Academies. I am grateful for comments from Christopher Magee, Nebosja Nakicenovic,
and John Weyant. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by William D. Nordhaus. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Perils of the Learning Model For Modeling Endogenous Technological Change
William D. Nordhaus
NBER Working Paper No. 14638
January 2009
JEL No. D83,O13,O3
ABSTRACT
Learning or experience curves are widely used to estimate cost functions in manufacturing modeling.
They have recently been introduced in policy models of energy and global warming economics to
make the process of technological change endogenous. It is not widely appreciated that this is a dangerous
modeling strategy. The present note has three points. First, it shows that there is a fundamental statistical
identification problem in trying to separate learning from exogenous technological change and that
the estimated learning coefficient will generally be biased upwards. Second, we present two empirical
tests that illustrate the potential bias in practice and show that learning parameters are not robust to
alternative specifications. Finally, we show that an overestimate of the learning coefficient will provide
incorrect estimates of the total marginal cost of output and will therefore bias optimization models
to tilt toward technologies that are incorrectly specified as having high learning coefficients.

William D. Nordhaus
Yale University, Department of Economics
28 Hillhouse Avenue
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
william.nordhaus@yale.edu

I. The Fundamental Identification Problem
Models of learning and experience have a long history in studies of
manufacturing productivity.2 Because of their perceived successes in
technological forecasting, they have recently been introduced in policy models of
energy and global warming economics to make the process of technological
change endogenous. This approach has serious dangers. The present note has
three points. First, it shows that there is a fundamental statistical identification
problem in trying to separate learning from exogenous technological change and
that the estimated learning coefficient will generally be biased upwards. Second,
we present two empirical tests that illustrate the potential bias in practice and
show that learning parameters are not robust to alternative specifications.
Finally, we show that an overestimate of the learning coefficient will generally
underestimate the total marginal cost of output; because of this underestimate,
optimization models tend to tilt toward technologies that are incorrectly
specified as having high learning coefficients.

The literature on learning curves is vast, going back more than a century, and no
single reference can adequately capture the major issues. The original concept of an
experience curve was documented with telegraph operators in W.L. Bryan and N.
Harter, “Studies on the Telegraphic Language: The Acquisition of a Hierarchy of
Habits,” Psychology Review, 6:345-75, 1899. Two particularly influential articles were T.P.
Wright, “Factors Affecting the Cost of Airplanes,” Journal of Aeronautical Sciences, Vol. 3,
No. 4, 122-128, 1936; and K. J. Arrow, “The Economic Implications of Learning-ByDoing,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 29, 155-173, 1961. A recent comparison of
alternative approaches is in Boyan Jovanovic and Yaw Nyarko, “A Bayesian Learning
Model Fitted to a Variety of Empirical Learning Curves,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity. Microeconomics, (1995), pp. 247-305. A comprehensive survey of learning curves
is contained in Louis E. Yelle, “The Learning Curve: Historical Review and
Comprehensive Survey,” Decision Sciences, 10, 302-328, 1979).
2

Page 2

The basic idea is that productivity improves or costs decline as workers or
firms gain experience with a production process. While there can be little doubt
that productivity benefits from experience, the exact mechanism is poorly
understood. In particularly, it is unclear whether the learning is embodied in
individual workers and firms, whether there are interindustry or international
spillovers, and whether the improvements lead to durable technological changes,
and even whether the learning effects can be distinguished from other
technological changes.
In this section, we focus on the problem of identifying differences in
productivity due to learning from exogenous changes. We begin by showing
why it is impossible without further identifying assumptions to distinguish
learning from exogenous technological change, and why the learning coefficient
is generally biased upwards. To simplify for this exposition, we assume that all
processes are exponential. Output (Qt ) is assumed to grow at constant growth
gt
rate g, so Qt = Q0 e . Cumulative output at time t (Yt ) is therefore:

(1)

Yt =

t

∫

Q0 e gv dv = Q0 e gt / g

v =−∞

Taking the logarithmic derivative of (1) shows that the growth rate of Yt is g.

The experience curve is assumed to have a true experience coefficient, b. In
addition, there is an assumed constant rate of exogenous technological change at
rate h. The cost function is therefore:

(2)

Ct = C0 e − htYt −b
Page 3

“Exogenous technological change” in this context denotes all sources of cost
declines other than the learning-curve-determined technological change. It
would include inter alia spillovers from outside the industry, the returns to
research and development, economies of scale and scope, as well as exogenous
fundamental inventions.

Assume that prices are proportional to current instantaneous marginal
cost, so the rate of decline in cost (ct ) equals the decline in price ( pt ) , which is
given by:

(3)

pt = ct = h + bgt

Because marginal cost is constant, price is under these assumptions
exogenous to current demand. Demand is determined by a demand function
with constant price elasticity (ε ) , elasticity of per capita demand with respect to
aggregate output ( λ ) , where the growth in aggregate per capita output is wt ,
and constant population growth is n. These yield the growth in output (demand)
as:

(4)

gt = ε pt + λ wt + n

We can substitute zt = λ wt + n = the autonomous (non-price-induced) growth
rate of demand. Solving (3) and (4), we get the following reduced-form equations
for the rate of cost (price) decline and the rate of output growth. Since the growth
rates are constant, we suppress the time subscripts. Price decline is:

Page 4

p = h + bg = h + b ( ε p + z )
or
p=

(5)

h + bz
1 − bε

which is the equation for cost (price). The equation for output growth is:
g = ε ( h + bg ) + z
or
g=

(6)

εh + z
1 − bε

From equations (5) and (6) we can calculate the slope of the behavioral
learning curve, β. This is equal to p/g, or:

β = p/g =

(7)

h + bz
= b(1 + φ )
εh + z

where
(8)

φ=

h(1 − ε b )
b(ε h + z)

Note how difficult it would be to separate the true learning parameter (b)
from the tangle of coefficients in (7).3 To obtain the true learning parameter, we

E. R. Berndt, The Practice of Econometrics: Classic and Contemporary, Addison-Wesley,
New York, 1991 is a useful survey of the literature and econometric issues. Zvi
Griliches, “R&D and Productivity: Econometric Results and Measurement Issues,” in P.
Stoneman (Ed.), Handbook of Economics on Innovation and Technological Change, Blackwell,
Oxford, 1995 reviews the more general questions of the econometrics of technological
change.

3

Page 5

would need to have reliable estimates of the rate of exogenous technological
change, the demand elasticity, and the rate of autonomous growth of demand.
Furthermore, the empirical experience parameter will be unbiased (β = b)
only when exogenous technological change is zero (h = 0). It will be biased if h ≠
0. The size of the bias is determined by the sign of (1 - ε b). For demand
elasticities that are relatively low (less than 4), we would expect that ε b > 1, in
which case the bias is upwards.

A numerical example will illustrate the result. A typical industry might
have a price elasticity of ε = 1, an exogenous demand growth of z = 0.04 per year,
and a rate of exogenous technological change of 0.01 per year. With a zero
learning effect (true b = 0), we have from (7) that:

β=

0.01 + 0 × 0.04 0.01
=
= 0.2
1 × 0.01 + .04 0.05

In this case, therefore, the empirical learning coefficient is 0.2 even though the
actual learning coefficient is zero.

Next, change the assumption to add a true experience curve coefficient of b
= 0.25. Then the empirical learning coefficient becomes:

β=

0.01 + 0.25 × 0.04 0.02
=
= 0.4
1 × 0.01 + .04
0.05

Page 6

In this case, the empirical experience coefficient is biased upwards from 0.25 to
0.4.
The general conclusion is that because of the interaction of demand, output
growth, exogenous technological change, and learning, behavioral learning
curves will generally have an upward biased in estimated learning coefficients.
The only general case in which the coefficient is unbiased is when exogenous
(non-learning) technological change is zero.
II.

Some Empirical Tests

We can take actual data on output and productivity to show the difficulty
in measuring learning from historical data. For a first example, we take U.S. data
on multifactor productivity in the non-farm business sector for the period 19482007. While this is a highly aggregated data set, it has very high quality input
and output data that are constructed by U.S. statistical agencies. The data are
available at www.bls.gov.

I construct cumulative output for the period 1800 to 2007. These are based
on government data for 1929 to 2007 and extrapolate backwards from 1929 using
an assumed constant growth rate of 3.9 percent per year. I then estimate bivariate
learning functions and exogenous technological change rates. The estimated rate
of exogenous technological change for the 1948-2007 period 0.0105 (+ .00038). A
learning equation without exogenous technological change has a learning
coefficient of 0.278 (+ 0.0093). If we combine the two variables, learning and time,
the learning coefficient rises to the implausibly high level of 2.1491 (+ 0.27). This
simple example shows that learning models generally have coefficients that are
not robust to specification changes.
Page 7

As a second example, we estimate learning parameters for 34 major
industry groups.4 For this purpose, we use data on industry output from the U.S.
national income and product accounts. We select only those industries where the
output and prices are “well measured.”5

The basic approach is to assume that output is produced by a constant
returns to scale production function either with or without learning, as above.
Average hourly earnings (AHE) are assumed to represent a reasonable proxy for
the cost of production with unchanging technology.6 Prices are proportional to
average instantaneous costs, and learning is assumed to be excluded from

These are Accommodation and food services; Administrative and waste management
services; Air transportation; Apparel and leather and allied products; Broadcasting and
telecommunications; Chemical products; Computer and electronic products; Computer
systems design and related services; Electrical equipment, appliances, and components;
Fabricated metal products; Farms; Food and beverage and tobacco products; Food
services and drinking places; Forestry, fishing, and related activities; Furniture and
related products; Information and data processing services; Machinery; Motion picture
and sound recording industries; Motor vehicles, bodies and trailers, and parts;
Nonmetallic mineral products; Oil and gas extraction; Paper products; Petroleum and
coal products; Plastics and rubber products; Primary metals; Printing and related
support activities; Publishing Industries (includes software); Rail transportation; Retail
trade; Securities, commodity contracts, and investments; Textile mills and textile
product mills; Transportation and warehousing; Truck Transportation; Utilities;
Wholesale trade; and Wood products.

4

The notion of well-measured industries is discussed in William Nordhaus, “Baumol's
Diseases: A Macroeconomic Perspective,” Berkeley Journal of Macroeconomics, Volume 8,
Issue 1, 2008, Article 9, pp. 1-37.
5

The reference on the use of wages as a proxy for technological change is analyzed in
William Nordhaus, “Baumol's Diseases: A Macroeconomic Perspective,” Berkeley Journal
of Macroeconomics, Volume 8, Issue 1, 2008, Article 9, pp. 1-37.
6

Page 8

pricing, or if included to be a multiplicative factor. 7 Under these assumptions,
the rate of change in the ratio of the AHE to the product price (call this the real
price decline) will equal the rate of cost decline given by equation (2). We can
then examine the relationship between the real price decline and factors such as
learning as represented by cumulative output or time.

The data on output and inputs have been prepared by the BEA and
provide both gross output and price indexes for the period 1947-2007 for major
industry groups and for 1959-2007 for all other industry groups. For each group,
we estimate cumulative output for the initial year as the first-year output index
divided by the growth rate for the first seven years. The BEA data are available at
http://www.bea.gov/industry/index.htm#annual.

For these data, two results are clear. First, the learning coefficients are
wildly variable. Figure 1 shows a histogram of the empirical learning coefficients
estimated from the linearized version of equation (2) with zero exogenous
technological change. Clearly, the estimates are highly variable. For the 34
industries, assuming zero exogenous technological change, only 4 have
estimated empirical learning coefficients in the plausible range between 0 and
0.5. The mean and median are well above the plausible range, which suggests a
positive bias in the estimation. Additionally, the results are highly sensitive to an
AR1 correction, which produce yet different learning coefficients.

Prices might reflect life-cycle costs if the firm believes that there are learning effects
(see for example C. Lanier Benkard, “Learning and Forgetting: The Dynamics of
Aircraft Production,” American Economic Review, 2000, vol. 90, pp. 1034-1054). However,
as long as the processes are exponential and the learning coefficient is constant, the
effect of learning on the ratio of marginal cost to price would be invariant over time.

7

Page 9

Figure 2 shows a scatter plot of the learning coefficients without and with
exogenous technological change [i.e., with h equal to zero or with h as estimated
in the linearized version of equation (2)]. The estimates with exogenous
technological change are very different from those without exogenous
technological change. The correlation between the two estimates is 0.009. Clearly,
the estimates are highly sensitive to the specification.

These examples show that the estimates of the learning coefficients are not
robust to specifications. Moreover, the estimates are often well outside the
theoretically acceptable range.8
III.

The perils of learning in optimization models

Learning has become a favorite tool for modeling technological change in
many models of the energy sector and of global warming. It is convenient
because learning-by-doing is one of the few “theories” of technological change
that is easily included in models because of its simple specification.9 It is a

As a technical note, readers might wonder about whether it is appropriate to use such
aggregated data to estimate learning equations. One advantage of the industry data is
that we have very carefully prepared indexes of output and price, so the measures are
close to the ideal. The appendix to this study shows the conditions under which
elemental processes can be aggregated to determine an aggregate learning function. The
results indicate that there are three sources of potential bias. The first bias would arise if
the growth rate in individual industries deviated from exponential growth; the second
bias relates to the correlation between the learning coefficient and output growth; and
the third bias comes from potential biases in productivity measurement.
8

Examples of studies that use learning in energy and global warming models are T.
Barker, H. Pan, J. Köhler, R. Warren, and S. Winne, “Decarbonizing the Global Economy
9

Page 10

dangerous modeling technique, however, because the estimated learning rates
are biased upwards and because these approaches therefore seriously
underestimate the marginal cost of output. We showed the first point above and
address the second in this section.

The danger in using learning to model exogenous technological change
arises when the models select technologies on the basis of their cost
characteristics. Learning models have total marginal costs that are lower than
current marginal costs because an additional unit of output lowers all future
costs as producers move down the learning curve. We can see this point by
starting with a total cost function, which is defined as the present value of all
current and future production (Vt ) , given by the following:10

(9)

Vt =

∞

∫

v =t

Q vC v e

−r ( v − t )

dv =

∞

∫

Qv [ C 0 e − hvYv − b ] e − r ( v − t ) dv

v =t

with Induced Technological Change: Scenarios to 2100 using E3MG,” The Energy Journal
Special Issue, Endogenous Technological Change and the Economics of Atmospheric
Stabilization, 241-258, 2006; and M. Grubb, J. Köhler, and D. Anderson, “Induced
Technical Change in Energy and Environmental Modeling: Analytic Approaches and
Policy Implications,” Annual Review of Energy and Environment, Vol. 27, 271-308, 2002.
The formula for marginal cost was developed in the context of industrial organization
in Pankaj Ghemawat and A. Michael Spence, “Learning Curve Spillovers and Market
Performance,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 100, Supplement (1985), pp. 839852 and Saman Majd and Robert S. Pindyck, “The Learning Curve and Optimal
Production under Uncertainty, “The RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 20, No. 3 (Autumn,
1989), pp. 331-343. The marginal cost is empirically estimated and used in the context of
a dynamic programming formulation in C. Lanier Benkard, “Learning and Forgetting:
The Dynamics of Aircraft Production,” American Economic Review, 2000, vol. 90, pp.
1034-1054.

10

Page 11

Taking the derivative of (9) with respect to current output yields total marginal
cost:

(10)

∂Vt /∂Qt = Ct − b

∞

∫

QvC 0 e − hvYv − b − 1 ( ∂Yv / ∂Qt ) e − r ( v − t ) dv

v =t

Equation (10) has two terms. The first term is just the marginal cost (equal
to the average cost) of output for the current (instantaneous) period. The second
term is the learning impact. It shows the impact on cost through the effect of
current output on future cumulative output. As long as b > 0, this learning
impact is negative. The size of the negative term depends upon the learning
parameter, the discount rate, and the exogenous growth term.

There is no obvious analytical expression that can be derived from
equation (10). However, we can calculate the expression numerically for different
parameters. Table 1 shows the calculation of the true total marginal cost as
calculated by equation (10) for different parameters using a 200-year horizon. We
have normalized the equation so that the instantaneous marginal cost is unity,
and this is clearly the total marginal cost when there is no learning.

The table shows how the total marginal cost declines sharply as the
assumed learning rate increases. The decline increases in the learning coefficient
and the growth rate and decreases in the discount rate, although the growth rate
does not affect the bias in a major way. For example, assume a conventional
learning coefficient is 0.2 and a discount rate of 5 percent per year. If the true
process is exogenous technological change, then this would bias downward the
Page 12

total marginal cost by between 39 and 51 percent for the two assumed growth
rates. With low discount rates, the bias is even larger.

This bias becomes particularly important in energy and global warming
models which are designed to choose among different emerging technologies
and where the technology is assumed to have an important learning component.
For example, the model solve for future paths of solar and wind technologies
based on current cost and different learning coefficients. Based on high learning
rates, the model might suggest that technology A is a good bet for research and
development. But this recommendation would be incorrect if the learning
coefficient is based on a biased estimate of learning.
The point to emphasize here is that, in analyses that pick technologies on the
basis of total discounted cost of production (as is entirely appropriate), then an
upward bias in the learning rate will have a major impact on the apparent benefit
of technologies with learning. The estimated costs can easily be underestimated
by a factor of two. This danger is reinforced because, as shown in the first
section, of the tendency to estimate learning rates in bivariate relationships,
which will generally lead to strong upward biases in the learning coefficient.

Page 13

14

Observations 34
12

Mean
Median
Maximum
Minimum
Std. Dev.

10
8

2.10
1.16
10.1
-0.15
2.47

6
4
2
0
-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Figure 1. Estimated learning coefficients for 34 major industries, with zero
exogenous technological change, 1947 – 2007 or subperiod

The histogram shows the estimated learning coefficients for 34 major industries.
Most are well outside the usual assumed range of between 0 and ½. For a
description of the methods, see the text.

Page 14

Learning coefficient (with exog. t.c)

20
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

Learning coefficient (no exog. t.c)

Figure 2. Comparison of estimated learning coefficient with and without
exogenous technological change

Note that the graph has truncated the plot to the limits shown. 4 observations lie
outside that range. The correlation coefficient between the two sets of estimated
coefficients in 0.009.

Page 15

Growth rate = 3 percent per year
Discount rate
Learning
coefficient
0.01
0.03
0
1.000
1.000
0.1
0.554
0.638
0.2
0.317
0.410
0.3
0.186
0.265
0.5
0.069
0.113

0.05
1.000
0.700
0.490
0.343
0.168

0.1
1.000
0.698
0.487
0.340
0.166

Growth rate = 10 percent per year
Discount rate
Learning
coefficient
0.01
0.03
0
1.000
1.000
0.1
0.420
0.597
0.2
0.221
0.377
0.3
0.129
0.246
0.5
0.050
0.111

0.05
1.000
0.780
0.608
0.475
0.289

0.1
1.000
0.774
0.599
0.463
0.277

Table 1. Total marginal cost with learning as function of growth, discount rate,
and learning coefficient

This table shows how the assumed learning curve affects the total marginal cost
as calculated by equation (10), conditional on discount rates and growth rates. To
see the impact of different assumed learning rates, read down the table. For
example, with a discount rate of 0.05 per year and a growth rate of 0.10 per year,
the total marginal cost is 1.0 with no learning but 0.608 with a true learning
coefficient of 0.2.

Page 16

Appendix. Aggregation of Learning Curves

Empirical studies of learning or experience curves often aggregate from
elemental processes. For example, an experience curve for photovoltaic cells might
aggregate over plants, firms, and countries. The results from this study are for major
industry groups. An important question analyzed in this appendix involves the
conditions under which elemental learning processes can be aggregated.
The aggregation of process learning curves proceeds as follows. It will be
convenient to work with productivity growth rather than cost decline because output
and inputs measurements are more precisely defined. The growth in aggregate
productivity is

 / A = a = Q / Q − M
 t / Mt = qt − m
t
( A.1) A
t
t
t
t
t
At is productivity, Qt is a Tornqvist measure of output, Mt is inputs, and the lower-case
letters are rates of growth. We can rewrite ( A.1) as the sum of the individual processes:
n

n

i =1

i =1

 i , t θ iM
( A.2) at = ∑ q i , t θ iZ, t − ∑ m
,t
 i , t are the growth rates of Qi , t and Mi , t , and θ iZ, t and θ iM
where q i , t and m
, t are the shares
in nominal output and physical inputs for each industry i = 1,... ,n .
Next, consider the rate of change of the learning function in equation (2):
( A.3) ai , t = hi , t − bi y i , t

For this analysis, we simplify by assuming that each process has a constant growth rate.
This implies that output growth equals the growth in cumulative output, so y i , t = q i , t .
Calculate an aggregate learning curve by weighting the individual productivity
growths in (A.3) by the shares of nominal output:

Page 17

(A.4)

n

n

n

i =1

i =1

i =1

∑ ai ,tθiZ,t = ∑ hi ,t θiZ,t − ∑ bi qi ,t θiZ,t

The left hand side of (A.4) is:
n

n

n

i =1

i =1

i =1

 i , t ]θ iZ, t = ∑ q i , tθ iZ, t − m
 i , tθ iM
 i , tθ iM
 i , tθ iZ, t
(A.5) lhs (A.4) = ∑ ai , tθ iZ, t = ∑ [q i , t − m
,t + m
,t − m
n

Z
 i , t [θ iM
= at + ∑ m
,t − θi ,t ]
i =1

This is aggregate productivity plus a bias term that weights the growth rates of inputs
by the difference between the shares of physical inputs and the shares of nominal
outputs. Where outputs and inputs are correctly measured and under conditions of
competition and constant returns, that bias term is zero.
After adding and subtracting a term, the right hand side of (A.4) is:
n

n

n

n

n

i =1

i =1

i =1

i =1

i =1

(A.6) rhs(A.4) = ∑ hi , t θ iZ, t − ∑ bq i , t θ iZ, t + ∑ bq i , t θ iZ, t − ∑ bi q i , t θ iZ, t = ht − bqt + ∑ [b − bi ]q i , t θ iZ, t

The first term of (A.6) is the weighted average rate of exogenous technological change,
using nominal output weights. The second term is the average learning rate times the
aggregate growth rate of output, where the average learning rate, b , is the weighted
average learning rate using nominal output weights. The third term is a bias term equal
to the deviation of the learning rate from the average times the weighted growth rate.
Putting all these together, we get the aggregate learning curve:
n

n

i =1

i =1

Z
 i , t [θ iM
(A.7) at = ht − bqt + ∑ [b − bi ]q i , t θ iZ, t − ∑ m
,t − θi ,t ]

This derivation shows that the learning curve can be aggregated from the
individual process to the aggregate level subject to three potential errors. The first arises
if the growth rate of output is not constant (which is not shown in the equation). The
second is the bias term in equation (A.7) relating to the correlation between the learning
coefficient, the rate of growth of output, and the output weights. As long as there is
little correlation between the learning rate and the rate of growth of output, then the
second bias term will be zero. The third bias comes from productivity measurement and

Page 18

relates to the relation between input growth and the shares of inputs and nominal
output.
As long as these three biases are small, the aggregate learning coefficient will be
the weighted average of the individual processes where the weights are those of
nominal output.

Page 19

