NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS
Eric M. Leeper
Todd B. Walker
Shu-Chun Susan Yang
Working Paper 14630
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14630

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2009

Leeper acknowledges support of NSF Grant SES-0452599. Most of this research was done while Yang
was at Academia Sinica. We also acknowledge comments by Troy Davig, Dale Henderson, Beth Klee,
Karel Mertens, Ricardo Nunes, Morten Ravn, Chris Sims, and participants at presentations at the Congressional
Budget Office, the Federal Reserve Board, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Sveriges Riksbank,
the Bank of Korea Conference “Recognizing and Coping with Macroeconomic Model Uncertainty
in Designing Monetary Policy,” the Third International Conference on Macroeconomics in Madrid,
UCSD, UC-Irvine, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, University of Auckland, University of Otago,
University of Canterbury, and Victoria University of Wellington. We are particularly grateful to Jim
Nason and Harald Uhlig for helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of authors
and should not be interpreted as those of the Congressional Budget Office nor of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Eric M. Leeper, Todd B. Walker, and Shu-Chun Susan Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fiscal Foresight and Information Flows
Eric M. Leeper, Todd B. Walker, and Shu-Chun Susan Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 14630
January 2009
JEL No. E3,E6
ABSTRACT
Fiscal foresight -- the phenomenon that legislative and implementation lags ensure that private agents
receive clear signals about the tax rates they face in the future -- is intrinsic to the tax policy process.
This paper develops an analytical framework to study the econometric implications of fiscal foresight.
Simple theoretical examples show that foresight produces equilibrium time series with nonfundamental
representations, which misalign the agents' and the econometrician's information sets. Economically
meaningful shocks to taxes, therefore, cannot generally be extracted from statistical innovations in
conventional ways. Econometric analyses that fail to align agents' and the econometrician's information
sets can produce distorted inferences about the effects of tax policies. The paper documents the sensitivity
of econometric inferences of tax effects to details about how tax information flows into the economy.
We show that alternative assumptions about the information flows that give rise to fiscal foresight
can reconcile the diverse empirical findings in the literature on anticipated tax changes.

Eric M. Leeper
Department of Economics
304 Wylie Hall
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER
eleeper@indiana.edu
Todd B. Walker
Department of Economics
105 Wylie Hall
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
walkertb@indiana.edu

Shu-Chun Susan Yang
Congressional Budget Office
Washington, DC 20515
susan.yang@cbo.gov

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS
ERIC M. LEEPER, TODD B. WALKER, AND SHU-CHUN SUSAN YANG

1. Introduction
Fiscal policy presents researchers with a unique empirical challenge: how to identify and
quantify the impacts of foreseen “shocks” to taxes. The challenge posed by taxes is unique
because few economic phenomena provide economic agents with such clear signals about
how important margins will change in the future. Intrinsic to the process of changing taxes
are two kinds of lags: the legislative lag, between when new tax law is proposed and when it
is passed, and the implementation lag, between when the legislation is signed into law and
when it actually takes eﬀect. Estimates of the total lag range from a couple of months to
two years or more, depending on the particular legislation being considered [Steigerwald and
Stuart (1997), Romer and Romer (2007b), Yang (2008)].
Public ﬁnance economists recognize the possibility of ﬁscal foresight and have accumulated
empirical evidence of its importance using a variety of econometric and event-study techniques.1 Macroeconomists have acknowledged the possibility of ﬁscal foresight in empirical
work, but the empirics are typically not solidly grounded in theory. This paper is the ﬁrst
theoretical attempt to systematically study the econometric implications of ﬁscal foresight.
Empirical ﬁndings from macroeconomic time series about the impacts of ﬁscal foresight are
all over the map.2 Existing work concludes that an anticipated cut in taxes may have little
or no eﬀect [Poterba (1988), Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Romer and Romer (2007a)], may
be expansionary in the short run [Mountford and Uhlig (2008)], or may be contractionary
in the short run [Branson, Fraga, and Johnson (1986), House and Shapiro (2006), Mertens
and Ravn (2008)]. We use simple analytical examples and a dynamic stochastic general
Date: January 21, 2009. Department of Economics, Indiana University and NBER, eleeper@indiana.edu;
Department of Economics, Indiana University, walkertb@indiana.edu; Congressional Budget Oﬃce, susan.yang@cbo.gov. Leeper acknowledges support of NSF Grant SES-0452599. Most of this research was
done while Yang was at Academia Sinica. We also acknowledge comments by Troy Davig, Dale Henderson,
Beth Klee, Karel Mertens, Ricardo Nunes, Morten Ravn, Chris Sims, and participants at presentations at
the Congressional Budget Oﬃce, the Federal Reserve Board, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Sveriges
Riksbank, the Bank of Korea Conference “Recognizing and Coping with Macroeconomic Model Uncertainty
in Designing Monetary Policy,” the Third International Conference on Macroeconomics in Madrid, UCSD,
UC-Irvine, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, University of Auckland, University of Otago, University of
Canterbury, and Victoria University of Wellington. We are particularly grateful to Jim Nason and Harald
Uhlig for helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of authors and should not be
interpreted as those of the Congressional Budget Oﬃce.
1
Evidence of foresight leading up to the Tax Reform Act of 1986 is documented in Auerbach and Slemrod
(1997) and Burman, Clausing, and O’Hare (1994).
2
The problems associated with ﬁscal foresight apply with equal force to estimated dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium models of ﬁscal policy, such as Braun (1994), McGrattan (1994), Coenen and Straub
(2004), Forni, Monteforte, and Sessa (2006), or Kamps (2007).

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

2

equilibrium (DSGE) model calibrated to U.S. data to rationalize these diverse ﬁndings as
the outcomes of alternative assumptions about the information sets underlying empirical
work.
Theory suggests that ﬁscal foresight poses a substantial challenge to econometric analyses
of ﬁscal policy. Foresight creates an equilibrium in which the information sets of economic
agents and the econometrician tend to be misaligned, with agents basing their choices on
more information than the econometrician possesses. Structural shocks to tax policy, then,
cannot be recovered from current and past ﬁscal data, a central assumption of conventional
econometric methods. Instead, conventional methods can lead the econometrician to label
as “tax shocks” objects that are linear combinations of all the exogenous disturbances at
various leads and lags.
An important ﬁnding of the paper is that econometric inferences about tax eﬀects can
be highly sensitive to details about how information about taxes ﬂows to economic decision
makers. Information ﬂows determine how news about taxes signals subsequent realizations
of tax rates. It is natural to pose this as a signal-extraction problem that faces both agents,
who are interpreting the news, and the econometrician, who is trying to identify the latent
news from observables. This emphasizes an aspect of the economic structure—information
ﬂows—that macroeconomists often do not explore.
Strong assumptions about information ﬂows, like those typically made in DSGE models,
can help to resolve the econometric diﬃculties that foresight presents. Once the information
structure of the economy has been speciﬁed, a solution to the signal-extraction problem
is available through the use of, for example, the Kalman ﬁlter. Of course, the solution is
conditional on the speciﬁed information ﬂows, an aspect of the economic structure about
which economists rarely have well developed prior beliefs. That foresight poses a structural
problem and not merely a statistical problem has not been widely appreciated, even in work
that focuses on foresight of various kinds; it is also not readily resolved.
Fiscal foresight poses a formidable challenge because, as Leeper (1989) and Yang (2005)
show, it generates an equilibrium with a nonfundamental representation. A nonfundamental representation is one in which the equilibrium time series contains a moving average
component that is not invertible in current and past observables.3 Issues associated with
nonfundamentalness were pointed out in the rational expectations econometrics literature
by Hansen and Sargent (1980, 1991) and Lippi and Reichlin (1993, 1994) and recently emphasized by Fernandez-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramirez, Sargent, and Watson (2007).4 To the
extent that ﬁscal foresight is an intrinsic feature of the tax policy process, conventional
3

Throughout the paper, we use the terms “nonfundamental” and “noninvertible” interchangeably.
A closely related line of work examines the conditions under which a ﬁnite-order VAR can adequately
capture agents’ information sets when state variables are excluded from the VAR system [for example, Cooley
and Dwyer (1995), Fry and Pagan (2005), Kapetanios, Pagan, and Scott (2005), Giannone, Reichlin, and
Sala (2006), Giannone and Reichlin (2006), Chung and Leeper (2007), Dungey and Fry (2007)]. This work
argues that expanding the VAR to include important state variables can solve the invertibility problem.
Faust, Rogers, Swanson, and Wright (2003) and Faust, Swanson, and Wright (2004) do not directly address
non-invertibility, but they use high-frequency ﬁnancial data to expand the econometrician’s information set
to aid in identifying monetary policy eﬀects. Fiscal foresight is distinctive because data on the missing
state variable—exogenous changes in anticipated future tax rates—are not readily available nor are they
straightforward to collect.
4

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

3

econometric work on ﬁscal policy ascribes to the econometrician an information set that is
strictly smaller than the information set on which agents base their decisions.
This paper oﬀers three contributions that are distinct from previous work on nonfundamental equilibria:
(1) It identiﬁes an important practical instance—ﬁscal policy—that is likely to give rise
to noninvertible equilibria and it oﬀers some evidence that private agents possess and
react to news about future tax changes.
(2) Rather than simply positing a nonfundamental driving process in an economic model,
we obtain a nonfundamental equilibrium through the information ﬂows implied by
the government’s technology for choosing tax rates (the government policy rule).
The nonfundamentalness that arises from ﬁscal foresight is a natural by-product of
the fact that agents’ optimal intertemporal decisions discount future tax obligations.
Although private agents discount tax rates in the usual way, they discount recent tax
news more heavily than past news because with foresight the recent news informs
about taxes in the more distant future. The econometrician, in contrast, discounts
in the usual way, down weighting older news relative to recent news. Agents and the
econometrician employ diﬀerent discounting patterns because the econometrician’s
information set lags the agents’.
(3) We go beyond the binary test of invertibility proposed, for example, by FernandezVillaverde, Rubio-Ramirez, Sargent, and Watson (2007) to assess the quantitative
importance of nonfundamentalness in a calibrated DSGE model drawn from the
class of models being ﬁt to data. We couch the quantitative assessment in terms of
tax multipliers and show that conventional econometric methods, such as identiﬁed
VARs, can produce wildly inaccurate inferences: multipliers can be estimated to be
positive, negative, or zero and they can be ﬁve or more times too large over various
forecast horizons. Within such a model we probe the sensitivity of such errors in
inference to alternative assumptions of how news about taxes ﬂows into the economy.
Whereas Lippi and Reichlin (1993) argue that economic theory does not necessarily
rule out nonfundamental representations, we show that for ﬁscal policy, plausible
hypotheses about the ﬂow of information about tax changes imply that fundamental
representations cannot necessarily be ruled in.
This paper focuses exclusively on foresight about taxes, but misalignment of agents’ and
the econometrician’s information sets, and the possibility of nonfundamental equilibrium
representations, is a widespread problem in macroeconomics. A prominent example is Quah’s
(1990) resolution of Deaton’s (1987) paradox; the resolution relies on agents forecasting
future income using strictly more information than the econometrician does. FernandezVillaverde, Rubio-Ramirez, and Sargent (2005) contains several examples of DSGE models
that in some regions of the parameter space exhibit an invertibility problem.
Nonfundamentalness is likely to present itself in several areas of research that are now
receiving attention: news about future technological improvement [Beaudry and Portier
(2006), Christiano, Ilut, Motto, and Rostagno (2007), Jaimovich and Sergio (2008), SchmittGrohe and Uribe (2008)]; foresight about large government spending run ups [Ramey (2007)];
recent moves by several inﬂation-targeting central banks—Norges Bank, Reserve Bank of
New Zealand, Sveriges Riksbank—to publish paths of future policy interest rates [Holmsen,

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

4

Qvigstad, and Roisland (2007), Blattner, Catenaro, Ehrmann, Strauch, and Turunen (2008),
Laseen, Linde, and Svensson (2008)]. Any of these applications, when studied in a rational
expectations model, would lend themselves to the type of analysis that we conduct. Our
paper raises a warning ﬂag about econometric work on these topics and calls for careful
modeling of the information ﬂows that give rise to economic foresight in general.

2. Evidence of Fiscal Foresight
Plenty of reduced-form and anecdotal evidence, mostly in the form of case studies of one
or more tax episodes, suggests that private agents respond to expected changes in taxes.
Reactions to tax foresight are most evident when policy changes are phased in, incorporate
sunset provisions, or include a delay between enactment and eﬀective dates.
Steigerwald and Stuart (1997) develop a residual-based test statistic, which allows comparison of prediction errors for econometric models under diﬀerent assumptions about the
period of tax foresight. By studying investment behavior around major tax legislation that
altered corporate income tax rates, investment tax credits, or the deductions for depreciation allowances, Steigerwald and Stuart conclude that ﬁrms had 4.5-month foresight for tax
changes in 1954, 1962, and 1981, and 16.5-month foresight for the tax reform of 1986.
In contrast to Steigerwald-Stuart, Poterba’s (1988) study of consumption responses to
tax announcements associated with legislation in 1964, 1968, 1975, 1981, and 1986, ﬁnds
little evidence of anticipatory behavior. He dates expectational changes as occurring the
month the legislation passes Congress. Poterba regards his ﬁndings as “tentative” because
his event study “is likely to have relatively low power against the alternative hypothesis that
consumers gradually revise their expectations of future tax policy and adjust consumption
accordingly” [p. 416].
The possibility that ﬁscal foresight can produce a “purely anticipatory recession” was ﬁrst
put forth by Branson, Fraga, and Johnson (1986) in an exploration of President Reagan’s tax
cuts. The Economic Recovery Tax Act, enacted in August 1981, announced a three-stage
tax cut to be phased in from 1982 to 1984. Branson, Fraga, and Johnson argue that in
an open-economy IS-LM model, anticipated tax cuts can reconcile three salient features of
the U.S. macro experience of the early 1980s: an inverted and steep real yield curve, real
appreciation of the dollar, and a severe recession—all of which occurred in 1981 and 1982,
before the tax cuts were fully realized. Mertens and Ravn (2008) make a similar argument
using a modern DSGE model and the time series on forecasted tax changes that Romer and
Romer (2007b) compiled.
The Tax Reform Act of 1986 oﬀered public ﬁnance economists a rich laboratory in which
to test hypotheses that economic agents may respond to news about tax changes before
the changes are eﬀective. The legislation, which was enacted in October 1986, repealed the
capital gains exclusion from ordinary income, raising the maximum capital gains tax rate
beginning in 1987 from an eﬀective rate of 20 percent to 28 percent. During the lag between
enactment and eﬀective dates, capital gains realizations jumped from $172 billion in 1985
to $328 billion in 1986 in anticipation of the tax hike [Congressional Budget Oﬃce (2002,
Table 1, p. 3)].

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

5

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4
12/31/1984

12/31/1985

12/31/1986

12/31/1987

Figure 1. Daily Federal Funds Rate
Auerbach and Slemrod (1997) thoroughly review the economic eﬀects of the 1986 reform.
They also point out the jump in long-term capital gains realizations that predated the
eﬀective date of the reform [see also Burman, Clausing, and O’Hare (1994)]. Auerbach and
Slemrod argue that the 1986 Act “established once and for all that the timing of capital
gains realizations behavior can be enormously sensitive to anticipated changes in the rate of
taxation” [p. 605]. The act also reduced marginal corporate tax rates from a maximum of
46 percent in 1986 to a maximum of 34 percent over 1987 and 1988. Scholes, Willson, and
Wolfson (1992) ﬁnd that the corporate tax rate reduction induced ﬁrms to act in anticipation
to defer revenue recognition or accelerate expense recognition.
Figure 1 documents two instances in which anticipations of the tax code changes associated
with the Tax Reform Act of 1986 spilled over to aﬀect monetary policy behavior. The ﬁgure
plots the daily federal funds rate from December 29, 1984 through January 9, 1988. At
the end of both 1985 and 1986, the daily federal funds rate spiked as traders shifted their
portfolios to get ahead of expected restrictive tax legislation. On December 31, 1985 the
funds rate rose almost 4.5 percentage points when, after the House of Representatives passed
the legislation on December 17, traders placed higher probability that tax reform would take
eﬀect during 1986. As it happened, the bill was not enacted until October 22, 1986, to be
eﬀective on January 1, 1987. This is why the funds rate more than doubled on December
30, 1986, and remained high on the last day of 1986. Despite repeated injections of funds
throughout the year, the trading desk at the New York Fed underestimated the extent to
which money markets would react to foresight about tax policy changes [see Federal Reserve
Bank of New York (1986, 1987)].
A well-documented example of behavior due to foresight underlies the controversy related
to estimating the taxable income elasticity with respect to the tax hike for the high-income

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

6

group that was embedded in the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993. Feldstein and
Feenberg (1996) examine the changes in income and tax data from 1992 to 1993 and ﬁnd
a large taxable income elasticity for the high-income group. Their ﬁnding implies that an
increase in the marginal tax rate has a strong negative eﬀect on the tax base. Goolsbee
(2000), on the other hand, ﬁnds this elasticity drops to 0.4 if the data are extended to 1995.
As the share of time-shiftable compensation (such as one-time bonuses, exercising stock
options, and so forth) rose dramatically with income from 1991 to 1992, the contrasting
estimates of a high short-run and low long-run elasticity arise because high-income taxpayers
in 1992 acted upon their foresight about anticipated higher income tax rates.
House and Shapiro (2006) use a neoclassical growth model with ﬁscal foresight to calibrate
the macroeconomic eﬀects of President Bush’s phased-in cuts in capital and labor tax rates
beginning in 2001. They argue that the slow recovery from the 2001 recession, especially in
the job market, can be attributed to the law’s phasing-in provisions, which created incentives
for workers and ﬁrms to delay production. Elimination of the phase-ins in 2003, moreover,
accounted for about half of the rebound in GDP in the middle of 2003. In recent work, House
and Shapiro (2008) estimate that investment in qualiﬁed types of capital—capital with a tax
recovery period of up to 20 years—rose in anticipation of the bonus depreciation provision
of the law. Investment began to rise after the House of Representatives passed the bill in
October 2001, before President Bush signed the legislation in March 2002.
Evidence of the impacts of ﬁscal foresight extends well beyond a single piece of legislation.
Yang (2007) compares responses to a typical tax innovation from VAR systems with and
without interest rates and prices. She ﬁnds that adding the three-month Treasury bill
rate and the GDP price deﬂator (or commodity prices) to a VAR substantially reduces
the responses of labor, investment, and output to a tax innovation. Since ﬁnancial markets
tend to be relatively sensitive to news in the economy, the result is consistent with the
interpretation that information contained in ﬁnancial variables reﬂects agents’ knowledge
of future tax policy changes. Sims (1988) ﬁnds similar results for government spending
multipliers.
Fiscal foresight may also apply to government spending: anticipated shifts in spending may
trigger changes in economic behavior before the spending shift is realized. Recent eﬀorts by
Ramey (2007) to reconcile the discrepancies in the eﬀects of government spending using
the narrative approach based on war dummies and VAR approaches lead her to conclude
that the VAR-based innovations are indeed anticipated.5 Since the war dates are identiﬁed
based on the timing when the media reported future defense buildups, the news reports
predate the actual rises in defense spending. Ramey ﬁnds that the war dates Granger-cause
defense spending and aggregate government spending, but not vice versa. This supports the
existence of foresight about government spending policy.
There is a line of work that is often interpreted as providing evidence that consumers
do not adjust savings in response to anticipated changes in taxes and that, therefore, ﬁscal
foresight is unlikely to be important in time series data. The work, which uses natural tax
experiments to test the permanent income hypothesis, ﬁnds that agents respond strongly to
predictable changes in tax liabilities and to current disposable income, a result that is taken
5

See Ramey and Shapiro (1998) and Edelberg, Eichenbaum, and Fisher (1999) for empirical analysis of
the dynamic impacts of war dummies.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

7

as evidence against the hypothesis.6 Because these papers focus on responses at the time of
or after the implementation of the policy change, they are silent about how behavior changes
during the foresight period. In fact, in a neoclassical growth model, where the permanent
income hypothesis holds, consumption responds both at the time that news about a future
change in capital or labor tax rates arrives and after the implementation of the tax rate
change [see Yang (2005)].
The evidence of ﬁscal foresight recounted here, although not decisive, does support the
view that some adjustment in behavior occurs before tax changes are implemented. The
evidence, however, is typically rather casual, relying on case studies, and it is often not
tightly connected to theory. We now turn to an illustrative model in which some of the
econometric implications of ﬁscal foresight can be derived explicitly.
3. Analytical Example
In this section, we introduce ﬁscal foresight into a simple economic environment so that
the econometric issues can be exposited analytically. The results and conclusions reached in
this section and the next extend to more general setups, as discussed in section 5.
Consider a standard growth model with log preferences, inelastic labor supply, and complete depreciation of capital. A proportional tax is levied against income. The equilibrium
conditions are well known and given by
1
1 Yt+1
= αβEt(1 − τt+1 )
Ct
Ct+1 Kt
α
Ct + Kt = Yt = AtKt−1

(1)
(2)

where Ct, Kt , and Yt denote time-t consumption, capital, and output, respectively, and {At}
is an exogenous technology shock. As usual, 0 < α < 1 and 0 < β < 1. The government
sets the tax rate according to a time-invariant rule and then adjusts lump-sum transfers to
satisfy the constraint, Tt = τt Yt . Government spending is identically zero.
After log linearizing equations (1)–(2), the equilibrium is characterized by a second-order
diﬀerence equation in capital



τ
−1
−1
−1
−1
Et kt+1 − (θ + α)kt + αθ kt−1 = Et [at+1 − θ at ] + θ (1 − θ)
Et τ̂t+1 . (3)
1−τ
where θ = αβ(1 − τ ) is a particularly important constant in the analysis and 0 ≤ τ < 1 is
the steady state tax rate. The solution to (3) satisﬁes the well-known saddlepath property
6

Shapiro and Slemrod (1995) use survey data to evaluate consumption responses to reductions in the
income tax withholding as ordered by President Bush in early 1992. Parker (1999) studies withholding
changes in Social Security taxes using sample drawn from 1980 and 1993 and Souleles (1999) studies changes
to the receipts of tax refunds based on sample drawing from 1980 to 1991. Souleles (2002) examines the
consumption eﬀect in response to withholding changes due to the pre-announced, phase-II income tax rate
cuts in the Economic Recovery Tax Act. Johnson, Parker, and Souleles (2004) study President Bush’s tax
rebate in 2001. In an earlier study, very much in the spirit of this line of work, Poterba and Summers
(1987) ﬁnds a failure of Ricardian equivalence, but acknowledge that their analysis is uninformative about
the eﬀects of ﬁscal foresight.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

and is given by



τ
kt = αkt−1 + at − (1 − θ)
1−τ


∞

θi Et τ̂t+i+1 .

8

(4)

i=0

Equilibrium investment depends negatively on the expected discounted present value of
future tax rates, a well-known result [Lucas (1976), Abel (1982), Judd (1985), Auerbach
(1989)]. Of course, more distant tax rates are discounted relative to more recent rates.
To model foresight, we must specify how news about taxes signals future tax rates. For
many of the points we wish to make, it suﬃces to assume that tax information ﬂows take a
particularly simple form: agents at t receive a signal that tells them exactly what tax rate
they will face in period t + q. The tax rule is τt = τ̄eετ,t−q , or in log-linearized form7
τ̂t = ετ,t−q

(5)

where τ̂ denotes percentage deviations of the tax rate from its steady state value.8 We
assume the technology and tax shocks are i.i.d. and the representative agent’s information
set at date t consists of variables dated t and earlier, including the shocks, {εA,t , ετ,t}. Given
the tax rule in (5), this implies that the agent at t has (in this case, perfect) knowledge of
{τ̂t+q , τ̂t+q−1 , . . .}.
It is useful to use the information ﬂows in the tax rule to solve for expected tax rates in
(4) for various degrees of ﬁscal foresight.
q = 0 implies:
q = 1 implies:

kt = αkt−1 + εA,t

(6)


τ
kt = αkt−1 + εA,t − (1 − θ)
ετ,t
1−τ

(7)



q = 2 implies:





ετ,t−1 + θετ,t

(8)



2
ετ,t−2 + θετ,t−1 + θ ετ,t

(9)

τ
kt = αkt−1 + εA,t − (1 − θ)
1−τ
q = 3 implies:



τ
kt = αkt−1 + εA,t − (1 − θ)
1−τ

If there is no foresight, q = 0, we get the usual result that i.i.d. shocks to tax rates have
no eﬀect on capital accumulation. When there is some degree of tax foresight (q > 0),
we obtain the unusual implication that even serially uncorrelated tax hikes reduce capital
accumulation.
In this model with inelastic labor supply, i.i.d. tax shocks should not aﬀect capital accumulation. As expression (7) makes clear, when there is one period of foresight, tax shocks
will assume a bounded support on ετ for each speciﬁcation of the tax rule to ensure the realizations
are bounded between 0 and 1.
8Jaimovich and Sergio (2008) assume an analogous process for the arrival of news about total factor
productivity or investment-speciﬁc shocks.
7We

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

9

appear to aﬀect capital contemporaneously. Moving average terms and, therefore, potential
invertibility problems appear to arise only when the foresight horizon is greater than one
period. This result is not general and stems from the assumption of ﬁxed labor. When labor
choice is elastic, even one period of foresight can produce an equilibrium with a noninvertible
moving average component.
An interesting, though seemingly perverse, implication of (8) and (9) is that more recent
news is discounted (by θ = αβ(1 − τ ) < 1) relative to older news. This is because with twoquarter foresight, ετ,t−1 aﬀects τ̂t+1 , while ετ,t aﬀects τ̂t+2 , so the news that aﬀects tax rates
farther into the future receives the heaviest discount. Tax rates are discounted in the usual
way, while tax news is discounted in reverse order. We now explore the broader ramiﬁcations
of this discounting result.
4. The Econometrics of Foresight
This section explores the question: What erroneous conclusions might be drawn by an
econometrician who does not explicitly model tax foresight and proceeds with conventional
econometric analyses, such as identiﬁed VARs?9
4.1. Misalignment of Information Sets and Improper Discounting. With ﬁscal foresight, the information set of private agents may be larger than the econometrician’s information set. The Wold representation theorem tells us that the econometrician’s information set
from estimating a VAR will be the sigma algebra generated by current and past observable
variables. In the analytical example, foresight implies that agents will observe tax news
before the tax rates are realized. Information sets of private agents will not coincide with
the information generated by observable variables, which the econometrician possesses.
We begin with the case in which the econometrician is well informed, observing the technology shock exactly. Suppose that agents have two-quarter foresight and the econometrician
estimates a VAR with current and past capital and technology, {kt−j , at−j }∞
j=0 ,
 
  
0
1
ετ,t
at
= −κ(L+θ)
1
kt
ε
A,t
1−αL
1−αL
yt = M(L)t ,

(10)

where κ = (1 − θ)(τ /(1 − τ )), θ = αβ(1 − τ ) and L is a lag operator (i.e., Ls xt = xt−s ). If
this system is invertible in nonnegative powers of L, then t may be obtained as a squaresummable linear combination of current and past yt . This suggests that knowledge of past
and present y is equivalent to knowledge of past and present , and forecast errors generated
by the econometrician’s VAR will coincide with the agents’.10 A necessary condition for
(10) to be a fundamental Wold representation is that the determinant of M(z) be analytic
κ
(z + θ), so
with no zeros inside the open unit disk.11 By direct calculation, det M(z) = 1−αz
this representation has a zero inside the unit circle (at z = −θ). Fiscal foresight implies the
9Much

of the analysis that follows draws on Hansen and Sargent (1991).
More speciﬁcally, the Hilbert space generated by {yt−j }∞
j=0 is equivalent (in mean-square norm) to the
Hilbert space generated by {t−j }∞
.
j=0
11This assumes that “noninvertible” means a root inside the unit circle.
10

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

10

information set generated by {yt, yt−1, yt−2 , ...} is smaller than the information set generated
by {t , t−1 , t−2 , ...}.
It is useful to think about this invertibility condition for each shock process individually.
By assumption the econometrician directly observes current and past technology shocks
{εA,t , εA,t−1 , ...}. Conditioning on current and past capital, however, will not reveal current
and past tax shocks. The reason is that while the technology process is an invertible representation, the process for capital is not. The solution for capital with two-quarter foresight
is given by
(1 − αL)kt = −κ(L + θ)ετ,t
Invertibility of the stochastic process in current and past kt requires |θ| > 1, so that


1 − αL
kt = −κθετ,t
1 + θ−1 L
is a convergent sequence. Because θ = αβ(1 − τ ) < 1, the process is not invertible in current
and past capital. Of course, the representation is invertible in current and future capital:


1 − αL
kt = −κετ,t−1
1 + θL−1
kt = (α−1 + θ)kt+1 − θ(α−1 + θ)kt+2 + θ2 (α−1 + θ)kt+3 − · · · + α−1 κετ,t.
(11)
In this VAR setting, the only way that the econometrician can recover the ﬁscal news seen
by agents at time t is if the econometrician has knowledge of future variables.12
Foresight concerning ﬁscal policy introduces a noninvertible moving average representation into the equilibrium. This non-invertibility implies the econometrician will not be able
to condition on current and past ετ,t. In order to determine the econometrician’s information
set, we need to derive the one-step-ahead forecast errors associated with predicting yt conditional only on its past values. This is achieved by ﬂipping the root of the moving average
representation from inside the unit circle to outside the unit circle via the Blaschke factor,
[(L + θ)/(1 + θL)]. The Wold representation for system (10) is given by
  
  1+θL   L+θ
 
0
1
0 1+θL 0 ετ,t
at
L+θ
= −κ(L+θ)
1
kt
0
1
0
1 εA,t
1−αL
1−αL
M∗(L)

yt =

which yields the representation for capital as

∗t .


1 + θL
(1 − αL)kt = −κ(L + θ)
L+θ



(12)


L+θ
ετ,t
1 + θL

−κ(1 + θL)
ε∗τ,t



τ
∗
∗
= −(1 − θ)
θετ,t−1 + ετ,t .
(13)
1−τ
Note that by observing current and past capital, the econometrician recovers current and past
ε∗τ , which are not the news that private agents observe, ετ . The econometrician’s innovations
=

12Instrumental

variables have been employed to deal with ﬁscal foresight [Blanchard and Perotti (2002)].
This representation demonstrates the properties necessary for valid instruments for foresight in this model.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

11

are the statistical shocks of the VAR, which turn out to represent information that is mostly
“old news” to the agents of the economy. To see this more clearly note that

∞

L+θ
ετ,t = (L + θ)
=
−θj ετ,t−j
1 + θL
j=0


ε∗τ,t

= θετ,t + (1 − θ2 )ετ,t−1 − θ(1 − θ2 )ετ,t−2 + θ2 (1 − θ2 )ετ,t−3 + · · ·

(14)

The mapping in (14) shows that what the econometrician believes to be the tax innovation
at time t, ε∗t , is actually a discounted sum of the tax news observed by the agents at date t
and earlier.
An important implication is that the econometrician who ignores foresight will discount the
innovations incorrectly. Comparing (13) with (8), according to the econometrician’s VAR,
yesterday’s innovation has less eﬀect than today’s innovation (note the terms θε∗τ,t−1 + ε∗τ,t
in (13)). Agents with foresight, in contrast, discount news according to ετ,t−1 + θετ,t because
yesterday’s news has a larger eﬀect on capital accumulation than today’s news. Diﬀerences
in discounting patterns applied by the econometrician and the agents lead to a variety of
econometric problems.
Mapping (14) also reveals that an equilibrium might fail to be invertible—θ < 1—yet
the noninvertibility may be quantitatively unimportant. Suppose θ is just below 1. Then,
according to (14), ε∗τ,t will be “close enough” to ετ,t that the econometrician’s estimates
of tax eﬀects will not be far wrong. Section 5 examines the quantitative importance of
noninvertibility in a calibrated DSGE model.

4.2. Econometric Implications. By employing VAR analysis and not modeling foresight,
the econometrician has unknowingly conditioned on a smaller information set and misspeciﬁed the true dynamics of the equilibrium. Not surprisingly, the consequence of this misspeciﬁcation is that inference provided by VARs may be quite misleading. The size of the
approximation error depends upon several factors—the complexity of the tax rule (5), the
conditioning variables in the VAR, the structural parameters, the degree of foresight, and so
forth. We show below how these factors confound the analysis in the present setting.
Impulse response functions are a widely used tool for conveying how agents dynamically
respond to innovations, but response functions based upon the econometrician’s information
set {ε∗τ,t} will not capture these responses. Consider the response functions generated by
(10) and (12). Figure 2 plots the responses of capital and output assuming two-quarter
foresight (setting α = 0.36, β = 0.99, τ = 0.25). With foresight, agents know exactly when
the innovation in ﬁscal policy is going to translate into changes in the tax rate. This creates
the sharp decline in capital one quarter after the shock and in output two quarters out, as the
dotted-dashed lines indicate. The econometrician’s VAR, on the other hand, discounts the
innovations incorrectly and gives a very diﬀerent response to the tax shock. According to the
econometrician, the biggest decline in capital will occur on impact, suggesting that foresight
does not exist (solid lines). The diﬀerence between the response functions can be quite
dramatic, especially at short horizons. Note that the drop in output for the econometrician’s
VAR is nearly four times as large as the true response one quarter after the innovation.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

0

12

0
−0.01

−0.05
−0.02
−0.1

−0.03
−0.04

−0.15

−0.05
−0.2

−0.06
−0.07

−0.25

−0.08
−0.3
−0.09

Agent
Econometrician
−0.35

0

1

2

3

4

Figure 2a: Response of K

5

6

7

8

−0.1

Agent
Econometrician
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Figure 2b: Response of Y

Figure 2. Responses of Capital and Output to Tax Increase. VAR system
includes (at, kt ) with α = 0.36, β = 0.99, τ = 0.25
Figure 2 shows that the econometrician will infer that the tax shock is unanticipated.
Obviously, not all shocks that aﬀect ﬁscal policy will be knowable several quarters in advance.
Consider a tax rate process, τ̂t = euτ,t + ετ,t−q , that allows for shocks that are anticipated
several quarters in advance (ετ ) and for surprises that are unanticipated (euτ ) at time t.13 If
these shocks are orthogonal at all leads and lags, then the equilibrium dynamics of (3) will not
change because i.i.d. tax shocks will not alter the dynamics of capital. The econometrician,
who does not account for ﬁscal foresight and proceeds to estimate (12), will attribute all of
the dynamics associated with the anticipated component of the tax rate to the unanticipated
component. This suggests that researchers interested in the dynamic eﬀects of ﬁscal policy—
whether the interest is in anticipated or unanticipated changes in policy—must explicitly
account for foresight in order to avoid spurious conclusions.
Fiscal foresight becomes even more pernicious if we make the more plausible assumption
that the econometrician does not observe technology shocks and, therefore, cannot condition
on {εA,t , εA,t−1 , . . .}. It is more natural for the econometrician to condition on observable
taxes (or some function of taxes, such as revenues), rather than the technology process.
Consider the case with two-quarter foresight and suppose the econometrician estimates the
following VAR
 
  
L2
0
ετ,t
τ̂t
= −κ(L+θ)
1
kt
ε
A,t
1−αL
1−αL
xt = H(L)t .

(15)

As in the previous case, foresight creates a zero inside the unit circle (now at z = 0), implying
that the information set generated by {xt, xt−1, xt−2 , ...} is smaller than the information set
generated by {t, t−1 , t−2 , ...}. The corresponding Wold representation for (15) is derived
13Christiano,

Ilut, Motto, and Rostagno (2007) posit a process like this for a technology shock and
interpret realizations of the ε terms as news.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

13

0.25
0.1
0.2

0.05
0

0.15
−0.05
−0.1
0.1
−0.15
−0.2

0.05

−0.25

Agent
Econometrician
0

1

2

3

4

5

Agent
Econometrician
6

Figure 3a: Response of K to Tax Increase
στ2 = 1, σa2 = [0.01, 1]

Figure 3. Responses of Capital.

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Figure 3b: Response of K to Technology Increase
στ2 = 1, σa2 = 0.01
VAR system includes (τt , kt )

by ﬂipping the zeroes outside the unit circle as in the previous example,

 
  
L2
0
τ̂t
−1

−1
 ετ,t
= −k(L+θ)
W B(L)W̃ B(L) B(L )W̃ B(L )W
1
kt
εA,t
1−αL
1−αL
H∗ (L)

xt =
where
W =

⎡

√

1
2
1+(θκ)
⎣ κθ
√
1+(θκ)2

√ −κθ

⎤

1+(θκ)2 ⎦
, W̃
√ 1 2
1+(θκ)

∗t

(16)


 −1 

−Δκ
0
L
Δ(1 + κ2 θ2 )
, B(L) =
=
2 2
Δκ
Δ(1 + κ θ )
0 1

and Δ = [(1 + κ2θ2 )2 + κ2 ]−1/2. In this case, the orthonormal W matrix must be employed to ensure the representation remains causal (i.e., preserves the assumption that the
econometrician does not observe future values of the variables).
Now the econometric problems are more severe. First, the econometrician who proceeds
with VAR analysis using (16) will likely obtain an impulse response function in which foresight does not appear to exist in the data. Figure 3a depicts the response of capital to a tax
increase for the agent and econometrician (dotted-dashed line) as the variance of the technology shock varies from 0.01 to 1 (using the calibration α = 0.36, β = 0.99, τ = 0.25). This
ﬁgure shows that conditioning on the econometrician’s information set the path of capital is
ﬂat when σa2 = στ2 = 1. In theory, unanticipated i.i.d. capital tax shocks have no eﬀects on
the economy. Based on the ﬂat response of capital, an econometrician will then infer that
the eﬀects of ﬁscal policy are limited to unanticipated components only. By not modeling
foresight, one may achieve a “self-fulﬁlling prophesy” and wrongly conclude that foresight is
not an issue.
Second, as the variance of the tax shock increases relative to the technology shock, the
errors associated with foresight become more pronounced. Figure 3a shows that the initial
response of K to a one standard deviation increase in the tax shock increases from 0 to

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

14

0.12 as σa2 varies from 1 to 0.01, respectively, so that an anticipated tax increase could be
estimated to have no eﬀect or a positive eﬀect on capital and output.
Existing empirical work reports a diverse set of inferences about the eﬀects of an anticipated tax increase on output, ranging from little or no eﬀect to contractionary to expansionary. Figures 2a and 3a demonstrate that even this simple model can deliver the diverse set
of results found in the empirical literature. In our case an anticipated tax increase always
lowers capital and output. The diﬀerent solid lines in the ﬁgures arise from confronting the
econometrician with diﬀerent signal-extraction problems. This suggests that foresight and
how it is handled econometrically is a leading cause of the diverse results.
Third, the statistical shocks recovered by the VAR analysis are now linear combinations
of both technology and tax shocks. From (16), the statistical shocks can be written as
ε∗τ,t = a1 ετ,t−2 − a2 ετ,t−1 + a3εA,t−2 + a4 εA,t−1 ,

ε∗A,t = −a4ετ,t−1 − a3ετ,t − a2εA,t−1 + a1 εA,t
(17)

where the a’s are complicated functions of α, β, and τ . The econometrician will not only
misinterpret the response to a tax shock but also the response to a technology shock. Figure
3b demonstrates that the econometrician would infer a very large and persistent response
of capital to a technology shock (solid line), when in fact the true dynamics are relatively
small (dotted-dashed line). Comparing (17) with (14), one sees that the statistical shocks
generated by (16) are not convolutions of the entire history of the structural shocks but
only depend upon structural shocks dated t − 2 and earlier. This is due entirely to the
simple tax rule (τ̂t = ετ,t−2). As the model and information ﬂows become more realistic, this
problem can become more severe. This example has a key message: foresight impinges on
the econometrician’s ability to correctly identify all shocks in the VAR.
Finally, as also emphasized by Hansen and Sargent (1991), variance decompositions in
this environment can lead to spurious conclusions.14 Let
E(xt −

∗
Et−j
xt )(xt

−

∗
Et−j
x t )

=

j−1


H∗k Σ∗ H∗
k

k=0

denote the j-step ahead prediction error variance associated with the econometrician’s information set, where Σ∗ is the variance-covariance matrix associated with (ε∗τ,t, ε∗A,t ). Like
impulse response functions, variance decompositions are derived using conditional expectations and hence the discrepancy in the information sets implies the coeﬃcients generated
by H∗ (L) will lead to a misallocation of the variance across the structural shocks. Figure
3a suggests that the econometrician will treat the tax shock as nearly i.i.d. and infer that
none of the variation in capital (and hence output) can be attributed to tax innovations.
Consequently, all of the variation will be attributed to the technology shock. This result
would continue to hold even if, in fact, the tax shock explained nearly all of the variation in
capital (for example, by setting the variance of the technology shock, σA2 , arbitrarily small).
14This

result holds even though the statistical shocks of the VAR remain uncorrelated. While the unconditional second moments of the VAR system remain the same due to the orthogonal nature of the Blaschke
and W matrices (W W  = W̃ W̃  = I and B(L)B(L−1 ) = I), the conditional moments will be diﬀerent.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

15

4.3. Testing Economic Theory. An extension of the econometric implications is that
tests of economic theory will also be misspeciﬁed. One important example pertaining to
ﬁscal policy is the testing of the government’s present-value constraint, which links the value
of government debt to the expected discounted value of future primary surpluses. A widelyused approach to test present-value restrictions estimates a VAR with debt and surpluses
and then tests for the cross-equation restrictions that the present-value condition imposes
on the model [Campbell and Shiller (1987)]. As we have shown, ﬁscal foresight implies the
VAR obtained by the econometrician will not yield the true dynamics and hence will not
impose the correct cross-equation restrictions in testing the present value condition.
To see how foresight will lead to type I error in present-value tests, consider an endowment
economy with lump sum taxes, a constant equilibrium real interest rate, and one-quarter
foresight with respect to innovations in surpluses (receipts less expenditures net of interest
payments on the government’s debt). Taking expectations conditional on information at
time t − 1 of the government’s ﬂow budget constraint yields
E(bt |Ωt−1 ) = β −1 bt−1 − E(st |Ωt−1 ),

(18)

where st is the primary surplus, bt is one-period debt outstanding, and β −1 = (1 + r) is the
constant gross rate of return between time t and t + 1. Fiscal sustainability is ensured by
a policy rule that makes future surpluses rise with debt. Two exogenous disturbances—for
revenues and spending—drive surpluses and agents have one period of foresight over both
components of the surpluses. The policy rule is
ε1,t−1
ε2,t−1
+
(19)
st = γbt−1 +
1 − ρ1 L 1 − ρ2 L
where γ is set to ensure that the agent’s transversality condition for debt is satisﬁed and
0 < ρ1 , ρ2 < 1 determine the serial correlation properties of the driving processes. The
expectations are taken with respect to the agents’ information set, which is assumed to
be, Ωt−1 = {ε1,t−j , ε2,t−j }∞
j=1 . If this process holds for t = 0, 1, ...T , then imposing the
transversality condition on government debt,
lim β N E(bt+N |Ωt−1 ) = 0

N →∞

implies the present-value restriction that the current value of outstanding debt equals future
discounted surpluses,
bt =

∞


β j E(st+j |Ωt−1 ).

(20)

j=1

Following Hansen, Roberds, and Sargent (1991) and Roberds (1991), the cross-equation
restrictions that satisfy (20) are given by
 
  
LA(L)
LC(L)
ε1,t
st
= β[L2 A(L)−β 2 A(β)] β[L2C(L)−β 2 C(β)]
bt
ε2,t
L−β
L−β
yt = P(L)vt
−1

−1

(21)

−γ
−γ
, and C(L) = (1−ρβ2 L)(1−γL)
. Two observations spring from (21).
where A(L) = (1−ρβ1 L)(1−γL)
First, foresight implies that (21) is not an invertible representation (due to the zero at L = 0).

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

16

Second, the cross-equation restrictions imposed on the moving-average representation are
nonlinear.
In light of the second observation, Campbell and Shiller (1987) derive the present-value
restrictions on the VAR representation instead of the moving-average representation. This
simpliﬁcation makes the present-value constraint easy to test, as it amounts to restrictions
on the coeﬃcients of the VAR. Denote the invertible representation of (21) by P ∗(L) and
write the corresponding VAR of (21) as15

 

 ∗
st−1
st
∗−1 ∗
∗−1 ε1t
= A0 A1(L)
+ A0
bt
bt−1
ε∗2t


  
a11 a12 st−1
w
=
+ 1t
a21 a22 bt−1
w2t
yt = A∗yt−1 + wt

(22)

Note that A∗(L) = P(L)∗−1 , implying that the coeﬃcients of the VAR will not yield the
correct cross-equation restrictions implied by (21) when there is foresight. Campbell and
Shiller (1987) show that the restrictions on the VAR coeﬃcients implied by the presentvalue constraint are given by
a11 + a21 = 0,

a22 + a12 = β −1

(23)

With foresight, however, the restrictions given by (23) will not hold even though the presentvalue constraint is satisﬁed. The VAR estimates give
a11 + a21 =

ηρ1 ρ2 βA(β)C(β)
,
ρ2 C(β) − ρ1 A(β)

a22 + a12 =

A(β)ηρ2ρ1(C(β) − A(β))
β(ρ2C(β) − ρ1 A(β))

where η = (1 + [A(β)C(β)]2)−1/2. Therefore, the econometrician will incorrectly reject the
null hypothesis that the present-value constraint holds.
Sargent (1981) calls for Granger (1969)-Sims (1972) causality tests to play a key role in
helping the econometrician determine which variables properly belong in agents’ information
sets. For example, causality tests are commonly used to justify treating variables as exogenous for purposes of inference. Causality tests, however, are misspeciﬁed if agents have ﬁscal
foresight.16 To see this more clearly, return to the analytical model of section 3 with one
quarter of foresight and an i.i.d. tax rule. The (true) moving-average representation, on the
left, and the (econometrician’s) fundamental representation, on the right, in the variables
(τ̂t , kt ) are given by
 



  
L
0
ετ,t
δ
−κδL
δ(ετ,t−1 + κεA,t−1 )
τ̂t
=
=
1
κ
− 1−αL
δ(−ετ,t + κεA,t )
0 [δ(1 − αL)]−1
kt
εA,t
1−αL
xt = D(L)t

=D∗ (L)∗t .

(24)

where δ = (1 + κ2)−1/2 . Note that the zero appearing in the true MA will appear in the
opposite oﬀ-diagonal in the econometrician’s representation. By theorem 1 of Sims (1972),
the econometrician’s representation implies that τ̂ fails to Granger-cause k; in fact, τ̂ lies in
15Given

the structure of the non-invertibility, the invertible representation is obtained as in (16).
(1990) shows that ﬁscal foresight can imply that money growth Granger-causes deﬁcits in an
equilibrium in which deﬁcits are systematically monetized.
16Leeper

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

17

a proper subspace of k, and hence k fails to Granger-cause τ̂. By not modeling foresight,
the econometrician eﬀectively reverses the Granger-causal ordering of the true dynamics.
5. Quantitative Importance of Foresight
This section examines the prevalence of noninvertibility in a more general setting and
assesses the quantitative importance of foresight. In doing so, the section pushes the analysis
forward in two fresh directions. First, we show that the modeling of information ﬂows,
which to this point has been rather crude, plays a critical role in determining whether the
equilibrium is fundamental. When the equilibrium is nonfundamental, moreover, information
ﬂows inﬂuence the magnitude of the error that an econometrician who does not model
foresight would make. Second, we conduct the analysis in a more complex DSGE model
that is calibrated to U.S. time series [details in appendix A]. By adding many of the features
that researchers commonly include in models that are ﬁt to data, this section moves the
analysis out of the realm of “toy” models and into the class of models now in use for practical
policy analysis. We demonstrate that many of the frictions found in DSGE models tend to
propagate the econometrician’s errors. To assess the quantitative importance of foresight, we
compute dynamic tax multipliers as estimated by an econometrician who ﬁts an identiﬁed
VAR and contrast those estimates to the true tax multipliers.
Two conclusions emerge. First, noninvertibility is a problem that is robust to substantial
variations in model structures and information ﬂows, so long as the information ﬂows imply
a suﬃcient degree of foresight. Second, the errors in inference from econometric estimates
that do not confront foresight can be substantial.
5.1. Brief Model Description. As appendix A describes in detail, we extend the basic
neoclassical growth model by adding elastic labor supply, variable utilization rates for capital, durable and non-durable consumption, habit formation in non-durable consumption,
investment adjustment costs, deliberation costs for durable goods, and seven exogenous
sources of random disturbance. Although this model abstracts from nominal considerations,
it nonetheless includes many of the features that have proven to be important in ﬁtting
DSGE models to data [see, for example, Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005), Smets
and Wouters (2003, 2007), Adolfson, Laseen, Linde, and Villani (2007)].
Two features of the extended model aim to reﬂect the type of signal-extraction problem
that agents actually face: endogeneity of tax policy and the gradual arrival of news about tax
changes. We incorporate both automatic stabilizers and a systematic adjustment of taxes
to the state of government debt, which relax the assumption of exogenous tax policy in the
analytical example. To move away from perfect foresight, news about tax policy changes at
time t is revealed gradually beginning at t − 4, t − 3,..., up to t. In log-linearized forms, labor
and capital income tax rates are
τ̂ti

=

i
ρi τ̂t−1

+

qiŝB
t−1

+ μi Ŷt +

4


φj εi,t−j

(25)

j=0

where ρi ∈ (0, 1), qi ≤ 0, and μi ≥ 0 for i = K, L. Tax news, as modeled by εi,t−j for
j = 1, ..., 4, is assumed to have an MA(4) process. For each i, εi,t is an i.i.d. random variable.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

18

When (25) determines tax choices, agents face a signal-extraction problem because, even if
they observe the ε’s one or more quarters in advance, they do not have advance knowledge
of Ŷ or ŝB . In addition, at time t a surprise piece of news, εi,t, arrives.
Modeling information ﬂows as moving average processes captures the idea that from quarter to quarter news about taxes evolves randomly. News might accumulate, with information
improving and concentrating agents’ probability distributions over future tax rates. Alternatively, news might disappoint, with agents’ expectations frustrated by realizations of ε’s
that suddenly reverse earlier expectations. This randomness
4 captures the vagaries of the
political process that determine ﬁscal choices. We restrict i=0 φi = 1 and φ4 ∈ [0, 1]. The
φ’s are interpreted as weights attached to news arriving at diﬀerent periods, reﬂecting their
importance in aﬀecting the tax policy that is ultimately implemented.
5.2. Generalizing Information Flows. Our analytical examples showed that invertibility
hinges on assumptions about information ﬂows and on discount factors that are functions
of the deep parameters of the model. To examine the robustness of our results, we apply
Fernandez-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramirez, Sargent, and Watson’s (2007) condition for invertibility of the moving-average representation to the more general calibrated DSGE model.
We ﬁnd that incorporating real frictions into the model does not ease the problem of noninvertibility.17 As long as φ4 = 1 and φ3 = φ2 = φ1 = φ0 = 0, so that agents have four
quarters of tax foresight, the equilibrium is always noninvertible. However, when news arrives
gradually—so that all the φ’s can be nonzero—there are certain parameter combinations that
produce an invertible equilibrium. The crucial factor that determines the impact of foresight
on invertibility, therefore, is the process of information ﬂows in the economy.
The model of section 3 with two periods of foresight provides useful intuition. We focus
on two aspects of the tax process: the persistence of tax shocks and the process governing
the arrival of tax news.
5.2.1. Persistence of Tax Policy. Suppose that the tax process follows τ̂t = ρτ̂t−1 + ετ,t−2.
Optimal capital accumulation is given by




τ (1 − θ)
(26)
(1 − ρθ)ετ,t−1 + θετ,t
(1 − αL)(1 − ρL)kt = εA,t −
(1 − τ )(1 − ρθ)
Assuming the econometrician can correctly identify the technology shock, this representation
is not invertible if θ < (1 + ρ)−1 . If the agent discounts recent news more than older news,
then the representation continues to be noninvertible. A highly persistent tax rate implies
the agent will more smoothly discount the shocks and older news will receive more of a
discount vis-á-vis the i.i.d. case in expression (8). If the discount factor is large enough
and there is enough persistence in the tax process, the agent will discount in the usual way,
yielding an invertible representation so that the optimal capital sequence will reveal the
agents’ information set.
In the analytical example, however, given θ = αβ(1 − τ ) and two periods of foresight, any
feasible choice of parameters implies (26) will be not be invertible. Moreover, this result
continues to hold when the tax rate follows an autoregressive process of length n, where n is
17We

perform 10,000 draws from distributions of parameters that yield a unique equilibrium.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

19

greater than or equal to the degree of foresight and is ﬁnite. If the tax rate follows an AR(n)
process with two periods of foresight, tedious algebra shows that the root of the moving
average component of capital is given by
θ + z(1 − ρ1 θ) + z 2 ρ3 θ3 + z 3ρ4 θ4 + · · · z n−1 ρn θn = 0.
The following theorem will be used to show that if θ < (1 + ρ1 )−1 , then the capital process
will not be invertible in the AR(n) case.
Theorem 1 (Rouché). Suppose that two functions f and g are analytic inside and on a
simple closed contour C. If |f(z)| > |g(z)| at each point on C, then the functions f(z) and
f(z) + g(z) have the same numbers of zeros, counting multiplicities, inside C.18
Deﬁne f(z) ≡ θ + z(1 − ρ1θ) and g(z) ≡ z 2ρ3 θ3 + z 3ρ4 θ4 + · · · z n−1 ρn θn and note that f(·) has
azero inside the unit circle if θ < (1 + ρ1 )−1 . Assuming the AR representation is stationary,
n
j=1 ρj < 1, gives f(·) > g(·) on the unit circle. Therefore, f(z) + g(z) has a zero inside the
unit circle and the representation is not invertible.
5.2.2. News Arrival Process. We now illustrate in the simple analytical model how treating information as ﬂowing according to a moving average process alters the conditions for
invertibility. Consider the following tax process, which simpliﬁes (25)
τ̂t = φετ,t−2 + (1 − φ)ετ,t−1

(27)

When φ ∈ (0, 1), there is no exact degree of foresight. τt+1 depends on information received
both last period and two periods ago. The limiting cases, φ = {0, 1}, imply a capital sequence
given by expression (7) (which is invertible) or by expression (8) (which is not invertible),
respectively. The parameter φ dictates the relative importance of the news received by the
agents at time t and earlier. The larger is φ, the more weight is given to news received
two periods ago when forecasting future tax rates. To see this more clearly, note that the
equilibrium capital dynamics are given by


(1 − θ)τ
{[1 − φ(1 − θ)]ετ,t + φετ,t−1}
(28)
kt = αkt−1 + εA,t −
1−τ
If φ ≈ 1, the tax process implies agents will down weight more recent news (ετ,t) relative
to older news (ετ,t−1). This leads to the perverse discounting of news that makes the representation noninvertible. More generally, if more recent news receives the heavier discount,
1 − φ(1 − θ) < φ, then the equilibrium will not be invertible, and the information set of the
agent will not coincide with the econometrician’s.
Major tax news that lays out the future direction of policy tends to arrive several quarters
before tax policy changes are implemented. Once tax legislation is proposed, the subsequent
negotiations between the two parties in Congress can, but often does not, introduce important changes in the details of a tax proposal. This suggests that in data, the weight on
the older news tends to be larger than the weight on more recent news. As a result, the
equilibrium is quite likely not to be invertible.
18See

Tutschke and Vasudeva (2005).

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

20

5.2.3. Information Flows and Forecast Errors. The extent to which private agents condition
on information that cannot be captured by current and past variables that are observable
to the econometrician determines the forecast error of an econometric model. The φ’s in
equation (25) indicate the weight given to each piece of tax news, ετ , received in previous
periods. If φ4 = 1, then only the innovations dated t = 4 and earlier will inﬂuence the
current tax rate.
The analytics in section 3 can be used to show that the information discrepancy depends
upon the discount factor θ. Recall that with two quarters of foresight equilibrium capital
evolves as
κ(L + θ)
ετ,t
kt = −
1 − αL
The variance of the one-step-ahead forecast error for the agent is given by19
2 

κ(L + θ)
−κ(L + θ)
2
−1
ετ,t+1 − L [−
+ κθ]ετ,t
E[(kt+1 − E[kt+1 |ετ,t, ετ,t−1, ...]) ] = E
1 − αL
1 − αL
(29)
= (κθ)2 στ2
For the econometrician’s information set, the variance of the forecast error is given by20


 2 
−κ(L + θ)
κ(1 + θL)
L+θ
2
−1
E[(kt+1 − E[kt+1 |kt , kt−1 , ...]) ] = E
ετ,t+1 − L [−
+ κ]
ετ,t
1 − αL
1 − αL
1 + θL
= κ2στ2
(30)
The diﬀerence between (29) and (30) is the discount factor θ. As θ approaches unity (zero),
the diﬀerence between the agent and econometrician’s information sets is small (large). If
θ is greater than or equal to 1, the representation for capital becomes fundamental and the
variances of the forecast errors (29) and (30) would coincide.
This reasoning extends to the more complex calibrated model. A necessary condition for a
representation, Xt = F (L)t, to be fundamental—and for the variance of the agent’s and the
econometrician’s forecast errors to coincide—is for the determinant of F (L) to have no zeros
inside the unit circle. The number and size of the zeros inside the unit circle will determine
the size of the econometrician’s error when estimating a structural VAR. Smaller numbers
indicate a larger discrepancy between the agent’s and the econometrician’s information sets.
Table 1 is based on the calibrated DSGE model using a tax rule that simpliﬁes (25),
τ̂t = φ0ετ,t + φ1 ετ,t−1 + φ2ετ,t−2. The table reports the multiplication of the zeros of the
structural VAR for the calibrated parameters as the informational assumptions of the tax
processes varies. We assume φ3 = φ4 = 0 and φ1, φ2 ∈ (0, 1) with φ1 + φ2 ≤ 1 and
φ0 = 1 − (φ1 + φ2 ).
Two points are noteworthy. First, as the minor diagonal indicates, if the tax process does
not depend upon contemporaneous innovations (i.e., φ1 + φ2 = 1), the econometrician’s estimates will deviate substantially from the truth, with multiplied zeros essentially equal to
zero. In these cases the agent observes the tax innovation in advance, making her one-stepahead forecast errors nearly zero. The econometrician does not see the news in advance,
19

These derivations assume the econometrician observes the technology shock exactly.
that the variance of the Blaschke factor is unity.

20Note

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

21

φ1
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
←1→
.30 .09 .02 5.3∗
←1→
.99 .15 .02 3.8∗
←1→
.99 .44 .03 3.1∗
.99 .56 .25 .06 2.4∗
.36 .16 .04 2.8∗
.11 .03 1.5∗
.02 1.1∗
0.9∗

0.1 0.2
0.1
0.2
0.3
φ2 0.4 1
0.5 .64
0.6 .25
0.7 .08
0.8 .02
0.9 .85∗

Table 1. The entries are the multiplication of the zeros inside the unit circle for the structural VAR representation. Smaller numbers indicate a larger
discrepancy between the information set of the agent and econometrician, and
unity signiﬁes no discrepancy. A * indicates number multiplied by 10−12 .

making his forecast errors relatively large. Second, table 1 shows the extent to which information ﬂows will alter the errors made by the structural VAR. If most of the weight is on φ0
(upper left part of the table), the structural VAR will not be misspeciﬁed. As more weight
is placed on φ1 and φ2 , the errors become very large.
Evidently, the errors in inference made by the econometrician are very sensitive to information ﬂows. This conﬁrms our belief that accurately specifying information ﬂows is crucial
to understanding the eﬀects of ﬁscal policy. In practice, the legislative and implementation
lags associated with ﬁscal policy create information ﬂows that are likely to produce zeros in
F (L) close to the minor diagonal, suggesting large econometric errors. We turn now to a
closer examination of the errors.
5.2.4. Robustness to Information Flows. We generalize the information ﬂows underlying table 1 by returning to the speciﬁcation of tax policy behavior in (25) but randomly drawing
the moving-average coeﬃcients—the φ’s. We ﬁx the model parameters at their calibrated
values in table 2 [appendix A] and draw the information parameters, the φ’s, according to
the following distributions:
φ4 ∼ 1 − β(1.5, 5);

φ1 , φ2, φ3 ∼ U[0, 0.1]

(31)

where the distribution of φ4 is left skewed between 0 and 1 and has a theoretical mean
of 0.77 and standard deviation of 0.15. This distribution assumes that most of the news
regarding changes in ﬁscal policy will be known up to a year in advance. It does not imply, a
priori, that the equilibrium process will be nonfundamental. We believe it is a conservative
approximation to the actual data generating process for U.S. tax policy in that it understates
the degree of foresight in practice.21
21Yang

(2008) estimates that the sum of the legislative and implementation lags averages about seven
quarters in the United States, while Mertens and Ravn (2008), drawing on the narrative work by Romer and
Romer (2007b), ﬁgure the median total lag to be six quarters.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

Impact Y Multiplier

1−Year Y Multiplier

1

1
0.8

0.6

0

Estimated
Truth

1−φ

1−φ0

0.8

0.4

0.6
0.4

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

0

1

0

1

3−Year Y Multiplier
1

0.8

0.8
0

1

1−φ

1−φ0

2−Year Y Multiplier

0.6
0.4

0.6
0.4

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

−5

−4

4−Year Y Multiplier

−3

−2

−1

5−Year Y Multiplier
1

0.8

0.8
0

1

1−φ

1−φ0

22

0.6
0.4

0.6
0.4

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1

Figure 4. Output Multipliers: True Value (∗) and Econometrician’s Estimate (+). Anticipated increase in capital taxes using information ﬂows implied
by policy rule (25).
For each draw of information parameters (φ’s), we simulate 10 datasets of 500 quarters
by drawing from the seven structural shocks. We estimate the VAR with the following
variables: capital tax rate, revenues, non-durable consumption, durable consumption, investment, output, and government debt.22 The tax eﬀects reported by the econometrician
for each draw of information parameters are the mean responses estimated from the 10 simulated datasets. To separate the issue of identiﬁcation from invertibility, we assume that the
econometrician has the exact income elasticity, μi for i = K, L, in identifying the structural
tax shocks. We conﬁrm that if no foresight is present, this identiﬁcation strategy delivers
accurate estimates.23
Figures 4-6 plot the actual (denoted ∗) and the estimated (denoted +) tax multipliers
at various horizons. The multipliers are dollar changes in output, nondurable consumption,
and investment due to an anticipated increase in the capital tax rate. Impulse responses are
normalized so that the peak response in revenues equals $1. Multipliers are plotted against
1 − φ0 on the vertical axes, which serves as a measure of the degree of foresight: when φ0 = 0
22Results

are invariant to alternative conditioning variables.
assumption is not innocuous. Foresight may make it extremely diﬃcult to reliably estimate the μi
elasticities. We abstract from this diﬃculty, so our results are the best case scenario for the econometrician.
23This

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

Impact C Multiplier

1−Year C Multiplier

1

1
0.8

0.6

0

Truth
Estimated

1−φ

1−φ0

0.8

0.4
−1.2

0.6
0.4

−1

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0

−1.2

−1

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0

−0.2

0

−0.2

0

3−Year C Multiplier
1

0.8

0.8
0

1

1−φ

1−φ0

2−Year C Multiplier

0.6
0.4
−1.2

0.6
0.4

−1

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0

−1.2

−1

−0.8

4−Year C Multiplier

−0.6

−0.4

5−Year C Multiplier
1

0.8

0.8
0

1

1−φ

1−φ0

23

0.6
0.4
−1.2

0.6
0.4

−1

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0

−1.2

−1

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

Figure 5. Nondurable Consumption Multipliers: True Value (∗) and Econometrician’s Estimate (+). Anticipated increase in capital taxes using information ﬂows implied by policy rule (25).

there is no exogenous surprise in tax rates; when φ0 = 1 there is no exogenous advanced
news about tax rates.
Empirical estimates of output multipliers following a $1 surprise change in tax revenues
vary widely. Blanchard and Perotti (2002) estimate a peak response of output between
−$1.33 and −$0.78, while Mountford and Uhlig (2008) estimate a much larger response of
−$3.23. The multipliers in ﬁgures 4-6 are not strictly comparable because they pertain to
an anticipated increase in the capital tax rate that raises revenues by $1, with no correlated
shock to the labor tax rate.
The ﬁgures show that as the degree of foresight varies—along the vertical axis—the econometrician’s estimated multipliers can deviate dramatically from the truth. The bias is largest
at the one-year horizon, which coincides with the maximum degree of foresight. Biases can
be very large: $3 for output, a factor of ﬁve for consumption, and a factor of two or more
for investment.
Biases tend to be smaller at longer horizons for both output and investment. This tendency
does not carry over to consumption, where the bias continues to be substantial even ﬁve years
after the tax news arrives. This diﬀerence is explained in the next section.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

Impact I Multiplier

1−Year I Multiplier

1

1
0.8
0

Truth
Estimated

1−φ

1−φ0

0.8
0.6
0.4
−4

0.6
0.4

−3

−2

−1

0

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

3−Year I Multiplier
1

0.8

0.8
0

1

1−φ

1−φ0

2−Year I Multiplier

0.6
0.4
−4

0.6
0.4

−3

−2

−1

0

−4

−3

4−Year I Multiplier

−2

−1

0

5−Year I Multiplier
1

0.8

0.8
0

1

1−φ

1−φ0

24

0.6
0.4
−4

0.6
0.4

−3

−2

−1

0

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

Figure 6. Investment Multipliers: True Value (∗) and Econometrician’s Estimate (+). Anticipated increase in capital taxes using information ﬂows implied
by policy rule (25).

The ﬁgures also make clear that biases can be of any sign. Even when news of a future
rise in capital tax rates actually reduces output in the short run, there are information ﬂows
that rationalize a diverse set of econometric inferences: the one-year estimated multiplier
could range from $1 to −$5. Figures 2a and 3a show that the simple analytical model can
produce the range of inferences of anticipated tax eﬀects that appears in empirical work.
Figures 4-6 make the analogous point in a calibrated DSGE model drawn from the class of
models in use for policy analysis.

5.2.5. Robustness to Internal Propagation. It is important to understand how aspects of
the model (e.g., parameters or assumptions) alter the eﬀects of foresight. The internal
propagation mechanisms built into many macroeconomic models are introduced to better
match important empirical characteristics. For example, investment adjustment costs are
introduced to elongate impulse response functions so that investment shocks have a smoother,
more persistent eﬀect on economic activity. Figure 7 demonstrates the response of investment
to a tax shock as the investment adjustment cost parameter changes from 0.5 to 0. The
dotted-dashed lines are the true responses of investment to news of a higher capital tax

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

25

0.8
2

0.6

1.5

1

0.4

0.5
0.2
0
0

−0.5

−1

−0.2

−1.5
−0.4
−2
−0.6
−2.5

−0.8

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

Figure 7a: With Adjustment Costs (γ = 0.5)

20

−3

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

Figure 7b: Without Adjustment Costs (γ = 0)

Figure 7. Response of Investment to Higher Anticipated Capital Tax Rate.
True responses (dotted-dashed lines) and means (solid lines) and 95% error
bands (dotted lines) of estimated responses.
rate, while the solid lines are the means of the econometrician’s estimated responses and the
dotted lines are 95% error bands.24
With investment adjustment costs turned oﬀ (ﬁgure 7b), the reaction at the quarter of
foresight, period four, is abrupt while the periods leading up to the quarter of foresight
are relatively unresponsive. With high adjustment costs (0.5), the model penalizes rapid
adjustments to investment and the agent slowly reduces investment in the periods before
the quarter of foresight. As the ﬁgure demonstrates, introducing frictions into the model
implies that the econometrician will not only misspecify short-run dynamics but potentially
medium-term dynamics as well.
5.2.6. Eﬀects of Other Shocks. Interestingly, we do not ﬁnd much evidence of misspeciﬁcation
of non-foresight shocks in the model. The analytical results of section 4 suggest that the
econometrician will not only draw incorrect inferences regarding the ﬁscal shocks but all
remaining shocks of the estimated VAR will also be misspeciﬁed. To examine this, we
identify the government spending shock and assume agents have no foresight with respect
to this shock. The true impulse response functions were all very close to the structural VAR
estimates; the lone exception is investment, which falls outside of the 90% error band.
While this suggests that foresight might not impinge on the identiﬁcation of other shocks,
we oﬀer two important caveats. First, in our simulation exercises, we give the econometrician
the exact parameters of the model necessary for identifying the shocks. This is done to
pinpoint the eﬀects of foresight. If instead we were to assume that the econometrician must
estimate these parameters, the results would look much worse. Second, and perhaps more
importantly, many recent papers argue that foresight should be extended in many directions
[e.g., Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2008)]. Indeed, Ramey (2007) argues forcefully that agents
will have knowledge of a government spending shock long before it hits the economy. There
24Based

on 100 simulated data sets of length 245 quarters.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

26

is no doubt that the introduction of multiple sources of foresight and, therefore of possible
noninvertibility, will dramatically magnify the size of the error for all shocks.
6. Concluding Remarks: Attacking the Problem
We have explicitly shown how ﬁscal foresight introduces econometric diﬃculties that complicate the interpretation of conventional econometric analyses. The crux of the issue is that
foresight, of any type, can introduce nonfundamental moving average representations into
the linear equilibrium process. This implies that the mapping between the true tax news
that agents observe and the “tax shocks” that the econometrician identiﬁes can be vastly
diﬀerent. Many of the econometric techniques in macroeconomists’ toolboxes—impulse response functions, variance decompositions, Granger-causality tests, tests of cross-equation
restrictions—can be distorted by empirical methods that do not adequately estimate the
non-invertible moving average components of equilibrium time series. Section 5 demonstrates that foresight is quantitatively important in the class of models now in wide use for
macro policy analysis.
Using theory to understand the econometric problems associated with ﬁscal foresight is a
necessary ﬁrst step toward developing econometric techniques to correct for potential noninvertibility problems. The macroeconomic literature does not take a theoretical approach
to identify the eﬀects of ﬁscal foresight; that empirical work has also produced a wide range
of results. This paper explains the wide range of inferences as stemming from confronting
the econometric work with alternative assumptions about the ﬂow of information about tax
changes.
Two lines of attack appear in the empirical macro literature. The ﬁrst estimates conventional VARs, identiﬁed in a variety of creative ways to isolate “anticipated taxes,” and
then examines the impacts of ﬁscal foresight ex-post [Sims (1988), Blanchard and Perotti
(2002), Yang (2007), Mountford and Uhlig (2008)]. A second line rejects VAR identiﬁcation schemes ex-ante, arguing that they cannot adequately measure the impacts of foreseen
changes in ﬁscal policy, and takes a diﬀerent—narrative—approach to identiﬁcation that
brings fresh data to bear on the problem [Ramey and Shapiro (1998), Edelberg, Eichenbaum, and Fisher (1999), Ramey (2007), Romer and Romer (2007a), Mertens and Ravn
(2008)]. Unfortunately, as noted earlier, no consensus about the impacts of anticipated tax
changes has emerged from either line of attack.
The explicit analytical characterization of ﬁscal foresight that we present allows one to
understand these diverse approaches within a single framework: both the ex-post and exante approaches share the aim of ﬁnding instrumental variables for news about future tax
changes. Returning to the simple model of section 3, the equilibrium representation of capital
is invertible in current and future capital, implying that a good instrument for the tax news
that arrives at t would be highly correlated with a particular weighted average of current
and future capital:25
kt = (α−1 + θ)kt+1 − θ(α−1 + θ)kt+2 + θ2 (α−1 + θ)kt+3 − · · · + α−1 κετ,t.
25Although

(32)

the simple mapping (32) emerges from this stylized example, any given theoretical model will
yield an analogous mapping that produces an object with which a good instrument should be correlated.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

27

In Leeper, Walker, and Yang (2008) we analyze the eﬃcacy of the ex-ante and ex-post
approaches. We provide conditions under which each approach delivers as a valid instrument.
We argue that the diverse results can largely be attributed to the quality of the instrumental
variable. Performance quality depends entirely on auxiliary assumptions about, for example,
information ﬂows and tax policy behavior. Both the ex-ante and ex-post approaches help to
alleviate the informational discrepancy between the agent and the econometrician, but they
do not obviate the need to confront the diﬃcult issues associated with modeling information
ﬂows and identifying exogenous ﬁscal actions. As our results in the previous section highlight,
slight deviations in information ﬂows can dramatically alter conclusions about ﬁscal policy
behavior.
A third, less macro-oriented, empirical approach is associated with Poterba (1989), Fortune
(1996), and Park (1997). Those papers exploit the diﬀerential tax treatment of municipal
bonds and other bonds, such as treasury and corporate securities, to identify innovations in
yield spreads with news about tax policy changes. When markets are eﬃcient, asset prices
reﬂect all information currently available to market participants, especially news concerning
the future paths of relevant variables. Because asset prices react quickly to news, conditioning
on asset prices should alleviate the discrepancy between the agents’ and the econometrician’s
information sets. This hypothesis led Beaudry and Portier (2006) to include stock prices
in a VAR in order to capture agents’ expectations about future changes in productivity.
Asset price movements are notoriously diﬃcult to interpret. It is hard to disentangle the
movement in asset prices associated with news from other sources of variation (e.g., changes
in risk premia).26 Ideally, the asset could be decomposed along some measurable dimension
to identify changes in news. Consider the case of ﬁscal foresight and municipal bonds. If
Rm is the yield on a municipal bond and R the yield on a taxable bond, then an “implicit
tax rate” can be calculated as τ = 1 − Rm /R, assuming the bonds have the same term to
maturity and credit risk. This is the tax rate at which the investor is indiﬀerent between the
tax-exempt and taxable bonds. If participants in the municipal bond market are forward
looking, the implicit tax rate should predict subsequent movements in individual tax rates.
Several papers document the ability of the municipal bond market to forecast changes in
ﬁscal policy [Poterba (1989), Fortune (1996), Park (1997)].
Finally, it is straightforward to use standard methods, such as An and Schorfheide (2007),
to estimate a model with foresight. This is the approach taken in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe
(2008), who make very particular assumptions about the information ﬂows that give rise
to foresight about technology and government spending. The tradeoﬀ is that the modeler
must be explicit about the role of information in the economy. As table 1 and ﬁgures
4-6 document, diﬀerent assumptions about information ﬂows can dramatically alter the
dynamics of the model and the associated econometric inferences. Robust results may emerge
from making the distribution of information more ﬂexible. A tricky aspect of this endeavor
is that misspeciﬁcation of information ﬂows is likely to get confounded with other types
of misspeciﬁcation, which is why it is essential to check for robustness of ﬁndings across
speciﬁcations of information ﬂows.
26

This identiﬁcation is less problematic for tax foresight than it is in Beaudry and Portier’s (2006) environment. News about technology amounts to a latent variable that provides information about an unobservable;
news about taxes, on the other hand, is a latent variable informing about a measurable object—tax rates or
revenues.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

28

This paper is the ﬁrst to document theoretically the important empirical implications generated by foresight. Future research will focus on developing the theoretical and econometric
techniques necessary to handle the issues implied by the analytical framework examined here.
Progress in identifying the dynamic impacts of tax changes calls for a fresh perspective on
the problem that carefully models the information ﬂows that underlie ﬁscal foresight.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

29

Appendix A. A Model with Real Rigidities
A.1. The Model Economy. The economy includes several features commonly added to
real business cycle (RBC) models to improve their ﬁt to data. Basic RBC models, while
capable of producing comparable moments of many key macroeconomic variables [Prescott
(1986) and King and Rebelo (1999)], rely heavily on technology shocks to generate ﬂuctuations in aggregate economic activity. The literature, however, cannot identify a large single
shock that is as quantitatively important as implied by the model [Cochrane (1994)]. Features such as variable factor utilization rates and durable goods consumption are designed
to enhance the propagation mechanisms of the RBC model [Bils and Cho (1994) and ?]. In
addition, models without frictions adjustment too quickly to innovations, inconsistent with
empirical ﬁndings. Features such as habit formation, deliberation costs, and investment
adjustment costs are intended to capture the sluggish responses found in estimates VARs
[Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Fisher (2004)].
A.1.1. Preferences. A representative household derives utility from three sources: nondurable
goods consumption (Ct ), durable goods consumption (Dt ), and leisure (1 − Lt ). It incurs
disutility from working and making decisions on durable good purchases. The utility function
takes the form
1
1− τ

1
1
1
1− σ
1− σ
∗ 1− σ
1−θ
(Ct )
+ vDt
ϕ (Dt − Dt−1 )2
(1 − Lt )
−1
−
+ χt
.
Ut ≡
1
2
Dt−1
1−θ
1− τ

Consumption enters the utility function in the form of Ct∗ ≡ Ct − bCt−1, where b ≥ 0,
indicating the degree of habit formation. τ and σ are the elasticities of inter temporal and
intratemporal substitution in consumption. θ is the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution in leisure. χt is the preference weight on leisure, subject to i.i.d. shocks εχt;
2
χ
t−1 )
χt = χeεt and εχt ∼ N(0, σχ2 ). The quadratic term − ϕ2 (Dt−D
(ϕ > 0) captures disutility
Dt−1
from changing the durable stock, often interpreted as deliberation costs.
The inﬁnitely lived household maximizes expected lifetime utility
∞

E0
β tξt Ut ,
t=0

subject to the budget constraint


Ct + Dt + It + Bt = 1 − τtL Wt Lt + (1 − τtK )rt ut Kt−1 + (1 − δD ) Dt−1 + Rt−1 Bt−1 + Tt,
and the law of motion for capital
Kt = (1 − δt )Kt−1 − Ω(It, It−1 ).

(33)

εξt

ξt is an i.i.d. shock to the rate of discount, with ξt = ξe . Bt is government debt issued at
time t, which pays Rt Bt units of goods at t + 1. It is gross investment, including investment
adjustment costs. As in Burnside,
 and Fisher (2004), we assume the net
 Eichenbaum,

It
investment takes the form Ω(·) ≡ 1 − Γ It−1 × It, where Γ (1) = Γ (1) = 0 and Γ (1) ≡
γ > 0.27 τtL and τtK are marginal labor and capital income tax rates, and Tt is lump-sum
27The

method of solution does not require the speciﬁcation of Γ(·), only γ.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

30

transfers. Wt is the wage rate for labor. Finally, ut is the capital utilization rate and rt is
the rental rate for one eﬀective unit of capital, ut Kt−1 .
We assume a constant depreciation rate for durables, δD , but not for capital. As in ?,
using capital more intensively makes capital depreciate at a faster rate. The depreciation
rate of capital has the form
δt = δuωt ,
(34)
where 0 < δ < 1 and ω > 1.
A.1.2. Production. A representative ﬁrm rents capital and labor from households to maximize proﬁt
(35)
Yt − Wt Lt − rt utKt−1 .
It produces goods according to the technology
.
Yt = At (ut Kt−1 )α L1−α
t

(36)

Technology, At, evolves according to
ln At = ρA ln At−1 + εA
t .

(37)

A.1.3. Government. Government each period sells one-period bonds and collect tax revenues
to pay for its expenditures on government consumption (Gt ) and transfers and to service its
debt obligations Rt−1 Bt−1 . The government’s budget constraint at each date is
Bt = Gt + Rt−1 Bt−1 − τtL Wt Lt − τtK rtut Kt−1 + Tt.

(38)

To maintain budget solvency, ﬁscal variables adjust in response to changes of government
Bt
indebtedness, as measured by deviations of the debt-output ratio (sB
t ≡ Yt ) from its steady
state level. Fiscal rules in log-linearized form (variables denoted byˆ) are as follows.
Transfer-output ratio, sTt ≡

Tt
Yt
T
ŝTt = ρT ŝTt−1 + qT ŝB
t−1 + εt ,

(39)

where 0 < ρT < 1, qT ≤ 0, εTt is an i.i.d. transfer shock, and εTt ∼ N(0, σT2 )
Government spending-output ratio, sG
t ≡

Gt
Yt

G
B
G
ŝG
t = ρG ŝt−1 + qG ŝt−1 + εt ,

(40)

G
2
where 0 < ρG < 1, qG ≤ 0, εG
t is an i.i.d. government spending shock, and εt ∼ N(0, σG )

Labor and capital tax rates are speciﬁed in (25).
A.2. Benchmark Calibration. The model is calibrated at a quarterly frequency. Table 2
summarizes the benchmark calibration. The benchmark calibration assumes four quarters
of foresight (φ4 = 1) and implies a steady state nondurable consumption-output ratio of
0.60, durable expenditures-output ratio of 0.09, investment-output ratio of 0.12, government
consumption-output ratio of 0.20, and debt-output ratio of 0.44. The corresponding average

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

Parameter
α
β
θ
δ
δD
ρT , ρG , ρK, ρL
ρA
μK
μL

Value
.36
.99
1
.02
.025
.9
.95
1
.2

Parameter
τL
τK
sT
sG
qT
qG
qK , qL
ϕ
b

Value
.2
.39
.064
.2
−.02
−.02
.01
4
.5

Parameter
ξ
ω
γ
τ
σ
σG
σA
σK , σL
σξ , σχ , σT

31

Value
1
1.9
.3
.6
1.05
.015
.007
.02
.005

Table 2. Benchmark calibration.
Relative s.d. in % Correl. with output 1st-order AR
Model
Data
Model
Data
Model Data
Output
1
1
1
1
.74
.84
Nondurables
.39
.47
.84
.78
.81
.78
Durables
3.13
3.09
.80
.58
.43
.72
Investment
5.74
4.79
.83
.83
.88
.78
Labor
.75
.88
.36
.87
.69
.91
Govt Spending
2.51
2.14
.06
.17
.74
.90
Capital Tax Rev. 3.64
3.11
.41
.54
.78
.83
Labor Tax Rev.
2.71
3.53
.18
.78
.68
.78
Table 3. Business cycle statistics for the model and the U.S. Economy,
1947:1Q-2008:2Q: relative standard deviations are in percent; 1st-order AR
is the autoregressive coeﬃcient for each series.
ratios in the U.S. data from 1947:1Q to 2008:2Q are 0.56, 0.08, 0.16, 0.20, and 0.42, respectively.28 Other statistics, based on 1000 simulations, are summarized in table 3. For each
variable of interest, the Hodrick-Prescott ﬁlter is applied to simulated data in logarithm. For
each series, we compute standard deviations in percent normalized by the standard deviation
of output, contemporaneous correlation coeﬃcients with output, and the coeﬃcient of the
ﬁrst-order autoregressive process. The model produces business cycle moments comparable
to the postwar U.S. data for most variables examined here.29
One caveat is that the model generates much weaker positive correlation between output
and labor than the empirical counterpart. Two main factors dampen the correlation between
output and labor. First, the automatic stabilizer built in the labor income tax rule raises the
labor income tax rate when output rises, which suppresses the positive response of labor to
a shock that increases output. Second, in response to a technology shock, the current model
28The

debt-output ratio is based on the average ratio of federal debt held by the public as computed in
table B-79 of Economic Report of the President (2008), from 1947 to 2007.
29
The data counterpart is taken as aggregate hours of wage and salary workers on nonfarm payrolls by
sector, available at ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/opt/tableb10.txt. Data counterpart of government
spending is government consumption and investment of all levels of government. Capital and labor income
tax revenues are constructed based on Jones’s (2002) deﬁnitions.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

32

with real rigidities such as habit formation and investment adjustment costs suppress the
quick movement in labor and dampens the positive contemporaneous correlation between
output and labor.

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

33

References
Abel, A. B. (1982): “Dynamic Eﬀects of Permanent and Temporary Tax Policies in a q
Model of Investment,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 9(3), 353–373. 8
Adolfson, M., S. Laseen, J. Linde, and M. Villani (2007): “RAMSES—A New
General Equilibrium Model for Monetary Policy Analysis,” Sveriges Riksbank Economic
Review, (2), 5–39. 17
An, S., and F. Schorfheide (2007): “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” Econometric
Reviews, 26(2-4), 113–172. 27
Auerbach, A. J. (1989): “Tax Reform and Adjustment Costs: The Impact on Investment
and Market Value,” International Economic Review, 30(4), 939–962. 8
Auerbach, A. J., and J. Slemrod (1997): “The Economic Eﬀects of the Tax Reform
Act of 1986,” Journal of Economic Literature, 35(2), 589–632. 1, 4
Beaudry, P., and F. Portier (2006): “Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations,”
American Economic Review, 96(4), 1293–1307. 3, 27
Bils, M., and J.-O. Cho (1994): “Cyclical Factor Utilization,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 33(2), 319–354. 29
Blanchard, O. J., and R. Perotti (2002): “An Empirical Characterization of the
Dynamic Eﬀects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 117(4), 1329–1368. 1, 10, 23, 26
Blattner, T., M. Catenaro, M. Ehrmann, R. Strauch, and J. Turunen (2008):
“The Predictability of Monetary Policy,” European Central Bank Occasional Paper No.
83. 4
Branson, W. H., A. Fraga, and R. A. Johnson (1986): “Expected Fiscal Policy and
the Recession of 1982,” in Prices, Competition, and Equilibrium, ed. by M. H. Peston, and
R. E. Quandt, pp. 109–128. Barnes & Noble, Totowa, New Jersey. 1, 4
Braun, R. A. (1994): “Tax Disturbances and Real Economic Activity in the Postwar
United States,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 33(June), 441–462. 1
Burman, L. E., K. A. Clausing, and J. F. O’Hare (1994): “Tax Reform and Realizations of Capital Gains in 1986,” National Tax Journal, 47(1), 1–18. 1, 5
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and J. D. M. Fisher (2004): “Assessing the Eﬀects of
Fiscal Shocks,” Journal of Economic Theory, 115(1), 89–117. 29
Campbell, J. Y., and R. J. Shiller (1987): “Cointegration and Tests of Present Value
Models,” Journal of Political Economy, 95(5), 1062–1088. 15, 16
Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005): “Nominal Rigidities
and the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy,
113(1), 1–45. 17
Christiano, L. J., C. Ilut, R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2007): “Monetary Policy
and Stock Market Boom-Bust Cycles,” Manuscript, Northwestern University. 3, 12
Chung, H., and E. M. Leeper (2007): “What Has Financed Government Debt?,” NBER
Working Paper No. 13425. 2
Cochrane, J. H. (1994): “Shocks,” Carneige-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 41, 295–364. 29

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

34

Coenen, G., and R. Straub (2004): “Non-Ricardian Households and Fiscal Policy in an
Estimated DSGE Model of the Euro Area,” Manuscript, European Central Bank. 1
Congressional Budget Office (2002): “Capital Gains Taxes and Federal Revenues,”
Revenue and Tax Policy Brief. 4
Cooley, T. F., and M. Dwyer (1995): “Business Cycle Analysis Without Much Theory:
A Look at Structural VARs,” Journal of Econometrics, 83(1-2), 57–88. 2
Deaton, A. S. (1987): “Life-Cycle Models of Consumption: Is the Evidence Consistent
with the Theory?,” in Advances in Econometrics: Fifth World Congress, ed. by T. F.
Bewley, vol. II, pp. 121–148. Cambridge University Press, New York. 3
Dungey, M., and R. Fry (2007): “The Identiﬁcation of Fiscal and Monetary Policy in a
Structural VAR,” CAMA Working Paper 29/2007, Australian National University. 2
Economic Report of the President (2008): United States Government Printing Oﬃce.
Washington, D.C. 31
Edelberg, W., M. Eichenbaum, and J. D. M. Fisher (1999): “Understanding the
Eﬀects of a Shock to Government Purchases,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2(1), 166–
206. 6, 26
Faust, J., J. H. Rogers, E. Swanson, and J. H. Wright (2003): “Identifying the Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks on Exchange Rates Using High Frequency Data,” Journal
of the European Economic Association, 1(5), 1031–1057. 2
Faust, J., E. Swanson, and J. H. Wright (2004): “Identifying VARs Based on High
Frequency Futures Data,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51(6), 1107–1131. 2
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (1986): “Monetary Policy and Open Market
Operations in 1985,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Review, 11(1), 34–53.
5
(1987): “Monetary Policy and Open Market Operations in 1986,” Federal Reserve
Bank of New York Quarterly Review, 12(1), 35–56. 5
Feldstein, M., and D. R. Feenberg (1996): “The Eﬀect of Increased Tax Rates on
Taxable Income and Economic Eﬃciency: A Preliminary Analysis of the 1993 Tax Rate
Increase,” in Tax Policy and the Economy, ed. by J. Poterba, vol. 10, pp. 89–117. MIT
Press, Cambridge. 6
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., J. F. Rubio-Ramirez, and T. J. Sargent (2005): “A,
B, C’s (and D)’s for Understanding VARs,” NBER Technical Working Paper 308. 3
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., J. F. Rubio-Ramirez, T. J. Sargent, and M. W.
Watson (2007): “ABCs (and Ds) of Understanding VARs,” American Economic Review,
97(3), 1021–1026. 2, 3, 18
Forni, L., L. Monteforte, and L. Sessa (2006): “Keynes vs. Ricardo: Revisiting the
Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy in an Estimated DSGE Model for the Euro Area,” Manuscript,
Bank of Italy. 1
Fortune, P. (1996): “Do Municipal Bond Yields Forecast Tax Policy?,” Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston New England Economic Review, September/October, 29–48. 27
Fry, R., and A. R. Pagan (2005): “Some Issues in Using VARs for Macroeconometric
Research,” CAMA Working Paper 19/2005, Australian National University. 2
Giannone, D., and L. Reichlin (2006): “Does Information Help Recovering Structural
Shocks from Past Observations?,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(2-3),
455–465. 2

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

35

Giannone, D., L. Reichlin, and L. Sala (2006): “VARs, Common Factors and the
Empirical Validation of Equilibrium Business Cycle Models,” Journal of Econometrics,
132(1), 257–279. 2
Goolsbee, A. (2000): “Its Not About the Money: Why Natural Experiments Dont Work
on the Rich.,” in Does Atlas Shrug: The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, ed.
by J. Slemord, pp. 141–158. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. 6
Granger, C. W. J. (1969): “Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and
Cross-spectral Methods,” Econometrica, 37(3), 424–438. 16
Hansen, L. P., W. Roberds, and T. J. Sargent (1991): “Time Series Implications
of Present Value Budget Balance and of Martingale Models of Consumption and Taxes,”
in Rational Expectations Econometrics, ed. by L. P. Hansen, and T. J. Sargent. Westview
Press, Boulder, CO. 15
Hansen, L. P., and T. J. Sargent (1980): “Formulating and Estimating Dynamic Linear
Rational Expectations Models,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2, 7–46. 2
(1991): “Two Diﬃculties in Interpreting Vector Autoregressions,” in Rational Expectations Econometrics, ed. by L. P. Hansen, and T. J. Sargent, pp. 77–119. Westview
Press, Boulder, CO. 2, 9, 14
Holmsen, A., J. F. Qvigstad, and O. Roisland (2007): “Implementing and Communicating Optimal Monetary Policy,” Staﬀ Memo No. 2007/3, Norges Bank. 3
House, C. L., and M. D. Shapiro (2006): “Phased-in Tax Cuts and Economic Activity,”
American Economic Review, 96(5), 1835–1849. 1, 6
(2008): “Temporary Investment Tax Incentives: Theory with Evidence from Bonus
Depreciation,” American Economic Review, 98(3), 737–768. 6
Jaimovich, N., and R. Sergio (2008): “Can News About the Future Drive the Business
Cycle?,” . 3, 8
Johnson, D. S., J. A. Parker, and N. S. Souleles (2004): “Household Expenditure
and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001,” Manuscript, Princeton University. 7
Jones, J. B. (2002): “Has Fiscal Policy Helped Stabilize the Postwar U.S. Economy?,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(May), 709–746. 31
Judd, K. L. (1985): “Short-Run Analysis of Fiscal Policy in a Perfect-Foresight Model,”
Journal of Political Economy, 93(2), 298–319. 8
Kamps, C. (2007): “Dynamic Scoring in an Estimated DSGE Model of the U.S. Economy,”
Manuscript, European Central Bank. 1
Kapetanios, G., A. R. Pagan, and A. Scott (2005): “Making a Match: Combining Theory and Evidence in Policy-Oriented Macroeconomic Modeling,” CAMA Working
Paper 1/2005, Australian National University. 2
King, R. G., and S. Rebelo (1999): “Resuscitating Real Business Cycles,” in Handbook
of Macroeconomics, Volume 1B, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, pp. 927–1007.
Elsevier, Amsterdam. 29
Laseen, S., J. Linde, and L. E. O. Svensson (2008): “Anticipated Instrument-Rate
Paths in Policy Simulations,” Manuscript, Sveriges Riksbank. 4
Leeper, E. M. (1989): “Policy Rules, Information, and Fiscal Eﬀects in a ’Ricardian’
Model,” Federal Reserve Board, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 360. 2
(1990): “The Dynamics of Interest Rate and Tax Rules in a Stochastic Model,”
Federal Reserve Board, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 375. 16

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

36

Leeper, E. M., T. B. Walker, and S.-C. S. Yang (2008): “Empirical Analysis of
Fiscal Foresight,” Manuscript, Indiana University. 27
Lippi, M., and L. Reichlin (1993): “The Dynamic Eﬀects of Aggregate Demand and
Supply Disturbances: Comment,” American Economic Review, 83(3), 644–652. 2, 3
(1994): “VAR Analysis, Nonfundamental Representations, Blaschke Matrices,”
Journal of Econometrics, 63(1), 307–325. 2
Lucas, Jr., R. E. (1976): “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” vol. 1 of CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, pp. 104–130. North-Holland. 8
McGrattan, E. R. (1994): “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Distortionary Taxation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 33(3), 573–601. 1
Mertens, K., and M. Ravn (2008): “The Aggregate Eﬀects of Anticipated and Unanticipated U.S. Tax Policy Shocks: Theory and Empirical Evidence,” EUI Working Papers,
ECO 2008/05. 1, 4, 21, 26
Mountford, A., and H. Uhlig (2008): “What Are the Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy Shocks?,”
Forthcoming in Journal of Applied Econometrics. 1, 23, 26
Park, S. (1997): “The Relationship Between Government Financial Condition and Expected Tax Rates Reﬂected in Municipal Bond Yields,” National Tax Journal, 50(1),
23–38. 27
Parker, J. A. (1999): “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes
in Social Security Taxes,” American Economic Review, 89(4), 959–973. 7
Poterba, J. M. (1988): “Are Consumer Forward Looking? Evidence from Fiscal Experiments,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 78, 413–418. 1, 4
(1989): “Tax Reform and the Market for Tax-Exempt Debt,” Regional Science and
Urban Economics, 19(3), 537–562. 27
Poterba, J. M., and L. H. Summers (1987): “Finite Lifetimes and the Eﬀects of Budget
Deﬁcits on National Saving,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 20(2), 369–391. 7
Prescott, E. C. (1986): “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement,” CarneigeRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, pp. 11–44. 29
Quah, D. (1990): “Permanent and Transitory Movements in Labor Income: An Explanation
for ”Excess Smoothness” in Consumption,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(3), 449–475.
3
Ramey, V. A. (2007): “Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It’s All in the Timing,”
Manuscript, University of California, San Diego. 3, 6, 25, 26
Ramey, V. A., and M. D. Shapiro (1998): “Costly Capital Reallocation and the Eﬀects
of Government Spending,” Carneige-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 48,
145–194. 6, 26
Roberds, W. (1991): “Implications of Expected Present Value Budget Balance: Application to Postwar U.S. Data,” in Rational Expectations Econometrics, ed. by L. P. Hansen,
and T. J. Sargent, pp. 163–175. Westview Press, Inc., Boulder, CO. 15
Romer, C. D., and D. H. Romer (2007a): “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Tax Changes:
Estimated Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” NBER Working Paper No. 13264.
1, 26
Romer, C. D., and D. H. Romer (2007b): “A Narrative Analysis of Postwar Tax
Changes,” Manuscript, University of California, Berkeley. 1, 4, 21
Sargent, T. J. (1981): “Interpreting Economic Time Series,” Journal of Political Economy, 89(April), 213–248. 16

FISCAL FORESIGHT AND INFORMATION FLOWS

37

Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe (2008): “What’s ‘News’ in Business Cycles?,” NBER
Working Paper No. 14215. 3, 25, 27
Scholes, M. S., G. P. Willson, and M. A. Wolfson (1992): “Firms’ Responses
to Anticipated Reducations in Tax Rates: The Tax Reform Act of 1986,” Journal of
Accounting Research, 30(Supplement), 161–185. 5
Shapiro, M. D., and J. Slemrod (1995): “Consumer Response to the Timing of Income:
Evidence from a Change in Tax Withholding,” American Economic Review, 85(1), 274–
283. 7
Sims, C. A. (1972): “Money, Income, and Causality,” American Economic Review, 62(4),
540–552. 16
(1988): “Identifying Policy Eﬀects,” in Empirical Macroeconomics for Interdependent Economics, ed. by e. a. Bryant, Ralph C., pp. 308–321. The Brookings Institution,
Washington, DC. 6, 26
Smets, F., and R. Wouters (2003): “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1(5),
1123–1175. 17
(2007): “Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97(3), 586–606. 17
Souleles, N. S. (1999): “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax Refunds,” American Economic Review, 89, 947–958. 7
(2002): “Consumer Response to the Reagan Tax Cuts,” Journal of Public Economics, 85(1), 99–120. 7
Steigerwald, D. G., and C. Stuart (1997): “Econometric Estimation of Foresight:
Tax Policy and Investment in the United States,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
79(February), 32–40. 1, 4
Tutschke, W., and H. L. Vasudeva (2005): An Introduction to Complex Analysis:
Classical and Modern Approaches. Chapman & Hall/CRC, London. 19
Yang, S.-C. S. (2005): “Quantifying Tax Eﬀects Under Policy Foresight,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 52(8), 1557–1568. 2, 7
(2007): “Tentative Evidence of Tax Foresight,” Economics Letters, 96(July), 30–37.
6, 26
(2008): “A Chronology of Postwar U.S. Federal Income Tax Policy,” CAEPR
Working Paper No. 2007-021. 1, 21

