                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           DO BEQUESTS INCREASE OR DECREASE WEALTH INEQUALITIES?

                                          Charles Yuji Horioka

                                          Working Paper 14639
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14639


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2009




I am indebted to the Institute for Research on Household Economics for conducting the survey used
in this paper and for granting me permission to use these data, to Tae Okada for capable research assistance,
to Wataru Kureishi, Keiko Murata, Kazuyasu Sakamoto, Sawako Shirahase, and Midori Wakabayashi
for helpful comments, and to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology
of the Japanese Government for Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research Category B (topic number 18330068)
and Category S (topic number 20223004), which supported this research. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Charles Yuji Horioka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Do Bequests Increase or Decrease Wealth Inequalities?
Charles Yuji Horioka
NBER Working Paper No. 14639
January 2009
JEL No. D12,D91,E21

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper finds that individuals in Japan do not leave very significant bequests, that parents often
require a quid pro quo for bequests to their children, and that wealthier individuals leave less bequests,
meaning that bequests ameliorate wealth inequalities.


Charles Yuji Horioka
Institute of Social and Economic Research
Osaka University
6-1 Mihogaoka, Ibaraki-shi
Osaka-fu 567-0047 JAPAN
and NBER
horioka@iser.osaka-u.ac.jp
1. Introduction


           The increasing inequality of income, wealth, employment opportunities, etc.,
is a topic of deep concern not only to economists but also to policymakers and to the
public at large in all countries, and bequests and other intergenerational transfers have
been suggested as one cause of increasing inequalities.             If individuals leave
substantial bequests and other intergenerational transfers, if bequests are unrequited
(involving no quid pro quo), and if wealthier individuals leave more bequests, bequests
will increase the inequality of the wealth distribution and cause wealth inequalities to
be passed on from generation to generation.      The purpose of this paper is to test each
of these three premises in turn.


2. The Data Source


           The data I use is this paper are taken from the “Setai-nai Bunpai to Sedai-kan
Iten ni kansuru Kenkyuu Chousa (Survey of Intra-household Distribution and
Intergenerational Transfers),” which was conducted in Japan during the October
6-December 8, 2006, period by the Institute for Research on Household Economics
(Zaidan Houjin Kakei Keizai Kenkyuusho). This survey surveyed married women
between the ages of 20 and 59 from throughout Japan using a paper questionnaire that
was dropped off, then picked up later.     4200 households were selected and surveyed
using a two-stage sampling procedure, resulting in 2814 observations (a response rate
of 67.00%).       This survey collects detailed information on bequests including
information on bequests received, bequest motives, bequest division, etc., and thus is
ideally suited to an analysis of bequests (see Sakamoto (2008) for more details on this
survey).
      The number of observations in the aforementioned survey is 2,814, but only
1,778 observations remained after deleting observations with missing information on
bequests received, holdings of financial assets and real assets, and loans outstanding.
      All monetary variables except for holdings of real assets are in category form

                                             1
and thus were converted to continuous form as follows: households that selected
categories other than the lowest and highest categories were assigned the midpoint of
the lower bound and the upper bound of the category they selected. Households that
selected the lowest category were assigned a value equal to 0.8 times the upper bound
of the lowest category. Finally, households that selected the highest category were
asked the actual value of their holdings of the asset or liability in question, and if they
answered this question, they were assigned the actual value of their holdings.      If they
did not answer this question, they were assigned a value equal to 1.25 times the lower
bound of the highest category.


3. Do Individuals Leave Substantial Bequests?


      The data source we use is unusual in collecting data on the value of bequests
(financial assets such as bank and postal deposits, negotiable securities, etc., as well as
real assets such as land, housing, etc.) received from already deceased parents and/or
parents-in-law.   As Table 1 shows, respondents receiving bequests from already
deceased parents and/or parents-in-law received an average of 14.334 million yen (or
143,340 U.S. dollars assuming an exchange rate of 100 yen per dollar).          However,
since only 23.96 percent of respondents had received bequests from already deceased
parents and/or parents-in-law, the average bequest received of all households was only
3.434 million yen (or 34,340 dollars).
      The total wealth (net worth) of respondents can be calculated by subtracting debt
outstanding (housing debt and non-housing debt outstanding) from the sum of financial
assets (bank and postal deposits, negotiable securities, life insurance, etc.) and real
assets (land, housing, etc.).    The average wealth (net worth) of respondents thus
calculated was 22.627 million yen (or 226,270 dollars), so the average bequest
received of respondents receiving bequests from their parents and/or parents-in-law
was a full 63.35% of average net worth but the average bequest received of all
households was only 15.18% of their average net worth.
      Finally, it is possible to calculate life cycle wealth by subtracting bequests

                                             2
received from total wealth (net worth), and if this is done, life cycle wealth amounts to
19,193 million yen (or 191,930 dollars).         This implies that the average bequest
received of all households was only 17.89% of life cycle wealth, meaning that the
wealth of respondents increased by only 17.89% as a result of receiving bequests from
their parents and/or parents-in-law.
      Many researchers have attempted to measure the share of bequests and other
intergenerational transfers in total household wealth, the best-known attempt being that
of Kotlikoff and Summers (1981), who obtained the surprising finding that
intergenerational transfers account for about 80 percent of total household wealth in
the United States. By contrast, Modigliani (1988) obtained the diametrically opposed
finding that intergenerational transfers account for only about 20 percent of total
household wealth in the United States (see also Kotlikoff (1988)).
      A number of researchers have done a similar calculation for Japan, including
Hayashi (1986), who found that intergenerational transfers account for at least 9.6% of
total household wealth, Dekle (1989), who obtained figures of 3-27% and at most
48.7%, depending on the calculation method used, Campbell (1997), who obtained
figures of at most 28.1% and at most 23.4%, depending on the calculation method used,
Barthold and Ito (1992), who obtained a range of 27.8-41.4%, and Horioka, et al.
(2002), who obtained a figure of 23.9%.         Thus, the results for Japan are closer to
Modigliani’s (1988) figure than to Kotlikoff and Summers’ (1981) figure, and the
15.18% figure obtained in the current study is no exception.１ It thus appears that
individuals do not leave substantial bequests in Japan.


4. Are Bequests Unrequited?


         The survey we used in our analysis also asked respondents about whether they
plan to leave a bequest to their children and how they plan to divide their bequest
among their children, and according to the results of the survey, 48.16% of respondents
with two or more children plan to divide their bequest equally, 29.90% do not plan to
leave a bequest, and 21.94% plan to divide their bequest unequally, with the vast

                                            3
majority of those in the third group planning to leave more to the child who lives with
or near them, who provides help with housework, who provides nursing care, who
provides financial assistance, and/or who takes over the family name or the family
business.     Thus, more than half (51.84%) of respondents either do not plan to leave a
bequest or plan to leave more to the child who provides some sort of quid pro quo,
most commonly some sort of assistance during old age (see Horioka (2008) for more
details).    Thus, it seems that more than half of Japanese are selfishly motivated, either
not leaving any bequest at all or requiring a quid pro quo such as assistance during old
age. Moreover, other surveys have asked similar questions and obtained broadly
consistent results (see, for example, Horioka, et al. (2000) and Horioka (2002), and see
also Horioka (1993), Hayashi (1995), and Wakabayashi and Horioka (2008) for other
types of evidence on this issue).


5. Are Wealthier Individuals More Likely to Receive Bequests?


            If wealthier individuals are more likely to receive bequests, bequests will
contribute to exacerbating wealth inequalities, but our results show that the correlation
between bequests received and life cycle wealth is -0.170, meaning that wealthier
individuals leave less bequests than less wealthy individuals, implying that bequests
actually ameliorate wealth inequalities.２
            The coefficient of variation of life cycle wealth and total household wealth are
1.54 and 1.34, respectively, meaning that the coefficient of variation decreases by 0.20
when bequests received are included in household wealth.         This finding is consistent
with our aforementioned finding that wealthier individuals leave less bequests and that
bequests ameliorate wealth inequalities.


6. Conclusion


       I analyzed data from a new and unique Japanese household survey and obtained
the following findings: individuals in Japan do not appear to leave very significant

                                               4
bequests, with bequests received accounting for only about 15 percent of total
household wealth, and parents often require a quid pro quo (such as some sort of
assistance during old age) for bequests left to their children, meaning that net transfers
from parents to children (net of transfers in the other direction such as financial and
in-kind assistance from children to parents during old age) are even less important than
the above figure suggests.       Furthermore, even if bequests were quantitatively
important, wealthier individuals leave less bequests than less wealthy individuals,
meaning that bequests ameliorate wealth inequalities rather than exacerbating them and
do not cause wealth inequalities to be passed on from generation to generation.     Thus,
it does not appear necessary to alleviate the adverse impact of bequests on wealth
inequalities by raising inheritance taxes or using other means.


References
Barthold, Thomas A., and Ito, Takatoshi (1992), “Bequest Taxes and Accumulation of
  Household Wealth: U.S.-Japan Comparison” in T. Ito and A. O. Krueger, eds.,
  Political Economy of Tax Reform (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp.
  235-292.
Campbell, David W. (1997), “Transfer and Life-cycle Wealth in Japan, 1974–1984,”
  Japanese Economic Review, vol. 48, no. 4 (December), pp. 410-423.
Dekle, Robert (1989), “The Unimportance of Intergenerational Transfers in Japan,”
  Japan and the World Economy, vol. 1, no. 4 (November), pp. 403-413.
Hayashi, Fumio (1986), “Why Is Japan’s Saving Rate So Apparently High?” in S.
  Fischer, ed., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1986, vol. 1 (Cambridge,
  Massachusetts: MIT Press), pp. 147-210.
Hayashi, Fumio (1995), "Is the Japanese Extended Family Altruistically Linked? A
  Test Based on Engel Curves," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 103, no. 3 (July), pp.
  661-674.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (1993), “Saving in Japan,” in Arnold Heertje, ed., World
  Savings: An International Survey (Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell Publishers), pp.
  238-278.

                                            5
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2002), “Are the Japanese Selfish, Altruistic, or Dynastic?”
  Japanese Economic Review, vol. 53, no. 1 (March), pp. 26-54.
Horioka, Charles Yuji (2008), “Nihon ni okeru Isan Douki to Oyako Kankei: Nihonjin
   ha Riko-teki ka Rita-teki ka, Ouchou-teki ka? (Bequest Motives and Parent-Child
   Relations in Japan: Are the Japanese Selfish, Altruistic, or Dynastic?),” in Charles
   Yuji Horioka and Institute for Research on Household Economics, eds., Setai-nai
   Bunpai to Sedai-kan Iten no Keizai Bunseki (An Economic Analysis of
   Intra-Household Distribution and Inter-Household Transfers) (Tokyo, Japan:
   Minerva Shobo), pp. 118-135 (in Japanese).
Horioka, Charles Yuji; Fujisaki, Hideki; Watanabe, Wako; and Kouno, Takatsugu
  (2000), “Are Americans More Altruistic than the Japanese?              A U.S.-Japan
  Comparison of Saving and Bequest Motives,” International Economic Journal, vol.
  14, no. 1 (Spring), pp. 1-31.
Horioka, Charles Yuji; Yamashita, Kouji; Nishikawa, Masashi; and Iwamoto, Shiho
  (2002), “Nihonjin no Isan Douki no Juuyoudo, Seishitsu, Eikyou ni tsuite (On the
  Importance, Nature, and Impact of the Bequest Motives of the Japanese),” Yuusei
  Kenkyuusho Geppou (The Monthly Review of the Institute of Posts and
  Telecommunications Policy), no. 163 (April), pp. 4-31 (in Japanese).
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. (1988), “Intergenerational Transfers and Savings,” Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, vol. 2, no. 2 (Spring), pp. 41-58.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Summers, Lawrence H. (1981), “The Role of
  Intergenerational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation,” Journal of Political
  Economy, vol. 89, no. 4 (August), pp. 706-732.
Modigliani, Franco (1988), “The Role of Intergenerational Transfers and Life Cycle
  Saving in the Accumulation of Wealth,“ Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 2,
  no. 2 (Spring), pp. 15-40.
Sakamoto, Kazuyasu (2008), “ ‘Setai-nai Bunpai, Sedai-kan Iten ni kansuru Kenkyuu’
  Chousa no Mokuteki to Houhou (The Purpose and Methodology of the ‘Survey on
  Intra-Household Distribution and Inter-Household Transfers’) in Charles Yuji
  Horioka and Institute for Research on Household Economics, eds., Setai-nai Bunpai

                                           6
    to Sedai-kan Iten no Keizai Bunseki (An Economic Analysis of Intra-Household
    Distribution and Inter-Household Transfers) (Tokyo, Japan: Minerva Shobo), pp.
    3-17 (in Japanese).
Wakabayashi, Midori, and Horioka, Charles Yuji (2008), “Is the Eldest Son Different?
    The Residential Choice of Siblings in Japan,” mimeo. (Institute of Social and
    Economic Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan).



１   It is low even compared to other studies for Japan, and one possible reason is that it
does not include inter vivos transfers.

２
    If the relative importance of inter vivos transfers increases with wealth due to tax
considerations, etc., the correlation between bequests received and life cycle wealth
might overstate the correlation between all intergenerational transfers and life cycle
wealth. Unfortunately, we cannot confirm this point because the data set used in this
paper does not collect information on inter vivos transfers.          I am indebted to
Kazuyasu Sakamoto for this point.




                                             7
