                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 LIFE (EVALUATION), HIV/AIDS, AND DEATH IN AFRICA

                                            Angus Deaton
                                             Jane Fortson
                                            Robert Tortora

                                        Working Paper 14637
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14637


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2009




We are grateful to Anne Case and Danny Kahneman for helpful discussions. Deaton acknowledges
financial support from NIA through grant P30 AG024361 to Princeton University and grant P01 AG05842–14
to the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Angus Deaton, Jane Fortson, and Robert Tortora. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Life (evaluation), HIV/AIDS, and Death in Africa
Angus Deaton, Jane Fortson, and Robert Tortora
NBER Working Paper No. 14637
January 2009
JEL No. I12,J17,O15

                                              ABSTRACT

We use data from the Gallup World Poll and from the Demographic and Health Surveys to investigate
how subjective wellbeing (SWB) is affected by mortality in sub-Saharan Africa, including mortality
from HIV/AIDS. The Gallup data provide direct evidence on Africans’ own emotional and evaluative
responses to high levels of infection and of mortality. By comparing the effect of mortality on SWB
with the effect of income on SWB, we can attach monetary values to mortality to illuminate the often
controversial question of how to value life in Africa. Large fractions of the respondents in the World
Poll report the mortality of an immediate family member in the last twelve months, with malaria typically
more important than AIDS, and deaths of women in childbirth more important than deaths from AIDS
in many countries. A life evaluation measure (Cantril’s ladder of life) is relatively insensitive to the
deaths of immediate family, which suggests a low value of life. There are much larger effects on experiential
measures, such as sadness and depression, which suggest much larger values of life. It is not clear
whether either of these results is correct, yet our results demonstrate that experiential and evaluative
measures are not the same thing, and that they cannot be used interchangeably as measures of “happiness”
in welfare economics.


Angus Deaton                                          Robert Tortora
328 Wallace Hall                                      Gallup Organization
Woodrow Wilson School                                 Bob_Tortora@gallup.com
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu

Jane Fortson
Becker Center on Chicago Price Theory
University of Chicago
jfortson@uchicago.edu
1. Introduction

The HIV/AIDS epidemic has brought large increases in morbidity and mortality to many

countries in sub-Saharan Africa. For some countries, the epidemic has eliminated the

large gains in life expectancy that took place between 1950 and 1990. More than 20

million Africans are estimated to be HIV positive, and between one and a half and two

million die from AIDS every year. In the South African province of KwaZulu-Natal, it

has been estimated that more than half of women aged between 25 and 29 are HIV

positive, Welz et al (2007), and according to data from the Demographic and Health

Surveys, national infection rates in Zimbabwe are more than thirty percent for women

aged 30 to 39 and men aged 35 to 44. According to data from the 2006 wave of the

Gallup World Poll, more than 80 percent of people in Kenya, Malawi, Rwanda, Uganda,

Zambia, and Zimbabwe reported knowing someone who had died of AIDS. In the 2007

wave, more than a third of respondents in Uganda and Tanzania reported having lost an

immediate family member to AIDS in the last year.

   In the context of this epidemic, we use the African data from the Gallup World Poll,

supplemented with information from the African Demographic and Health Surveys, to

look at the links between disease and self-reported wellbeing. Among the measures we

examine is an overall life-evaluation measure, Cantril’s (1965) ladder of life, as well as

measures of emotion or affect, including sadness, depression, happiness, and enjoyment.

These data provide direct evidence on the emotional and hedonic impact of one of

history’s most serious epidemics as reported by those who are directly experiencing it.

The World Poll also contains a set of questions about the perceived importance of

HIV/AIDS relative to other factors restricting wellbeing, and we use these, together with



                                             1
the wellbeing questions, to investigate the importance that Africans place on HIV/AIDS

compared with other factors in their lives, such as other diseases, as well as income,

poverty, employment, and education.

   We use this information to address two distinct questions. The first is the value of life

in sub-Saharan Africa, a topic that has long been controversial. We use self-reported

wellbeing measures to calculate the change in income required to compensate people for

the reduction in wellbeing associated with the death of an immediate family member. The

second question concerns the self-reported wellbeing measures themselves. Is it

legitimate to use them as a basis for calculating compensation? Beyond that, can self-

reported wellbeing, or “happiness,” the blanket term often used in the literature, serve as

an adequate guide to wellbeing in designing policies for public health and social welfare?

   The use of self-reported wellbeing measures to calculate compensation for the death

of relatives has previously been recommended by Oswald and Powdthavee (2009). Their

paper is part of a literature that uses self-reported wellbeing measures to calculate the

income compensation associated with non-monetized factors such as the value of

informal care (van den Berg and Ferrer-i-Carbonell, 2007), airport noise (van Praag and

Baarsma, 2005), and urban renewal (Dolan and Metcalfe, 2008, who argue that these

measures will often be superior to direct assessment of willingness-to-pay). In earlier

work using the Gallup World Poll, one of us found a strong positive—and approximately

linear—relationship between average national life-evaluation and the logarithm of

national income but, conditional on income, could find no effect of life expectancy, or of

the national prevalence of HIV infection (Deaton, 2008). If this finding is correct—and

the more comprehensive analysis here will suggest that it is, at least if we confine



                                              2
ourselves to the life-evaluation measure—it would appear that Africans require little

compensation for the consequences of the epidemic and attach relatively little priority to

dealing with it. Such a finding has implications for a number of important topics,

including the design of foreign assistance for Africa, and more broadly, the measurement

of the level and distribution of international wellbeing using measures that incorporate

both health and income. We shall address these issues in the final section of the paper.

   Our findings are also important for the “happiness” literature, about the meaning of

measures of self-reported wellbeing, and about how and whether they can be used in

assessing welfare and in directing public policy. The African results show that the death

of immediate family members has little effect on life evaluation, but a substantial effect

on measures of negative affect, such as depression and sadness. These results show that

different measures of wellbeing, although correlated, are by no means the same thing;

measures of life evaluation capture different aspects of experience than do measures of

affect. The sums of money required to compensate affect for the death of a family

member are much larger than those required to compensate life evaluation. In

consequence, it is not legitimate to subsume both into a blanket measure of “happiness,”

let alone to use them more or less interchangeably as the practical counterparts of

Benthamite utility and as a guide to utilitarian public policy. In the final section we argue

that while measures of both life evaluation and affect are relevant for assessing

wellbeing, each is seriously compromised as an exclusive guide.

   The paper is laid out as follows. Section 2 uses data on HIV prevalence from the

Demographic and Health Surveys together with data on self-reported wellbeing from the

Gallup World Poll. Within countries in both data sets, we match means by sex and age



                                              3
group. These calculations are designed to reexamine and extend to sub-national

aggregates the aggregate results in Deaton (2008), who found no effect of national health

measures on average life evaluation across countries. In Section 3, we move to micro data

from the World Poll, and look at the consequences for subjective wellbeing (SWB) of

knowing someone who has died of HIV/AIDS (2006 survey), or of having a family

member who died in the previous year (2007 survey). We compare these effects to the

effects of higher income, placing a monetary value on the health outcomes. Following

Tortora (2008), we also summarize the results of questions about the importance that

people attach to dealing with various problems—such as joblessness, poverty, education,

and disease—and compare these with the results of the hedonic regressions. Section 4

discusses the implications of our findings.

   In the remainder of this section, we briefly describe the African data from the Gallup

World Poll on which our analysis is based. We use data from the 2006 and 2007 waves of

the Poll, which is a representative survey of adults from countries around the world.

Samples of around 1,000 adults are drawn from each country; 140 countries in 2006 and

150 in 2007. In developing countries, including all of those we cover here, data are

collected in face-to-face interviews. In both years the surveys almost always covered

more than 95 percent of the population age 15 or over in each country. An example of

where this coverage did not occur is in Angola where areas with landmines were not

surveyed. Typically, the frame consists of a list of Enumeration Areas used by the

country’s central statistical office, from which primary sampling units (PSUs) were

selected by Gallup. In each country, the PSUs are stratified into six strata, from those in

cities of more than a million people to the very few rural areas with a population less than



                                              4
10,000, and are selected with probability proportional to population within each stratum.

One hundred and twenty five PSUs are selected within each country, and eight interviews

are obtained in each. A random route procedure is used to select households and the Kish

Grid is used to select one respondent, age 15 or older, at random from each selected

household. The Gallup World Poll covers more than 90 percent of the population of sub-

Saharan Africa as a whole. A core set of questions, including questions on wellbeing,

education, and income, is asked in every country. There are also questions that are

different in each region, and the questions about death from HIV/AIDS and other

diseases are asked only in sub-Saharan Africa, where 32 countries were covered by either

or both of these two waves.



2. HIV infection and wellbeing in Africa

Deaton (2008) found that, conditional on the logarithm of national income, national HIV

prevalence is uncorrelated with mean life evaluation. In this section, we use better data on

HIV prevalence from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) to investigate in more

detail the link between HIV and life evaluation within some of the most highly-affected

countries. We also broaden the set of outcomes to include measures of affect, including

enjoyment, smiling, sadness, and depression. We use HIV-related data drawn from the

DHS for fourteen countries in sub-Saharan Africa: Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ethiopia,

Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Tanzania, Zambia, and

Zimbabwe. In these fourteen countries, a recent wave of the DHS has included the

collection of blood samples for HIV testing. These blood samples, as well as responses to

the individual questionnaire, yield information about HIV prevalence, HIV knowledge,



                                             5
and perceived HIV risk. HIV prevalence estimates from these data are arguably the best

estimates available. The data from the DHS is described in the data notes at the end of the

paper.

   Table 1 shows, separately for each country, three measures of HIV from the DHS—

HIV prevalence, the fraction of respondents who say that they know someone who has

AIDS or has died of AIDS, and the fraction of respondents who say that they are at

moderate or higher risk of being infected with HIV. The last five columns show national

average levels of life evaluation, enjoyment, smiling, sadness, and depression, calculated

using data from the Gallup World Poll. Life evaluation is measured using the Cantril

ladder, which ranges from 0, “the worst possible life,” to 10, “the best possible life”; we

shall refer to points on this evaluative ladder as “rungs” or “steps,” of which there are

eleven, from 0 to 10. Enjoyment, sadness, and depression are indicators for whether, on

the previous day, the respondent experienced these emotions a lot of the day. Smiling is

an indicator for whether the respondent reported smiling and laughing a lot on the

previous day. The national averages of these outcomes in Table 1 show no significant

correlations across countries between HIV prevalence and average levels of subjective

wellbeing.

   Our approach here is to look within countries at the relationship between HIV and

measures of subjective wellbeing. In particular, we use individual-level HIV testing data

from the DHS for each country to calculate prevalence separately by sex for each of

seven five-year age-groups (spanning ages 15-49). Figure 1 provides an overview of what

drives our more detailed results. The first panel shows DHS estimates of HIV prevalence

for each age-group and sex, separately for high- and low-HIV prevalence countries. High



                                              6
prevalence countries are those with prevalence above six percent (Kenya, Malawi,

Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe). The figure shows the high degree of variability in

HIV prevalence across countries and shows that, within countries, HIV infection is

strongly related to age and sex, with prevalence in high-HIV countries peaking among

women ages 30-34 and men ages 40-44.

   The pattern by sex and age of averages of wellbeing measures—including life

evaluation, enjoyment, smiling, sadness, and depression—do not mirror the age profile in

HIV prevalence in any obvious way. The difference in mean wellbeing for a sex/age-

group between high and low HIV countries at the top of the third column of Figure 1

bears little relation to the sex/age-group pattern in HIV infection in other rows. The

figures show that adults in high HIV countries are more likely to report smiling and less

likely to report depression; women in high HIV countries report more enjoyment than

women in low HIV countries. Of course, the differences illustrated in Figure 1 could well

be driven by the fact that high HIV countries have other characteristics, such as better

economic conditions, that raise wellbeing.

   In Table 2, we estimate the relationship between life evaluation and HIV, controlling

for other individual and country characteristics. Here (as elsewhere), we do not weight by

country population so that, for example, a person in Ghana gets the same weight as a

person in Nigeria. Standard errors are clustered at the country, sex, and age-group level.

Controlling for log GDP per capita, HIV prevalence in a country, sex, and age-group is

associated with lower life evaluation (Table 2, column 2). The coefficient is about a third

larger (more negative) in column 3, which also includes country fixed effects. The

addition of the sex dummy in column 4 does very little, as does the replacement of



                                             7
national income by individual household income in column 5, although income itself has

a large positive effect on the ladder. These magnitudes imply that adults in a country, sex,

and age-group with prevalence of ten percent report life evaluation values about a tenth

of a rung lower than those in a country, sex, and age-group without HIV.

   One problem with these estimates is that the previous literature has established the

existence of pronounced age-patterns in life evaluation, see for example Helliwell (2006)

or Blanchflower and Oswald (2008), who argue that there is a universal U-shape in life

evaluation with a minimum in middle-age. This is approximately the mirror image of the

age-pattern in HIV-prevalence (see Figure 1), so that it is possible that the results in

columns 2 and 3 are driven purely by a correlation in these age profiles. Since life

satisfaction is U-shaped in countries where HIV-prevalence is low or zero, we cannot

safely use these patterns in countries in Africa where the infection rate is high. To deal

with these concerns, we add controls for age groups. Our preferred specification is in

column (6), where we control for sex, log family income, age-group, and country. Here

the estimated coefficient, although negative, is no longer statistically significant. In a

check to see whether this finding might come from the small sample size, or range of

explanatory variables, we have repeated (but do not show) the regressions adding data

from Cambodia, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, and India—for which there is also DHS

HIV testing data—and have found the same insignificant result.

   Table 3 repeats the specification in the final column of Table 2, but with measures of

affect replacing the ladder measure of life evaluation. Controlling for sex, log income,

age-group, and country, HIV is not significantly associated with enjoyment, smiling, or

sadness, but is significantly associated with depression. Adults in a country, sex, and age-



                                              8
group with HIV prevalence of ten percent, compared to adults in a country, sex, and age-

group without HIV, are about two percentage points more likely to report experiencing

depression a lot of the day on the previous day. In Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2, we

estimate these regressions substituting for HIV prevalence the fraction of adults who

report knowing someone who has AIDS or has died of AIDS. The results are broadly

consistent with the results in Tables 2 and 3, and the preferred specification (Table A.1,

column (6)) shows no significant relationship between life evaluation and HIV

knowledge. Likewise, and with the exception of smiling, HIV knowledge is unrelated to

the outcomes in Table A.2. Adults in country/sex/age-groups in which a higher fraction

know someone affected by AIDS are less likely to report smiling a lot on the previous

day. Appendix Tables B.1 and B.2, for which the sample sizes are admittedly much

smaller, likewise show little relationship between HIV—now measured as the fraction of

adults who report being at moderate or higher risk of being infected with HIV—and these

outcomes.

   Overall, these results are indecisive, but they provide no clear evidence of strong

effects of HIV on any of the measures of self-reported wellbeing. But they can hardly be

taken to establish that HIV/AIDS has little effect on wellbeing: being HIV-positive is not

the same as having AIDS, and people who are infected may have no knowledge of the

fact. High rates of infection in the population may not imply an increase in morbidity for

respondents, especially if, in the absence of ARV therapy, survival times with full-blown

AIDS are short. Mortality from AIDS may also be attributed to other causes, especially in

populations where background adult mortality is high, so that group variation in infection

rates may not have a perceptible effect on group variation in life evaluation or affect, so



                                              9
that we may be looking at the wrong variables. Moreover, the use of the two different

data sources means that we can only merge at the country, age-group and sex level. The

lack of individual-specific data is likely to reduce the precision of our estimates, and we

do not know for sure that the prevalence rate in one’s own sex and age-group is the one

that people are aware of or care about.



3. Wellbeing and mortality among individuals

In this section, we take a more direct approach by looking at the effects on respondents of

knowing someone who has died. In the 2006 sub-Saharan Africa module of the Gallup

World Poll, respondents were asked “Do you personally know anyone that has died from

X?” where X includes tuberculosis, malaria, HIV/AIDS, smallpox, polio, hepatitis, and

cholera. In the 2007 round, with an overlapping group of countries, the question was

changed to “Please tell me if any one in your immediate family has died from X in the

past 12 months?” where X includes the same diseases as before plus death from chronic

(more than six months) diarrhea and deaths of women in childbirth. In countries where

people often have little contact with doctors or clinics, some of these diagnoses are

manifestly unreliable, but at the least they provide an indication of how people perceive

the effects of these diseases. In interpreting the usefulness of these answers, it should also

be kept in mind that reliable data on adult mortality are almost completely absent in many

of the countries covered here, and even official estimates of mortality from HIV/AIDS

are little more than intelligent guesses based on small surveillance sites or projections

from infection rates from surveys or ante-natal clinics. Note also, that even where

qualified personnel are in attendance, cause of death is not easily ascertained, especially



                                             10
when the decedent suffered from multiple diseases. In the current context, this is

particularly important for HIV/AIDS, which opens the way to opportunistic infections,

particularly tuberculosis, with which a large fraction of the population has long been

asymptomatically infected. A substantial fraction of what are recorded as deaths from TB

are likely attributable to HIV infection.

   Table 4 lists the fractions of people in the 2006 wave who reported that they knew

someone who died of malaria, HIV/AIDS, and TB. In columns 4 and 5, we report the

fractions of people who know someone who died of either HIV/AIDS or of TB as well as

who died of any of the seven listed diseases, including also polio, hepatitis, smallpox, and

cholera. There are close to 1,000 respondents in each country. Clearly, these numbers

should be treated with great caution as indicators of mortality rates. For example, only

people with long memories could have known people who died of smallpox, yet in one or

two countries, smallpox is frequently listed, for example by 41 percent of respondents in

Chad, 20 percent in Sierra Leone, and 13 percent in Niger (not shown in the tables).

These figures are most likely indicative of the quality of these data from those countries.

Even so, the figures in Table 4 are broadly sensible; the correlations between column 2 or

column 4 on the one hand, and the UNAIDS (2008) estimates of mortality rates—

themselves subject to error—are 0.57 and 0.56. The combined TB and HIV/AIDS

numbers are probably the more accurate for AIDS deaths in the countries where the

epidemic is severe, but this would not be the case where HIV/AIDS prevalence is low, as

in most of West Africa.

   One important feature of Table 4 is that respondents typically know more people who

died of malaria than who died of HIV/AIDS. This is true, not only where it is to be



                                            11
expected, in the countries of West Africa where HIV/AIDS is relatively rare, such as

Benin, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone,

and Togo, but it is also true, or within a point or two of being true, in some of the

countries where HIV/AIDS is most severe, such as Burundi, Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi,

Mozambique, Tanzania, and Zambia. There is clearly substantial background mortality

from disease in Africa, even before the advent of HIV/AIDS.

   Table 5 presents data from the 2007 wave of the Gallup World Poll on an overlapping

group of countries using the more focused question of whether respondents have lost a

member of their immediate family in the last twelve months. These data also include two

causes of death that were not asked in 2006, death of a family member in child birth, and

death of a family member to chronic diarrheal disease. The latter did not generate many

positive responses, and is not included in the table. The numbers in Table 5 are much

smaller than those in Table 4, as must be the case, and a few remain implausible, such as

the very high numbers for HIV/AIDS in Chad and the Central African Republic. The

correlation between column 2 and the UNAIDS-based estimates of mortality rates is now

only one third. However, perhaps the most important numbers are those in the fifth

column for women in the immediate family who have died in childbirth. For half of the

countries, particularly those in West Africa, these numbers are higher than the numbers

of family members dying from HIV/AIDS, though typically not higher than those dying

from malaria. Once again, there is a major cause of (at least perceived) mortality that is

currently present, and was present (and presumably more severe than now) long before

the advent of HIV/AIDS.




                                             12
   Table 6 presents the first evidence on the effects of having recently lost an immediate

family member on five measures of self-reported well-being. The measure of loss we

have used is whether the respondent has lost an immediate family member in the last

twelve months to one of (a) malaria, (b) TB, (c) HIV/AIDS, and (d) death in childbirth.

The World Poll does not have a question on all-cause mortality, and we have ignored the

other reported causes (hepatitis, cholera, polio, smallpox, and chronic diarrhea) because

the fractions reporting are very small, and because there are substantial numbers of

missing values from “don’t knows” or refusals. We look at five different measures of

wellbeing (described in Section 2): (a) the Cantril ladder of life, (b) enjoyment, (c)

smiling, (d) sadness, and (e) depression. Each of these measures captures a potentially

different aspect of feelings and of life assessment and we have no prior expectation that

they will respond in the same way to the deaths of family members.

   Table 6 shows the differences in the SWB measures between people who report

having lost a family member and those who do not. Figures in bold are more than twice

their standard errors, computed taking into account the survey design. The results are

generally in the direction that would be expected: deaths of immediate family members

reduce the ladder value, reduce the probability of having smiled, laughed, or enjoyed

oneself yesterday, and increase the likelihood of experiencing sadness or depression. But

there are exceptions, a few of which are significantly different from zero (e.g., the

positive effect of a death on the ladder in Sudan, or on enjoyment in Kenya), and only

about a quarter of the differences are significantly different from zero. Sadness and

depression are the two most consistent of the indicators, with only two negative signs for




                                             13
sadness (Senegal and Sudan) and four for depression (Benin, Kenya, Mozambique, and

Sudan), and these six differences are small and insignificantly different from zero.

   We deal with the heterogeneity by pooling across countries, and by either running

regressions with country fixed effects, or by averaging the results over countries, taking

simple averages with each country as a data point. (Weighting by population would give

most of the weight to Nigeria.) In the fixed effect regression, we regress each SWB

measure on a dummy for a death and a set of country dummies. This regression also

yields an average of the country effects, but where each country difference is weighted by

the inverse of its estimated variance, so that more precisely estimated differences get

higher weights. Both numbers are shown in the bottom panel of Table 6. As it turns out,

the two sets of estimates are almost the same. Over sub-Saharan Africa as a whole, the

death of an immediate family member reduces the ladder values by 0.11 or 0.12 of a step,

the probability of enjoyment or smiling/laughter by 2 to 4 percentage points, and

increases the probability of experiencing sadness and depression by 5 to 6 percentage

points.

   These estimates come from simple differences of averages in each country, with no

controls for other differences across people who have and have not lost a family member

in the last year. SWB is generally sensitive to demographic status, such as age and sex, as

well as to education and income, all of which could potentially confound the effects of a

death. As we shall see, education is positively related to SWB and more educated people

are more likely to be HIV positive in several of these countries (Fortson, 2008). Tables 7

and 8 move to a multivariate analysis, using the same outcomes as Table 6 (an 11 point

scale for the ladder, and linear probability models for the other SWB measures) and



                                            14
including age, sex, education, and income as controls. As before, we present estimates

based on pooled regressions with country fixed effects (Table 7) and estimates that come

from estimating regressions for each country, and then averaging the coefficients (Table

8). Given that the World Poll data has about 1,000 observations for each country, the

estimation of separate regressions for each country is entirely feasible, and the averaging

recognizes that fact. Nor is it clear that when we average across countries, we wish to

give more weight to the more precisely estimated coefficients rather than counting each

country as a unit. Even so, Tables 7 and 8, while differing in detail, are remarkably

similar, so that little depends on which we use, and we have the comfort of knowing that

our results are robust to the choice of procedure.

   For each measure of SWB, we present two regressions, one with and one without

income. We want to condition on income, which has consistently proved to be one of the

most powerful predictors of the ladder and of the affect measures in the World Poll, but

there are two countries here (Guinea and Mali) where we do not have useable income

data, and there are many missing observations within countries that do have income data,

so that we lose about a quarter of the sample size when income is introduced. By showing

regressions with and without income, we can check that the restriction of the sample does

not have a major effect on the results. We also note that the income measure comes from

a single question in which the individual respondent is asked to choose an income bracket

for family income. In sub-Saharan Africa—as in other poor, largely agricultural areas of

the world—such questions are unlikely to elicit more than an extremely imprecise

estimate of the usual concept of income. As a result, there is likely to be substantial

attenuation bias in the estimates of the effects of income. We work with the logarithm of



                                             15
income; previous work by Deaton (2008) and by Stevenson and Wolfers (2008) has

shown that the logarithmic form works well both within and between countries, at least as

far as the ladder is concerned.

    Table 7 presents the fixed effect regression results for the five SWB measures. All

coefficients and their t–values are shown, other than the country fixed effects. In each

case, the first column shows the estimates without income, and the second column shows

the estimates including the logarithm of income; the second column always has two

fewer countries. Of the non-mortality variables, education—whether the respondent has

eight or more years of completed schooling—and income have consistently positive

effects on life satisfaction and on reported emotions. More educated and higher income

people report higher values on the ladder of life, they are more likely to remember

laughing and smiling and enjoying themselves yesterday, and are less likely to remember

being sad or depressed. The effects of being better educated are similar in size to an

increase of one unit in the logarithm of income, which corresponds to a 172 percent

increase. Given the errors of measurement in the income variable, it would be a mistake

to interpret the tables as showing the separate effects of income and education since the

latter is likely to pick up at least some effects of the former.

    The effects of gender and age are inconsistent and usually weak. In the World Poll in

general, women are more likely than men to report both more positive and more negative

emotion, but these results are not clearly apparent in these sub-Saharan African countries

and the significance of estimates depends on whether or not income is included. We do

not replicate the standard finding that life evaluation is U-shaped over the life-cycle,




                                              16
though there is a U-shape for smiling and laughing (reaching the minimum around age

50), and (more weakly) for being depressed, with a minimum around age 40.

   Our main results are in the first four rows which report the effects on well-being of

having lost an immediate family member in the last twelve months. The pattern of these

estimates differs sharply across the SWB measures as well as across causes of death

within the measures. The ladder of life is close to the life satisfaction or “happiness”

measure that is used by Layard (2005) and others to measure overall well-being. Yet the

loss of immediate family members has only a modest negative effect on the ladder.

Deaths from TB, malaria, and childbirth have negative effects, while a death from

HIV/AIDS has an apparent positive effect. The t–values for all of the estimates are

unimpressive, and we can barely reject the hypothesis that all are zero (final row, F

statistic is 2.76 with p–value of 0.027) or that a death has the same effect no matter what

its cause (F-statistic is 2.80 with a p–value of 0.039). In Table 8, where the country

regressions are averaged, the t–values are somewhat larger and the tests of no effects and

of equality are larger and more significant. The anomalous effects of HIV/AIDS may

have some real basis—for example, there is some evidence that some deaths, such as

deaths from cancer or other “dread diseases,” are feared more than others (Sunstein,

2004). Different causes of death will typically involve different family members of

different ages—we do not know who died in these data—but it seems likely that in most

of Africa, even now, HIV/AIDS deaths are more common among those who are

relatively well-off, which is consistent with the reduction of the positive effect when

income is introduced, albeit imperfectly given the measurement error in income. Note

also that the change in the estimates with income also comes from the change in sample



                                             17
size; for example, the upward revision of the effect of an AIDS death on sadness in Table

8 can be replicated without income but with the regression confined to the sample for

which income is not missing.

    Even if we take the largest negative coefficient, which is for the loss of a family

member to tuberculosis, the estimate in Table 8 is –0.129, compared with 0.374 for log

income, so that the income equivalent of losing an immediate family member to TB is a

change in log income of –0.129 divided by 0.374, or –0.345, equivalent to a 29 percent

reduction in income. Alternatively, the compensation for the loss would be 41 percent of

income for as many years as the effect lasts. By the same token, the compensation for a

loss to HIV/AIDS or to childbirth (at least in Table 8) is negative. These numbers seem

absurd on their own terms, even before we consider comparing those monetary values to

similar monetary values from rich countries. And they are almost certainly gross

overestimates, given attenuation bias in the estimates of income through measurement

error.

    The estimated effects of mortality on the two positive emotions, smiling and

enjoyment, are qualitatively similar to the estimated effects of mortality on the ladder.

Deaths from TB and malaria inhibit smiling or laughing and inhibit enjoyment, but deaths

from HIV/AIDS or from childbirth have sometimes positive and sometimes negative

effects, depending on whether income is included. The coefficients are sufficiently far

from zero that we can reject the null of no effect from any death in most cases, but we

can usually accept the hypothesis that all deaths have the same effect on the experience of

these emotions.




                                             18
    The results for the last two measures—sadness and depression—are closely in line

with what we might expect, and at variance with the results for the ladder. People are

sharply and significantly more likely (up to five percentage points) to report feeling sad

or depressed if they have lost a family member. All four causes of death have similar

effects, and in spite of their individual and joint significance, we cannot reject the

hypothesis that the four estimates are identical. The anomalous effect of an HIV/AIDS

death on the ladder or on positive feelings—and in some cases of a death from a woman

in childbirth—does not recur for sadness or depression. A death is a death and leads to

sadness and depression. The evident coherence and sensibleness of these results contrasts

with those for the ladder, and make it much harder to attribute the latter to the effects of

poorly designed questions, lack of understanding by respondents, or general measurement

error.

    If we were to choose to express the effects on sadness and depression in terms of the

effects of income, the results would be much larger than for the ladder of life. For

example, if we were to take –0.04 as a representative estimate of the effects of disease,

and 0.025 as a representative estimate of the effect of log income, the ratio is –1.6, so that

the effects of the death on sadness or depression would be reproduced by an 80 percent

reduction in income, or offset by a fivefold increase. Of course, if we were to decide to

use these numbers to calculate the monetary equivalent of the death of a family member,

we would have to explain why they are to be preferred over the much smaller (and barely

significantly different from zero) numbers that come from looking at the ladder of life,

particularly given that the ladder is much closer to the life satisfaction measures that have

been used in the previous literature.



                                              19
   Before addressing that question, it is worth considering another measure, previously

reported by Tortora (2008). The World Poll asked respondents in Africa to rank in

importance twelve objectives based on the Millennium Development Goals. The

objectives were (1) providing more jobs for youth, (2) achieving primary education for

all, (3) reducing the spread of malaria and TB, (4) improving access to safe drinking

water, (5) reducing the death rate among children under five, (6) reducing poverty, (7)

reducing the number of women dying during childbirth, (8) reducing the spread of

HIV/AIDS, (9) achieving gender equality and empowering women, (10) improving

access to sanitation facilities, (11) providing access to new technology, and (12) reducing

hunger. Each respondent was given a random selection of six of the twelve objectives,

and asked to rank them from one (most important) to six (least important).

   Tortora’s Table 1 shows that reducing poverty and reducing hunger handily win this

race, with average ranks of 2.41 and 2.48 respectively. Next, but with a considerably

lower rank, comes reducing the spread of HIV/AIDS, with an average rank of 3.05,

followed by jobs for youth (3.17), reducing the death rate from children under five (3.34),

reducing deaths in childbirth (3.38), achieving primary education for all (3.62), reducing

the spread of malaria and TB (3.64), and improving access to safe drinking water (3.75).

There is then another substantial gap in the rankings before we come to improved

sanitation (4.09), gender equality (4.38), and providing access to new technology (4.65).

   Kharas (2008) reports similar findings from the Afrobarometer surveys from Kenya,

Mozambique, Nigeria, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia, where respondents

listed their top priorities as jobs, income, support for agriculture, and improvement in

infrastructure, with health, including HIV/AIDS, attracting much lower rankings.



                                             20
   These results are consistent with some, although not all, of the findings from the

SWB analysis. The high rank for reducing poverty and hunger is consistent with the

(dominant) importance of income and education as determinants of life evaluation. That

HIV/AIDS comes next, and is ranked higher than TB and malaria, in spite of the higher

prevalence of both of the latter (Tables 4 and 5) is perhaps attributable to the current

attention given to HIV/AIDS relative to the more long-established and familiar diseases.

TB and malaria are ranked well behind deaths of children and deaths of mothers in

childbirth; the former might have been captured by the World Poll question on deaths

from chronic diarrhea, but evidently were not. Note also that only some of the ranking

questions refer explicitly to mortality, and the “spread” questions presumably elicit

responses about morbidity or other consequences of the diseases. So perhaps differences

are to be expected. But the important point about all of the results is the huge importance

attached to income (poverty and hunger) relative to the importance attached to disease.



4. Discussion: value of life and subjective wellbeing

Consider first our findings on the value of life in sub-Saharan Africa, and suppose for the

moment that it is appropriate to use the life evaluation measures in this way, an issue to

which we will return. Given this, we find very small numbers. The largest estimates are

30 to 40 percent of income, and even those estimates are biased upwards by errors of

measurement in income. These compensations refer to annual income for the death of an

immediate family member in the past twelve months; we have no information on the

required compensation in subsequent years. In a comparable exercise for Britain, using

data from 1992 to 2002, Oswald and Powdthavee (2009) estimate compensation for the



                                             21
loss of a family member to be between ₤200,000 (upper end estimate for loss of a

partner) and ₤16,000 (lower end estimate for loss of a sibling) with monetary amounts in

1996 prices. Median earnings in 1997 were approximately ₤12,500. Viscusi and Aldy

(2003) review estimates of the value of a statistical life; these are based on the now

standard methodology, dating back to Rosen’s (1988) formulation, in which a value of

life is inferred from the earnings premium that workers receive in riskier jobs. For the

US, their central estimate for the value of a statistical life is $6.8 million for a prime age

worker earning $26,000 a year, or more than 250 times annual earnings. They review

comparably-based estimates from around the world—though none from Africa—and

estimate that the international income elasticity of the value of life is 0.6 to 0.8, which

would imply that the ratio of the value of life to income will be higher in lower income

countries. The theoretical concept underlying these estimates is the value of a person’s

own life, which is arguably higher than the value of the life of a family member, but they

nevertheless provide an indication of the magnitude that is used in the literature and by

various government agencies.

    There is additional, albeit less precise, evidence for a low value of life in Africa. We

have already cited the findings on policy priorities from the World Poll and the

Afrobarometer surveys. Related evidence comes from the high price elasticity of demand

in Africa for healthcare, with large negative responses to user fees or to small charges for

medicine or preventative measures (see Easterly, 2009, for a review and discussion).

These findings may reflect a lack of understanding of the benefits of western medicine, or

they may reflect a more fundamental adaptation to and acceptance of the high levels of

morbidity and mortality that have long been a feature of African history, Iliffe (1995).



                                              22
Certainly, the World Poll’s findings on mortality rates in childbirth, or from malaria and

tuberculosis, show that HIV/AIDS is not usually the leading cause of disease compared

with other, long-standing scourges. African households have many mechanisms that

might help them deal with the consequences of losing family members. Households are

large and there is a great deal of coming and going, particularly in those economies that

depend heavily on migration which, not coincidentally, are those most heavily afflicted

by the HIV/AIDS epidemic. In such places, even before this latest epidemic, it is not

unusual for people to depart for long periods, and sometimes never to return.

   These arguments are all supportive of the belief that the value of life in Africa is very

low. Yet it is important to clarify exactly what this means. It does mean that Africans are

prepared to give up relatively little money in order to prolong the life of immediate

relatives, if not their own. It does not mean that African lives are worth less than

American or European lives, that international health policy should be conditioned on

that supposition, or that we can assess the level and distribution of international wellbeing

based on these low values. The belief in the relatively low worth of African lives was a

feature of imperialism, as documented by historians such as Davis (2002) and Watts

(1997), who begins his book with an 1835 statement about how little the plague meant to

the Egyptians. It is even incorporated into the UNDP’s Human Development Index

which, by adding life expectancy to the logarithm of income, values an additional year of

life expectancy in the US as worth 20 times an additional year in India and nearly 50

times an additional year in Tanzania (Ravallion, 1997). Similarly, the analysis of the

global convergence of full income by Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) accepts

willingness to pay as relevant for international comparisons, though the convergence they



                                             23
document would be much reduced or eliminated if African lives were valued at the low

income equivalents found here.

    Even if we accept our and the other estimates of the value of life as representing

people’s own trade-offs between health and income, that does not imply that we must

attach the same social value to additional money to all people in the world. Indeed,

international agencies, by prioritizing aid to the poor, particularly in Africa, certainly

believe that money is worth more to poorer people. One way to think about this has been

developed by Fleurbaey (2005), who works in terms of money-metric utility; the

approach been applied to international comparisons by Fleurbaey and Gaulier (2007). If

each individual has a utility function υ (h, y ) , where h is a list of health conditions, and y

is income, we can define the quantity y by

                                       υ (h*, y ) = υ (h, y )                                (1)

where h * is the list of health states corresponding to perfect health. The difference

between y and y is the amount that the person would reduce income to be restored to

perfect health, and y is the money-metric utility that captures both current health and

current income. Social welfare—here international, or cosmopolitan social welfare—is

defined over the individual levels of y , and we can use this social welfare function to

calculate, not only the priority in income that should be given to the poor, but also the

social value of health interventions directed towards them. Suppose that we write W for

the social welfare function, and there is a health innovation θ , the effect of changing θ

on social welfare takes the form

                                  ∂W    ∂W ⎡ ∂yi ∂h j ⎤
                                     =∑     ⎢∑           ⎥                                    (2)
                                  ∂θ        ⎢ j ∂h j ∂θ ⎥⎦
                                      i ∂yi ⎣




                                                 24
where i indexes individuals, and j indexes the health states. The term outside the square

brackets on the right-hand side is the social value of money to individual i, which is

higher the poorer the individual is—the standard argument for foreign aid—while the

weights applied to the derivatives of the health states inside the brackets are each

individual’s own willingness to pay for health. The point of this formulation is that each

individual’s own monetary evaluation of health is respected in making social judgments,

but the overall value of the intervention depends in addition on the marginal social value

of income to each person. So it is entirely rational for international agencies to attach

great value to improving health in Africa, even if Africans themselves are prepared to

give up relatively little money to do so.

    This analysis leaves unresolved a number of difficult issues. For example, giving

money to Africa would be even better than giving healthcare, and the assistance intended

for healthcare is likely to be subverted towards poverty reduction and income

enhancement by local politicians, even those who are acting in the interests of their

constituents. So the low value placed on life by Africans still poses problems for the

current refocusing of foreign aid away from support for growth towards support for

healthcare, perhaps because it is more difficult to reach people with cash, or because aid

agencies value lives differently than individuals do, or because the methods based on

self-reported wellbeing do not tell us what we want to know, an issue to which we now

turn.

    The immediate issue is that we have two different measures of wellbeing, a life

evaluation measure for which the monetary compensation for a death is low, and affect

measures, for which the monetary compensation for a death is large. The ladder question



                                             25
requests an overall evaluation of life; this, or the related question about life satisfaction, is

often loosely referred to as “happiness” and has a more plausible claim than momentary

feelings or emotions to be a comprehensive measure of individual wellbeing. Yet the

affect measures yield more plausible measures of compensation. If we are to decide

between them, or possibly rule both to be incorrect, we need a better understanding of

what these measures tell us.

    The ladder is an evaluation of life as a whole, affected by momentary experiences and

feelings, but distinct from them, Kahneman and Riis (2005). One interpretation is that the

ladder is a measure of life achievement, in which material success, education, and social

standing are the key ingredients. If so, it is easy to imagine why someone who has lost a

parent, for example, could be sad and depressed, but would not necessarily downgrade

his or her sense of achievement in life, though we would hardly expect this to be true for

the death of a partner or of a child. It is even possible that a sense of dealing well with the

misfortune might lead to an improvement in life evaluation; it is possible to wake up in

the morning feeling depressed, but still believe that one’s life as a whole is going well

(Annas, 2004). If this argument is accepted, neither life evaluation nor life satisfaction

measures, informative though they may be, are useful for calculating the compensation

for emotional distress. To quote Annas, “if you rush to look for empirical measures of an

unanalyzed ‘subjective’ phenomenon, the result will be confusion and banality.” Here the

“banality” is our finding that the loss of an immediate family member makes people sad,

while the “confusion” is that this sort of unhappiness is the same thing as “happiness”

measured as life evaluation.




                                               26
   A reasonable position is one in which both life evaluation and affect are both

components of wellbeing, without having an exclusive claim either separately or

together; it is good to have a sense of achievement, and it is good not to be depressed, but

other things—such as health—matter too, even if they are not fully captured in either a

sense of achievement or in a lack of depression. Any argument for focusing on either

affect or life evaluation would also need to deal with the imperfections of each. Affect

measures are subject to adaptation, and are easily influenced by trivial features of the

situation, while life evaluations often misremember the affective content of past episodes

(Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarin, 1997). We are surely on safer ground if we take a

capability approach, through which we value health, or income, or other things, by the

opportunities for freedom that they provide (Sen, 2001). Improving health extends

capabilities, even if those capabilities are not adequately captured by self-reported

wellbeing.



References


Annas, Julia, 2004, “Happiness as achievement,” Daedalus, 133(2), Spring, 44–51,
Becker, Gary S., Tomas J. Philipson, and Rodrigo R. Soares, 2005, “The quantity and
   quality of life and the evolution of world inequality,” American Economic Review,
   95(1), 277–91.
Blanchflower, Danny and Andrew Oswald, 2008, “Is well-being U-shaped over the life-
   cycle?” Social Science and Medicine, 66, 1733–49.
Cantril, H. 1965, The pattern of human concern, Rutgers University Press.
Davis, Mike, 2001, Late Victorian holocausts: El Niño famines and the making of the
   third world, New York, Verso.




                                             27
Deaton, Angus, 2008,”Income, health, and well-being around the world: evidence from
  the Gallup World Poll,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(2), Spring, 53–72.
Dolan, Paul and Robert Metcalfe, 2008, “Comparing willingness-to-pay and subjective
  well-being in the context of non-market goods,” CEP Discussion Paper 890, LSE,
  London, mimeo. (October).
Easterly, William, 2009, “Can the west save Africa?” Journal of Economic Literature,
  forthcoming. (NBER Working Paper No. 14363, September 2008.)
Fleurbaey, Marc, 2005, “Health, wealth, and fairness,” Journal of Public Economic
  Theory, 7(2), 253–84.
Fleurbaey, Marc and Guillaume Gaulier, 2007, “International comparisons of living
  standards by equivalent incomes,” CEPII Working Paper No 2007–03, January.
Fortson, Jane G., 2008, “The gradient in sub-Saharan Africa: socioeconomic status and
  HIV/AIDS,” Demography, 45(2), 303–22.
Helliwell, John F., 2003, “How’s life? Combining individual and national variables to
  explain subjective well-being,” Economic Modelling, 20(2), 331–60.
Iliffe, John, 1995, Africans: the history of a continent, Cambridge. Cambridge University
  Press.
Kahneman, Daniel, Peter P. Wakker, and Rakesh Sarin, 1997, “Back to Bentham:
  explorations of experienced utility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2), 375–
  405.
Kahneman, Daniel and Jason Riis, 2005, “Living, and thinking about it: two perspectives
  on life,” in F. A. Huppert, B. Kaverne, and N. Baylis, eds., The science of wellbeing,
  London. Oxford University Press, 285–304.
Kharas, Homi, 2008, “A reality check on African aid,” The Brookings Institution,
  February 20, http://www.brookings.edu/opinions/2008/0220_african_aid_kharas.aspx
  accessed on November 17th, 2008.
Layard, Richard, 2005, Happiness: lessons from a new science, New York. Penguin.
Oswald, Andrew and Nattavudh Powdthavee, 2009, “Death, happiness, and the
  calculation of compensatory damages,”Journal of Legal Studies, forthcoming.
Ravallion, Martin, 1997, “Good and bad growth: the human development reports,” World
  Development, 25(5), 631–8.

                                           28
Rosen, Sherwin, 1988, “The value of changes in life expectancy,” Journal of Risk and
   Uncertainty, 1(3), 285–304.
Sen, Amartya K., 1999, Development as freedom. New York. Knopf.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers, 2008, “Economic growth and subjective well-
   being: reassessing the Easterlin paradox,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
   Number 1, Spring 2008, 1–87.
Sunstein, Cass R., 2004, “Valuing a life: a plea for disaggregation,” Duke Law Journal,
   54, 385–445.
Tortora, Robert D., 2008, “Sub-Saharan Africans rank the Millennium Development
   Goals (MDGs),” Gallup Organization, processed, submitted for publication.
UNAIDS, 2008, 2008 Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic, Geneva, Switzerland.
   UNAIDS and WHO.
van den Berg, Bernard, and Ada Ferrer-i-Carbonell, 2007, “Monetary evaluation of
   informal care: the well-being evaluation method,” Health Economics, 16, 1227–44.
van Praag, Bernard M. S. and Barbara E. Baarsma, 2005, “Using happiness surveys to
   value intangibles: the case of airport noise,” Economic Journal, 115, 224–46.
Viscusi, W. Kip, and Joseph E. Aldy, 2003, “The value of a statistical life: a critical
   review of market estimates throughout the world,” The Journal of Risk and
   Uncertainty, 27(1), 5–76.
Watts, Sheldon J., 1997, Epidemics and history: disease, power, and imperialism, New
   Haven, Yale University Press.
Welz, Tanya, Victoria Hosegood, Shabbar Jaffar, Jorg Batzing-Feigenbaum, Kobus
   Herbst, and Marie-Lousie Newell, 2007, “Continued very high prevalence of HIV
   infection in rural KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa: a population-based longitudinal
   stuffy,” AIDS 21(11), 1467–72.
World Bank, 2008, Global purchasing power parities and real expenditures,
   Washington, DC.




                                             29
Data Notes

This analysis uses data from the 2006 and 2007 waves of the Gallup World Poll in conjunction
with data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS). The DHS data come from the
following country-years: Burkina Faso (2003), Cameroon (2004), Ethiopia (2005), Ghana (2003),
Guinea (2005), Kenya (2003), Malawi (2004), Mali (2001), Niger (2006), Rwanda (2005),
Senegal (2005), Tanzania (2003), Zambia (2001/2002), and Zimbabwe (2005/2006). In some
robustness checks, we also use data from Cambodia (2005), Dominican Republic (2002), Haiti
(2005), and India (2005/2006). The data from the following countries are from preliminary
releases of the data: Cambodia, Ethiopia, Haiti, India, Niger, Senegal, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe.
The DHS are nationally-representative household surveys that are available from ORC Macro
(http://www.measuredhs.com). DHS surveys include a household questionnaire, a women’s
questionnaire, and a men’s questionnaire. An exception is the 2003 DHS for Tanzania (also
referred to as the HIV/AIDS Indicator Survey (AIS) and which covers only mainland Tanzania);
this survey has an individual questionnaire (administered to both men and women), rather than
separate men’s and women’s questionnaires.
    In the fourteen cross-sections in our sample, the survey also includes an HIV test. The
household questionnaire and women’s questionnaire are administered to all households
responding to the survey; the men’s questionnaire and HIV test are, in some countries,
administered to only a subsample of households. Results of HIV testing can be linked to
individual survey responses, except in Mali and Zambia. However, the HIV testing component in
these countries includes some information about respondents tested, including basic demographic
characteristics. Our analysis using DHS data uses three measures of HIV. Though in a few cases
these are calculated at the national level, for the most part they are calculated within each country
for each five-year age-group, separately by sex. Five-year age-groups are as follows: 15–19, 20–
24, 25–29, 30–34, 35–39, 40–44, 45–49. In some countries, the DHS collects HIV test results
from men (but not women) ages 50–59 but for consistency across countries (as well as across
genders), we restrict the analysis to adults 15–49. HIV Prevalence is the fraction of adults
infected with HIV (among those tested), using results from the HIV testing component. HIV
Knowledge is the fraction of DHS respondents who say that they know someone who has AIDS
or has died of AIDS. This question was asked only of those who say that they have heard of
AIDS; the fraction is calculated among those who have heard of AIDS. Responses are drawn
from the women’s and men’s questionnaires; this question was not asked in Tanzania. HIV Risk
is the fraction of DHS respondents who say that they are at moderate or greater risk of getting
AIDS (including those who say that they have AIDS). This question was asked only of those who

                                                 30
say that they have heard of AIDS; the fraction is calculated among those who have heard of
AIDS. Responses are drawn from the women’s and men’s questionnaires; this question was asked
only in Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. When calculating the prevalence of HIV
infection, we weight results using DHS-provided HIV sample weights. When calculating the
fractions with HIV Knowledge and HIV Risk, we weight results using DHS-provided individual
sample weights. Data on GDP per capita are for 2005, and come from the latest round of the
International Comparison Program, World Bank (2008).




                                              31
                                                              Figure 1
                           HIV Prevalence, Life Evaluation, Enjoyment, Smiling, Sadness, and Depression,
                                                       by Age–group and Sex
                                            (separately for low and high HIV countries)



                                          Low HIV                                                              High HIV                                                        High HIV - Low HIV




                                                                      0 .0 5 .1 .1 5 .2 .2 5
                                                                        H IV P re va le n c e
 0 .0 5 .1 .1 5 .2 .2 5
   H IV P re va le n c e




                                     Men                 Women




                                                                                                                                         0 .0 5 .1 .1 5 .2
                                                                                                                                             D iffe re n c e
                           15   20   25      30     35    40     45                             15   20   25      30      35   40   45                               15   20      25    30    35    40   45




                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                                                      1 2 3 4 5
 1 2 3 4 5




                                                                      L ife E va lu a tio n
 L ife E va lu a tio n




                                                                                                                                         D iffe re n c e
                                                                                                                                           -.2      0
                                                                                                                                                    -.4
                                                                                 0
            0




                           15   20   25      30     35    40     45                             15   20   25      30      35   40   45                               15   20      25    30    35    40   45
                                                                                 .8
            .8




                                                                                                                                                     .1
 E n jo ym e n t




                                                                      E n jo ym e n t




                                                                                                                                         D iffe re n c e
                                                                           .4 .6
      .4 .6




                                                                                                                                           0      .0 5
                                                                                 .2
            .2




                                                                                                                                                    -.0 5
                                                                                 0
           0




                           15   20   25      30     35    40     45                             15   20   25      30      35   40   45                               15   20      25    30    35    40   45
                                                                                 .8
            .8




                                                                                                                                         0 .0 2 .0 4 .0 6 .0 8 .1
                                                                                                                                             D iffe re n c e
                                                                        .4 .6
   .4 .6




                                                                      S m ilin g
 S m ilin g




                                                                                 .2
           .2




                                                                                 0
            0




                           15   20   25      30     35    40     45                             15   20   25      30      35   40   45                               15   20      25    30    35    40   45
                                                                                                                                                         .0 5
 .0 5 .1 .1 5 .2




                                                                      .0 5 .1 .1 5 .2




                                                                                                                                         D iffe re n c e
     Sadness




                                                                           Sadness




                                                                                                                                         -.0 5      0
                                                                                                                                                    -.1
                                                                                 0
           0




                           15   20   25      30     35    40     45                             15   20   25      30      35   40   45                               15   20      25    30    35    40   45
                                                                      .0 5 .1 .1 5 .2




                                                                                                                                         -.1-.0 8-.0 6-.0 4-.0 2 0
 .0 5 .1 .1 5 .2
    D e p re s s io n




                                                                         D e p re s s io n




                                                                                                                                             D iffe re n c e
                                                                                 0
           0




                           15   20   25      30     35    40     45                             15   20   25      30      35   40   45                               15   20      25    30    35    40   45




Notes: “High HIV” countries are Kenya, Malawi, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. “Low HIV” countries are
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea, Mali, Niger, Rwanda, and Senegal. In the left and middle
columns, each bar represents the weighted mean in a particular age-group, separately by sex. In the right column,
each bar represents the difference, within an age-group/sex category, between high and low HIV countries (i.e.,
middle column – left column). HIV Prevalence data are drawn from the DHS. Life evaluation, enjoyment, smiling,
sadness, and depression are drawn from the Gallup World Poll. Enjoyment, sadness, and depression are indicators
for whether, on the previous day, the respondent experienced these emotions a lot of the day. Smiling is an
indicator for whether, on the previous day, the respondent smiled and laughed a lot of the day. Five year age-groups
are as follows: 15–19 (“15” in the figure), 20–24 (“20” in the figure), 25–29 (“25” in the figure), 30–34 (“30” in the
figure), 35–39 (“35” in the figure), 40–44 (“40” in the figure), and 45–49 (“45” in the figure).
Table 1
HIV and Subjective Wellbeing, Means by Country

                    HIV          HIV         HIV
   Country          Prev.       Knows        Risk      Ladder      Enjoyment      Smiling    Sadness     Depression

Burkina Faso         0.02        0.47         --        3.91          0.68         0.69        0.19         0.08
Cameroon             0.06        0.46         --        4.18          0.63         0.63        0.24         0.21
Ethiopia             0.01        0.10         --        4.03          0.58         0.54        0.22         0.46
Ghana                0.02        0.38         --        4.93          0.65         0.74        0.17         0.14
Guinea               0.02        0.13         --        4.32          0.71         0.67        0.25         0.14
Kenya                0.07        0.75        0.22       4.24          0.72         0.70        0.15         0.09
Malawi               0.12        0.66         --        4.41          0.70         0.72        0.17         0.13
Mali                 0.02        0.25         --        4.05          0.80         0.75        0.14         0.10
Niger                0.01        0.18         --        4.01          0.78         0.73        0.13         0.08
Rwanda               0.03        0.78         --        4.23          0.68         0.82        0.25         0.25
Senegal              0.01        0.08         --        4.65          0.78         0.75        0.16         0.04
Tanzania             0.07         --         0.23       4.14          0.73         0.76        0.19         0.18
Zambia               0.16        0.79        0.50       4.50          0.68         0.72        0.20         0.11
Zimbabwe             0.18        0.29        0.27       3.64          0.68         0.73        0.25         0.20

Notes: In all cells, the sample is restricted to adult respondents ages 15–49 and results are weighted using provided
sample weights. HIV Prevalence, the mean of HIV Knowledge, and the mean of HIV Risk are calculated using
DHS data. Means of life evaluation, enjoyment, smiling, sadness, and depression are calculated using Gallup data.
HIV knowledge is the fraction of DHS respondents who say that they know someone who has AIDS or has died of
AIDS. HIV Risk is the fraction of DHS respondents who say that they are at moderate or higher risk of being
infected with HIV. Life evaluation is the Cantril ladder on a scale from 0 (“the worst possible life”) to 10 (“the best
possible life”). Enjoyment, sadness, and depression are indicators for whether, on the previous day, the respondent
experienced these emotions a lot of the day. Smiling is an indicator for whether, on the previous day, the respondent
smiled and laughed a lot of the day.
Table 2
Life Evaluation and HIV Prevalence
Life Evaluation           (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)

HIV                     –0.483         –0.986*        –1.392*         –1.348*        –1.323*         –0.860
                        (0.322)        (2.512)        (3.305)         (3.167)        (2.648)         (1.426)
ln GDP                   0.401         0.388*
                        (1.834)        (5.834)
Female                                                                –0.020            0.001          –0.011
                                                                      (0.527)          (0.015)         (0.254)
ln y                                                                                   0.414*          0.415*
                                                                                      (14.984)        (14.967)
Country FEs?                 No              No            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
Age-group FEs?               No              No            No             No             No              Yes
R2                          0.264           0.010         0.035          0.035          0.081           0.082
N                             14           21663          21663          21663          14210           14210
N (Countries)                 14             14             14            14             12              12
Notes: In all columns, the sample is restricted to adult respondents ages 15–49 and results are weighted using
provided sample weights. The dependent variable is the ladder. In column (1), the dependent variable is the country-
level weighted average of the ladder. In columns (2)–(6), the dependent variable is the individual ladder. HIV is
country-level HIV prevalence among adults 15–49 in column (1) and country/sex/age-group-level prevalence in
columns (2)–(6). Ln GDP is the log of country-level GDP per capita in 2005, as measured by the International
Comparison Program, World Bank (2008). Ln y is the log of family income, using individual responses from the
Gallup survey. In columns (2)–(6), standard errors are clustered at the country/sex/age-group-level. Absolute values
of t-statistics are in parentheses. * p < 0.05
Table 3
Emotions and HIV Prevalence
                             (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)
                          Enjoyment                Smiling                Sadness               Depression
HIV                           –0.151                  –0.087                –0.053                  0.198*
                              (1.060)                 (0.598)               (0.413)                 (2.083)
Female                         0.001                   0.013                 0.009                  –0.005
                              (0.136)                 (1.249)               (0.919)                 (0.716)
Lny                           0.056*                  0.050*                –0.029*                –0.020*
                             (10.992)                 (9.446)               (6.264)                 (4.902)
Country FEs?                    Yes                     Yes                   Yes                     Yes
Age–group FEs?                  Yes                     Yes                   Yes                     Yes
R2                             0.036                   0.030                 0.017                   0.091
N                              14172                   14048                 14157                   14127
N (Countries)                   12                      12                    12                      12
Notes: In all columns, the sample is restricted to adult respondents ages 15–49 and results are weighted using
provided sample weights. In column (1), the dependent variable is an indicator for whether, on previous day, the
respondent experienced enjoyment a lot of the day. In column (2), the dependent variable is an indicator for
whether, on previous day, the respondent smiled and laughed a lot of the day. In column (3), the dependent variable
is an indicator for whether, on previous day, the respondent experienced sadness a lot of the day. In column (4), the
dependent variable is an indicator for whether, on previous day, the respondent experienced depression a lot of the
day. HIV is country/sex/age-group-level HIV prevalence in all columns. Ln y is the log of family income, using
individual responses from the Gallup survey. In all columns, standard errors are clustered at the country/sex/age-
group-level. Absolute values of t–statistics are in parentheses. * p < 0.05
Table 4
Fractions of people who report knowing someone who died of various conditions

                             Malaria     HIV/AIDS                 TB         TB or           Any of       UNAIDS
                                                                         HIV/AIDS             seven       mortality
 Angola                          0.69            0.26           0.54            0.60            0.84           0.69
 Benin                           0.40            0.18           0.16            0.28            0.54           0.39
 Botswana                        0.13            0.58           0.29            0.64            0.69           6.23
 Burkina Faso                    0.71            0.54           0.31            0.60            0.79           0.70
 Burundi                         0.84            0.85           0.53            0.88            0.99           1.46
 Cameroon                        0.56            0.58           0.49            0.71            0.79           2.39
 Chad                            0.85            0.87           0.66            0.90            0.96           1.44
 Ethiopia                        0.74            0.71           0.51            0.82            0.95           0.94
 Ghana                           0.49            0.33           0.24            0.43            0.64           0.95
 Kenya                           0.81            0.83           0.50            0.88            0.93           2.91
 Madagascar                      0.39            0.02           0.19            0.20            0.53           0.03
 Malawi                          0.83            0.85           0.79            0.93            0.98           5.28
 Mali                            0.77            0.21           0.33            0.43            0.84           0.43
 Mauritania                      0.52            0.04           0.38            0.39            0.65           0.16
 Mozambique                      0.78            0.61           0.41            0.71            0.95           4.09
 Niger                           0.87            0.29           0.43            0.50            0.91           0.29
 Nigeria                         0.40            0.32           0.22            0.40            0.59           1.29
 Rwanda                          0.74            0.93           0.46            0.95            0.98           0.86
 Senegal                         0.73            0.06           0.28            0.31            0.78           0.15
 Sierra Leone                    0.78            0.13           0.48            0.52            0.91           0.60
 Tanzania                        0.64            0.60           0.40            0.67            0.78           2.50
 Togo                            0.58            0.47           0.24            0.54            0.75           1.48
 Uganda                          0.88            0.93           0.43            0.94            0.99           2.67
 Zambia                          0.78            0.82           0.66            0.89            0.97           4.80
 Zimbabwe                        0.62            0.88           0.73            0.94            0.96          10.76

Notes: Fractions of respondents, weighted by sampling weights, who in the 2006 wave of the Gallup World Poll
answer positively to the question “Do you know someone who has died from X?” where the column heads show X.
The seven diseases are those listed, plus cholera, hepatitis, polio, and smallpox. The final column is an estimate of
AIDS mortality per thousand based on the estimate of AIDS deaths taken from UNAIDS (2008), divided by a
thousand times 2005 population taken from the 2007 World Development Indicators.
Table 5
Fractions of people who report losing an immediate family member in the last twelve
months

                                 Malaria          AIDS             TB          TB or     Childbirth            Any
                                                                               AIDS
Angola                               0.19          0.07           0.07           0.11           0.10           0.30
Benin                                0.09          0.05           0.02           0.07           0.22           0.32
Burkina Faso                         0.25          0.10           0.05           0.13           0.11           0.33
Cameroon                             0.29          0.17           0.17           0.27           0.18           0.48
Central African R.                   0.26          0.44           0.26           0.51           0.17           0.62
Chad                                 0.52          0.47           0.32           0.51           0.36           0.69
D. R. of the Congo                   0.19          0.12           0.11           0.20           0.16           0.39
Ethiopia                             0.11          0.08           0.10           0.16           0.07           0.29
Ghana                                0.06          0.01           0.03           0.04           0.11           0.16
Guinea                               0.24          0.04           0.10           0.12           0.11           0.38
Kenya                                0.18          0.17           0.06           0.19           0.10           0.35
Liberia                              0.15          0.01           0.05           0.05           0.09           0.23
Madagascar                           0.10          0.00           0.06           0.06           0.10           0.18
Malawi                               0.26          0.15           0.18           0.26           0.11           0.45
Mali                                 0.18          0.03           0.05           0.07           0.09           0.27
Mauritania                           0.13          0.03           0.04           0.06           0.04           0.17
Mozambique                           0.15          0.08           0.09           0.14           0.05           0.27
Namibia                              0.05          0.19           0.08           0.21           0.01           0.23
Niger                                0.39          0.02           0.09           0.11           0.21           0.45
Nigeria                              0.06          0.02           0.03           0.04           0.07           0.13
Senegal                              0.20          0.00           0.02           0.02           0.08           0.24
Sierra Leone                         0.33          0.03           0.10           0.11           0.21           0.47
South Africa                         0.00          0.11           0.05           0.13           0.02           0.14
Sudan                                0.09          0.03           0.02           0.03           0.08           0.17
Tanzania                             0.33          0.35           0.19           0.39           0.25           0.60
Uganda                               0.27          0.38           0.03           0.39           0.11           0.52
Zambia                               0.21          0.13           0.10           0.19           0.07           0.35
Zimbabwe                             0.14          0.28           0.18           0.34           0.10           0.38

Notes: Fractions of respondents in the 2007 wave of the Gallup World Poll, weighted by sampling weights, who
answer positively to the question “Please tell me if any one in your immediate family has died from X in the past 12
months?” where the column heads show X. The correlation between the HIV/AIDS fractions in column 2 and the
UNAIDS mortality numbers in the final column of Table 4 for the countries shown here (excluding Sudan, for
which there are no UNAIDS data) is 0.40.
Table 6: Differences in wellbeing measures between those who know someone who has died
and those who do not
(Differences in bold are more than twice their estimated standard errors.)

                                Ladder              Enjoy              Smile                Sad         Depressed


 Angola                          –0.03              –0.16              –0.08               0.10               0.06
 Benin                           –0.15              –0.03               0.08               0.05              –0.02
 Burkina Faso                    –0.08              –0.02               0.04               0.05               0.08
 Cameroon                         0.24              –0.01              –0.03               0.05               0.08
 Central African R                0.11              –0.05              –0.00               0.12               0.04
 Chad                            –0.19              –0.03               0.08               0.04               0.02
 D.R. Congo                      –0.11              –0.08              –0.05               0.03               0.06
 Ethiopia                        –0.44              –0.06              –0.06               0.09               0.10
 Ghana                           –0.06               0.13               0.01               0.05               0.10
 Guinea                           0.18              –0.05              –0.08               0.06               0.08
 Kenya                           –0.07               0.11               0.05               0.00              –0.01
 Liberia                         –0.48               0.01               0.05               0.00               0.03
 Madagascar                      –0.08              –0.12              –0.04               0.05               0.18
 Malawi                          –0.22              –0.05              –0.11               0.00               0.02
 Mali                            –0.23              –0.06              –0.13               0.11               0.03
 Mauritania                       0.04              –0.18              –0.17               0.09               0.09
 Mozambique                      –0.36              –0.03              –0.01               0.06              –0.01
 Namibia                         –0.04              –0.03              –0.05               0.13               0.08
 Niger                           –0.40              –0.08              –0.12               0.07               0.04
 Nigeria                         –0.00              –0.14              –0.10               0.12               0.15
 Senegal                         –0.38              –0.06              –0.01              –0.03               0.00
 Sierra Leone                     0.07               0.04               0.05               0.07               0.01
 South Africa                     0.22               0.00              –0.07               0.14               0.13
 Sudan                            0.39              –0.05               0.02              –0.01              –0.02
 Tanzania                        –0.32               0.01               0.01               0.08               0.07
 Uganda                          –0.23               0.04               0.13               0.01               0.01
 Zambia                          –0.16               0.04               0.04               0.09               0.03
 Zimbabwe                        –0.36              –0.16              –0.13               0.14               0.11
      Average                    –0.11              –0.04              –0.03                0.06               0.05
 FE regression+                  –0.12              –0.04              –0.02                0.06               0.05

Notes: The average is a simple average over countries (calculated using the within country weights) without
population weighting. Each column shows the difference in means between those reporting to have lost, in the last
twelve months, an immediate family member to malaria, HIV/AIDS, TB, or childbirth and those who did not so
report. Standard errors are corrected for design effects. The FE regression in the last row comes from regressing the
dependent variable on a dummy for mortality from any cause and a set of country fixed effects, with standard errors
corrected for survey design.
Table 7: Country fixed effect regressions on SWB of knowing a family member who died and other controls, including income

                          Ladder                        Enjoy                          Smile                          Sad                        Depressed
 Malaria        –0.083         –0.082         –0.025         –0.029         –0.004         –0.011         0.027          0.034          0.026          0.030
                (2.0)          (1.8)          (2.3)          (2.3)          (0.4)          (0.9)          (2.9)          (3.1)          (3.1)          (3.2)
 TB             –0.104         –0.128         –0.032         –0.024         –0.038         –0.028         0.038          0.038          0.045          0.045
                (1.9)          (2.2)          (2.1)          (1.4)          (2.5)          (1.6)          (2.8)          (2.5)          (3.4)          (3.1)
 AIDS           0.104          0.100          0.009          –0.002         0.006          –0.001         0.050          0.050          0.017          0.020
                (1.9)          (1.8)          (0.7)          (0.1)          (0.4)          (0.1)          (4.0)          (4.0)          (1.6)          (1.8)
 Childbirth     –0.035         0.042          –0.010         0.005          –0.016         –0.014         0.029          0.013          0.034          0.028
                (0.7)          (0.8)          (0.7)          (0.3)          (1.2)          (0.9)          (2.5)          (1.0)          (3.2)          (2.3)
 Age            0.00452        –0.00153       –0.00218       –0.00225       –0.00543       –0.00488       0.00051        –0.00044       0.00249        0.00153
                (1.1)          (0.3)          (1.9)          (1.6)          (5.1)          (3.7)          (0.5)          (0.3)          (2.6)          (1.3)
 Age2           –0.00006       0.00002        0.00001        0.00001        0.00005        0.00004        0.00000        0.00001        –0.00003       –0.00002
                (1.3)          (0.3)          (0.7)          (0.4)          (3.8)          (2.8)          (0.3)          (0.5)          (2.5)          (1.3)
 Female         –0.013         –0.011         0.004          0.000          0.018          0.008          0.012          0.021          –0.002         –0.004
                (0.5)          (0.4)          (0.6)          (0.0)          (2.5)          (1.0)          (1.9)          (2.8)          (0.4)          (0.6)
 Education      0.458          0.273          0.098          0.070          0.053          0.024          –0.053         –0.032         –0.041         –0.028
                (14.4)         (7.6)          (11.9)         (7.1)          (6.7)          (2.6)          (7.6)          (4.0)          (6.5)          (3.6)
 Lny            ..             0.366          ..             0.057          ..             0.046          ..             –0.035         ..             –0.024
                               (19.2)                        (11.7)                        (10.1)                        (8.6)                         (6.2)
 obs            26,232         19,459         26,172         19.396         26,060         19,320         26,295         19,439         26,255         19,414
 countries      28             26             28             26             28             26             28             26             28             26
 F(equal)       2.80           3.36           1.55           1.17           1.45           0.41           0.75           1.42           0.80           0.48
 F(zero)        2.76           2.70           3.03           2.14           2.23           1.42           15.31          13.14          13.37          10.88

Notes: Each pair of columns shows two country fixed-effect regressions with the dependent variable as column head, the first excluding the log of income, the
second including it. Education is a dummy that is 1 if the person has completed more than an elementary education. Obs is the number of observations in each
regression; note the drop when income is included. The two F-statistics are F-tests for the coefficients on the four causes of death being equal, and for all effects
being zero.
Table 8: Averaged coefficients from country regressions on SWB of knowing a family member who died and other controls,
including income

                        Ladder                   Enjoy                      Smile                      Sad                     Depressed
 Malaria       –0.110      –0.102       –0.023        –0.030        0.003       –0.009       0.034        0.034       0.029         0.035
               (2.2)       (2.0)        (1.8)         (2.0)        (0.2)        (0.6)        (3.0)        (2.5)       (2.5)         (2.7)
 TB            –0.116      –0.129       –0.036        –0.033       –0.053       –0.053       0.021        0.013       0.049         0.063
               (2.0)       (2.0)        (2.1)         (1.5)        (3.1)        (2.4)        (1.5)        (0.8)       (3.3)         (3.7)
 AIDS          0.202       0.166        0.006         –0.005       –0.022       –0.010       0.085        0.127       0.016         0.025
               (2.9)       (2.0)        (0.4)         (0.2)        (1.2)        (0.5)        (3.7)        (5.0)       (0.9)         (1.1)
 Childbirth    –0.035      0.094        –0.016        0.001        –0.011       –0.003       0.033        0.021       0.039         0.033
               (0.6)       (1.6)        (1.1)         (0.1)        (0.8)        (0.2)        (2.4)        (1.3)       (3.4)         (2.2)
 Age           0.00052     –0.00471     –0.00226      –0.00275     –0.00536     –0.00439     0.00032      –0.00091    0.00282       0.00240
               (0.1)       (0.9)        (1.9)         (1.9)        (4.8)        (3.2)        (0.3)        (0.7)       (3.0)         (2.0)
 Age2          –0.00000    0.00006      0.00001       0.00001      0.00005      0.00004      0.00000      0.00002     –0.00003      –0.00003
               (0.0)       (1.0)        (0.8)         (0.8)        (3.7)        (2.3)        (0.0)        (0.9)       (3.0)         (2.1)
 Female        –0.009      –0.020       0.005         0.002        0.019        0.004        0.012        0.025       –0.004        –0.007
               (0.4)       (0.6)        (0.7)         (0.2)        (2.6)        (0.5)        (1.9)        (3.3)       (0.7)         (1.1)
 Education     0.456       0.273        0.102         0.071        0.057        0.029        –0.053       –0.028      –0.040        –0.029
               (14.1)      (7.1)        (12.3)        (7.1)        (7.0)        (3.0)        (7.5)        (3.3)       (6.4)         (3.7)
 lny           ..          0.374        ..            0.064        ..           0.055        ..           –0.042      ..            –0.028
                           (16.8)                     (12.0)                    (10.7)                    (9.1)                     (6.8)
 obs           26,232      19,459       26,172        19.396       26,060       19,320       26,295       19,439      26,255        19,414
 countries     28          26           28            26           28           26           28           26          28            26
 F(equal)      4.48         3.96        0.88          0.69         2.31         1.21         1.77          4.67       0.66          0.79
 F(zero)       3.73         2.98         3.13         2.35          3.92        2.37         10.71        11.08       10.10          9.43

Notes: See Table 8 above. Here the regressions are run country by country, and the coefficients averaged over them.
Table A.1
Life Evaluation and HIV Knowledge
Life Evaluation            (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)

HIV Knows                0.079           0.012         –0.958*         –1.264*         –1.226*         –0.544
                        (0.225)         (0.130)        (3.524)         (4.818)         (4.189)         (1.606)
lnGDP                    0.410          0.421*
                        (1.815)         (5.740)
female                                                                 –0.119*          –0.110*           –0.074
                                                                       (3.361)           (2.565)          (1.706)
Lny                                                                                      0.426*           0.426*
                                                                                        (15.211)         (15.083)
Country FEs?                 No             No             Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes
Age–group FEs?               No             No             No               No             No               Yes
R2                         0.264           0.010          0.037            0.038          0.084            0.085
N                            13            19973          19973           19973           13056            13056
N (Countries)                13              13             13              13             11                11
Notes: In all columns, the sample is restricted to adult respondents ages 15–49 and results are weighted using
provided sample weights. The dependent variable is the ladder on a scale from 0 (“the worst possible life”) to 10
(“the best possible life”). In column (1), the dependent variable is the country–level weighted average of the ladder.
In columns (2)–(6), the dependent variable is the individual ladder. HIV Knows is country–level HIV knowledge
among adults 15–49 in column (1) and country/sex/age-group-level knowledge in columns (2)–(6). Knowledge is
the fraction of DHS respondents who say that they know someone who has AIDS or has died of AIDS. lnGDP is
the log of country-level GDP per capita in 2005, as measured by the International Comparison Program, World
Bank (2008). lny is the log of family income, using individual responses from the Gallup survey. In columns (2)–
(6), standard errors are clustered at the country/sex/age-group-level. Absolute values of t–statistics are in
parentheses. * p < 0.05
Table A.2
Emotions and HIV Knowledge
                             (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)
                          Enjoyment                Smiling                Sadness               Depression
HIV Knows                      0.002                –0.207*                 –0.005                 –0.065
                              (0.017)                (2.033)                (0.058)                (1.023)
Female                        –0.005                  0.002                  0.007                  –0.005
                              (0.401)                (0.122)                (0.645)                (0.568)
Lny                           0.060*                 0.051*                –0.032*                 –0.020*
                             (10.770)                (8.845)                (6.788)                (4.566)
Country FEs?                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
Age–group FEs?                  Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes
R2                             0.037                  0.029                  0.019                  0.099
N                              13019                  12918                  13015                  12986
N (Countries)                   11                     11                     11                      11
Notes: In all columns, the sample is restricted to adult respondents ages 15–49 and results are weighted using
provided sample weights. In column (1), the dependent variable is an indicator for whether, on previous day, the
respondent experienced enjoyment a lot of the day. In column (2), the dependent variable is an indicator for
whether, on previous day, the respondent smiled and laughed a lot of the day. In column (3), the dependent variable
is an indicator for whether, on previous day, the respondent experienced sadness a lot of the day. In column (4), the
dependent variable is an indicator for whether, on previous day, the respondent experienced depression a lot of the
day. HIV Knows is country/sex/age-group-level knowledge in all columns. Knowledge is the fraction of DHS
respondents who say that they know someone who has AIDS or has died of AIDS. lny is the log of family income,
using individual responses from the Gallup survey. In all columns, standard errors are clustered at the
country/sex/age-group-level. Absolute values of t–statistics are in parentheses. * p < 0.05
Table B.1
Life Evaluation and HIV Risk
Life Evaluation            (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)

HIV Risk                 1.155           0.467          –0.960*         –1.124*         –1.242          –1.321
                        (3.574)         (1.698)         (2.245)         (2.658)         (1.951)         (1.135)
lnGDP                    0.746          0.791*
                        (7.132)         (6.355)
female                                                                   0.065             0.099          0.106
                                                                        (0.815)          (1.064)         (0.869)
lny                                                                                       0.374*         0.376*
                                                                                         (7.849)         (7.898)
Country FEs?                 No             No             Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes
Age–group FEs?               No             No              No              No              No             Yes
R2                         0.986           0.024          0.030            0.030           0.079          0.082
N                             4            6894            6894            6894            5264           5264
N (Countries)                 4              4               4               4               4              4
Notes: In all columns, the sample is restricted to adult respondents ages 15–49 and results are weighted using
provided sample weights. The dependent variable is the ladder, on a scale from 0 (“the worst possible life”) to 10
(“the best possible life”). In column (1), the dependent variable is the country–level weighted average of the ladder.
In columns (2)–(6), the dependent variable is the individual ladder. HIV Risk is country–level HIV risk among
adults 15–49 in column (1) and country/sex/age-group-level risk in columns (2)–(6). Risk is the fraction of DHS
respondents who say that they are at moderate or higher risk of being infected with HIV. lnGDP is the log of
country-level GDP per capita in 2005, as measured by the International Comparison Program, World Bank (2008).
lny is the log of family income, using individual responses from the Gallup survey. In columns (2)–(6), standard
errors are clustered at the country/sex/age-group-level. Absolute values of t–statistics are in parentheses. * p < 0.05
Table B.2
Emotions and HIV Risk
                             (1)                      (2)                    (3)                    (4)
                          Enjoyment                 Smiling                Sadness               Depression
HIV Risk                       0.346                  0.206                   –0.072                –0.147
                             (1.774)                 (0.958)                 (0.476)                (0.995)
female                        –0.015                 –0.016                    0.014                 0.013
                             (0.728)                 (0.659)                 (0.803)                (0.726)
lny                           0.049*                 0.050*                  –0.024*               –0.023*
                             (6.497)                 (6.897)                 (3.274)                (3.899)
Country FEs?                    Yes                    Yes                      Yes                   Yes
Age–group FEs?                  Yes                    Yes                      Yes                   Yes
R2                             0.024                  0.023                   0.019                  0.026
N                              5253                   5206                     5242                  5229
N (Countries)                    4                      4                        4                     4
Notes: In all columns, the sample is restricted to adult respondents ages 15–49 and results are weighted using
provided sample weights. In column (1), the dependent variable is an indicator for whether, on previous day, the
respondent experienced enjoyment a lot of the day. In column (2), the dependent variable is an indicator for
whether, on previous day, the respondent smiled and laughed a lot of the day. In column (3), the dependent variable
is an indicator for whether, on previous day, the respondent experienced sadness a lot of the day. In column (4), the
dependent variable is an indicator for whether, on previous day, the respondent experienced depression a lot of the
day. HIV Risk is country/sex/age-group-level risk in all columns. Risk is the fraction of DHS respondents who say
that they are at moderate or higher risk of being infected with HIV. lny is the log of family income, using individual
responses from the Gallup survey. In all columns, standard errors are clustered at the country/sex/age-group-level.
Absolute values of t–statistics are in parentheses. * p < 0.05
