NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW BIG ARE THE GAINS FROM INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INTEGRATION?
Indrit Hoxha
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
Dietrich Vollrath
Working Paper 14636
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14636

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2009

The authors would like to thank the participants at the 2007 NBER Summer Institute, 2008 IEFS Meetings,
2008 CEPR-ESSIM Meetings, Fabrizio Perri, Andrei Levchenko, Bent Sorensen, David Weil and
Helen Popper for their comments and suggestions. We also thank Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Olivier
Jeanne, who kindly provided us with their data and gave suggestions. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Indrit Hoxha, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Dietrich Vollrath. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Big are the Gains from International Financial Integration?
Indrit Hoxha, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Dietrich Vollrath
NBER Working Paper No. 14636
January 2009, Revised July 2011
JEL No. F36,F41,F43,O4
ABSTRACT
The literature has shown that the implied welfare gains from international financial integration are
very small. We revisit the existing findings and document that welfare gains can be substantial if capital
goods are not perfect substitutes. We use a model of optimal savings that includes a production function
where the elasticity of substitution between capital varieties is less then infinity, but more than the
value that would generate endogenous growth. This production structure is consistent with empirical
estimates of the actual elasticity of substitution between capital types, as well as with the relatively
slow speed of convergence documented in the growth literature. Calibrating the model, our results
are that welfare gains from financial integration are equivalent to a 9% increase in consumption for
the median developing country, and up to 14% for the most capital-scarce. These gains rise substantially
if capital’s share in output increases even modestly above the baseline value of 0.3, and remain large
even if inflows of foreign capital after integration are limited to a fraction of the existing capital stock.
Indrit Hoxha
University of Houston
Department of Economics
Houston, TX 77204
indrit.hoxha@mail.uh.edu
Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan
University of Houston
Department of Economics
Houston, TX 77204
and NBER
sebnem.kalemli-ozcan@mail.uh.edu

Dietrich Vollrath
University of Houston
201C McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204
devollrath@uh.edu

1

Introduction

How big are the gains from international financial integration? Given the crises of the emerging market
countries after their liberalizations, and the current global financial meltdown, one wonders if there are any
gains at all from the trade in international assets. Indeed, the literature so far has shown that the implied
welfare gains from financial integration are very small. We reexamine the potential benefits of integration
by incorporating the tools of endogenous growth theory into an otherwise standard neo-classical model of
consumption and savings.
The essential idea of our paper is that the welfare gains increase when capital varieties within a country
are not perfect substitutes, as is the case in the typical production functions used so far in this literature.
Once we allow for an elasticity of substitution between capital varieties of less than infinity, the potential
gains of financial integration become quite large. Our simple model of capital varieties lies between the neoclassical model (with infinite substitution of capital varieties) and the endogenous growth literature (which
makes a knife-edge assumption implying that substitution is very low). In our more realistic intermediate
setting, financial integration benefits a country by providing access to scarce capital, even though it has no
effect on the long-run rate of technological progress.
Financial integration generates a welfare gain, relative to autarky, because capital flows in immediately to
bring the rate of return down to the world rate, which allows for a permanently higher level of consumption.
This benefit is larger the longer it would have taken in autarky to reach the world rate. Once capital
types are not perfect substitutes, the marginal product of any single type is less sensitive to the size of the
aggregate stock of capital. As capital accumulates, the rate of return falls more slowly than in the standard
neo-classical model, and the time it takes in autarky to reach the world rate is extended. Hence, the welfare
gain of integrating is larger once capital types are imperfect substitutes.
Several recent empirical studies indicate the elasticity of substitution between capital types cluster around
values of 3–4.1 In our calibrations, elasticities in this range imply a welfare gain of integration equivalent to a
9% permanent increase in consumption, on average, for developing countries with the median capital/output
ratio. For those countries that are very capital scarce, with capital/output ratios of one or lower, the welfare
gains are equivalent to a 14% permanent increase in consumption on average. If we allow for capital’s share
in output to be as high as 0.40, which is well within the observed range of values, then the gains are as large
as 23% for the median country and 34% for the most capital-scarce.
Allowing for imperfect substitution between types of capital or intermediate goods is commonly used
in studies of both economic growth and trade. Romer (1990) builds his original endogenous growth model
with varieties of intermediate goods, and explicitly mentions that these can be thought of as different capital
types. Later endogenous growth models dealing with scale effects, such as Young (1998), Peretto (1998), and
Dinopoulos and Thompson (1998), all rely on varieties of intermediate goods. Voigtländer and Voth (2006)
use the idea of different capital varieties explicitly in their model of long-run growth, while Acemoglu and
Guerrieri (2008) study structural change and accumulation using different varieties of intermediate goods
produced directly using capital.
1 See

Goolsbee (2004), Goolsbee and Gross (2000), and Chun and Mun (2003).

2

Different varieties of capital and intermediate goods have also been used to study the relationship of
trade and growth, as in Grossman and Helpman (1989, 1990), Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991), and Young
(1991). More recently, Broda, Greenfield, and Weinstein (2006) use a similar production structure to ours to
actually estimate the elasticity of substitution between intermediate good varieties, which includes capital
goods. They find elasticities of 3–4, similar to the more direct estimates, from a sample that includes 73
countries.
Our contribution is to bring the concept of imperfect substitution between capital varieties to the study
of welfare gains from financial integration, which has typically relied on standard neo-classical production
functions with infinite substitutability. There have been two approaches in the literature to quantify the
welfare gains from financial integration.2 The first approach focuses on the risk sharing mechanism. International asset trades allow agents to pool idiosyncratic risk and smooth consumption. Starting with Lucas’s
work (1987), there is an extensive literature that shows, in a representative agent framework with transitory
shocks, the welfare gains from consumption smoothing upon integration are very small. Lucas himself finds
a welfare cost of fluctuations that is around 0.042% of average consumption. Although subsequent work
showed that with permanent shocks and/or a feedback effect on industrial structure welfare gains via the
risk sharing mechanism of integration can be as big as 20%, once calibrated to different countries the gains
stay around 1% on average (Obstfeld, 1994; Kalemli-Ozcan, Sorensen and Yosha, 2001).
The second approach, and the one more closely related to our paper, focuses on capital scarcity. This
channel will work through reducing the cost of capital, accelerating capital accumulation and raising consumption due to an influx of foreign capital. Gourinchas and Jeanne (2006) (GJ hereafter) were the first
ones to have investigated the implied welfare gains of this channel. They find very small gains, equivalent to
a permanent increase in consumption of 1.74% for the median of their sample of developing countries. They
find that, although foreign integration provides an influx of capital to a country, the gain from this is small
due to the fact that countries would have converged to the world rate of return very quickly in autarky.3
Their results arise, in part, from their standard assumption that capital is perfectly substitutable. In GJ,
the marginal product of capital falls very quickly to the assumed world rate, even in autarky, as a country
accumulates capital. Hence integration provides little benefit. Allowing for even a small departure from
perfect substitution of capital types generates much larger implied welfare gains.
We explore the plausibility of our results by looking at the actual marginal product of capital over the
period 1960–2000. Across a sample of 102 countries, marginal products of capital decline very slowly, so
that by 2000 most of the original differences across countries from 1960 remain.4 Compared to this data,
the neo-classical model of perfect capital substitution predicts that marginal products of capital would have
converged within only 10–15 years (i.e. by 1975) to a common world rate of approximately 5.42%, far too
fast compared to the data. On the other hand, our model that allows for imperfect substitution is consistent
with the general pattern of slow declines in the marginal product of capital over time.
2 There is an enormous literature that tries to quantify the effect of financial integration on growth. See Kose, Prasad, Rogoff,
and Wei (2009) for an extensive survey.
3 It will still be the case that gains are relatively larger for the countries that are further away from their steady states.
4 This result holds even after we apply the relative price adjustment to marginal product of capital as suggested by Caselli
and Feyrer(2007).

3

The observations on rates of return link our work to the work on convergence in output per capita. As
has been commonly noted, the estimated speed of output convergence is approximately 2–2.5% per year
(see Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1992). This slow convergence holds across countries, U.S. states and the
OECD (Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1992), Japanese prefectures, European regions, and Canadian provinces
(Sala-i-Martin, 1996a,b), Indian provinces (Cashin and Sahay, 1996), and Swedish counties (Persson, 1997).5
The standard neo-classical model predicts convergence speeds that are far faster, but allowing for imperfect
substitution of capital varieties generates speeds of output convergence consistent with the rates of 2–2.5%
per year.
To proceed we first lay out a simple production structure involving capital varieties and relate it to the
existing work. Following that, we put this production structure into a standard model of intertemporal
utility maximization, and use that model to evaluate the welfare gains of financial integration, similar to GJ.
Calibrating that model, we find much larger welfare gains than are implied by existing work, and we then
discuss the plausibility of these results in light of existing data on marginal products of capital, and under
several alternative assumptions.

2

Capital Varieties and Financial Integration

To build towards a model in which we can evaluate the welfare effects of financial integration, we begin
with the following production function, which is also used by Broda, Greenfield, and Weinstein (2006) in the
context of imperfect substitutability of consumption goods where they estimate the role of product variety
in trade and growth.
!α/ǫ
Mt
X
1−α
ǫ
Yt = (At Lt )
xit
(1)
i=0

in which various varieties of capital, xi , with a constant elasticity of substitution of 1/(1 − ǫ), are combined
with labor, L, to produce the final good Y . Note that, given this production function, labor will earn 1 − α
of output, while the various capital varieties earn α.
This production function nests versions used across both the endogenous growth and financial integration
literatures. If we allow ǫ = 1, then the elasticity of substitution between capital varieties is infinite, and the
production function reduces to the standard neo-classical model with the capital stock equal to the sum of
the various varieties. Alternatively, if we allow ǫ = α, for an elasticity of substitution equal to roughly 1.4
given a value of α = 0.3, then we have the standard expanding product-variety model found in Romer (1990)
or Grossman and Helpman (1991).
Similar to those authors, we consider a case where each capital variety is produced by a single monop5 While there are panel studies, such as Caselli, Esquivel and Lefort (1996), that report much faster convergence rates of
around 11% per year, there appear to be biases built into the estimations. Durlauf, Johnson, and Temple (2005) discuss the
issues with the panel approach, and in particular the GMM estimation of Caselli et al. Their conclusion is that these estimates
of fast convergence are not reliable. Note that if one assumes the implied autarky convergence by the Ramsey model to calculate
the welfare gains as done in GJ, this rate will correspond to a much faster output convergence of 11-13%, which is not supported
by the empirical evidence on output convergence.

4

olistically competitive firm. The firms produce these varieties by using units of the final good, so that the
aggregate capital stock can be considered as the amount of foregone consumption in the economy. More
precisely,
Mt
X
Kt =
xit .
(2)
i

We will, as is common, make the assumption that the firms are identical, and therefore that each firm’s
xit = xt . This implies that Kt = Mt xt . Putting this together with the production function above yields the
following
α/ǫ

Yt = Kt

α−α/ǫ

(At Lt )1−α xt

(3)

which shows the relationship of aggregate output to the total capital stock.
The value of xt , however, is still to be determined. Here, the assumptions one makes will have various
effects on the presence of endogenous growth and/or scale effects in the economy. The original endogenous
growth models of Romer (1990) and Grossman and Helpman (1991) not only used the assumption that
ǫ = α, but that the nature of firms is such that xt is constant over time. This leads to scale effects, which is
at odds with the data presented by Jones (1995). Next generation models by Young (1998), Peretto (1998),
and Dinopoulos and Thompson (1998) all provided a way of eliminating the scale effect. In general, these
models relied on making the cost of innovation (for our purposes, the cost of entry) increasing with the the
scale of the economy, so that xt was also increasing in the scale of the economy.
To avoid scale effects and their implications we adopt a similar strategy to that used by Voigtländer and
Voth (2006) in addressing this issue. Details can be found in the appendix. Basically, by setting the fixed
cost of entry for a capital-variety producer to be proportional to At Lt , and with an appropriate choice of
units, we have that the optimal firm decision will be to produce xt = At Lt for each variety. This implies
that the amount of each variety per efficiency unit is constant, but the capital employed of each type grows
along with efficiency and population.
As mentioned, assuming that the fixed costs work in this manner is done to prevent any scale effects from
arising, which we want to eliminate for several reasons. First there is little empirical evidence consistent with
scale effects (see Jones, 1995). Secondly, we are trying here to establish the role that financial integration
can have in alleviating capital scarcity, and to focus on this alone we want to eliminate the possibility that
financial integration will contribute directly to the long-run growth rate. Notice that, if it did raise the
growth rate, welfare gains would be even bigger and hence we are essentially calculating a lower bound to
the benefits of integration. Mechanically speaking, our assumption that fixed costs are proportional to At Lt
ensures that there is a well-defined balanced growth path.
With xt = At Lt due to the firm decision, the aggregate production function can be written as
α/ǫ

Yt = Kt

(At Lt )1−α/ǫ

(4)

which features an elasticity of output with respect to capital of α/ǫ, even though capital’s share of output is
equal to α. If we assume that ǫ = 1, this reduces to the standard neo-classical production function, in which

5

the share paid to capital is equal to the elasticity of output with respect to capital.
Alternatively, if we assume that ǫ = α, then we reach an “AK” style production function, which will
allow for endogenous growth. Again, in examining financial integration, we will not be interested in such
an extreme assumption. Rather, we will simply consider values such that α < ǫ ≤ 1 and their implications
for the potential welfare gain of integration. So while we are using the framework of an endogenous growth
model, we do not need to incorporate the starkest assumptions of these models for our findings to hold.
An important implication of the production function in (4) is that the convergence speed of output per
capita towards steady state will depend on α/ǫ. Given this production function, the convergence speed can
be approximated in a Solow model of constant savings rates, as


1−

α
(g + n + δ)
ǫ

(5)

where g is the exogenous rate of technological growth, n is population growth, and δ is the depreciation rate.
In a neo-classical model with ǫ = 1 (implying infinite substitutability between capital types) and α = 0.3,
the convergence rate is predicted to be about 5.56% per year, assuming values of g = 0.012, n = 0.0074,
and δ = 0.06, as in GJ. This is nearly triple the empirical estimates of the convergence rate, which generally
cluster is the 2-2.5% range.
However, note that once ǫ is not constrained to be equal to one, it is possible to rationalize the observed
convergence speeds. In particular, if the value of ǫ is as low as 0.45, implying an elasticity of substitution
between capital varieties of about 1.8, then the convergence speed would be 2.5% per year, matching the
results documented by Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992), Sala-i-Martin (1996a, 1996b), and Durlauf, Johnson,
and Temple (2005).
The rate of convergence towards steady state in an economy will turn out to be a crucial determinant
of the implied welfare gains of financial integration. By incorporating capital varieties into our model
of production, we will be able to more accurately capture the empirical convergence speeds while also
maintaining the assumption that capital earns a reasonable share of output.

2.1

Households and Maximization

We have a flexible production structure in place, but for welfare calculations we must specify utility and the
behavior of households. Here we follow very closely to the work of GJ mentioned in the introduction. Their
work implicitly assumed that the elasticity of substitution for capital varieties was infinite, or ǫ = 1. We
use their optimization framework combined with an exogenously varying value of ǫ so that we can provide
comparable welfare estimates under different assumptions regarding the elasticity of substitution between
capital varieties.
Households are infinitely-lived and have a utility function of
V =

∞
X

β t (1 + n)t u(ct )

t=0

6

(6)

where β ∈ (0, 1) is the time discount factor, n is the growth rate of the population and u(ct ) is the utility
of consumption in period t. For our purposes, we will assume that u(ct ) = c1−σ
/(1 − σ), a constant relative
t
risk aversion utility function with σ > 0, or alternatively that u(c, t) = ln(ct ).
Production takes place as described above, but we add exogenous growth in productivity and population.
The exogenous growth in productivity implies that steady-state growth is similar in the long-run across
economies. We make this assumption, as do GJ, so that we can focus exclusively on the role that integration
plays in addressing capital scarcity, as opposed to any effect of financial integration on productivity directly.
Specifically, Lt+1 = (1+n)Lt and At+1 = (1+g)At . If we denote productivity and population normalized
variables with a hat, x̂t = xt /(At Lt ), then we can write the dynamic budget constraint for each economy as
k̂t+1 (1 + n)(1 + g) = k̂t (1 − δ) + ŷt − ĉt

(7)

where δ is the depreciation rate of capital. Note that with firm profits equal to zero, all of output (ŷ) is paid
out as either wages or returns to capital. Hence, a household’s dynamic budget constraint will be identical
to the above.
Drawing on the production function specified in equation (4), we have that output per efficiency unit is
described by
α/ǫ

ŷt = k̂t

.

(8)

αYt
α/ǫ−1
= αk̂t+1 + 1 − δ.
Kt

(9)

The return on a unit capital is determined as follows,
Rt+1 =

Note that households only account for the share of output, α, that they earn, but the relationship of Rt+1 to
the capital stock per efficiency unit depends upon the overall elasticity, α/ǫ. If we considered the optimization
problem from the perspective of a central planner, then they would internalize the role of capital varieties,
and would perceive the social rate of return to capital as being equal to α/ǫ times Yt /Kt . This would imply
that the central planner’s optimal solution would be to save more than in the decentralized case.
Utility maximization delivers the Euler equation relating consumption over adjacent periods as
1/σ

ĉt+1 = ĉt

(βRt+1 )
1+g

.

(10)

At a steady state ĉt+1 = ĉt and thus the steady state return to capital is
R∗ =

(1 + g)σ
β

(11)

and note that this does not depend on either the capital share or the capital elasticity. The long-run return on
capital depends only upon the patience parameter and the long-run growth rate of technology. Incorporating
some kind of capital externality does not alter the long-run interest rate, it simply slows down the rate at

7

which Rt+1 converges to R∗ .
Given this return, the long-run steady state level of capital per efficiency unit is
k̂ =
∗



α
∗
R +δ−1

1/1−α/ǫ

(12)

and the capital/output ratio is
k∗
α
= ∗
.
y∗
R +δ−1

(13)

Note that the capital/output ratio is also not affected by the size of ǫ, and allowing for capital varieties does
not imply the existence of inconceivable capital/output ratios in the long run.

2.2

Welfare from Financial Integration

We follow the work of GJ, and presume that all countries share an identical value of R∗ , which is the
presumed world rate of return on capital. This is done to focus on the role of capital scarcity, as opposed to
differences in fundamental growth rates (g) or patience (β). Thus any welfare gains we find will be due only
to the ability of financial integration to alleviate capital scarcity, and not through any change in fundamental
parameters in the economy. Given this, we describe how the economy will work in two distinct situations:
integration and autarky.
Under integration, capital flows into the country immediately to assure that Rt+1 = R∗ . Given this
and the Euler equation, this implies that consumption per capita grows at exactly the rate g each period.
Combining this fact with the countries inter-temporal budget constraint leads the following solution for
initial consumption
 α/ǫ
∗
∗
(14)
cint
0 = [R − (1 + n)(1 + g)]A0 k̂0 + (1 − α)A0 k̂

which states that initial consumption depends not only on the countries initial stock of capital, k̂0 , but on

the present discount value of future wages, which depend upon the value k̂ ∗ .
With initial consumption and knowing the growth rate of consumption, utility can be directly calculated
as
U int =

R∗

1−σ
R∗
(cint
0 )
− (1 + n)(1 + g) 1 − σ

(15)

where we’ve assumed that initial population is normalized to one.
Turning to the autarky case, we do not have such simple analytical answers. In autarky, the household
takes initial capital, k̂0 , as given, and then plans the optimal path of consumption and saving. We can solve
for consumption numerically, and then calculate the value of U aut directly from this.
Again, to match previous work we look at the Hicksian equivalent variation, µ, the percentage increase
in a country’s consumption that brings welfare under autarky up to the level of welfare under integration.
This is
 int 1/(1−σ)
U
µ=
−1
(16)
U aut
8

when σ > 1 and µ = exp((1 − (1 + n)β)(U int − U aut )) − 1 if we have log utility.

2.3

Calculating Welfare Gains

To actually calculate µ, we need to specify several parameters and initial values. We will begin with the
assumption that ǫ = 1, or that capital is perfectly substitutable. This provides the baseline against which
we can compare alternatives, and will match the original results of GJ.
To proceed, we require values for several other parameters. Again, to stay consistent with prior research,
we follow GJ in choosing these. The time preference rate is set to β = 0.96, σ = 1 for log utility, depreciation
is set to δ = 0.06, and the initial value of A0 is set to one. The growth rates of population and TFP are set
to the long-run U.S. values, so that n = 0.0074 and g = 0.012. Finally, capital’s share in output is set to
α = 0.3.
The initial value of k̂0 is found by specifying the initial capital/output ratio, k̂0 /ŷ0 and solving for k̂0 .
GJ, in their examination of a set of developing countries, find that the median capital-output ratio in 1995
was 1.4, with a value of 1.0 at the 10th percentile and 2.1 at the 90th. We will focus on these three initial
values, as they allow us to explore the welfare gains for countries that are at various levels of capital scarcity.
For reference purposes, the chosen parameter values imply that the steady-state capital/output ratio is equal
to 2.63, and the steady-state return to capital is R∗ = 1.054.
Table 1 shows the value of µ, in percents, as we vary the value of ǫ and the initial capital/output ratio
in Panel A. The first line, with ǫ = 1 (implying an infinite elasticity of substitution between capital types),
replicates the results of GJ. In particular, for a country with an initial capital/output ratio of 1.4, the implied
welfare gain of financial integration is 1.74%, the number they report. For a country with the lower initial
ratio of 1, the welfare gain is larger, but is still only 3.31 percent. For a country at the 90th percentile of
the capital/output ratio, at 2.1, the gain is negligible at 0.26 percent.
As we move down the rows of table 1, we have decreased the value of ǫ while keeping capital’s share of
output equal to 0.3. For ǫ = 0.75, for example, the implied elasticity of substitution between capital types
is 4.0, and the elasticity of output with respect to capital (α/ǫ) is 0.4.
As can be seen, once we increase ǫ to 0.75, the welfare gains for each of the three initial capital/output
situations rise. The increase is substantial. For the most capital-scarce countries, the welfare gain of
integration is now over 9 percent, while even for the median countries the welfare gain is approximately
5.74%. For those countries with initial capital/output ratios of 2.1, the welfare gain is still small, but is
nearly six times larger than it was in the standard neo-classical setting.
The welfare gains continue to increase rapidly as the value of ǫ falls. For the case where ǫ = 0.67, the
elasticity of substitution between capital varieties is 3.0. In this case the welfare gains are approximately
14% for the most capital-scarce countries, almost 9% for the median countries, and about 2.5% for those
that are capital-abundant. With ǫ = 0.6, the gains are 21%, 13%, and 4%, respectively, for the three initial
conditions. Raising ǫ to 0.5, for an implied elasticity of substitution between capital varieties of 2.0, leads
to even larger gains of 48%, 30%, and 9% for the three initial situations.
Panel B of table 1 repeats these calculations, only now assuming that capital’s share in output, α, is

9

actually equal to 0.4. The work of Gollin (2002), suggests that there is not any systematic relationship
between labor shares and GDP per capita once adjustments for self-employed labor are made, but that does
not necessarily imply that labor shares are identical across countries. From his data on employee/workforce
ratios, the implied capital share (i.e. one minus the labor share) is as large as 0.52 for Bolivia and Botswana,
0.51 for Mauritius, 0.50 for Ecuador, 0.44 for Norway, and 0.40 for Portugal. It appears quite plausible that
labor shares could be larger than the typical 0.3 assumed in the literature.
Once we make this adjustment to capital’s share, the overall gains to integration rise. Simply adjusting
the elasticity of substitution between capital varieties to be 5.0 rather than infinity implies welfare gains on
the order of 26% for the most capital-scarce countries, nearly 18% for the median situation, and even 8%
for those countries that have a relatively high capital/output ratio of 2.1. As the value of ǫ is set lower in
the following rows, the implied welfare gains increase dramatically. For ǫ = 0.75, so that the elasticity of
substitution between capital types is equal to 4.0, the welfare gains are about 34%, 23%, and 11% for the
three initial conditions, each significant gains based solely on integration.
What panel B shows is that as capital’s share rises, the gains to integration become substantial, even in
the case of the neo-classical model with perfect capital substitution (ǫ = 1). Once we allow for even a slight
imperfection in substitutability, such as with ǫ = 0.8 for an elasticity of substitution of 5.0, the welfare gains
are on the order of 26% for the most capital-scarce countries. Given Gollin’s (2002) data, it’s quite possible
that capital shares in developing countries are well above the 0.3 typically assumed in this literature, and
this alone increases substantially the implied welfare gains of integration.

2.4

How Large is the Elasticity of Substitution?

From the results in table 1, it is clear that the potential gains from financial integration can be large,
provided that the elasticity of substitution between capital varieties is less than infinity. There is evidence
that capital is, in fact, not perfectly substitutable across varieties. Chun and Mun (2003) use data from
41 U.S. industries, and find that the (Allen) elasticity of substitution between IT equipment and non-IT
equipment is roughly 4.7, on average. For durable goods producers, the elasticity is 4.4, and in services
the elasticity is 4.5. For “IT-intensive” industries, they document an even lower elasticity of 1.2. These
values are slightly higher than the ones found by Goolsbee (2004), who examines the elasticity across types
of mining, construction, and farm equipment varieties. He finds an elasticity of 4.1 when using all types,
and an elasticity of 3.0 for mining equipment alone. Drilling down even further, Goolsbee and Gross (2000)
document that within airlines, the elasticity of substitution between types of capital (i.e. aircraft) is only
1.5.
Broda, Greenfield, and Weinstein (2006) estimate elasticities of substitution across all intermediate goods.
While not a direct measure of capital good substitutability, they find values as low as 2.3 for the U.S., and
as high as 5.0 for Canada. Breaking down by types of intermediates, the median elasticity of substitution for
commodity goods is 3.8, but 3.0 for goods with a U.S. reference price, and 3.3 for the differentiated goods that
are not in the first two categories. These values are all lower than the previously mentioned estimates, but
remain in the same range of elasticities between 3–4. In this range, the welfare gains of financial integration

10

are large, as table 1 documents. With a capital share of 0.3, and an elasticity of substitution of 4.0, the gains
are three times larger than prior work would suggest, and are equivalent to a nearly 10% permanent increase
in consumption for the most capital scarce countries. For an elasticity of substitution between capital types
of 3.0, the gains are on the order of 14%. If the capital share in output is closer to 0.4, as the data indicate
is plausible, then the gains are likely to be equivalent to a nearly 25% permanent increase in consumption.
Once we have broken the link between capital’s share and the capital elasticity, a key insight of endogenous growth theory, it becomes quite plausible that financial integration can deliver impressive gains in
welfare to capital-scarce countries. The mechanism at work is that as the elasticity of output with respect
to capital rises, the loss of consumption necessary in autarky to reach steady state becomes very large.
Integration allows a country to avoid this large sacrifice of consumption by providing the necessary capital
stock immediately. Even the long-run loss of consumption necessitated by having to make interest payments
on that foreign capital is not enough to offset the immediate gains to consumption.

2.5

What is Driving the Gains?

The implied welfare gains of integration are dictated by assumptions about how a country would operate
in autarky. The basic intuition is that the faster that a country reaches the steady state rate of return to
capital in autarky, the lower the implied gain to integration.
R
C: Autarky, “AK” model, ǫ = α

R0

B: Autarky, α < ǫ ≤ 1

A: Autarky, neo-classical model, ǫ = 1

Rw

Full Integration
time

Figure 1: Rates of Return under Different Scenarios
Notes: This figure plots stylized paths of the rate of return under different scenarios. From an initial value of R0 , a financially
integrated country would have a path of the domestic rate exactly equal to Rw . If that country were in autarky, though, the
baseline neo-classical model would predict a path as in curve A. Using an elasticity of substitution between capital varieties
would slow down convergence, as in curve B. Finally, if one allowed ǫ = α, then we have an endogenous growth model, as in
curve C, and the rate of return never reaches the world rate.

The size of the welfare gain from integration can be inferred from figure 1 as the distance between the
11

autarky path of rates of return and the world rate, denoted Rw . Imagine a country that has an initial rate
of return of R0 , and borrows an amount of money on the world market at Rw . They gain R0 in marginal
output, but will only have to pay Rw in interest, gaining higher consumption and increased utility in the
transaction. The country could continue to do this each period, but the gains will decline as the rate of
return naturally converges towards Rw over time due to their own domestic savings.
For the situation depicted by curve A, the neo-classical case, the convergence happens very quickly, and
the gains of borrowing internationally dwindles very quickly. The welfare gain of integration is small, as
found by GJ. However, if ǫ < 1, and capital varieties are not infinitely substitutable, then the implied rate of
return in autarky declines more slowly, as in curve B. This implies that the gain of having access to foreign
capital remains large for a longer time. A limiting case is when ǫ = α, and we have an “AK” model, where
the rate of return never declines, and conceptually the welfare gains of integration are infinite, as in curve
C. Regardless, as capital gets less substitutable, and ǫ falls, convergence slows down and the welfare gains
increase, something seen in table 1.
We can provide some evidence that, in fact, a situation like curve B in figure 1 seems appropriate. To
do this, we examine the observed marginal product of capital for a sample of 102 countries starting in 1960.
The idea, starting at this point, is that we can observe how Rt evolves over time for a set of countries, and
see whether the neo-classical model, ǫ = 1, matches the data.
Using the same sample of countries as GJ, we calculate an initial value for the rate of return in 1960 as
R1960 = 1 − δ + M P K1960 = 1 − δ + α

Y1960
K1960

(17)

where the depreciation rate is set to 6% per year and α is set to 0.3. The value of Y1960 is taken from the Penn
World Tables 6.1, and the value of K1960 is calculated by a perpetual inventory method using investment
data from the Penn World Tables as well. Note that for this calculation we do not need any information on
ǫ. All we are using is the assumption that capital earns 30% of output.6 While this measure of the return
to capital actually available on the open market is crude, it has the value of being directly comparable to
the marginal product of capital that comes out of our calibrated model. In that sense, then, it will allow us
to compare the ability of the model to match the observed data.
Now, we look at the time series data on the rate of return. We plot the values of Rt+1 from 1961 to the
year 2000, calculated in exactly the same manner as was R1960 as given in equation (17), using data from
the Penn World Tables for output and investment to derive Yt and Kt in every year, again assuming that
α = 0.3, and not requiring any assumption regarding ǫ.
Figure 2 plots these calculated rates of return for each of the 102 countries in our sample, by year. As
can be seen, the initial spread of returns in 1960 declines only slightly over the forty years of data we have.
Countries appear to be converging, but only very slowly, towards a long-run steady state. Note that we
6 Specifically, the initial size of K
1960 is calculated as K1960 = I1960 (1 − δ)/(δ + g) + I1960 where g is the growth rate of
aggregate output from 1960-1970. This method will tend to under-state the size of the capital stock in K1960 , meaning that
initial rates of return are relatively large. This bias will work against us finding large welfare gains, as it will appear that rates
of return converge to long-run levels very quickly. Estimating g using growth rates from 1950-1960 and starting our capital
series with K1950 for the 45 countries for which this data is available only strengthens our findings.

12

2
1.8
Rate of Return
1.4
1.6

1.0542

1.2
1
1960

1970

1980
Year

1990

2000

Figure 2: Observed Rates of Return, 1960-2000
Notes: The figure displays the observed rate of return on capital for all 102 countries in the sample, by year. The return is
the marginal product of capital calculated from observed capital stock and output data, as described in the text. The assumed
world rate, equal to 1.0542, is denoted by the horizontal line.

have not restricted the sample to countries that were closed to financial flows. Thus figure 2 likely overstates
the speed at which rates of return would fall in autarky, as some of what we see in the figure is driven by
cross-border capital flows that reduce the variation between countries over time.7
This is useful because We can compare the actual data in figure 2 to the predictions of the neo-classical
model, setting ǫ = 1 and using the observed capital stocks in 1960 as the initial conditions. Again, α = 0.3,
and we use the model described in the previous section to extract the optimal path of consumption, and
hence the rate of return, by year, for each country. The predicted values of Rt+1 are plotted in figure 3
As can be seen in the figure, using the assumption that ǫ = 1 implies very fast convergence of rates of
return to the assumed steady state value of 1.054. In 1960 there is a wide spread of rates of return, running
from around 1 to nearly 2 (an implied return of 100%). Very quickly, though, the predicted autarky rates of
return converge towards the long-run world rate of 1.0542. By 1975, there is essentially no variance remaining
in the predicted rate of return, as every country is assumed to be very close to this long-run steady state.
Given figure 1, we see that there is little scope for welfare gains, regardless of how large is the initial autarky
rate of return. µ will be small even for countries that begin with a very large value of R1960 .
The implication of figure 3 is that assuming ǫ = 1 - as in the neo-classical model - leads to predictions
inconsistent with the observed path of rates of return from 1960 to 2000. In particular, the standard neoclassical model assumes that countries reach their steady states in an unbelievably short amount of time.
7 The figure looks similar after adjusting the MPK’s using the relative price of investment goods, as in Caselli and Feyrer
(2007). This result is available upon request.

13

2
1.8
Rate of Return
1.4
1.6

1.0542

1.2
1
1960

1970

1980
Year

1990

2000

Figure 3: Neo-classical Predicted Autarky Rates of Return, 1960-2000
Notes: The figure displays the predicted rate of return on capital for all 102 countries in the sample, by year, assuming that
α = 0.3 and ǫ = 1. The return is the marginal product of capital calculated from the neo-classical model of optimal savings
assuming the country is in autarky, as described in the text. The assumed world rate, equal to 1.0542, is denoted by the
horizontal line.

The message of figure 2, however, is that country’s rates of return only converge very slowly.
By setting ǫ < 1 in our production structure, we raise output’s elasticity with respect to capital, and
make the rate of return decline more slowly as countries save. Thus the predictions of the optimal savings
model will be closer to the observed rates of return. In short, as ǫ gets smaller, the elasticity of substitution
between capital varieties gets smaller, and the convergence speed of the rate of return to the world rate slows
down. Allowing ǫ < 1 within our model of optimal savings would lead to a predicted path of returns closer
to those actually observed in figure 2. The mechanism is that as ǫ goes down, the marginal product of any
particular variety of capital falls slowly with the addition of new capital to the economy. Thus the aggregate
rate of return on capital falls more slowly, similar to what is seen in figure 2.

2.6

Alternative Rates of Return

In addition to the speed at which rates converge, the welfare gain of integration will also depend upon the
size of the steady state rate of return. In our original calculations, we presumed that each country would
reach a common steady state with a rate of return of R∗ = 1.054. If the actual steady state value is higher,
then the potential gains of integration become smaller. In figure 1, this would be captured by a shift upward
of the Rw line, which shrinks the gap between it and the other curves.
To address the impact of this, we consider an alternative set of calculations in which the steady state
return is higher, implying a lower steady state capital stock. To parameterize this, we modify the original
14

calibrations, now setting β = 0.93, making countries more impatient. This leads to a steady state rate of
return of 1.088. Note that we are assuming that the world will only invest in a country at this higher rate,
perhaps reflecting structural differences. Hence, even if the country integrates, the long-run rate of return
it has access to is 1.088. The welfare gains are thus driven by capital scarcity alone, and not through a
permanent ability to borrow internationally at a low rate.
In panel B of table 2, the results for µ are reported under the same combination of values for ǫ and the
initial capital/output ratio, only changing the steady state rate to 1.088. For the countries that are most
capital-scarce, with capital/output ratios of 1, the welfare gains of integration are smaller than in table 1,
but still remain quite large. With ǫ = 0.6 and an elasticity of substitution of 2.5, for example, the gain of
integrating is equivalent to a 21% increase in consumption. For the median case, the gains are also smaller
than before, but if the elasticity of substitution is less than four, there still are meaningful welfare benefits
to integration.
For the most capital-abundant countries, one can see that the welfare gains are not applicable in most
cases. That is because the rate of return to capital with a k/y ratio of 2.1 is already below the steady state
rate of 1.088, and we presume that they have a steady state rate of return already below this level. In
other words, these are likely to be economies that function well enough to access world markets closer to the
developed rate of 1.0542.

2.7

Incremental Integration

Our results suggest the potential for very large welfare gains from full financial integration. That is, we
compare autarky to the alternative where foreign capital flows in immediately to a country in amounts
sufficient to drive down the rate of return to the world rate. However, most real experiences with financial
integration have proceeded more cautiously, allowing foreign capital to flow in only limited amounts over
time.
As an alternative way of understanding the welfare gains of integration, we consider here the welfare gain
of an incremental integration in which foreign capital is allowed to enter a country, but only as a constant
fraction of the installed capital base. In each period, a country allows foreign capital in the amount equal
to φ × k̂t , where 0 ≤ φ ≤ 1. The inflow of foreign capital is thus limited, and we can examine the welfare
gain of different values of φ.
To implement this, consider the dynamic budget constraint of the model economy, which will now be
modified to be as follows:
k̂t+1 (1 + n)(1 + g) + ĉt + φk̂t (1 + n)(1 + g)Rw = k̂t (1 − δ) + ((1 + φ)k̂t )α/ǫ + φk̂t .

(18)

The economy has access to φk̂t in additional capital from foreign inflows. This foreign capital will produce
additional output (which depends on the current MPK), and offsets a portion of the depreciation that occurs
naturally. In the following period, the economy must pay the foreign investors at the rate Rw (the world
rate) for the use of the capital. The additional foreign capital loosens the dynamic budget constraint so long

15

as the marginal product of capital is higher than Rw . As the economy approaches the steady state, there
will be no net gain from adding foreign capital.
We can evaluate the welfare gain from incremental integration by computing the optimal path of consumption, allowing for φk̂t inflows, and using this to find U int . Then we can compute the value of µ as in
equation (16). In table 3, we show the value of µ across values of ǫ, assuming that α = 0.3 and that the
economy is capital-scarce initially, with k0 /y0 = 1.0. The world rate is presumed, again, to be identical to
the steady state value of 1.0542.
The welfare gain was calculated under three different values of φ: 1%, 5%, 10%, and 20% of the current
capital stock. These values provide useful benchmarks for examining financial integration, as they are similar
magnitudes to observed values for private foreign capital flows relative to capital stocks. Lane and MilesiFerretti’s (2007) report the value of private foreign capital flows across countries. Comparing these flows to
capital stocks, in constant dollars from the Penn World Tables, we can infer reasonable values of φ. From
the early 1980’s to the late 1990’s, Argentina had private foreign capital flows equal to 2.6% of their total
capital stock on average, per year. These flows reached a maximum of 8.6% in 1993. In Botswana during
a similar time period, the average flow of foreign capital per year was equal to 2.6% of the capital stock,
peaking at a value of 11.9% in 1980. For Brazil, the average was 2.3% with a maximum of 4.7%. Several
Asian economies experienced similar patterns of inflows. China had a an average value of 1.7% per year,
with a maximum of 4.6%. Malaysia averaged inflows equal to 3.3% of their capital stock, peaking at 7.3%,
and Singapore was similar with an average of 2.8% and a maximum of 4.2%.
There are several examples of much larger inflows, however. Hong Kong average inflows equal to 16% of
the capital stock in the late 1990’s, peaking at 26% in 2000. Ireland averaged 4.3%, but peaked at inflows
equal to 45% of capital in 1998. Very large inflows are certainly within the realm of possibility.
Table 3 shows the potential gains to allowing in these limited flows of capital. In the case where capital
is perfectly substitutable, with ǫ = 1, the gains range from 0.17% to 3.01%, depending on how large are the
foreign capital flows. As can be seen, allowing in capital equivalent to 20% of the existing capital stock is
very close to the welfare gain of full integration (3.31%) found in table 1 with ǫ = 1.
Again, as we allow for imperfect substitution between capital types, the implied welfare gains rise. For
elasticities of substitution of 3.0 or 4.0 (ǫ equal to 0.67 and 0.75, respectively), the welfare gains are as high
as 5.88% or 7.35% when allowing foreign capital flows equivalent to 20% of the current capital stock. Even
with capital flows of only 10% of current capital, the gains are on the order of 3.07% to 3.85%. These are
obviously smaller than those from the full integration investigated in table 1, but the gains are larger than
even a full integration when capital is assumed to be completely substitutable. The results suggest that even
marginal adjustments to the ability of foreign capital to enter a country can have distinct welfare advantages.

3

Conclusion

We show that welfare gains from international financial integration can be as large as a 14% permanent
increase in consumption for the most capital scarce countries, and 9% for a developing country with the

16

median capital/output ratio. With a reasonable increase in the share of income accruing to capital, these
gains can be as high as 34% for the capital scarce countries and 24% for the median. These estimate
are an order of magnitude larger than the gains calculated by previous works. Our paper departs from
this literature by allowing capital goods to be imperfect substitutes, as is commonly assumed in models of
endogenous growth and trade following the work of Romer (1990) and Grossman and Helpman (1991), and
as supported by empirical estimates from several sources.
By allowing for imperfect substitution of capital types, the production structure allows us to separate
capital’s share of output from the elasticity of output with respect to capital, which are assumed to be
identical in the standard neo-classical model. Our model allows for capital’s share to be 0.3–0.4, while also
being consistent with existing empirical evidence on countries slow speed of convergence to steady state.
Although we use the production structure of endogenous growth models, we do not incorporate the
additional assumptions necessary in those models that create endogenous growth in steady state. Rather,
our work focuses only on the gains from integration in alleviating capital scarcity, disregarding the endogenous
productivity benefits such as knowledge spill-overs and increased know-how that foreign capital may bring.
As such, our estimates likely represent a lower bound for the gains of integration.
Our work show that developing nations have much to gain from the process of financial integration, in
the sense that they will be able to support higher levels of consumption now and in the immediate future,
as compared to the decades they may take to reach those levels by remaining in autarky.

17

4

Appendix A: Firm Behavior

In the model of imperfect capital substitution, each variety is provided by a single monopolistically competitive producer. Given the original production function in equation (1), firms face the inverse demand curve
for variety i of
!α/ǫ−1
Mt
X
1−α
ǫ
pit = α(At Lt )
xit
xǫ−1
(19)
it .
i

Firm profits are

πit = pit xit − Rit xit − Ft

(20)

which shows that firms earn pit xit in revenue, and must pay Rit to produce a unit of capital, while also
being required to pay a fixed cost of Ft to produce. For simplicity, we presume that the fixed cost must be
paid each period, so that one can think of firms as being one-period lived.
Taking into account the inverse demand curve, firms will optimize over the amount that they will produce,
which results is the optimal decision of


αǫ
(At Lt )1−α
x∗it = 
Rit

Mt
X
i

!α/ǫ−1 1/(1−ǫ)

.
xǫit

(21)

This incorporates the assumption that individual firms take the aggregate supply of capital goods (the
summation term) as a given. Note that, given that each firm is identical, each variety i is produced in
precisely the same amount.
Free entry implies that firms will enter until profits are driven to zero. This will occur when the fixed
costs exactly offset the profits made due to the markup over marginal cost producing x∗it . As mentioned in
the text, we make an assumption regarding fixed costs that ensures the model will not display scale effects.
In particular, let
At Lt
Ft = α(1 − ǫ)
(22)
k̂ 1−α/ǫ
which shows that fixed costs are proportional to effective labor, At Lt , which is the mechanism that prevents
scale effects from arising. As the economy grows extensively, fixed costs are higher, and this will counteract
the increased profits available to firms due to increased demand for their variety. Scaling the fixed cost by
capital per efficiency unit is necessary to ensure the presence of a balanced growth path, and simply implies
that fixed costs are rising with At Lt once the economy is in steady state.

18

References
[1] Acemoglu, D. and V. Guerrieri (2008) “Capital Deepening and Nonbalanced Economic Growth,” Journal
of Political Economy, 116(3):467-498.
[2] Alfaro, Laura and Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan and Vadym Volosovych (2008) “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow
from Rich to Poor Countries: An Empirical Investigation,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90:347368.
[3] Barro, Robert, N. Gregory Mankiw, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1995) “Capital Mobility in Neoclassical
Models of Growth,” American Economic Review 85, 103-115.
[4] Barro, Robert, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1992) “Convergence,” Journal of Political Economy, 100,
223-251.
[5] Barro, Robert, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1995) Economic Growth, MIT Press.
[6] Broda, C., J. Greenfield, and D. Weinstein (2006) “From Groundnuts to Globalization: A Structural
Estimate of Trade and Growth,” NBER Working Paper No. 12512.
[7] Caselli, Francesco, G. Esquivel, and F. Lefort (1996) “Reopening the Convergence Debate: A New Look
at Cross-country Growth Empirics,” Journal of Economic Growth, 1(3), 363-389.
[8] Caselli, Francesco, and James Feyrer (2007) “The Marginal Product of Capital,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 122(2), 535-568.
[9] Cashin, Paul and Ratna Sahay (1996) “Regional Economic Growth and Convergence in India,” Finance
and Development, 33:49-52.
[10] Chun, H. and Mun, S. (2006) “Substitutability and Accumulation of Information Technology Capital
in U.S. Industries,” Southern Economic Journal, 72(4):1002-10.
[11] Dinopoulos, E. and P. Thompson (1998) “Schumpeterian Growth Without Scale Effects,” Journal of
Economic Growth, 3(4):313-335.
[12] Durlauf, Steven, Paul Johnson, and Jonathan Temple (2005) “Growth Econometrics,” in Handbook of
Economic Growth, ed. P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, 555-677. New York:North-Holland.
19

[13] Easterly, William, and Ross Levine (2001) “It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and Growth
Models,” World Bank Economic Review 15, 177-219.
[14] Gollin, D. (2002) “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(2):458-474.
[15] Goolsbee, A. (2004) “Taxes and the Quality of Capital,” Journal of Public Economics, 88(3-4):519-543.
[16] Goolsbee, A. and D. Gross (2000) “Estimating Adjustment Costs with Data on Heterogeneous Capital
Goods,” U. of Chicago working paper.
[17] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne (2006) “The Elusive Gains from International Financial
Integration,” Review of Economic Studies 73(3), 715-741.
[18] Grossman, G.M. and E. Helpman (1989) “Product Development and International Trade,” Journal of
Political Economy, 97:1261-1283.
[19] Grossman, G.M. and E. Helpman (1990) “Comparative Advantage and Long-run Growth,” American
Economic Review, 80:796-815.
[20] Grossman, G.M. and E. Helpman (1991) Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, The MIT
Press: Cambridge, MA.
[21] Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones (1999) “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
per Worker than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 83-116.
[22] Jones, C. (1995) “Time Series Tests of Endogenous Growth Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
110(2):495-525.
[23] Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, and Bent Sorensen and Oved Yosha (2003) “Risk Sharing and Industrial
Specialization: Regional and International Evidence”, American Economic Review 93(3), 903-918.
[24] Klenow, Pete and Andres Rodrigues-Clare (1997) “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics: Has
It Gone Too Far?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, 73-103.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
[25] Kose, Ayhan, Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff and Shang-Jin Wei (2009) “Financial Globalization: A
Reappraisal”,IMF Staff Papers, 56, 1.
20

[26] Lane, P. R. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2007) “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II: Revised and
Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,” Journal of International Economics,
73:223-250.
[27] Lucas, Robert E. (1987) “Model of Business Cycles,” Basil Blackwell, New York.
[28] Obstfeld, Maurice (1994) “Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth,” American Economic
Review 84(5), 1310-1329.
[29] Obstfeld, Maurice (2009) “International Finance and Growth in Developing Countries: What have we
learned?” IMF Staff Papers, 56, 1.
[30] Peretto, P. (1998) “Technological Change and Population Growth,” Jounral of Economic Growth,
3(4):283-311.
[31] Persson, J. (1997) “Convergence across Swedish Counties, 1911-1993,” European Economic Review, 41,
1835-1852.
[32] Rivera-Batiz, L.A. and P.M. Romer (1991) “Economic Integration and Endogenous Growth,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 106:531-555.
[33] Romer, Paul (1990) “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(5):71-102.
[34] Sala-i-Martin, Xavier (1996a) “The Classical Approach to Convergence Analysis,” Economic Journal,
106, 1019-1036.
[35] Sala-i-Martin, Xavier (1996b) “Regional Cohesion: Evidence and Theories of Regional Growth and
Convergence,” European Economic Review, 40, 1325-1352.
[36] Voigtländer, N. and H. Voth (2006) “Why England? Demographic Factors, Structural Change and Physical Capital Accumulation during the Industrial Revolution,” Journal of Economic Growth, 11(4):319361.
[37] Young, A. (1991) “Learning by Doing and the Dynamic Effects of International Trade,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 106:369-405.
[38] Young, A. (1998) “Growth Without Scale Effects,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(1):41-63.

21

Table 1: Welfare Gains of Integration, by Capital/Output Ratio and Capital’s Share.
Assumed Steady State Return: R∗ = 1.0542
Capital varieties:
Production
µ (in percent)
Parameter Elas. of subs.
function
for initial condition:
ǫ
1/(1 − ǫ)
α/ǫ
k/y = 1.0 k/y = 1.4 k/y
Panel A: α = 0.3
1.00
∞
0.30
3.31
1.74
0.75
4.0
0.40
9.39
5.74
0.67
3.0
0.45
14.30
8.93
0.60
2.5
0.50
21.35
13.45
0.50
2.0
0.60
48.16
30.04
Panel B: α = 0.4
1.00
0.80
0.75
0.67
0.57

∞
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.3

0.40
0.50
0.53
0.60
0.70

10.45
26.12
33.76
62.34
176.02

6.57
17.63
23.48
42.22
112.62

= 2.1
0.26
1.55
2.56
3.97
8.90

2.50
8.16
10.81
20.15
50.68

Notes: The table reports the welfare gain, µ, of financial integration relative to autarky. The assumed steady state return to
capital in a country is 1.0542, which is also the assumed rate of return that the country is assumed to face in world markets.
The welfare gain is measured as the percent permanent increase in consumption that is equivalent to allowing in foreign capital
in the limited amounts. ǫ is the coefficient on the CES function for capital types in the production function in equation (1).
The value α/ǫ is the coefficient on capital in the aggregate production function in (4).

22

Table 2: Welfare Gains of Integration, Alternative Steady State Return
Assumed Steady State Return: R∗ = 1.088
Capital varieties:
Production
µ (in percent)
Parameter Elas. of subs.
function
for initial condition:
ǫ
1/(1 − ǫ)
α/ǫ
k/y = 1.0 k/y = 1.4 k/y = 2.1
1.00
∞
0.30
2.86
0.99
n/a
0.75
4.0
0.40
8.96
3.88
n/a
0.60
2.5
0.50
20.63
9.91
n/a
0.50
2.0
0.60
45.76
21.65
n/a
0.42
1.7
0.70
114.05
49.66
n/a

Notes: The table reports the welfare gain, µ, of financial integration relative to autarky. The assumed steady state return to
capital in a country is 1.088, which is also the assumed rate of return that the country is assumed to face in world markets.The
welfare gain is measured as the percent permanent increase in consumption that is equivalent to allowing in foreign capital in
the limited amounts. ǫ is the coefficient on the CES function for capital types in the production function in equation (1). The
value α/ǫ is the coefficient on capital in the aggregate production function in (4).

23

Table 3: Welfare Gains of Integration, by Size of Foreign Capital Inflows
Assumed Steady State Return: R∗ = 1.0542
Initial capital/output ratio: k/y = 1.0
Capital varieties:
Production
µ (in percent)
Parameter Elas. of subs.
function
for foreign capital inflows as percent of k̃
ǫ
1/(1 − ǫ)
α/ǫ
1%
5%
10%
20%
1.00
∞
0.30
0.17
0.85
1.63
3.01
0.75
4.0
0.40
0.32
1.57
3.07
5.88
0.67
3.0
0.45
0.40
1.95
3.81
7.35
0.60
2.5
0.50
0.47
2.33
4.58
8.88
0.50
2.0
0.60
0.63
3.11
6.15
12.04

Notes: The table reports the welfare gain, µ, of financial integration relative to autarky. The assumed steady state return to
capital in a country is 1.0542, which is also the assumed rate of return that the country is assumed to face in world markets.
The inflow of foreign capital under financial integration is limited to a constant proportion of the existing capital stock (the
parameter φ in the paper), so that the rate of return does not immediately fall to the world rate, Rw . The calculation is
described more fully in section 2.7. The welfare gain is measured as the percent permanent increase in consumption that is
equivalent to allowing in foreign capital in the limited amounts. ǫ is the coefficient on the CES function for capital types in the
production function in equation (1). The value α/ǫ is the coefficient on capital in the aggregate production function in (4).

24

