                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             LEARNING IN FINANCIAL MARKETS

                                            Lubos Pastor
                                           Pietro Veronesi

                                        Working Paper 14646
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14646


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2009




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Learning in Financial Markets
Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 14646
January 2009
JEL No. G0

                                             ABSTRACT

We survey the recent literature on learning in financial markets. Our main theme is that many financial
market phenomena that appear puzzling at first sight are easier to understand once we recognize that
parameters in financial models are uncertain and subject to learning. We discuss phenomena related
to the volatility and predictability of asset returns, stock price bubbles, portfolio choice, mutual fund
flows, trading volume, and firm profitability, among others.


Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagogsb.edu

Pietro Veronesi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
pietro.veronesi@gsb.uchicago.edu
1.      Introduction

Parameter uncertainty is ubiquitous in finance. Agents are uncertain about many of the
parameters characterizing financial markets, and they learn about these parameters by ob-
serving data. This learning is facilitated by the existence of vast quantities of financial data,
but it is also hampered by the large amount of randomness pervading financial markets.

     This survey reviews selected recent work on learning in finance. The overarching theme
is that learning helps us better understand a variety of phenomena observed in financial
markets. Many facts that appear baffling at first sight seem less puzzling once we recognize
that parameters are uncertain and subject to learning. We ask questions such as: Why are
stock returns so volatile? Why are they predictable? Why do investors trade so much? Why
do stocks of young firms exhibit high valuations and high volatility? Why are technological
revolutions accompanied by stock price “bubbles”? Why do fund flows react strongly to
fund performance? Why do firms become less profitable after they go public? We show that
learning helps us answer all of these questions, as well as many others.

     Our quest for the answers is guided by the principle of parsimony. We always seek
the simplest explanation, one that makes as few assumptions as possible. For example, a
single-agent model is more parsimonious than a multi-agent model, symmetric information
is simpler than asymmetric information, and rationality has fewer degrees of freedom than
irrationality. If a fact can be explained in a rational single-agent model, then it can surely
be explained in more complicated models as well. Of course, many facts cannot be explained
with few assumptions. But the world appears a lot more parsimonious once parameter
uncertainty is acknowledged.



2.      Bayesian Updating

The cornerstone of learning is Bayes’ rule, which describes how rational agents update their
beliefs after receiving new information. To illustrate the updating process, consider the
following example of an agent who is uncertain about the parameter θ. Before observing any
signals, the agent’s prior beliefs about θ are normally distributed with mean θ0 and variance
σ02. The agent observes T independent signals about θ, st = θ + t, where each t is normal
with zero mean and known variance σ 2 . According to Bayes’ rule, the agent’s posterior (i.e.,




                                               1
revised) beliefs about θ are normally distributed with mean θ̃T and variance σ̃T2 , where
                                                      1                         T
                                                      σ02                       σ2
                                θ̃T = θ0        1           T     + s̄     1         T                       (1)
                                                σ02
                                                      +     σ2            σ02
                                                                                +    σ2

                                                1
                                σ̃T2 =     1          T     ,                                                (2)
                                          σ02
                                                +     σ2

                                                       PT
and s̄ is the average signal value, s̄ = (1/T )                 t=1   st . The posterior mean θ̃T is a precision-
weighted average of the prior mean and the average signal. Unlike θ̃T , the posterior variance
σ̃T2 does not depend on the realizations of the signals. This variance, which we also refer
to as uncertainty about θ, decreases as the number of signals T increases (learning reduces
uncertainty). The posterior variance is always smaller than the prior variance, σ̃T2 < σ02.

     Bayesian updating can also be formulated recursively. Denoting ∆θ̃t = θ̃t − θ̃t−1 , we have
                                                                                    1
                       ∆θ̃t = mt st − θ̃t−1           with              mt =               2
                                                                                               .             (3)
                                                                                 1 + σ 2/σ̃t−1

Intuitively, observing a higher-than-expected signal, st > θ̃t−1 , leads the agent to revise the
expectation upward, θ̃t > θ̃t−1, and vice versa. This revision is large when the multiplier
                                                             2
mt−1 is large, which happens when the ratio of uncertainty σ̃t−1 to signal variance σ 2 is large.

    If time is viewed as continuous rather than discrete, the signal takes the differential form,
dst = θdt + σdWt , where dWt denotes a Brownian motion. The updating formula is then
                                                                                        σ̃t2
                           dθ̃t = mt dst − θ̃t dt                     with      mt =           ,             (4)
                                                                                          σ2
which is analogous to (3). Note that mt in (3) can also be written as σ̃t2/σ 2 . Even in
continuous time, uncertainty σ̃t2 declines over time according to the same formula (2).



3.      Stock Valuation

When the discount rate r and dividend growth g are constant, the stock price is given by
                                                        D
                                           P =             ,                                                 (5)
                                                       r−g
where D is the next period’s dividend. This well-known Gordon growth formula holds not
only when dividend growth is constant, but also when it follows the process
                                      dDt
                                          = g dt + σ dWt ,                                                   (6)
                                      Dt

                                                       2
in which case g represents average dividend growth. See the Appendix for proof.

   Interesting things happen when g in (6) is unknown. Pástor and Veronesi (2003, 2006)
argue that uncertainty about g increases the stock price. The Appendix shows that for any
probability density f(g) such that r > g with probability one,
                                       (      )
                                     D                     D
                              P = E                >             ,                         (7)
                                    r−g                r − E {g}
where E {.} denotes an expectation with respect to f(g). The inequality in (7) follows from
Jensen’s inequality, since 1/(r − g) is convex in g. For the same reason, the price-to-dividend
(P/D) ratio increases with the dispersion of f(g). Intuitively, uncertainty about g makes the
distribution of future dividends right-skewed, thereby increasing expected future dividends.
Loosely speaking, a firm with some probability of failing (a very low g) and some probability
of becoming the next Google (a very high g) is very valuable. When r is endogenously
determined in equilibrium with a power-utility representative agent, uncertainty about g
may increase or decrease r, but its overall effect on P/D is positive (Pástor and Veronesi
(2006)). Instead of focusing on P/D, which does not exist for non-dividend-paying firms,
Pástor and Veronesi focus on the market-to-book ratio (M/B). This ratio increases with
uncertainty about the firm’s average profitability, which can be interpreted as uncertainty
about the average growth rate of book value.

   Since uncertainty declines over time due to learning (see (2)), the Pástor and Veronesi
(2003) model predicts that M/B declines over a typical firm’s lifetime, so that younger
firms should have higher M/B’s than otherwise identical older firms. This prediction is
confirmed in U.S. stock data: the median M/B falls monotonically from 2.25 for 1-year-old
firms to 1.25 for 10-year-old firms, and the cross-sectional relation between firm age and
M/B is reliably negative. The model also implies that the effect of age on M/B should be
stronger for younger firms and non-dividend-paying firms. Besides, M/B should decrease
with expected return and increase with both the level and the volatility of profitability. All
of these predictions are confirmed empirically.


3.1.    Stock Price “Bubbles”

Pástor and Veronesi (2006) extend their 2003 model and calibrate it to match the observed
stock valuations at the peak of the Nasdaq “bubble”. They argue that stocks were not
necessarily overvalued in the late 1990s because uncertainty about g was unusually high.
The higher the uncertainty about g, the higher the stock price in (7). The authors compute
the level of uncertainty that allows their model to match the Nasdaq valuations at the peak

                                               3
in March 2000. This uncertainty, which they call “implied uncertainty” for its similarity to
implied volatility in option pricing, seems plausible because it matches not only the level
but also the volatility of Nasdaq stock prices. These prices in the late 1990s were not only
high but also highly volatile, and both facts are consistent with high uncertainty about
g. (We show later that uncertainty about g increases return volatility.) Moreover, cross-
sectionally, stocks with high M/B’s also had highly volatile returns, suggesting that these
stocks had highly uncertain future growth rates. In general, the authors argue that the level
and volatility of stock prices are positively linked through firm-specific uncertainty about g.

   The same learning model also seems capable of explaining the bursting of the Nasdaq
bubble. Nasdaq’s profitability plummetted in 2000 and 2001. As a result, investors revised
their expectations of Nasdaq’s future profitability downward, pushing prices down. Since
the investors’ prior uncertainty was large, their expectation revision was also large (see (3)).
Starting with prior beliefs that match Nasdaq’s level and volatility in March 2000, the model
predicts a post-peak Nasdaq price decline that is comparable to that observed in the data.

   The Nasdaq bubble, which developed during the Internet boom, is an example of a more
general pattern. Technological revolutions tend to be accompanied by bubbles in the stock
prices of innovative firms. This evidence is typically attributed to market irrationality, but
Pástor and Veronesi (2009) argue that it is also consistent with a rational general equilibrium
model of learning. They argue that new technologies are characterized by high uncertainty
about their future productivity, and that the time-varying nature of this uncertainty can
produce the observed bubbles. In their model, a representative agent is learning about a new
technology’s productivity. If the agent learns that the technology is sufficiently productive,
he adopts it on a large scale, creating a technological revolution. Most new technologies
do not cause revolutions, but those that do exert two opposing effects on stock prices: a
positive cash flow effect and a negative discount rate effect. On the one hand, the new
technology must surprise the agent with high realized productivity (otherwise he would not
adopt it), and this positive cash flow news pushes stock prices up. On the other hand, the
risk associated with the new technology gradually changes from idiosyncratic to systematic,
thereby pushing up discount rates and thus depressing stock prices. The cash flow effect
prevails initially, but the discount rate effect prevails eventually, producing an apparent
bubble in stock prices. Importantly, these bubbles are observable only in hindsight—they
are unexpected by investors in real time but we observe them ex post when we focus only
on technologies that eventually led to technological revolutions.

   The Pástor-Veronesi model makes numerous additional predictions, which are supported
by the evidence from 1830–1861 and 1992–2005 when the railroad and Internet technologies


                                               4
spread in the U.S. A key prediction is that the market beta of innovative firms—a measure
of systematic risk—should increase during technological revolutions. Indeed, the beta of the
technology-loaded Nasdaq index doubled between 1997 and 2002, and the beta of railroad
stocks increased sharply in the 1850s. Since stories based on irrationality do not predict
increases in systematic risk during revolutions, this evidence suggests that rational learning
about new technologies is useful in explaining the bubble-like patterns in stock prices.

     Technological revolutions exhibit not only stock price bubbles but also apparent overin-
vestment. This fact is also consistent with rational learning, as shown by Johnson (2007).
Johnson develops an equilibrium model of investment in a new industry whose production
function has an unknown return to scale. The model implies that the most efficient way to
learn about returns to scale is by overinvestment relative to the full-information case. This
overinvestment is accompanied by high stock prices and low expected returns.

   Other models that link stock price bubbles to learning include Scheinkman and Xiong
(2003) and Hong, Scheinkman and Xiong (2006, 2008). Unlike the models discussed above,
these models feature heterogeneous beliefs, and they produce bubbles with the help of addi-
tional assumptions such as short-sale constraints and behavioral biases. Battalio and Schultz
(2006) argue that short-sale constraints were not responsible for the Nasdaq bubble. Li and
Xue (2008) argue that this bubble can be explained by uncertainty about a possible struc-
tural break in the economy’s productivity. Finally, Donaldson and Kamstra (1996) argue
against a bubble in the 1920s based on a neural network model of dividend expectations.



4.      Stock Return Volatility

The volatility of stock returns exhibits interesting empirical features. For example, it is high
relative to the volatility of the underlying dividends, and it varies over time in a persistent
fashion. Learning helps us understand these facts.


4.1.     The Level of Volatility

When the discount rate r and the average dividend growth g are both constant and known,
the stock price is given by (5), and return volatility equals the volatility of dividend growth.
In reality, though, the post-war volatility of market returns has averaged 17% per year,
whereas the dividend growth volatility has been only 5%. To reconcile this difference, it
helps to view g in (6) as unknown (Timmermann (1993)). Agents learn about g by observing


                                               5
realized dividends. Unexpectedly high dividends increase the stock price not only through
current dividends, but also by raising expectations of future dividends. This “double kick”
to the stock price increases return volatility compared to the case in which g is known.

   To formalize Timmermann’s intuition, let r be constant and known, let g have a truncated
normal distribution that assigns zero probability to g ≥ r, and let g̃t and σ̃t2 denote the mean
and variance of g as perceived at time t. Extending Timmermann’s work, we show in the
Appendix that the standard deviation of returns is approximately equal to
                                                              "                    !     #
                                                            ∂ log(P/D)t
       Return Volatility ≈ Dividend Growth Volatility × 1 +                            mt ,   (8)
                                                                 ∂g̃t

where “dividend growth volatility” stands for σ in (6), ∂ log(P/D)t /∂g̃t > 0, and mt > 0
is given in (4). This formula shows that return volatility exceeds the volatility of dividend
growth. The difference can be substantial. For example, let σ = 5%, r = 10%, g̃t = 3% and
σ̃t = 2%. Return volatility is then about 20%, four times higher than the 5% volatility of
dividend growth. Equation (8) also shows that return volatility increases with σ, and it also
increases with uncertainty σ̃t2, through mt. If σ̃t2 → 0, then mt → 0, and return volatility
converges to σ. Finally, return volatility increases with the sensitivity of log P/D to g̃t . This
sensitivity is higher when the discount rate is lower because distant future dividends then
matter more for today’s stock price.

   The key implications of the simple model used above carry over to more sophisticated
models. Brennan and Xia (2001a), for example, consider a general equilibrium model with
a representative agent who learns about time-varying gt . They obtain results similar to ours
in a model successfully calibrated to aggregate consumption and dividend data.

   Uncertainty σ̃t2 declines over time as investors learn about g (see (2)), so return volatility
should decline over time as well (see (8)). One might therefore expect stocks of younger
firms to have more volatile returns than stocks of older firms. Indeed, Pástor and Veronesi
(2003) find a negative cross-sectional relation between volatility and firm age. The median
return volatility of U.S. stocks falls monotonically from 14% per month for 1-year-old firms
to 11% per month for 10-year-old firms. The authors’ model predicts higher stock volatility
for firms with more volatile profitability, firms with more uncertain average profitability, and
firms that pay no dividends. These predictions are confirmed empirically.




                                                6
4.2.    Time Variation in Volatility

Stock return volatility varies dramatically over time—it has been as low as 10% per year in
the mid-1990s and as high as 70% in October 2008. Moreover, volatility is persistent, as there
are extended periods of sustained high or low volatility. Learning helps us understand the
variation in volatility. The models of Timmermann (1993) and Pástor and Veronesi (2003)
cannot generate increases in volatility because they feature a constant g, and uncertainty
about a constant g declines deterministically to zero (in (2), σ̃T2 → 0 as T → ∞). Even
when g varies over time in a smooth manner, as in Brennan and Xia (2001a), the posterior
uncertainty about g converges deterministically to a constant. However, if g follows a process
with unobservable regime shifts, then uncertainty about g can fluctuate stochastically, and
return volatility can rise. For example, if a dividend growth realization is far from the current
estimate of g, the probability of a regime shift in g increases. The posterior uncertainty about
g then increases because after a regime shift, past data become less useful for forecasting.
The higher uncertainty pushes up return volatility through a mechanism similar to that in
(8): investors’ expectations react more swiftly to news when uncertainty is higher. Moreover,
volatility is persistent because perceptions of regime shifts change slowly.

    David (1997) develops a model with unobservable regime shifts in the average productiv-
ities of linear technologies, which are subject to learning by a representative agent. Learning
induces time-varying allocations to these technologies, resulting in persistent stochastic vari-
ation in return volatility. Veronesi (1999) uses similar means to show that even if dividends
display low constant volatility, stock returns may possess high volatility with persistent
variation. He also shows that learning about a regime-shifting g generates stock price “over-
reaction” to bad news in good times. Such news increases uncertainty about g, which might
have shifted from a high-g to a low-g regime. This increase in uncertainty increases not
only volatility but also the equilibrium discount rate, thereby amplifying the stock price
drop. In a similar setting, Veronesi (2004) shows that a small probability of a long recession
can induce volatility to cluster at high levels during recessions. Johnson (2001) shows that
learning about the degree of persistence of fundamental shocks generates time-varying return
volatility, as well as a novel relation between volatility and momentum. David and Veronesi
(2002) employ unobservable regime shifts to explain the dynamics of option-implied volatility
and skewness spreads. David and Veronesi (2008) develop a structural model for volatility
forecasting that exploits learning-induced relations between volatility and price multiples.
This model improves upon regression-based volatility forecasts.




                                               7
5.      Return Predictability

Stock returns are somewhat predictable. When the aggregate P/D ratio is low, future stock
market returns tend to be high. Timmermann (1993, 1996) explains that such predictability
can arise due to learning about g. When the current estimate of g, g̃t , is below the “true”
value of g, investors are pessimistic about future dividends, so P/D is low. The future
returns are likely to be high, though, because g̃t is likely to be revised upward. As a result,
low P/D forecasts high future returns.

     This learning-induced predictability is observable only in hindsight, as explained by
Lewellen and Shanken (2002). Returns appear predictable to econometricians analyzing
historical data, but real-time investors cannot exploit this predictability. Learning drives a
wedge between the distribution perceived by investors and the “true” distribution estimated
by empirical tests. Lewellen and Shanken show that learning can also induce cross-sectional
predictability. For example, econometricians may observe violations of the Capital Asset
Pricing Model (CAPM) even if all real-time investors believe this model holds. Coles and
Loewenstein (1988) argue that the CAPM should hold even with estimation risk, but that
is true only for the perceived, not the empirical, distribution of returns.

     Learning can also generate risk-driven predictability that is detectable by real-time in-
vestors. Veronesi (1999, 2000) shows how learning induces time-varying expected returns
that are correlated with P/D. Massa and Simonov (2005) and Ozoguz (2009) argue that
uncertainty is a priced risk factor in the cross-section of stock returns. Croce, Lettau and
Ludvigson (2006) show that learning helps explain the cross-sectional value effect. In their
model, consumption growth has a small but persistent “long-run” component (see Bansal and
Yaron (2004)), as well as a transitory “short-run” component. Stocks that are more exposed
to the long-run component command higher risk premia. Even though value stocks tend to
have shorter-duration cash flows, they can exhibit more long-run risk and therefore higher
risk premia than growth stocks. The reason is that when the long-run component of con-
sumption is unobservable, its optimal forecasts covary with short-run consumption shocks.
Learning induces positive correlation between the long-run and short-run consumption risks.

   Another cross-sectional puzzle that can be understood via learning is the negative relation
between stock returns and the dispersion of analysts’ earnings forecasts, documented by
Diether, Malloy and Scherbina (2002). The authors interpret their result as evidence of
market frictions that preclude investors with pessimistic views from shorting stocks, which
are then temporarily overvalued. Johnson (2004) delivers the same result in a frictionless
rational learning model. He interprets dispersion as a proxy for uncertainty about asset

                                               8
value. After adding leverage to a model similar to Pástor and Veronesi (2003), Johnson
shows that expected stock return decreases with this uncertainty. Equity is a call option
on the levered firm’s assets. More idiosyncratic uncertainty raises the option value, which
lowers the stock’s exposure to priced risk, thereby reducing the expected return. The model
also predicts that the negative relation found by Diether et al should be stronger for firms
with more leverage. Johnson finds empirical support for this prediction.

     Uncertainty about the value of a firm’s assets also helps us understand credit spreads on
corporate bonds. In structural models of corporate bond valuation à la Merton (1974), the
firm’s value follows an observable diffusion process. These models imply counterfactually
small credit spreads for short-term bonds because they imply that the default probabil-
ity over a short period is small. Uncertainty about firm value increases short-term credit
spreads, Duffie and Lando (2001) explain, because investors are uncertain about the near-
ness of current assets to the default-triggering level. Supporting this explanation, Yu (2005)
finds empirically that firms with more accounting disclosure (and so less uncertainty about
firm value) tend to have lower credit spreads, especially on short-term bonds. Finally, David
(2008a) uses learning about unobservable regime shifts in the fundamentals to explain why
the observed credit spreads are higher than spreads produced by Merton-like models cali-
brated to the observed default frequencies.

     Empirical Bayesian studies that analyze return predictability include Kandel and Stam-
baugh (1996), Stambaugh (1999), Avramov (2002), Cremers (2002), Avramov and Chordia
(2006), Pástor and Stambaugh (2009), Wachter and Warusawitharana (2009), and others.



6.      The Equity Premium

Learning can help us understand the equity premium puzzle. Note, however, that uncer-
tainty about average dividend growth g can increase or decrease the equity premium. In
Veronesi (2000), this uncertainty decreases the equity premium. Veronesi considers an en-
dowment economy with a power-utility representative agent whose elasticity of intertemporal
substitution (EIS) is below one. The agent consumes aggregate dividends. Bad news about
dividends decreases not only current consumption but also expected future consumption, as
the agent revises g̃t downward. The agent’s desire to smooth consumption leads him to save
more today and demand more stock, which cushions the decline in the stock price. Therefore,
learning about g decreases the covariance between stock returns and consumption growth,
compared to the case with known g. As a result, the equity premium is lower as well.


                                               9
     The opposite result obtains under different preferences. When EIS exceeds one, downward
revisions in g̃t lead the agent to save less and demand less stock, resulting in a positive relation
between uncertainty and the equity premium (e.g., Brandt, Zeng, and Zhang (2004) and Ai
(2007)). The relation is positive also when the agent has exponential utility (Veronesi (1999))
and when dividends and consumption follow separate processes with correlated unobservable
drift rates (Li (2005)). Finally, if the agent learns about average consumption growth, the
expected consumption growth varies over time. Such variation increases the equity premium
under Epstein-Zin preferences (e.g., Bansal and Yaron (2004)).

     The equity premium is also affected by uncertainty about the volatility of consumption
growth. Weitzman (2007) considers an endowment economy with unknown consumption
volatility. He shows that the posterior distribution of consumption growth is fat-tailed,
which induces a power-utility representative agent to demand a substantially higher equity
premium compared to the case of known volatility. Lettau, Ludvigson and Wachter (2008)
also assume that consumption volatility is unobservable, but they allow it to jump between
two states. They find empirically that the posterior probability of the low-volatility state
increased in the 1990s, helping justify the stock price run-up in that period.

    Learning can also generate higher equity premia when investors are averse to ambiguity
(e.g., Cagetti et al. (2002), Leippold et al. (2008), Epstein and Schneider (2008)). When
investors worry about model misspecification, their learning must take into account the set
of possible alternative models. Model uncertainty is penalized and investors maximize utility
over worst-case beliefs. This cautious behavior increases the risk premia in equilibrium.



7.      Learning About the Conditional Mean Return

The studies discussed in the previous section let investors learn about fundamentals and
analyze the equilibrium implications for expected returns. Another way of relating learning
to expected returns is to let investors-econometricians, who do not necessarily set prices,
learn about expected returns by observing realized returns and other information.

     Let rt+1 denote a return from time t to time t + 1. This return can be decomposed as

                                        rt+1 = µt + ut+1 ,                                      (9)

where µt is the conditional expected return and ut+1 is the unexpected return with mean
zero, conditional on all information at time t. In reality, investors observe only a subset of
all information, so they do not observe the true value of µt . How do rational investors learn

                                                10
about µt from realized returns?

   If the conditional mean is constant, µt = µ, the updating formula (3) applies: unexpect-
edly high returns increase the posterior mean µ̃t , and vice versa. Under noninformative prior
beliefs about µ (σ0 = ∞ in (1)), µ̃t is simply the historical sample mean.

   If µt varies over time, though, the sample mean is no longer the best estimate of µt . Given
a process for the unobservable µt , we obtain the best estimate of µt by optimal filtering. For
example, if µt follows an AR(1) process with normal shocks,

                                µt+1 = (1 − β)µ̄ + βµt + wt+1 ,                            (10)

then the Kalman filter implies that the best estimate of µt (and hence also the best forecast
of rt+1) is a weighted average of all past returns,
                                                   t−1
                                                   X
                                   E(rt+1 |Ft) =         κs rt−s ,
                                                   s=0

where Ft contains the full history of returns up to time t (see Pástor and Stambaugh (2009)).
The weights in this average, κs , crucially depend on ρuw , the correlation between unexpected
returns, ut+1 in (9), and innovations in expected returns, wt+1 in (10). This correlation is
likely to be negative because unexpected increases in discount rates tend to push prices
down. If this correlation is sufficiently negative, then recent returns receive negative weights
and more distant returns receive positive weights in computing the average.

   To understand this result, suppose recent returns have been unusually high. On the one
hand, one might think the expected return has risen, since a high mean is more likely to
generate high realized returns, and µt is persistent. On the other hand, one might think the
expected return has declined, since declines in expected returns tend to be accompanied by
high realized returns. When ρuw is sufficiently negative, the latter effect outweighs the former
and recent returns enter negatively when estimating the conditional expected return. At the
same time, more distant past returns enter positively because they are more informative
about the unconditional mean µ̄ than about recent changes in the conditional mean µt .

   The above analysis assumes that the information set Ft consists only of past returns.
However, investors might use more information to forecast returns. For example, investors
might believe that µt is given by a linear combination of observable predictors xt:

                                     µt = α + β(xt − x),                                   (11)

where x is the unconditional mean of xt . Viewing β as unobservable, Xia (2001) uses
continuous-time filtering to derive an updating rule for β̃t = E[β|Ft]. This rule features

                                              11
time-varying covariance between updates to β̃t and realized returns. The sign of the covari-
ance depends on whether xt is above or below x. When xt exceeds x, an unusually high
return implies that β̃t is revised upward, and vice versa.

     The assumption (11) is unlikely to hold exactly. If the true mean µt is not a linear
function of xt , the updating rule for µt involves not only xt but also past returns (Pástor
and Stambaugh (2009)). Past dividends can also be useful in estimating µt , as shown by
van Binsbergen and Koijen (2008) and Rytchkov (2008). These studies exploit present value
relations to estimate not only µt but also expected dividend growth rates.

     Learning about µt also affects long-horizon return volatility. Let rt,t+k = rt+1 + rt+2 +
. . . + rt+k denote the return in periods t + 1 through t + k. The variance of rt,t+k conditional
on data available at time t, Var(rt,t+k |Ft ), depends on uncertainty about µt+j . Consider the
following example from Pástor and Stambaugh (2008). Suppose rt ’s are independently and
identically distributed with known variance σ 2 and unknown constant mean µ. Conditional
on µ, the mean and variance of rt,t+k are kµ and kσ 2, respectively. An investor who knows µ
faces the same per-period variance, σ 2 , regardless of k. However, an investor who does not
know µ faces variance that increases with k. Applying the variance decomposition,

               Var(rt,t+k |Ft) = E{kσ 2|Ft} + Var{kµ|Ft } = kσ 2 + k 2Var {µ|Ft } .

Since µ remains uncertain after seeing the data, (1/k)Var(rt,t+k |Ft ) increases with k. Thus,
an investor who believes that stock prices follow a random walk but who is uncertain about
µ views stocks as riskier in the long run. When µt is time-varying, predictability induces
both mean reversion, which reduces long-run variance, and additional uncertainty, which
increases long-run variance. The overall effect, according to Pástor and Stambaugh (2008),
is a higher per-period variance at longer horizons, contrary to conventional wisdom.



8.      Portfolio Choice

Investors appear to invest too little in stocks. Consider an investor with risk aversion γ who
can invest in risky stocks and riskless T-bills. If the mean µ and variance σ of excess stock
returns are both constant and known, the investor’s optimal stock allocation is given by
                                                         µ
                                   Myopic Demand =           .                              (12)
                                                        γσ 2
Based on the historical estimates, µ = 7% and σ = 16% per year, the optimal stock allocation
is 273% for γ = 1, 91% for γ = 3, and 55% for γ = 5, but households typically invest much
less in stocks. This fact could in part be due to learning, as explained below.

                                               12
   If µ is unobservable, investors learn about it by observing realized returns. Even though
µ is constant, its posterior mean µ̃t is not, and investors wish to hedge against learning that
µ is low (Williams (1977), Detemple (1986), Dothan and Feldman (1986), and Gennotte
(1986)). Gennotte (1986) shows that uncertainty about µ reduces the stock allocation, as
the variation in µ̃t generates a negative hedging demand. Following Merton (1971), investors
tilt their portfolios to hedge against fluctuations in marginal utility induced by changes in
the state variable µ̃t . The size of the hedging demand is
                                                          σµ̃        ∂UW /∂ µ̃
                                                               
                        Hedging Demand = −ρµ̃,r                                ,                (13)
                                                          σ         W ∂UW /∂W
where ρµ̃,r is the correlation between dµ̃t (revisions in µ̃t ) and instantaneous returns, σµ̃ is the
volatility of dµ̃t , σ is return volatility, and UW is marginal utility with respect to wealth W .
The sign of the hedging demand depends on γ. Under power utility with γ > 1, the hedging
demand is negative since ∂UW /∂W < 0, ∂UW /∂ µ̃ < 0, and learning about a constant µ
induces ρµ̃,r > 0 (see (4)). Intuitively, a negative stock position (relative to the myopic
demand) is a good hedge because it profits from unexpectedly low stock returns, which are
accompanied by decreases in µ̃t that increase marginal utility. The higher the uncertainty
about µ, the higher the value of σµ̃ , and the more negative is the hedging demand.

   Brennan (1998) shows that the learning-induced hedging demand can be large. For
example, with a µ estimate of 8.5%, prior uncertainty about µ of 4.5%, and volatility of
σ = 14%, an investor with γ = 4 and a 20-year investment horizon invests only 56% in
the stock market, down from 102% when only the myopic demand is considered. Whereas
Brennan assumes that µ is constant, Xia (2001) considers time-varying µt , with investors
learning about the slope β in the predictive relation (11). The hedging demand now has two
components. The first one, which is well understood outside the learning literature, stems
from time variation in the predictor xt. The second component stems from learning about
β, and it involves the covariance between returns and β̃t, as discussed earlier. Xia shows
that both hedging demands are economically important.

   The portfolio literature under learning has been extended to multiple assets. Brennan
and Xia (2001b) assess the importance of the value and size anomalies from the perspective
of an investor who is uncertain whether the anomalies are genuine. They find the value
anomaly attractive even after incorporating parameter uncertainty. Pástor (2000) provides
similar evidence in a single-period context, and also finds the home bias anomaly significant
from the investment perspective. Cvitanic, Lazrak, Martellini, and Zapatero (2006) analyze
how optimal allocations depend on the correlation between the assets’ expected returns.
This correlation reduces uncertainty by allowing learning across assets, but it also makes es-
timation risk more difficult to diversify. Another extension incorporates non-linear dynamics

                                                 13
of µt . David (1997) and Honda (2003) solve for optimal allocations when µt undergoes un-
observable regime-shifts. Guidolin and Timmermann (2007) study asset allocation when
regime-shifts affect not only the mean but the whole return distribution. They empirically
identify four regimes and solve for the optimal allocation among four asset classes. They
find that unobservable regimes have a large impact on asset allocation.

   The learning models discussed above are set in continuous time. There is also a grow-
ing discrete-time portfolio literature that relies on Bayesian econometric techniques. This
literature typically does not estimate learning-induced hedging demands, but it integrates
portfolio choice with empirical estimation of the parameters of the return-generating process.
Parameter uncertainty is incorporated by focusing on the “predictive distribution” of asset
returns. Letting θ denote the unknown parameters and Ft denote the data available at time
t, the predictive distribution of returns at time t + k is given by
                                           Z
                          p(Rt+k |Ft ) =       p(Rt+k |θ, Ft) p(θ|Ft )dθ,                   (14)

where p(θ|Ft ) is the posterior distribution of θ. Investors maximize expected utility computed
with respect to the predictive distribution. Early contributions to this literature include Zell-
ner and Chetty (1965), Brown (1976), Klein and Bawa (1976), and Bawa, Brown, and Klein
(1979). Recent contributions include Kandel and Stambaugh (1996), Barberis (2000), Pástor
(2000), Pástor and Stambaugh (2000, 2002b), Tu and Zhou (2004, 2008), Avramov (2004),
Brandt et al (2005), Avramov and Chordia (2006), Avramov and Wermers (2006), Kan and
Zhou (2007), and Wachter and Warusawitharana (2009). Whereas the early contributions
used noninformative prior distributions, recent contributions increasingly emphasize infor-
mative priors motivated by economic theory. Other recent studies analyze portfolio choice
of ambiguity-averse investors (e.g., Uppal and Wang (2003), Wang (2005), Garlappi, Uppal,
and Wang (2007)).



9.      Investor Behavior

9.1.     Mutual Fund Flows

The way investors allocate their capital to mutual funds might seem puzzling. For example,
net capital flows into mutual funds respond positively to past fund performance, even though
there is little persistence in performance. Also, the performance-flow relation is convex and
stronger for younger funds.

     Berk and Green (2004) show that these facts are consistent with rational learning. Their

                                                14
model makes three key assumptions. First, the fund managers’ ability is unobservable, and
investors learn about it by observing fund returns. Second, this ability exhibits decreasing
returns to scale. Third, rational investors compete for superior returns. To illustrate the
model’s implications, suppose that a given fund achieved higher-than-expected returns re-
cently. From these returns, investors infer that the fund manager’s ability is higher than
they previously thought, and they allocate more capital to this fund. This additional capital
reduces the fund’s ability to generate abnormal returns, due to decreasing returns to scale.
Given perfect competition in the provision of capital, investors pour capital into the fund
until its abnormal performance disappears. As a result, a fund that outperformed in the
past will attract new money, but it will not outperform in the future.

   The positive performance-flow relation is stronger for younger funds because recent re-
turns of a younger fund represent a bigger portion of the fund’s track record, and so they
are more informative about the fund manager’s ability. Put differently, investors are more
uncertain about the ability of funds with shorter track records, so any signal about ability
has a bigger impact on the investors’ beliefs. The performance-flow relation is convex at least
in part because investors expect underperforming funds to change their strategies (Lynch
and Musto, 2003). Therefore, poor past performance contains less information about future
performance than good past performance does. As a result, fund flows are less sensitive to
past performance when that performance is poor.

   Dangl, Wu, and Zechner (2008) extend the Berk-Green model to allow the management
company to replace portfolio managers. They derive the optimal replacement strategy and
examine fund flows and portfolio risk around manager replacements. Their model rationalizes
several empirical facts: (i) managers are more likely to be fired after poor performance; (ii)
manager turnover is more performance-sensitive for younger managers; (iii) managers with
longer tenure tend to manage larger funds and are more likely to retain their jobs; and (iv)
manager replacement is generally preceded by capital outflows and increases in portfolio risk,
then followed by inflows and decreases in risk. Taylor (2008) develops a related model in
which a board of directors learns about CEO skill and repeatedly decides whether to keep or
fire the CEO. Taylor estimates his model and finds that very high turnover costs are needed
to rationalize the observed rate of forced CEO turnover.

   The above studies assume learning by agents in theoretical models, but a learning per-
spective also seems useful in empirical work. Examples of studies that use Bayesian em-
pirical techniques to analyze the performance of money managers include Baks, Metrick,
and Wachter (2001), Pástor and Stambaugh (2002a), Jones and Shanken (2005), Busse and
Irvine (2006), and Kosowski, Naik, and Teo (2007).


                                              15
9.2.    Individual Investor Trading

The trading behavior of individual investors exhibits interesting regularities. Individuals
lose money by trading, on average, but they trade frequently nonetheless. Individuals’
trading intensity depends on their past performance. Poor performance is often followed
by exit. More active traders outperform less active ones. Performance exhibits persistence.
Explanations offered for these facts range from overconfidence to utility from gambling.

   Mahani and Bernhardt (2007) and Linnainmaa (2008) show that these facts are also
consistent with rational learning. When individuals are uncertain about their own trading
ability, they can learn by trading and observing their profits. Individuals can find it optimal
to trade even if they expect to lose money, as long as the expected short-term loss from
trading is offset by the expected gain from learning. Individuals increase their trade sizes
after successful trades and decrease them after unsuccessful trades, since successful (unsuc-
cessful) trades lead to upward (downward) revisions of perceived ability. More active traders
perform better because good news about one’s ability leads one to trade more. Linnain-
maa finds empirically that the above-mentioned empirical regularities can be explained with
moderate uncertainty about trading ability. In contrast, alternative explanations such as
overconfidence and risk-seeking seem unable to explain all of the regularities.

   How do investors learn from their trading experience? Is their ability a constant subject
to learning, as in the models described above, or does it improve as a result of more trading,
as in the “learning-by-doing” literature? Seru, Shumway, and Stoffman (2008) find evidence
of both types of learning. They find that poorly-performing households are more likely to
cease trading, consistent with the former type of learning, and they estimate this type of
learning to be quantitatively more important than learning by doing.


9.3.    Trading Volume

Why do investors trade so much? Why is trading volume correlated with volatility? Learn-
ing combined with information asymmetry can shed light on these questions. Note, however,
that heterogenous information alone cannot induce trading; given the no-trade theorem, trad-
ing requires additional motives, such as liquidity (e.g., Kyle (1985), Admati and Pfleiderer
(1988), Wang (1993)), hedging (e.g., Wang (1994)), different prior beliefs (e.g., Detemple
and Murthy (1994), Zapatero (1998), Basak (2000), Buraschi and Jiltsov (2006)) or different
interpretation of common signals (e.g., Harrison and Kreps (1978), Harris and Raviv (1993),
Kandel and Pearson (1995), Scheinkman and Xiong (2003), David (2008b)).


                                              16
   Wang (1994) helps us understand the correlation between trading volume and return
volatility. His model features informed agents, who trade for both informational (specula-
tive) and noninformational (hedging) reasons, and uninformed agents, who trade for nonin-
formational reasons only. When the informed agents sell stocks, the stock price must drop to
induce the uninformed agents to buy. As information asymmetry increases, the uninformed
agents demand a larger discount to cover the risk of trading against private information.
Therefore, trading volume is positively correlated with return volatility, and the correlation
increases with information asymmetry. Wang’s model also implies that hedging-motivated
trading induces return reversals, whereas speculative trading induces return continuations.
Llorente et al. (2002) find empirical support for these predictions.

   Another way of modeling trading relies on differences in beliefs. In Scheinkman and
Xiong (2003), heterogeneous beliefs arise from the presence of overconfident agents who
believe their information is more accurate than it really is. These agents observe the same
signals but, due to their behavioral bias, they interpret the signals differently. The resulting
fluctuations in the differences of beliefs induce trading. The amount of trading in this model
can be large, even infinite.



10.      Entrepreneurial Finance

Firm profitability tends to rise before the firm’s initial public offering (IPO) and fall after the
IPO. Common explanations for these facts include irrationality and asymmetric information.
Pástor, Taylor, and Veronesi (2009) show that these facts are also consistent with a rational
symmetric-information model of learning. This model features two types of agents: investors,
who are well diversified, and an entrepreneur, whose wealth is tied up in a private firm.
All agents learn about the average profitability of the private firm by observing realized
profits. The entrepreneur solves for the optimal time to go public, trading off diversification
benefits of going public against benefits of private control. The model produces a cutoff rule
whereby going public is optimal when the firm’s expected future profitability is sufficiently
high. Therefore, expected profitability must go up before the IPO. According to Bayes’
rule, agents revise their expectations upward only if they observe realizations higher than
expected. As a result, realized profitability exceeds expected profitability at the time of the
IPO, and thus profitability is expected to drop after the IPO.

   The model also predicts that the post-IPO drop in profitability is larger for firms with
more volatile profitability and firms with less uncertain average profitability. These predic-
tions also follow from Bayesian updating. Agents revise their expectations by less if their

                                                17
prior uncertainty is lower (because prior beliefs are stronger) and if signal volatility is higher
(because signals are less precise). In both cases, realized profitability must rise more sharply
to pull expected profitability above the IPO cutoff. As a result, the expected post-IPO drop
in profitability is larger when volatility is higher and when uncertainty is lower. These predic-
tions are supported empirically. Volatility and uncertainty can be separated by estimating
the stock price reaction to earnings announcements, which is strong when uncertainty is
high and volatility is low. Firms with weaker stock price reactions experience larger post-
IPO drops in profitability, as predicted by the model. Since the volatility and uncertainty
predictions seem unique to learning, this evidence suggests that learning is at least partly
responsible for the observed profitability patterns around IPOs.

   Sorensen (2008) develops a model of learning by investing, extending the multi-armed
bandit model literature (e.g., Gittins, 1989). In his model, each investment brings not
only a monetary payoff but also more information, which helps improve future investment
decisions. Investors learn from their own investment returns. Their optimal strategy trades
off exploiting investments with known high payoffs and exploring investments with uncertain
payoffs but a higher option value of learning. Sorensen estimates his model on U.S. data
from venture capital (VC) investments. He finds that VCs’ investment decisions are affected
not only by immediate returns but also by the option value of learning. He also finds that
VCs who engage in more learning are more successful.

   Empirically, the performance of VC funds managed by the same general partner (GP)
exhibits high persistence (unlike the performance of mutual funds). This fact raises the
question why successful GPs do not raise their fees or fund size to capture all the surplus, as
in Berk and Green (2004). Hochberg, Ljungqvist and Vissing-Jorgensen (2008) rationalize
VC performance persistence in a learning model in which investors learn about a GP’s skill
over time. The idea is that limited partners (LPs) who invest in a GP’s fund learn more
about the GP’s skill than do other investors. This asymmetric learning enables incumbent
LPs to hold up the highly-skilled GP when he raises his next fund, because other potential
investors would interpret incumbent LPs’ failure to reinvest as a negative signal about the
GP’s skill. Thanks to their hold-up power, incumbent LPs continue to earn high net-of-fee
returns in their investments in the follow-on funds of the same GP. In contrast, performance
persistence is weaker for mutual funds where asymmetric information between the incumbent
investors and outsiders is smaller. Hochberg et al also predict that LPs should earn higher
returns in follow-on funds than in first-time funds, and there should be persistence in the
LP composition across the funds run by the same GP. These predictions are supported
empirically in a large sample of U.S. VC funds.



                                               18
11.     Future Issues

Much work on the role of learning in finance still lies ahead. Some promising directions are
evident in recent work that is not examined in this survey. For example, in most existing
learning models, agents learn by observing cash flows or asset returns, but they could also
learn from the prices of derivative securities (e.g., Dubinsky and Johannes (2006), Beber
and Brandt (2009), Johannes, Polson, and Stroud (2009)). Other interesting topics not
covered here include endogenous information acquisition (e.g., Veldkamp (2006), Peng and
Xiong (2006), Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2008, 2009)), non-Bayesian learning (e.g.,
Gervais and Odean (2001), Brav and Heaton (2002), Piazzesi and Schneider (2007)), learning-
by-doing (e.g., Arrow (1962), Berk, Green, and Naik (2004)), informational cascades (e.g.,
Welch (1992)), incomplete information equilibria (e.g., Feldman (2007)), and higher-order
beliefs (e.g., Allen, Morris, and Shin (2006), Banerjee, Kaniel, and Kremer (2009)).

   Another promising direction is to separate systematic and idiosyncratic uncertainty,
which have different implications for asset prices. While idiosyncratic uncertainty increases
both return volatility and asset valuations, systematic uncertainty increases volatility but
decreases valuations. Time variation in the two types of uncertainty produces dynamic
relations between prices, expected returns, and volatility. Separating the two types of un-
certainty, perhaps with the help of option prices, could shed new light on the asset price
dynamics.

   Future work can also analyze strategic information generation. We have discussed learn-
ing from exogenously specified signals, but what agents observe may depend on the actions of
other agents whose objectives are different. For example, corporate insiders may manipulate
earnings, which are used by outside investors as signals about average profitability. It seems
interesting to analyze dynamic agency models with asymmetric information. More generally,
we need more dynamic learning models in corporate finance.

   New learning models should be held to high standards. For each model, one should
identify testable predictions that are unique to learning, so the model can be empirically
distinguished from alternatives. It is also important to assess the magnitude of the learning-
induced effects, either by calibration or by structural estimation. Examples of the latter
approach include Linnainmaa (2008), Sorensen (2008), and Taylor (2008). We expect to see
more structural estimation of learning models down the road.




                                             19
12.      Appendix

Let ft (g) denote the probability density function of g at time t, with Pr(r > g) = 1. The
stock price is given by
                      Z       ∞                                    Z   r        Z    ∞                            
            Pt = Et                e   −r(τ −t)
                                                    Dτ dτ =                   E             e   −r(τ −t)
                                                                                                           Dτ dτ | g ft (g) dg.
                           t                                             −∞         t

                                                    2 /2)(τ −t)+σ(W −W )
Conditional on g, Dτ = Dt e(g−σ                                    τ  t
                                                                                  , with Wτ − Wt ∼ N(0, τ − t). Therefore,
                       Z       r       Z    ∞       h                             2 /2)(τ −t)+σ(W −W )
                                                                                                                 i
              Pt =                              E e−r(τ −t)Dt e(g−σ                              τ  t
                                                                                                                |g dτ ft (g)dg
                               −∞       t
                                       r                                                                    r    1
                                   Z        Z       ∞                                                  Z
                  = Dt                                  e   −(r−g)(τ −t)
                                                                           dτ ft (g)dg = Dt                         ft (g)dg,     (15)
                                    −∞          t                                                          −∞   r−g

which is (7). When g is observable, ft (g) is degenerate and we obtain (5).

   The volatility in (8) obtains from (15) as follows. Let ft (g) represent the normal distri-
bution with mean g̃t and variance σ̃t2, except for the truncation g < r. Approximate the
dynamics of g̃t and σ̃t2 by (4) with dst = dDt /Dt , so that dg̃t ≈ mt (dDt /Dt − g̃t dt). This is
an approximation because (4) holds exactly only when ft (g) is non-truncated normal. Let
F (g̃t, σ̃t2 ) ≡ log(Pt /Dt ). From Ito’s Lemma,

                                                   ∂F (g̃t, σ̃t2)
                                                                                        !
                                       dPt   dDt
                                           =     +                dg̃t + o(dt),
                                        Pt    Dt      ∂g̃t

where o(dt) denotes deterministic terms of order dt. Substituting for dg̃t and rearranging,

                                              ∂F (g̃t, σ̃t2)
                                                               "                            !         #
                               dPt   dDt
                                   ≈     × 1+                                                     mt + o(dt).
                                Pt    Dt         ∂g̃t

Taking standard deviations of both sides, we obtain return volatility in (8).




                                                                             20
                                LITERATURE CITED

Admati, Anat R., and Paul Pfleiderer, 1988, A theory of intraday patterns: Volume and
  price variability, Review of Financial Studies 1, 3–40.

Ai, Hengjie, 2007, Information quality and long-run risk: Asset pricing and welfare implica-
    tions, Duke University, Working paper.

Allen, Franklin, Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin, 2006, Beauty contests, bubbles, and
   iterated expectations in asset markets, Review of Financial Studies 19, 719–752.

Arrow, Kenneth, 1962, The economic implications of learning by doing, Review of Economic
   Studies 29, 155–173.

Avramov, Doron, 2002, Stock return predictability and model uncertainty, Journal of Fi-
   nancial Economics 64, 423-458.

Avramov, Doron, 2004, Stock return predictability and asset pricing models, Review of
   Financial Studies 17, 699–738.

Avramov, Doron, and Tarun Chordia, 2006, Predicting stock returns, Journal of Financial
   Economics 82, 387–415.

Avramov, Doron, and Russ Wermers, 2006, Investing in mutual funds when returns are
   predictable, Journal of Financial Economics 81, 339–377.

Baks, Klaus P., Andrew Metrick, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2001, Should investors avoid all
   actively managed mutual funds? A study in Bayesian performance evaluation, Journal
   of Finance 56, 45–85.

Banerjee, Snehal, Ron Kaniel and Ilan Kremer, 2009, Price drift as an outcome of differences
   in higher order beliefs, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
   pricing puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.

Barberis, Nicholas, 2000, Investing for the long run when returns are predictable, Journal of
   Finance 55, 225–264.

Basak, Suleyman, 2000, A model of dynamic equilibrium asset pricing with heterogeneous
   beliefs and extraneous risk, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 24, 63–95

Battalio, Robert H., and Paul Schultz, 2006, Options and the bubble, Journal of Finance
   61, 2071–2102.

Bawa, Vijay S., Stephen J. Brown, and Roger W. Klein, 1979, Estimation Risk and Optimal
   Portfolio Choice, North Holland, Amsterdam.


                                             21
Beber, Alessandro, and Michael W. Brandt, 2009, Resolving macroeconomic uncertainty in
   stock and bond markets, Review of Finance, forthcoming.

Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance in
   rational markets, Journal of Political Economy 112, 1269–1295.

Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vassant Naik, 2004, Valuation and return dy-
   namics of new ventures, Review of Financial Studies 17, 1–35.

Brandt, Michael W, Qi Zeng and Lu Zhang, 2004, Equilibrium stock return dynamics under
   alternative rules of learning about hidden states, Journal of Economic Dynamics and
   Control 28, 1925–1954.

Brandt, Michael W, Amit Goyal, Pedro Santa-Clara, and Jonathan R. Stroud, 2005, A
   simulation approach to dynamic portfolio choice with an application to learning about
   return predictability, Review of Financial Studies 18, 831–873

Brav, Alon, and J.B. Heaton, 2002, Competing theories of financial anomalies, Review of
   Financial Studies 15, 575–606.

Brennan, Michael J., 1998, The role of learning in dynamic portfolio decisions, European
   Finance Review 1, 295–306.

Brennan, Michael J. and Yihong Xia, 2001a, Stock return volatility and equity premium,
   Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 249–283.

Brennan, Michael J. and Yihong Xia, 2001b, Assessing asset pricing anomalies, Review of
   Financial Studies 14, 905–942.

Brown, Stephen J., 1976, Optimal portfolio choice under uncertainty: A Bayesian approach,
   Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago.

Buraschi, Andrea, and Alexei, Jiltsov, 2006, Model uncertainty and option markets with
   heterogeneous beliefs, Journal of Finance, 61, 6, 2841–2897

Busse, Jeffrey, and Paul J. Irvine, 2006, Bayesian alphas and mutual fund persistence, Jour-
   nal of Finance 61, 2251–2288.

Cagetti, Marco, Lars Peter Hansen, Thomas Sargent, and Noah Williams, 2002, Robustness
   and pricing with uncertain growth, Review of Financial Studies 15, 363–404.

Coles, Jeffrey, and Uri Loewenstein, 1988, Equilibrium pricing and portfolio composition in
   the presence of uncertain parameters, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 279–303.

Cremers, Martijn, 2002, Stock return predictability: A Bayesian model selection perspective,
   Review of Financial Studies 15, 1223–1249.



                                            22
Croce, Mariano M., Martin Lettau, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2006, Investor information,
   long-run risk, and the duration of risky cash flows, Working paper, New York University.

Cvitanic, Jaksa, Ali Lazrak, Lionel Martellini, and Fernando Zapatero, 2006, Dynamic port-
   folio choice with parameter uncertainty and the economic value of analysts’ recommen-
   dations, Review of Financial Studies 19, 1113–1156.

Dangl, Thomas, Youchang Wu, and Josef Zechner, 2008, Market discipline and internal
   governance in the mutual fund industry, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2307–2343.

David, Alexander, 1997, Fluctuating confidence in stock markets: Implications for return
   and volatility, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 32, 4, 427 – 462.

David, Alexander, 2008a, Inflation uncertainty, asset valuations, and the credit spreads
   puzzle, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2487–2534.

David, Alexander, 2008b, Heterogeneous beliefs, speculation, and the equity premium, Jour-
   nal of Finance, 63, 1, 41–83

David, Alexander and Pietro Veronesi, 2008, Inflation and earnings uncertainty and volatility
   forecasts: A structural form approach, Working Paper.

David, Alexander and Pietro Veronesi, 2002, Option prices with uncertain fundamentals:
   Theory and evidence on the dynamics of implied volatilities, Working Paper.

Detemple, Jerome B., 1986, Asset pricing in a production economy with incomplete infor-
   mation, Journal of Finance 41, 383–391.

Detemple, Jerome B., and Shashidhar Murphy, 1994, Intertemporal asset pricing with het-
   erogeneous beliefs, Journal of Economic Theory, 62, 294 – 320

Diether, Karl B., Christopher J. Malloy, and Anna Scherbina, 2002, Differences of opinion
   and the cross section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2113–2141.

Donaldson, R. Glen, and Mark Kamstra, 1996, A new dividend forecasting procedure that
   rejects bubbles in asset prices: The case of 1929’s stock crash, Review of Financial Studies
   9, 333–383.

Dothan, Michael U., and David Feldman, 1986, Equilibrium interest rates and multiperiod
   bonds in a partially observable economy, Journal of Finance 41, 369–382.

Dubinsky, Andrew, and Michael Johannes, 2006, Earnings announcements and equity op-
  tions, Working paper, Columbia University.

Duffie, Darrell and David Lando, 2001, Term structure of credit spreads with incomplete
   accounting information, Econometrica, 69, 633 – 664.



                                              23
Epstein, Larry, and Martin Schneider, 2008, Ambiguity, information quality and asset prices,
   Journal of Finance 63, 197–228.

Feldman, David, 2007, Incomplete information equilibria: Separation theorems and other
   myths, Annals of Operations Research 151, 119–149.

Garlappi, Lorenzo, Raman Uppal, and Tan Wang, 2007, Portfolio selection with parameter
   and model uncertainty: A multi-prior approach, Review of Financial Studies 20, 41–81.

Gennotte, Gerard, 1986, Optimal portfolio choice under incomplete information (with dis-
   cussion), Journal of Finance 41, 733–749.

Gervais, Simon, and Terrance Odean, 2001, Learning to be overconfident, Review of Financial
   Studies 14, 1–27.

Gittins, John, 1989, Multi-armed Bandit Allocation Indices, John Wiley & Sons, New York.

Guidolin, Massimo and Allan G. Timmermann, 2007, Asset allocation under multivariate
   regime switching, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31, 3503 – 3544.

Harris, Milton, and Artur Raviv, 1993, Differences of opinion make a horse race, Review of
   Financial Studies 6, 473–506.

Harrison, J. and David Kreps, 1978, Speculative behavior in a stock market with heteroge-
   neous expectations. Quarterly Journal of Economics 92, 323-336.

Hochberg, Yael, Alexander Ljungqvist, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, 2008, Informational
   hold-up and performance persistence in venture capital, Working paper, Northwestern
   University.

Honda, Tashiki, 2003, Optimal portfolio choice for unobservable and regime-switching mean
   returns, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 28, 45–78.

Hong, Harrison, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong, 2006, Asset float and speculative bubbles,
   Journal of Finance 61, 1073–1117.

Hong, Harrison, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong, 2008, Advisors and asset prices: A model
   of the origins of bubbles, Journal of Financial Economics 89, 268–289.

Johannes, Michael, Nicholas Polson, and Jonathan Stroud, 2009, Optimal filtering of jump-
   diffusions: Extracting latent states from asset prices, Review of Financial Studies, forth-
   coming.

Johnson, Timothy C., 2001, Return dynamics when persistence is unobservable, Mathemat-
   ical Finance 11, 415–445.

Johnson, Timothy C., 2004, Forecast dispersion and the cross section of expected returns,


                                             24
   Journal of Finance 59, 1957–1978.

Johnson, Timothy C., 2007, Optimal learning and new technology bubbles, Journal of Mon-
   etary Economics 54, 2486–2511.

Jones, Christopher, and Jay Shanken, 2005, Mutual fund performance with learning across
   funds, Journal of Financial Economics 78, 507–552.

Kan, Raymond, and Guofu Zhou, 2007, Optimal portfolio choice with parameter uncertainty,
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 42, 621–656.

Kandel, Eugene and Neil Pearson, 1995, Differential interpretation of public signals and
  trade in speculative markets, Journal of Political Economy 103, 831–872.

Kandel, Shmuel, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1996, On the predictability of stock returns:
  An asset allocation perspective, Journal of Finance 51, 385–424.

Klein, Roger W., and Vijay S. Bawa, 1976, The effect of estimation risk on optimal portfolio
   choice, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 215–231.

Kosowski, Robert, Narayan Y. Naik, and Melvyn Teo, 2007, Do hedge funds deliver alpha?
   A Bayesian and bootstrap analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 84, 229–264.

Kyle, Albert S. 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315–1336.

Leippold, Markus, Fabio Trojani and Paolo Vanini, 2008, Learning and asset prices under
   ambiguous information, Review of Financial Studies 21, 2565–2597.

Lettau, Martin, Sydney Ludvigson, and Jessica Wachter, 2008, The declining equity pre-
   mium: What role does macroeconomic risk play?, Review of Financial Studies 21, 1653–
   1687.

Lewellen, Jonathan, and Jay Shanken, 2002, Learning, asset-pricing tests, and market effi-
   ciency, Journal of Finance 57, 1113–1145.

Li, George, 2005, Information quality, learning and stock market returns, Journal of Finan-
    cial and Quantitative Analysis, 40 (3), 595–620.

Li, Wei, and Hui Xue, 2008, A Bayesian’s “bubble,” Working paper, Louisiana State Uni-
    versity.

Linnainmaa, Juhani, 2008, Why do households trade so much?, Working paper, University
   of Chicago.

Llorente, Guillermo, Roni Michaely, Gideon Saar, Jiang Wang, 2002, Dynamic volume-return
   relation of individual stocks, Review of Financial Studies 15, 1005–1047.

Lynch, Anthony W., and David K. Musto, 2003, How investors interpret past fund returns,


                                            25
   Journal of Finance 58, 2033–2058.

Mahani, Reza S., and Dan Bernhardt, 2007, Financial speculators’ underperformance: Learn-
  ing, self-selection, and provision of liquidity, Journal of Finance 62, 1313–1340.

Massa, Massimo, and Andrei Simonov, 2005, Is learning a dimension of risk?, Journal of
  Banking and Finance 29, 2605–2632.

Merton, Robert C. 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time
  model, Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373–413.

Merton, Robert C. 1974, On the pricing of corporate debt: the risk structure of interest
  rates, Journal of Finance 29 (2), 449–470.

Ozoguz, Arzu, 2009, Good times or bad times? Investors’ uncertainty and stock returns,
   Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Pástor, Ľuboš, 2000, Portfolio selection and asset pricing models, Journal of Finance 55,
    179–223.

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2000, Comparing asset pricing models: an invest-
    ment perspective, Journal of Financial Economics 56, 335–381.

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2002a, Mutual fund performance and seemingly
    unrelated assets, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 315–349.

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2002b, Investing in equity mutual funds, Journal
    of Financial Economics 63, 351–380.

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2008, Are stocks really less volatile in the long
    run?, Working paper, University of Chicago.

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2009, Predictive systems: Living with imperfect
    predictors, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Pástor, Ľuboš, Lucian Taylor, and Pietro Veronesi, 2009, Entrepreneurial learning, the IPO
    decision, and the post-IPO drop in firm profitability, Review of Financial Studies, forth-
    coming.

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2003, Stock valuation and learning about profitability,
    Journal of Finance 58, 1749–1789.

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2006, Was there a Nasdaq bubble in the late 1990s?,
    Journal of Financial Economics 81, 61–100.

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Pietro Veronesi, 2009, Technological revolutions and stock prices, Amer-
    ican Economic Review, forthcoming.


                                             26
Peng, Lin, and Wei Xiong, 2006, Investor attention, overconfidence, and category learning,
   Journal of Financial Economics 80, 563-602.

Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider, 2007, Equilibrium yield curves, in Daron Acemoglu,
   Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, published
   in 2007, Cambridge MA: MIT press, 389–442.

Rytchkov, Oleg, 2008, Filtering out expected dividends and expected returns, Working paper,
   University of Texas.

Scheinkman, Jose and Wei Xiong, 2003, Overconfidence and speculative bubbles, Journal of
   Political Economy 111, 1183–1219.

Seru, Amit, Tyler Shumway, and Noah Stoffman, 2008, Learning by trading, Working paper,
   University of Chicago.

Sorensen, Morten, 2008, Learning by investing: Evidence from venture capital, Working
   paper, Columbia University.

Stambaugh, Robert F., 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial Economics 54,
   375–421.

Taylor, Lucian A., 2008, Why are CEOs rarely fired? Evidence from structural estimation,
   Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Timmermann, Allan G., 1993, How learning in financial markets generates excess volatility
   and predictability of stock returns, Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, 1135–1145.

Timmermann, Allan G., 1996, Excess volatility and predictability of stock prices in autore-
   gressive dividend models with learning, Review of Economic Studies 63, 523 – 557.

Tu, Jun, and Guofu Zhou, 2004, Data-generating process uncertainty: What difference does
   it make in portfolio decisions?, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 385–421.

Tu, Jun, and Guofu Zhou, 2008, Incorporating economic objectives into Bayesian priors:
   Portfolio choice under parameter uncertainty, Working paper, Washington University.

Uppal, Raman, and Tan Wang, 2003, Model misspecification and under-diversification, Jour-
  nal of Finance 58, 2465–2486.

Van Binsbergen, Jules H., and Ralph S. J. Koijen, 2008, Predictive regressions: A present-
   value approach, Working paper, Duke University.

Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp, 2008, Information acquisition and under-
   diversification, Working paper, New York University.

Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp, 2009, Information immobility and the home


                                            27
   bias puzzle, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Veldkamp, Laura, 2006, Media frenzies in markets for financial information, American Eco-
   nomic Review 96, 577–601.

Veronesi, Pietro, 1999, Stock market overreaction to bad news in good times: A rational
   expectations equilibrium model, Review of Financial Studies 12, 975–1007.

Veronesi, Pietro, 2000, How does information quality affect stock returns?, Journal of Fi-
   nance 55, 807–837.

Veronesi, Pietro, 2004, The peso problem hypothesis and stock market returns, Journal of
   Economic Dynamics and Control 28, 707–725.

Wachter, Jessica, and Missaka Warusawitharana, 2009, Predictable returns and asset alloca-
  tion: Should a skeptical investor time the market?, Journal of Econometrics, forthcoming.

Wang, Jiang, 1993, A Model of intertemporal asset prices under asymmetric information,
  Review of Economic Studies 60, 249–282.

Wang, Jiang, 1994, A model of competitive stock trading volume, Journal of Political Econ-
  omy 102, 127-168.

Wang, Zhenyu, 2005, A shrinkage approach to model uncertainty and asset allocation, Review
  of Financial Studies 18, 673–705.

Weitzman, Martin, 2007, Subjective expectations and asset-return puzzles, American Eco-
   nomic Review 97, 1102-1130.

Welch, Ivo, 1992, Sequential sales, learning, and cascades, Journal of Finance 47, 695–732.

Williams, Joseph T., 1977, Capital asset prices with heterogeneous beliefs, Journal of Fi-
   nancial Economics 5, 219–239.

Xia, Yihong, 2001, Learning about predictability: The effects of parameter uncertainty on
   dynamic asset allocation, Journal of Finance 56, 205–246.

Yu, Fan, 2005, Accounting transparency and the term structure of credit spreads, Journal
   of Financial Economics, 75, 53–84.

Zapatero, Fernando, 1998, Effect of financial innovation on market volatility when beliefs
   are heterogeneous, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 22, 597–626.

Zellner, Arnold, and V. Karuppan Chetty, 1965, Prediction and decision problems in re-
    gression models from the Bayesian point of view, Journal of the American Statistical
    Association 60, 608–616.




                                            28
