                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                EXPORT SUBSIDIES AND INTERNATIONAL
                       MARKET SHARE RIVALRY


                         James A.   Brander
                        Barbara J, Spencer



                      Working Paper No. i1t61




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 19814




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
a"thors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #1464
                                       September 1984




      Export Subsidies and International Market Share Rivalry


                            ABSTRACT



     Countries often perceive themselves as being in competition

with each other for profitable international markets. In such a

world export subsidies can appear as attractive policy tools, from

a national point of view, because they improve the relative position

of a domestic firm in noncooperative rivalries with foreign firms,

enabling it to expand its market share and earn greater profits. In

effect, subsidies change the initial conditions of the game that firms

play. The terms of trade move against the subsidizing country, but its

welfare can increase because, under imperfect competition, price exceeds

the marginal cost of exports. International noncooperative equilibrium

is characterized by such subsidies on the part of exporting nations, even

though they are jointly suboptimal.


        James A. Brander                    Barbara J. Spencer
        Faculty of Commerce and Business    Department of Economics
        Administration                      Boston College
        University of British Columbia      Chestnut Hill, MA 02167
        Vancouver, British Columbia         U.S.A.
        V6T 1Y8
        Canada
        (604) 228—4878                       (617) 552—3694
                                                                         1.
         Export Subsidies and International Market Share Rivalry

         James A. Brander I The University of British Columbia
                       Barbara J. Spencer/Boston College



1. Introduction

     Considerable recent attention has been focussed on the role of export

subsidies in international trade policy. Effective subsidization of firms

engaged in international rivalry has been a common practice in western

economies for some time, and there seems to be a growing belief that

foreign subsidization of exports is "unfair" and merits some sort of retali-

ation.

     Such policies do not appear to make much sense from the standpoint of two-good

competitive models of international trade. Even in markets where the

domestic country can exercise some influence over world prices, the

domestic interest is served by trade restriction, not by subsidization of

trade.1 If foreigners wish to subsidize us to consume the goods they produce,

so much the better for us.

     How then are we to understand arguments in favor of export subsidization

and in favor of retaliation against foreign subsidization. Rather obviously,

domestic producerswho stand to gain from protection or subsidization would

be strong proponents of such arguments.:Still, the alleged success of

Japanese policies, for example, suggests that there may be more to the

issue than just this.

     In this paper we present an analysis based on imperfect competition to

 explain why export subsidies might be attractive policies from a domestic point

of view. Tile central idea is that it is to the advantage of a country to

capture a large share of the production of profit-earning imperfectly competitive

industries.2 Export subsidies can be used to carry out such"profit-shifting"

policies. Such a motive for subsidization requires the presence of (at least)
                                                                            2.




two exporting countries. We also assume a third country which imports the

iiperfect1y competitive good.

     Our results also depend (of course) on the equilibrium concept we use.

The industry in question is modelled as a simple Cournot (or Nash quantity)

duopoly: firms take as given subsidy levels set by governments and output

levels set by their rivals. Governments are able to act first, and set

subsidy levels before output levels, using their understanding of how

subsidies influence the output equilibrium. We first consider a single

government, then examine a Nash equilibrium in government subsidy levels.

As expressed by the referee "firms play Nash against all other players, and

governments play Stackelberg against firms and Nash against other governments."

A slightly different expression of the same structure is that the equilibrium

is subgame perfect3 in a two stage model in which governments (simultaneously)

choose subsidy levels in the first stage and firms (simultaneously)

choose output levels in the second stage.4

     In relating our analysis to the literature of international trade theory

there are several themes that should be mentioned. Recent papers by Spencer

and Brander5 (1983) and Krugman (1984) explicitly use the idea that national

governments may wish tb help domestic firms expand market shares in pro-

fitable areas. This is tangentially related to Basevi (1970) , Frenkel

(1971), and Pursell and Snape (1973) where a domestic monopolist can

benefit by exporting, and to Brander and Spencer (1981), where a govern-

ment may promote entry of a domestic firm which can earn rent, from foreign

sales. One can also connect our arguments to the "distortions" literature

associated with, among others, Bhagwati (1971). Specifically, the possi-

bility of a second best policy, like subsidies, being in the national

interest depends on the existence of some distortion, which in our case

is imperfect competition. The focus here, however, is really quite
                                                                            3.




 different, as it is the effect of government policies on the strategic

 interaction between domestic and foreign firms which is of the essence.

      Section 2 sets out the basic model and shows the unilateral incentive

 of a government to subsidize exports. In section 3 the argument is

 presented in a simple general equilibrium framework, incorporating domestic

 consumption of the imperfectly competitive good. The effects of the

 subsidy are interpreted using terms of trade and output effects, and the

 relationship between our results nd the standard optimum tariff argument is

 discussed. Section 4 Extends tjie analysis to the case in which governments

 in both exporting countries may subsidize exports, leading to a Nash equili-

brium in subsidies. Section 5 extends the analysis further to include

the optimal response of the government in the importing nation,arid section

6 contains concluding remarks.

2. The Model

     We use the simplest possible structure capable of bringing out the

main points.   As mentioned, firm behaviour is modelled as a simple Nash

quantity (or Cournot) duopoly, with one domestic firm and one foreign firm,

who produce identical products.6 We assume (for this section) that both

firms produce only for third markets: there is no consumption in the

producing countries. An important assumption is that the government under-

stands the structure of the industry and is able to set a credible subsidy

on exports in advance of the quantity decision by firms.

     The domestic firm produces quantity x and the foreign firm produces

y. The domesic firm maximizes variable profit it.

     it(x,y;s)xp(x+y)   —   c(x)   + sx                                     (1)

where c is variable cost, s is a per unit subsidy, and p(x+y) is the (inverse)

world demand (or price) for the good. There may be some additional sunk cost

which explains the existence of imperfect competition in this industry. It

is omitted since it plays no role in our analysis. The first order condi—
                                                                                          4.




tion for profit maximization is then

                                                                                           (2)

with second order condition

          =    2p' + xp"    —        <                                                    (3)
     xx                         c>

where derivatives are denoted by subscripts except for p', the derivative

of inverse demand.

     Similarly, the variable profit of the foreign firm, ,                is   given by

              yp(x+y) -    c*(y)                                                          (1*)


leading to first and second order conditions

                                                                                          (2*)


          =   2p' +   yp             <   0                                                 (3*)

We also use the following conditions

                 + xp"                           p' + yp"   < 0                                (4)


          ::                             :
     xx        xy           yy           yx                                                    (5)


Condition (4) means that own marginal revenue declines with an increase in

the output of the other firm.                This is equivalent, given satisfaction of

the second order conditions, to reaction functions being downward sloping.

This is a fairly standard regularity condition in noncooperative models,

but it can be violated by feasible demand structures, in particular, if

demand is very convex. From second order conditions (3) and(3* and

from (4), condition (5) always holds if marginal cost is nondecreasing.

Only if marginal cost falls more steeply than demand can it be violated.

Condition (5) means that own effects of output on marginal profit dominate

cross effects.

     Conditions (4) and (5) imply
                                                                                                  5.



                                   *
          D   !1T
                     XX
                              iT
                                   yy
                                        _itxy ,vX >0
                                                                                                      (6)

 If conditions (3), (3*) and (6) hold globally, they imply global unique-

 ness of the equilibrium (see Nikaido (1968), Ch. 7). Condition (6) is

 also the Routh-Hurwitz condition for reaction function stability.

          Rather obviously, comparative static properties of the model will

 depend on these conditions. If one wishes to consider cases in which

 the conditions are vinlated, "perverse" comparative static properties and

 policy implications can be obtained. This is of some interest, but

 we focus on structures. which satisfy (4) and (5), since they include most

economically relevant cases.

      First order conditions (2) and (2*) are reaction functions for the

two firms in implicit form. Each shows the best response of the firm to

any particular output chosen by its rival. The simultaneous solution to

(2) and (2*) is the noncooperative solution.

     What is the effect of the subsidy, 5?                         It   is fairly easy to calculate

the comparative static effects dx/ds and dy/ds. Total differentiation of

first order conditions (2) and (2*) yields

     ir
       xx
              dx+ir                dy+tr
                                      xs
                                         dsO                                                      (7)
                          xy

       *                  *                  *
     ryx      dx + it              dy + it        ds      =   0                                   (7*)
                          yy                 ys


Since ir, =      1    and               =    0,   these equations can be put in matrix form and

solved, using Cramer's rule, to yield



              dx/ds                _iTyy/D >          0                                           (8)




              dy/ds =                   ID   <    0                                               (8*)
                                                                                            6.
where D is defined in expression (6).

Naturally enough, an increase in the export subsidy, s, increases domestic

exports, as expressed in (8) (using (3) and (6)). Similarly, from (4)

and (6), a domestic subsidy reduces the output of the foreign firm as

shown in (8*).

     Diagrammatically, the subsidy shifts out the reaction function of

the domestic firm, increasing its exports and reducing foreign exports,

as shown in Figure 1, where the subsidy shifts the equilibrium from N to S.


                                 -   Insert   Figure 1 —




     The subsidy lowers marginal cost to the domestic firm, which commits

it to a higher reaction function. Propostion 1 summarizes the (compara-

tive static) effects of the subsidy on prices and profits.

Proposition 1

     An increase in the domestic subsidy

     i) lowers the world price of the good

    ii) increases domestic profit

   iii) reduces foreign profit

Proof:

     i) The change in price is given by the slope of inverse demand times

the change in total quantity:

            dp/ds    =           +
     PS E                p'(x5
                                     - ;)/D by (8) and (8*)
                     < 0 by (3*), (5) and (6).

    ii) from total differentiation of iT            with       respect to s,

                            dn/dS             +       + 3iT/S

Since       =   0 by (2), 1T/S = x by (1),                 =
                                                               xp'   and y5    0 by (8*),

                                                                                                 ()
         w5xpy5+x>O.
    FIGURE 1




               domestic firm
               reaction functions
y



                           foreign firm
                          reaction function

                z
                                                                                  7.




    iii) Similarly from (1*), (2*) , (8) and 7               =


                                          d/ds w    x5
                                                         +



                                               = ypx5    < 0                      (10)

*       *        *

        A domestic subsidy, not surprisingly, lowers price, increases domestic

profit and lowers foreign profit. What is perhaps more surprising is that

the subsidy actually increases domestic welfare net of the subsidy. In our

simple case with all production for export, domestic surplus1 G, net of

the subsidy, is the profit of the domestic firm (earned from exports) minus

the cost of the subsidy.

        G(s) =       ir(x,y;s)     — sx                                           (11)

Taking the derivative of (11) and using (9) to substitute for i          yields
        G =ir
         S       s
                      -x-sxS

              = xp'y5    —
                             sx                                                   (12)




At s =0,              is clearly positive (by 8*) indicating that a marginal increase

in the subsidy will increase welfare. Alternatively, setting G5             0 to obtain

the optimal subsidy yields

        s =                  > 0                                                  (13)
              xp'y5/x5
leading to the following proposition.

Proposition 2

     The domestic country has a unilateral incentive to offer an export

subsidy to the domestic firm.

*   *        *
     This is a simple and familiar model with a striking result: export
subsidies which enable the domestic firm to capture a larger share of
                                                                           8.




 profitable international markets can appear to be attractive policies

from a domestic perspective. This occurs despite the fact that the

contribution of the subsidy to profit exactly offsets the cost of the

subsidy to the government, leading to a domestic benefit function which

is the same as the profit function of the domestic firm with no subsidy. In

essence, the government's prior action in setting a subsidy changes the

domestic firm's set of credible actions (i.e., its reaction function) in

the output rivalry with its rival. The noncooperative equilibrium in

the inter-firm rivalryis altered in favour of the domestic firm.

       The formal structure is similar to Dixit (1980), where a firm may

influence later output rivalry by an earlier irreversible capital stock

decision, or to Prescott and Visscher (1976), where an irreversible location

decision determines later output reaction functions. Instead of a prior

capital or location decision, however, we have a prior government subsidy.

In acting first, the government can actually move the domestic firm to

the Stackelberg leader position in output space.

position 3
       The optimal export subsidy, s, moves the industry equilibrium to

what would, in the absence of a subsidy, be the Stackelberg leader-

follower position in output space with the domestic firm as leader.

Pr f
    Suppose the domestic firm were a Stackelberg leader without a

subsidy. From differentiation of (1), the first order condition for a

profit maximum is then,

                +   TT (x,y;O)(dy/dx)   0                                  (14)
                                                                              9.




where dy/dx is the slope of foreign firm's reaction function. Total

differentiation of (2*) (as shown in (7*)) implies that dy/dx =

which, using (8) and (8*), is equal to y5/x5. Also substituting for
    and IT,   (14) becomes
      xp' + p   —
                    c   +
                            (xp'y51x5)
                                         =   0                                 (15)

If we then compare condition (15) with first order condition (2) (sub-

stituting in the optimal subsidy given by (13) for s) we find that the

conditions are identical, which proves the result.

*    *   *
     That this case for subsidies is dependent on the existence of at
least one foreign competitor producing for the world market should now

be clear. To take the simplest case, if the domestic firm had an

international monopoly in the imperfectly competitive good, then by the

envelope theorem             x and from (12), G5   —sx which is always negative If

s is positive.

3. Terms of Trade Effects

     How is it that a country can perceive an incentive to subsidize an

exported good when such an action will lead to a worsening of the

country's terms of trade. This would never be optimal in a two-good

perfectly competitive neoclassical world. If the country were large

enough to influence the price of the exported good, then an export tax

would be appropriate so as to improve the terms of trade.

     However,expanded output sold at a price above marginal cost can lead

to a net increase in profit, more than offsetting the adverse terms of

trade offset.

     In this section we see how the terms of trade effect is incorporated

by examining the argument for export subsidies in a simple general

equilibrium framework familiar to trade theorists. This allows illustra—
                                                                           10.



 tion of the argument using a production possibility curve diagram.

 We also extend the analysis to consider the possibility of domestic

 Consumption.

      The inclusion of domestic consumption is particularly simple if firms

 can price discriminate between the home and foreign (third country) market

and if each enjoys a monopoly in its home market. If marginal cost is

constant an export subsidy then does not affect the profit maximizing level

of sales in the domestic market. The existence of domestic consumption

therefore does not affect the noncooperative export subsidy levels.

However if marginal cost were decreasing, the export subsidy would reduce

the cost of production for the domestic market as well as for the export

market so that the optimal export subsidy would be higher in the presence

of domestic consumption. Conversely the optimal noncooperative

export subsidy would be lower if marginal cost were increasing.

     On the other hand, if a subsidy must be applied to all production,

whether it is exported or sold domestically, then the pressure of domestic

consumption tends to increase the optimal subsidy. This is because with

imperfect competition, the level of domestic sales is below the pareto.

efficient level. We model this case in this section under the additional

assumption that markets are unified so that the price of x is the same

in the home and in the export market. Also, although the distribution

of each firm's sales between markets is indeterminate with the zero

transport costs that we are implicitly assuming, it is convenient to

assume that each producing country supplies its own consumers (as well as

exporting to the third country).

     Consider a utility function u(z,m)7, where z is domestic consumption

of the imperfectly competitive good and m is consumption of a numeraire

conpetitive good. The change in utility associated with marginal changes
                                                                                   11.



in consumption levels is given by

     du      u2dz +    udm                                                             1l6

Dividing through by Urn           yields
     dl      dU/Um = pdz + dm                                                          (17)

where p =             is the relative price of the imperfectly competitive
             Uz/Um
export good. dl is the change in "real income" and must have the same

sign as the change in utility.

     Domestic production levels are x and                  Assuming all profits from
sales of x accrue to domestic residents, balanced trade requires that the

value of production equal the value of consumption.

     px +    m    = pz + m                                                             (18)

Totally differentiating (18) and substituting into (17) yields

     dl = (x—z)dp + pdx +               dm                                             (19)

This is the standard breakdown of a change in real income into a "terms

of trade" effect, (x-.z) dp, and a "value of output" effect, pdx +           dm.
(A frequent reference for this kind of analysis is Caves and Jones (1981)).

The marginal rate of transformation is ..dm/dx =c where marginal cost,

c, is measured in units of m, Therefore (19) becomes

     dl =    (x-z)dp    +
                             (p_c)dx                                                   (20)

Under pure competition p =              c so a subsidy, which causes dp to be negative,
produces a negative change in real income.

     Starting from the equilib'iurri determined by Cournot rivalry between

domestic and foreign firms, however, a subsidy increases real income. Substi-

                  =   -xp'    —   s (from (2)) into (20), we obtain
tuting p —   c,
     dl =    (x-z)dp    -
                             (xp'   +   s)dx                                           (?1)

     With a general utility function, the comparative static effects

derived in Section 2 do not apply directly, because of income effects.

In general, a change in the subsidy affects profit and income in the
                                                                                      12.

 producing countries and therefore may affect demand arising from producing

 countries. (These effects tend to be small because the loss to one

 country is partially offset by the gain to the other as subsidy levels

 change). At any rate, the main point can be made by using the utility

 function, u(z,m)           tj(z) + m, since, in this case, all income effects are

 absorbed by the perfectly competitive numeraire good. With this utility

 function previous comparative static results apply exactly so dividing

 (21) by ds (measured in units of good m) and using p5             p'(x5 +   y5)   yields

      duds = (x     —           —
                                    (xp'       +                                        (22)
                        z)p5                       s)x5

                                    —
               -zp5 +       xp'y         sx5

 It is clear that duds is positive at s = 0 since p5 and y5 are negative,

indicating that there is an incentive to raise the subsidy to positive

levels. The optimal subsidy can be obtained by setting duds to zero:

     s =
           xp'y5/x5
                        —
                            zp/x >         0                                            (23)

The gieral equilibrium effect of the subsidy is illustrated8 in Figure 2.


                                     -   Insert       Figure 2 —

     Point   C represents the competitive production paint with the associated

consumption at QC and utility level c. A subsidy from this point must

lower welfare since production moves down the production possibility frontier

(PPF) and the terms of trade move adversely.

     The quantity of good x produced by the domestic firm at the noncoop-

erative Cournot equilibrium is indicated by point N. Consumption occurs

at Qfl, indicating that quantity NA of good x is traded for QA of good m.

The absolute value of the slope of QN, which represents the terms of trade,

then exceeds the absolute value of the slope of the PPF, which represents

the marginal rate of transformation. (As drawn, utility at the noncooper-

ative equilibrium, u, exceeds uC but this need not be the case9 and is

not necessary for our argument showing the advantage from a subsidy.)
              FIGURE 2




    us

         Un
m




               x
                                                                          13.




      The imposition of a subsidy then shifts production to point S,

 increasing the output of good x but worsening the terms of trade as

 represented by the absolute value of the slope of QSS. Nevertheless (as

we have shown) a small subsidy at the noncooperative equilibrium always

increases domestic welfare through an expansion of profitable exports.

As illustrated in Figure 2, domestic consumption occurs at    and

consumers enjoy higher level of utility uS rather than uVl.

4. Two Governments: Nash Export Subsidy Equilibrium

     The actions of the two foreign governments must also be considered.

Surely the two producing nations face similar incentives and there also

may be some response by the importing nation. In this section we examine

the noncooperative Nash equilibrium in subsidies in which each exporting

country is assumed to choose its subsidy level given the subsidy level

of the other exporting country. The actions of the importing nation

are considered in the next section. As in section 3, we assume that

any consumption of the good by the producing nations is at a common

world price and that the subsidy applies to all units of production. If

these consumption levels are zero, the subsidi's reduce to pure export

subsidies of the type considered in section 2.

     Assume the utility of the consumers inthe foreign exporting country
                          * *        *     *        *
can be represented by u(z ,m ) = IJ(z ) + m where z is consumption of
                                      *
the imperfectly competitive good and m is consumption of a numeralre
competitive good. With this utility function the marginal utility of

income is constant and equal to 1, so that consumer benefit from the

consumption of z is consistently measured by IJ*(z*)_pz*. The "gain"

function of the foreign producing nation from a per unit production
                                                                                         14.



subsidy, s*, given s is then

        G*(s,s*)        U*(z*)_pz* +       *(xy;s*).s*y                                   (24)

where lr*= yp(x+y)_c(y)+s*y and z, x and y all depend on s and s.

        Using dU*/dz*         p and d7r*/dS*         yp'x5+y (see(9)), the first order

condition for a maximum of G* with respect to s is

        G —ZI5. + yri'x               —
                                           sy5   =   0                                    (25)


Similarly the gain of the domestic country at subsidy levels s and s is

        G(s,s*)     tJ(z)—pz +    ir(x,y;s)-sx                                            (26)

so that the first order condition for the choice of S IS

               =        + xpty   —           0
                   2s                sx5                                                  (27)



This expression is the same as (22) in section 3, reflecting the fact that

the foreign subsidy s affects G only indirectly through the values of

z, x and y. Expressions (25) and (27) define the noncooperative Nash

equilibrium in subsidies and imply the following proposition.

Proposition 4

         The noncooperative Nash subsidy equilibrium is characterized by positive

production subsidies in both exporting countries

Proof

         Rearranging (25) and (27) yields
                          —               and s =
         s =
               xp'y5/x5       zp/x                   yp'X?/Yr _z*p/y5                     (28)



Introducing s does not affect the signs of the comparative static effects

    <   0, x > 0    and PS < 0 given by (8)., (8*) and Proposition 1 (although

the magnitudes are altered) so that s is still positive. Comparative static

effects X.r1            and      are simetric implying that s* is also positive...

*    **
         If   the exporting countries do not consume the good, then zz*0
                                                                                              15.




    and it is clear from (28) that both the pure export subsidies are

 still positive: the incentive for subsidization remains. Regard-

 less of the level of consumption by the exporting nations, however, their joint

welfare would be higher if subsidy levels were reduced below the Nash

equilibrium levels.              The noncooperative solution is jointly suboptimal

for the producing countries but if one country sets a zero subsidy, it

cannot expect this to deter the other country and it will then be worse

off than if it had joined the subsidy game.

Proposition 5

          At the noncooperative Nash subsidy equilibrium given by (25) and (27),

joint welfare of the producing nations would rise if subsidy levels were

reduced.

Proof

          The joint gain function is g =             G(s,s*)     +   G*(s,s*).   Since

at the noncooperative equilibrium, by (27) G50, and using (24)
                =      = -zp + ,r* - sy5.           From (10) and p5 =
                                                                              p(x5+y)
                =                  +           —
                    _z*pt(x5+y5)       yp3x5       s*y                                          (29)



                                                                 +
Substituting (28) for s, using p =                       p'(x5       y5)   and gathering terms yields

                =
                    (y_z*)p'x5   (1xyIyx)                                                       (30)


From (8) and (8*) and similar expressions for x5, and y5*,

                =                                                                               (31)


which with some exports (y_z*>0), is negative by (6) and (8). The effect

of s is symetric. Therefore a reduction in s or s will increase joint

wel fare.

*     *     *
                                                                         16.




           The subsidy levels which maximize joint welfare are1°

     s =    (y_(z+z*))pJ   ;
                                 5* = (x(z+z*))p*                           (32)


 These jointly optimal subsidy levels are positive provided total consumption

 by producing nations exceeds their individual export levels. If there were

 no consumption of the good by producing nations, the jointly optimal policy

would be to tax exports. These optimal taxes would ensure that each firm

would produce the same output that a member of a two-firm monopoly cartel

would, enabling the two producing countries to act as a monopoly against

the rest of the world. The countries are, we assume, unable to make bind-

ing agreements of this sort.

5.   Three Governments: Nash tariff and subsidy equilibrium

       The consuming nation also has an incentive to set a tariff or subsidy

on the import of the imperfectly competive good, so as to extract some of

the rent earned by its producers. The optimal tariff (or subsidy) for the

importing nation has been analysed by Brander and Spencer (1984a) for the

case of a foreign Cournot oligopoly, but no consideration was given to

the way export subsidies might affect the optimal import tariff or to the nature

of the Nash tariff and subsidy equilibrium between the three governments.

      For this purpose we again assume a simple additive utility function in

good x and the numeraire good. Then let G3(s,s*,t) represent the gain to

the importing nation (country 3) from a tariff, t, on total imports

X =x+y of the imperfectly competitive good. Then,

      G3(s,s*,t)      11(X) —   q(X)X + tX                                 (33)

where q(X) is the consumer price including the tariff. The first order

condition for the choice of t given s and s is

      G_Xq'(X)X+tX+X=O                                                     (34)

where X.      x. +
                                                                                               17.



  The comparative static effects x and                 (obtained   by the same

 method as in (7), (7*), (8) and (8*)) are

        x =                             =
                      _w)/D;                      _.;)ID                                        (35)

 From condition (6), D is positive and at least one of

 {x*Yt) is negative. In the syninetric case in which the two                      firms face
 the same costs both x and               are negative ensuring that           <   0.   From (34)



       t =
             -Xl_q'(x)X)/x+                                                                     (36)

 From (36), with        <   0,   the optimal tariff is positive If the rate

 of change of the consumer price with respect to the tariff is less than one.

 This is the "usual" case.1

       With a tariff on imports, the price function p(X) becomes p(X;t)

 and must be re-interpreted as the producer price received by firms net

 of the tariff: p(X;t)           q(x)       t. With this interpretation, there is no

change in        formulas (25) and (27) which,together with (34), are the first

order conditions for the (three) government subsidy and tariff equilibrium.

      To see more clearly the nature of this Nash tariff and subsidy

equilibrium, consider the case of linear demand and constant marginal cost.

Assume also that exporting nations do not consume the imperfectly competi-

tive good. In this case              =        = 2p'   and     =       = p',
so that from (8), (8*) and (35)

      x =    y   =   l/3p',   x=y5= —2/3p' and x= y5 =             l/3p'                       (37)

Hence using the fact that q'=p/xEp', from                    (28) and (36)

(with z=z*=0).

      s =   -xp'/2; s = -yp'/2          and t =   -Xp'/2                                       (38)

In this example, the tariff set by the importing country is just the sum

of the two subsidy levels set by the exporting countries. Also, taking the

derivative of t =     ..Xp•/2    recognizing that )( depends on.both s and t- yields
                                                                           18.


                      +           therefore, a small
dt/ds =
           .p"X5/(2       pXt);
 increase l.n the subsidy set by one exporting nation serves to increase

the import tariff by 1/8 as much (using (37)) enabling the importing

country to shift additional rent to itself. (An equal Increase In both

s and s leads to an increase In t by 1/4 of this increase). In this

example12 the Introduction of export subsidies increases both the import

 tariff and the level of world output so that the Importing country increases Its

 tariff revenue by 30% relative to the situations where t is set optimally but

both s and s are zero.

      Conversely, If both s and ,s are chosen optimafly,• at

increase   In the import tariff serves to reduce export subsidy levels by 1/5.

The tariff reduces the potential gains from (unilateral) export subsi-

dization and in this linear example, rather than offsetting the cost

increase from the tariff, the exporting countries reduce subsidy levels.

       One further possible direction of generalization suggests itself:

 if markets in the two producing countries are segmented rather than unified,

 then there may be two-way trade in the imperfectly competitive commodity.

 Dixit(1984) analyzes the motives for and consequences of tax/subsidy, tariff,

 an.d anti-trust policies in the presence of such trade between producing

 countries, but without third markets.


6. Concluding Remarks

     There are a couple of caveats that should be stressed. First, any

policy involving subsidies should be viewed with suspicion because the

marginal opportunity cost of government revenue may be much higher than

the value of unity assumed in simple surplus analysis, Secondly, in a

world of imperfect information and imperfect governments, any argument

indicating a plausible national motive for subsidies may open the door
                                                                        19.




for various kinds of socially wasteful rent-seeking. These are Important

concerns, but it seems worthwhile to us to separate out the logical impli-

cation of imperfect competition per se for international trade policy incentives.

What the paper shows is that noncooperative behaviour provides incentives

for such policies, but these policies are jointly suboptimal from the point

of view of producing nations taken together.

      The paper is built around what seems to us an important part of the

modern international environment: •countries perceive themselves as

being in competition with each other for profitable international markets.

In such a world the credibility of governments can confer strategic advantages

on domestic firms. In particular export subsidies can appear as attractive

weapons because they improve the relative position of the domestic firm in

noncooperative rivalries with other firms, and allow it to expand its

market share. The terms of trade will move against the subsidizing country

but price still exceeds the marginal resource cost of exports so that the

resulting expansion of exports can actually raise domestic welfare.

Producing countries have cooperative incentives to get together to agree

not to use such subsidies, but they also have an incentive to cheat on any

resulting agreements, suggesting that international regulations which attempt

to discourage subsidization, such as GATT regualtions, are likely to require

regular reinforcement if they are to survive.
                                                                            20.

                                fptnoteL

 *    We would like to thank Ron Jones for very helpful discussions In the early
     stages and we also thank an anonymous referee for inducing us to Improve our
     exposition and for offering several suggestions leading to improvements in
     the substance of the paper,
1. One important extension of the standard optimum tariff argument, considered by

     Graaff (1949-50) and developed by Feenstra (1983) Is that In an n

     good world (n >   3) the optimal tariff structure may Involve export
     subsidies on some goods because of what Feenstra calls "export linkages."



2. We model the rents as accruing to residual profit takers In the firm.

     One could easily imagine more complex and more realistic structures in

     which benefits also accrue to workers in the form of wages above

     opportunity cost, or in expanded employment at a (high) fixed wage.



3. The subgame perfection concept is well exposited in Shubik (1982).

     The basic idea is that each player anticipates that other players will

     act in their own best interests when they choose the levels of their

     strategy variables: these are the only "credible" choices.



4 Why the governments are able to act first is something we do not model

     explicitly. In essence the government subsidy announcements are simply

     assumed to be credible. This government credibility may arise because

     a government has some reputation which it has an incentive to maintain.



5. Spencer and Brander (1983) is a companion paper to this which shares

     the idea the governments may wish to help domestic firms capture large

     shares of profit-earning industries. In that paper governments subsidize

     R&D activities while firms themselves use R&D for strategic purposes.

     This gives rise to a fairly complicated structure in which the simple

     general equilibrium aspects are surpressed.
                                                                        19.




for various kinds of socially wasteful rent-seeking. These are Important

concerns, but it seems worthwhile to us to separate out the logical impli

cation of imperfect competition per se for international trade policy incentives.

What the paper shows is that noncooperative behaviour provides incentives

for such policies, but these policies are jointly suboptimal from the point

of view of producing nations taken together.

      The paper is built around what seems to us an important part of the

modern international environment: countries perceive themselves as

being in competition with each other for profitable international markets.

In such a world the credibility of governments can confer strategic advantages

on domestic firms. In particular export subsidies can appear as attractive

weapons because they improve the relative position of the domestic firm in

noncooperative rivalries with other firms, and allow it to expand its

market share. The terms of trade will move against the subsidizing country

but price still exceeds the marginal resource cost of exports so that the

resulting expansion of exports can actually raise domestic welfare.

Producing countries have cooperative incentives to get together to agree

not to use such subsidies, but they also have an incentive to cheat on any

resulting agreements, suggesting that international regulations which attempt

to discourage subsidization, such as GAIT regualtions, are likely to require

regular reinforcement if they are to survive.
                                                                          20.

                               fQn
 *     We would like to thank Ron Jones for very helpful discussions In the early
      stages and we also thank an anonymous referee for inducing us to Improve our
      exposition and for offering several suggestions leading to improvements in
      the substance of the paper.
1. One Important extension of the standard optimum tariff argument, considered by

     Graaff (1949-50) and developed by Feenstra (1983) is that In an n

     good world (n   3) the optimal tariff structure may Involve export

     subsidies on some goods because of what Feenstra calls "export linkages."



2. We model the rents as accruing to residual profit takers in the firm.

     One could easily imagine more complex and more realistic structures in

     which benefits also accrue to workers In the form of wages above

     opportunity cost, or in expanded employment at a (high) fixed wage.



3. The subgame perfection concept is well exposited in Shubik (1982).

     The basic idea is that each player anticipates that other players will

     act in their own best interests when they choose the levels of their

     strategy variables: these are the only "credible" choices.



4 Why the governments are able to act first is something we do not model

     explicitly. In essence the government subsidy announcements are simply

     assumed to be credible. This government credibility may arise because

     a government has some reputation which it has an incentive to maintain.



5. Spencer and Brander (1983) is a companion paper to this which shares

     the idea the governments may wish to help domestic firms capture large

     shares of profit-earning industries. In that paper governments subsidize

     R&D activities while firms themselves use R&D for strategic purposes.

     This gives rise to a fairly complicated structure In which the simple

     general equilibrium aspects are surpressed.
                                                                                      21.
      6.       These assumptions could be relaxed to some extent without affecting

               the central principles under consideration. However, adding more

               domestic firms weakens the incentive for domestic subsidies (see

               Dixit(1984) and Salant (1984)), and the introduction of more imperfectly

               competitive industries may weaken the subsidy case for any one industry

               (see Dixit and Grossman (1984)). In addition, changing the nature of

               the oligopolistic rivalry between firms may also affect the results,

               as shown in Eaton and Grossman (1983).


 7. We are assuming an economy with Identical consumers who receive the

           same income based on identical endowments and an equal share of the

           profits of the imperfectly competitive domestic firm, This Is the

           usual assumption one makes so as to abstract from the problem that the

           national distribution of income affects demand and welfare.



 8. Similar diagrams are available in the literature to illustrate other

           imperfectly competitive situations. For example Rieber (1982) illus-

           trates   the case of a domestic monopoly producing an export good with
           a competitive fringe in        the foreign country.



 9.        Whether this is the case depends on the          tradeoff between the consumer

           loss   from the restriCtion of domestic consumption of x versus the
           additional   profits earned      from exports.



10.        At the jointly optimal solution ag/s=0 and ag/as*0. The solutions for
           s and s*can be found directly as follows. Using (27) and its analogue

           G                           yields

                           +       =                                             0
                                       ..(z+z*)p5 + xp'y5
                                                          +
                               G                            ypx5     sx s*y5
       There isa corresponding expression for g/as*. Then using (8) and (8*)
                                                                                    22




    to substitute for x and.y we obtain

         ag/es =                                                             =0
                         x+sy__+z*            1y+_+z*)PI1tx)/D
                                                                                  = 0
         ag/aS*

    These can be solved by Inspection for S         = (y.(z+z*))p1 and s*(x_(z+z*))p.



11. The rate of change of the consumer price with respect to the tariff is less than

    one if the demand curve Is not too convex to the origin. Constant

    elasticity demand curves violate this condition, but linear demand curves

    and most other plausible demand curves satisfy it. (See Brander and

    Spencer (l984a).)



12. Assuming linear demand and cc*, if s=s*=O, but t                 —Xp'/2 is set optimally

    x=y= .-(a..c)/4p'. Tariff revenue is tX =        -(a—c)2/8p.          With the intro-

    duction of subsidies, s =     s = —xp'2, output rises to x=y= —2 (a—c)2/7p'
     and tariff revenue to tX = —8(a—c)2/49p', which is a 30% increase.


13, From (38), ds/dt =                        +               +
                            (-p'/2)(x5ds/dt       xs*ds*jdt       xe).    Using

     ds/dt =   ds*/dt,   we obtain ds/dt =
                                             _p'xt/t2   +
                                                            p(x5    +
                                                                         x5)j,   which,

     from (37), reduces to —1/5,
                                References                                23.




 Basevi, Giorglo, 1970, Domestic demand and the ability to export,

     Journal of Political Economy 78, 330-337.



 Bhagwati, Jagdish, N. 1971, The generalized theory of distortions and

     welfare, in: Jagdish Bhagwati et.al., eds., Trade, balance of payments

     and growth: Essays in honor of Charles P. Kindleberger (North-Holland,

     Amsterdam).



 Brander, James A. and Barbara J. Spencer, 1981, Tariffs and the extraction

     of foreign monopoly rents under potential entry, Canadian Journal of

     Economics 14, 371—389.



 Brander, James A. and Barbara J. Spencer, 1984a, Trade warfare: tariffs

     and cartels, Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.



 Brander, James A. and Barbara J. Spencer, 1984b, Tariff protection and

     imperfect competition, in: Henryk Kierzkowski ed., Monopolistic

     Competition and International Trade (Oxford University Press, forth-

     coming).



'Caies ,Richard E. and Ronald W. Jones, 1981, World trade and payments, 3rd, ed.

     (Little. Brown and Company, Boston).



Corden, W.M. 1974, Trade policy and economic welfare (Oxford University Press,

    London).
                                                                           24.




Dixit, Avinash, K., 1980, The role of investment In entry-deterrence,

    Economic Journal 90, 95-106.



Dixit, Avinash, K., 1984, International Trade Policy for oligopolistic

    industries, Economic Journal Conference Papers, forthcoming.

Dixit, Avinash K, and Gene M. Grossman, 1984, Targeted export promotion

     with several oligopolistic industries, mimeo.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Gene M. Grossman, 1983, Optimal trade and industrial

    policy under oligopoly, rnimeo.



Feenstra, Robert C., 1983, The case for export subsidies: Market linkages,

    Discussion paper, Columbia University.



Frenkel, Jacob, 1971, On domestic demand and the ability to export, Journal

    of Political Economy 79, 668-72.



Friedman, James W., 1977, Oligopoly and the theory of games (North-Holland:

    Amsterdam).



Graaff, J. de V.,, 1949-50, On Optimum Tariff Structures, Review of Economic

    Studies 17, 47-59,



Krugman, Paul R., 1984, Import protection as export promotio,n: International

    competition in the presence of oligopoly and economies of scale, In:

    Henryk Kterzskowskl, ed., Monopolistic competition and international

    trade (Oxford University Press, forthcoming).
                                                                              25.




 Nikaido, Hukukane, 1968, Convex structures and economic theory (Academic

     Press, New York).



 Prescott, Edward and Michael Visscher, 1976, Sequential location among firms

     with foresight, Bell Journal of Economics 8, 379-393.



 Pursell, Carry, C. and Richard Snape, 1973, Economies of scale, price

     discrimination and exporting, Journal of International Economics 3,

     85-91.



 Rieber, William J., 1982, Discriminating monopoly and international trade,

     Economic Journal 92, 365—376.


Salant, Stephen W., 1984, Export subsidies as instruments of economic

     and foreign policy, mimeo.



Schelling, Thomas, C., 1960, The strategy of   conflict   (Harvard University Press,

    Cambridge, Massachusetts).



Shubik, Martin, 1982, Game theory in the Social Sciences (MIT Press, Cambridge,

    Massachusetts).




Spence,A. Michael, 1977, Entry, investment, and oligopoltstic pricing, Bell

    Journal of Economics 8, 534-544,.



Spencer, Barbara J, and James A. Brander, 1983, International R&D rivalry..

   and industrial strategy, Review of Economic Studies 50, 707—722.
