                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 INTERNATIONAL COMPARISON OF THE
            SOURCES OF PRODUCTIVITY SLOWDOWN 197'3—1982


                          John Helliwell
                           Peter Sturm
                           Gerard Salou


                     Working Paper No. 1165




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 19814




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies and project in Productivity (World
Econoiy). Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #1465
                                                September 1984




                  International Comparison of the Sources of
                       Productivity Slowdown 1973-1982


                                  ABS1RAC


       This paper uses an integrated model of aggregate supply to analyze the
post-1973 slowdown in productivity growth in the seven major OECD economies.
Factor substitution, unexpected demand changes, profitability, and inventory
disequilibrium all contribute to the explanation, which is based on a
three-factor nested aggregate production function, including energy, and
postulating Harrod-neutral disembodied technical progress. The model is first
applied separately to the seven countries assuming constant (though
country-specific) rates of technical progress. This model provides empirical
evidence that this rate of progress has in fact slowed down for several of the
faster-growing countries, even after adjusting for factor substitution and
cyclical factors. The model is therefore re-estimated, and the sources of
productivity decline recalculated, on the hypothesis that rates of efficiency
growth in other countries are converging to those in the United States.




John Helliwell                         Peter Sturm and Gerard Salou
Department of Economics                O.E.C.D.
University of British Columbia         Growth Studies Division
Vancouver, B.C.                        2, rue Andre Pascal
Canada V6T lY2                         F-750l6 Paris
                                       France
(064) 228 4953
            INThRNATIONAL (DMPARISON OF ThE SOURCES OF WODUCTIVITY

                              SLOWDOWN 1973-1982



1.     Introductjon*



       What happened to productivity in the 1970s? Why has post-1973 growth

in output per employed person in the major OECD economies been so much slower

than it was between 1962 and 1973? These are key questions in economic

history, and their answers have important implications for economic policy.

Among the many papers devoted to this topic, analysing the problem either at

an aggregate level or for disaggregated industries, most have concluded that

there is a large residual to be explained, or have had to use rough guesses

and often inconsistent methods to allocate the blame among a large variety of

possible causes. Our study is based on the assumption that enough post-1973

history is now on record to permit using a more consistent and systematic

approach, in which a comparable yet fairly simple analytic framework is

applied to data from a number of countries. Errors in the explanation

generated by this framework will show the size of the remaining puzzle

requiring appeal to other models or additional influences.



       In our analysis of the post-1973 slowdown in labour productivity growth

in the seven major OECD economies, we apply an aggregate three-factor model of

production behaviour that treats factor substitution, unexpected demand

changes, deviations from desired inventory levels and profitability in an

integrated and consistent manner. We proceed in two stages in a way that

illustrates two distinct elements of comparative macroeconomics: the first is

the use of comparable theory and data to assess productivity growth in a

number of countries, and the second is the development of an international

framework to explain the inter-country differences and possible future

evolution of long-term productivity growth.
                                        -3-




       In the first stage, we apply our model separately to comparable sets of

data for each of the countries, and use the results to disentangle the effects

of energy price changes from those of unexpected changes in demand and

profitability in explaining each country's post-1973 slowdown in the rate of

growth of output per employed person. The model used has a nested long-term

production function in which capital and energy are combined in a vintage CES

inner function, and this bundle then enters a Cobb-Douglas outer function with

efficiency units of labour.    At the first stage of the research long-run

technical progress is taken to be Harrod-neutral, occurring at a constant

annual rate.   Actual production is determined by a behavioural utilization

rate equation in which the ratio of actual output to that determined by the

production function (with given technical progress and normal utilization

rates for employed factors) is explained by unexpected changes in final
demand, abnormal profitability, and the discrepancy between actual and target

inventory levels. For all countries there is strong evidence that changes in

demand and profitability have led to important declines in the rate of

utilization of employed factors, and hence in the rate of growth of measured

total factor productivity and output per employed person, between 1973 and

1982. The post-1973 factor mix has also changed substantially, to use more

labour and less energy, thus leading to further reductions in the rate of

growth of output per employed person.



       The first stage of our research also showed large international

differences in the underlying rate of Harrod-neutral technical progress, with

evidence of a slow-down in its rate of growth, even after adjusting for factor

mix and cyclical factors, in those countries with initially lower but rapidly

rising levels of labour efficiency.           We also found evidence of some

significant increases in labour income as a share of total factor payments in
                                      -4-




countries where the cost of labour had risen faster than the rate of

Harrod-neutral technical progress, thus suggesting that the elasticity of

substitution between labour and the capital-plus-energy bundle may not be as

high as assumed by the use of a Cobb-Douglas outer function.



       These results led us to a second stage of research in which the initial

model was further developed, on the basis of the first stage results, to

include an explanation of the international transmission and convergence of

technical progress.   As a separate development, we have also applied the

two-level production structure using the CES form at both levels, and

including simultaneous estimation of the derived factor demand equations

(Helliwell, Sturm and Salou, 1984).   In this paper, we shall concentrate on

the convergence model using the Cobb-Douglas outer function, with references

where appropriate to the two-level CES results. Thismarks a second distinct

phase of comparative international macroeconomics, where the uniform modelling

and comparison of production in national economies leads to a more general

framework in which increasing trade in goods and services, and especially

information and technology, tends toward international convergence of rates of

growth of labour efficiency. Since the United States shows the highest level

and the slowest rate of growth in Harrod-neutral technical progress of all of

the seven countries (except for the United Kingdom), and does not show

evidence of decline from the 1960s to the 1970s and l980s (after adjusting for

changes in cyclical position), its experience is used to approximate the rate

of growth of technical progress to which other countries are converging.
                                         —5-




        The logic of our approach suggests that we present the first stage

results in some detail, including the evidence that led us to proceed to the

second stage. This will permit the second-stage results to be presented more

concisely, since their underlying framework and basic pattern are similar, and

will permit a clearer view of what is at stake in moving from a constant to a

variable rate of technical progress.




2.              cal and Theoretical_Background



        Table   1 shows the average annual growth of output per employed person,

GDP per capita, and changes in various input and factor price ratios, in each

of the seven major OECD countries between 1973 and 1982, with the growth rates

between 1962 and 1973 given for comparison.       The average annual growth of

output per employed person fell by 2.5 percentage points from the pre-1973 to

the post-1973 period.     In all cases the average growth was less than half as
                                     I

high   over the 1973-1982 period as over the 1962-73 period.      In the United

States and Canada, the countries with the lowest rates of growth of output

per employed person 1962-1973, there was almost no growth in output per
employed person from 1973 to 1982. Reference to statistics for productivity

growth in industrialised countries over a century or more cautions that the

twenty-five years of high productivity growth prior to 1973, especially
outside North America, may be the exceptional performance (1).         Thus any

satisfactory explanation of the post-1973 slowdown that implies a return to

1962-73 average growth rates of output per employed person should also be

consistent with the permanent transition to these growth rates from those

experienced in the first half of the century.
      How has ecOnomic research responded to the problem of explaining the

large and pervasive slowdown in labour productivity growth since 1973? Nelson

(1981, pp 1029-30) describes contemporary research on productivity as showing

evidence of schizophrenia, with one set of studies characterised by
neo-classical production functions applied under the assumption of continuous

equilibirum, and a variety of other more eclectic approaches not relying on a

formal analytical framework. Attempts to disentangle cyclical factors from

other determinants of productivity growth are generally lacking from both sets

of studies (important exceptions are Mohr (1980) for U.S. manufacturing and

Kouri, de Macedo, and Viscio (1982) for French manufacturing), except insofar

as cyclical factors are included among the reasons for productivity slow-down

in some studies of the second type (e.g. Giersch, 1982;       Denison, 1982;

Lindbeck, 1982).



       The presumption underlying our research is that this schizophrenia is

unnecessary and costly, since any robust explanation of the post-1973 changes

must deal in a coherent way with major changes in relative factor prices as

well as large and sustained departures from long-run macroeconomic

equilibrium.   The neo-classical production framework is necessary to deal

consistently with the effects of changes in factor prices, while the

assumption of continuous equilibrium must be dropped if cyclical elements are

to be treated properly. The production framework applied in this paper is

based on the assumption that the explanatory power of the neo-classical model

of production can best be harnessed by using it to provide an equilibrium

towards which the system tends to move, but from which there may be many

systematic departures.   The likely pervasiveness of these departures means

that it is necessary to avoid econometric procedures (such as the usual cost

share equations used for deriving substitution parameters in translog
production functions) that are only valid under conditions of continuous

equilibrium.
                                       —7-.




       Our approach has some similarities with that of Bruno in his

comparative studies of productivity slowdown in manufacturing (1984) and in

the private economy as a whole (1982).        Like us, he assumes an underlying

three-factor model of production, and permits short-term deviations of actual

output from normal output. He does, however, not use his production structure

to define a normal output series, and hence is not able to separate cleanly

the effects of factor substitution from those of factor utilization. From his

cross-section equation, he concludes (1982, p. 99) that about half of the

slowdown in private-sector productivity growth was due to import price
increases and half to demand slowdown.        His estimated import price effect
combines the influence of factor substitution with the impact of profitability

on utilization which is separately estimated in our model.



       Sylos-Labini (1984) explains productivity growth in Italy and the
United States in terms of output growth, changes in the wage rate relative to

the price of machinery, and current and lagged investment rates. The first

term probably captures mainly cyclical effects, while the wage ratio probably

combines some factor substitution with some profitability effects.          By
treating the production decision and the definition of potential output in a

more explicit way, we are able to disentangle these separate influences more

clearly, and then later to use our integrated framework to test for the

possibility of general slowdown or country-specific catch-up effects in the

rate of growth of labour efficiency.



      We turn now to our model and its results.
                                           -8-




3.       The Two-Level   Production Structure and the Influence of Engç

         The   basic   production structure employed in the first stage of our

research is explained in detail in the technical annex,           It consists of a

three factor nested aggregate production function.          The inner CES function

combines capital and energy into a vintage capital-energy bundle which is

combined with efficiency units of labour in an outer Cobb-Douglas function to

define potential output.           Estimates of the relevant production function

parameters are presented in Table 2. Energy is singled out for treatment as a

separate factor of production, in addition to capital and labour, since its

relative price moved so differently in the pre-1973 and post-1973 periods,

leading to changes in output per employed person that need to be disentangled

from the other causes of changes in labour productivity.           Since energy is

treated as a separate factor of production, the output concept has to be

enlarged to include net energy imports (2).



         Our choice of a nested structure with capital and energy combined in

the inner function follows earlier research conclusions (e.g. Berndt and Wood

1979) that the separability assumptions implied by this nesting are more

plausible than the alternatives.          We restricted our choice to production

function structures that can be represented explicitly by their primary forms,

as well as by their dual cost functions, so that we are able to have an

explicit factor-based measure of potential output, and hence can decompose

output per employed person into two key ratios:

         Q/NE = (Q/QSv).(QSVINE)                                                 (1)
Where:

         Q      = actual     output,

         NE     =   number of employed persons, and

         QSV    =   output   defined by the production function, with all quantities

                    of employed factors operating at normal utilization rates.
                                     -9-.




       We employ a flexible vintage structure for the capital and energy

bundle. Some vintage structure is likely to be required since much capital

equipment and many buildings are designed to embody a certain energy
requirement. However, it would not be appropriate to apply a rigid vintage

model, in which energy requirements were held fixed at their initial levels

until the capital is scrapped, because there is much in the way of adjustment

and retrofitting that can be done to change the energy use of the existing

capital stock. We therefore designed our vintage model so that the degree of

retrofitting should be a parameter to be estimated simultaneously with the

long-term elasticity of substitution between capital and energy in the CES

bundle. The distribution parameters in the inner CES bundle are derived from

the assumption that the actual and desired energy/capital ratios are equal on

average over the ainple period, and by scaling the mean of KEV to have the

same mean as K, so that the derived CES dual cost index for capital and energy:




      PKE=(b.PK +       c5.PE)11'5)                                        (2)


measures the cost (after vintage effects have been worked out) of owning and

providing energy for one unit of the capital stock.     For any given pair of

values for the retrofitting parameter (LU in Table 2) and the elasticity of

substitution (s) between capital and energy, equation 8 in the technical Annex

defines the vintage energy requirement EV (3). Using EV as a predictor of E,

Table 2 shows the maximum likelihood pairs of Ri and s for each of the seven

countries. The long-term elasticity of substitution ranges from .6 to .95

(the highest value considered).    If those values seem high, it should be

remembered that they refer to energy as it is priced for final users,

including all taxes and distribution charges, and that those prices have moved

less than proportionately in response to changes in world crude oil prices,
                                     -10-




even in those countries where world crude oil price changes were passed on

immediately to final users.     There is wider variation in values for the

retrofitting parameter, which in some countries is not very precisely

determined statistically, and in any case is likely to get confused with the

numerous non-price policies that several countries adopted to speed the

conservation of energy, and especially of crude oil, following the world oil

price shocks of 1973-74 and 1979-80. These latter policies may, for example,

have combined with the increasing availability of natural gas service to

explain the estimated high speed of the U.K. response.



       Examination of the various country panels in Figure 1 shows why the

elasticity of substitution and the retrofitting parameter both tend to be

high, and also why there is a trade-off between RI and s in the likelihood

surfaces for several countries. In all seven countries there were matching

decreases in relative energy prices and in capital/energy ratios prior to

1973, with the trends reversed thereafter.



       How big were the effects of energy price changes on factor
substitution, and hence on the rate of growth of output per employed person?

The answer to this question depends on the properties of each country's

production function. So far we have explained the method for obtaining the

parameters of the inner CES function, and for defining the quantity and price

of the bundle of capital plus energy. The higher price of energy leads to a

substitution of capital for energy and also to a rise in the price index for

capital plus energy, leading to substitution of labour for the bundle of

capital and energy. The size and speed of this substitution depend on the

parameters of the outer function and on the speed with which actual employment

and the capital stock respond to changes in desired factor proportions.
                                     —11—




        The Cobb-Douglas form for the outer function implies a unit    elasticity
of substitution between efficiency units of labour and   units   of the capital -

energy bundle.   The exponents of the outer function are based on average

nominal income shares over the entire sample period. The labour efficiency

index and the constant term are defined from the requirement that QSV, the

value of normal output defined by the production function at normal
utilization rates and steady trend increases in labour efficiency, should have

the same mean and trend as actual output Q over the entire sample period.

The implied constant rates of growth of the labour efficiency indexes for each

country are shown in Table 2.



        To compute the substitution effects of energy prices on labour

productivity, it matters what is held constant, and on the time lags involved

in adjusting capital/labour ratios. Since our first stage research does not

otherwise require estimated equations for employment and investment, we shall

report results on the basis of full adjustment, and shall therefore refer only

to the effects of the two long movements in energy prices relative to the

prices of capital and labour: down from 1962 to 1973 and up from 1973 to

1982.   Table 3 shows the results for each country, under the assumption of

given levels of output and full adjustment of relative factor inputs.        The

first column shows by how much lower was 1973 equilibrium employment as a

consequence of energy prices following their actual paths rather than staying

at their 1962 values relative to the price of capital goods.          The second

column shows the amount by which equilibrium employment in 1982 increased

because of the increase in relative energy prices between 1973 and 1982. The

third column shows the combined effect of these two changes in terms of the

reduction they imply in the average annual rate of increase in output per

employed person from the first sub-period (1962-1973) to the second
(1973-1982).
                                       —12-




4.     The Importance and Explanation of Variations in Factor Utilization



       If it is true, as we assume, that there are systematic changes in the

rate of utilization of employed factors, and hence in output per employed

person, then it should be possible to estimate an output equation, including

cyclical variables, that substantially improves on the prediction of output by

the production function on its own.



       Tne regression results reported in Table 4 show that this condition is

very easily met for all of the seven countries, as the cyclical variables

explain a significant proportion of any variations in output not already

explained by variations in QSV.         For each country the ratio Q/QSV is

significantly reduced when average unit costs are high relative to the output

price and significantly increased when final sales are high relative to what

firms were expecting them to be when they made the factor demand decisions

whose results are embodied in QSV.



       Do these systematic departures from the long-term production function

mean that firms are getting something for nothing when utilization rates are

high, or being heedlessly wasteful when utilization rates are low? Before

interpreting the results it might be useful to explain why not, by sketching a

short-term optimization process that would lead producers, in the aggregate,

to respond in the way revealed by the equations reported in Table 4.



       It is costly and time-consuming to adjust capital, employment, and

energy-intensity, and the size and profitability of future sales cannot be

forecast with any precision.    Firms deal with this situation by planning their

productive capacity --   buildings,   equipment, production schedules, marketing
                                    -13-




facilities, supply contracts, and so on --   to   support an expected level of

sales at some average desired rate of utilization.         They recognize the

inevitability of unexpected changes in demand and cost conditions by investing

in short-term flexibility until the point where the expected costs of more

flexibility start to exceed the expected benefits. Many of the devices that

individual firms use to provide short-term flexibility, through contracts that

transfer the extra demands to other suppliers, or by arrangements to purchase

goods or services at short notice from other firms, are not available to the

economy as a whole, except through the more limited extent permitted by

additional imports of goods and services.     Given whatever margin of spare

capacity firms provide for themselves, they react to an unanticipated increase

in final demand by some combination of:     increases in capital, labour, and

energy inputs (thereby inceasing QSV), running down inventories, raising
prices, and increasing the utilization rate of employed factors. The feasible

set of points for the short-term production function is a band about the

longer-term function with given, or only slightly variable, quantities of

employed factors.



       The optimal choice of the current production level can be thought of as

the selection of a fourth factor input, "factor utilization" which is not

independently measurable except partially through data for working hours,

number of shifts, and so on. The preferred rate of utilization will depend on

its own cost relative to the costs of alternative means of dealing with

changes in demand or cost conditions. The cost of higher utilization rates is

not precisely measurable, but comprises some combination of increased risk of

production failure (from human or mechanical stress, neglected maintenance, or

control procedures ignored in the search for higher output levels), lower

quality of output, and lack of time to plan for future innovations and
                                     -14-




investment. The costs of the alternatives --   inventory   destocking, increased

imports, price increases, and hence foregone sales -- cannot be measured

precisely either, but it is possible to find measured variables that influence

them.   For example, the marginal cost of running down inventories may be

expected to increase as inventory stocks fall further from their target

levels, and the opportunity cost of foregone sales will be inversely related

to unit costs and positively related to the output price.          Thus the CQ

variable (which represents current unit costs divided by the output price)

will negatively affect the demand for utilization as a short term factor of

production, as will the stock of inventories at the beginning of the period.

changes in these variables not only influence how the firm will respond to a

change in demand conditions, hut will also lead to the choice of a new

short-term utilization rate.    Thus the inventory and cost terms enter in

log-linear form with the unexpected or temporary sales variable, which in turn

is defined as final sales divided by QSV since QSV represents that portion of

final sales that was forecast to be sufficiently permanent and profitable to

be provided for by domestic factors operating at normal utilisation rates.



        Since any deviation of the short-term utilization rate from unity is a

measure of macroeconomic disequilibrium, it may be expected to have an

important explanatory role elsewhere in the macroeconomic system, influencing

imports, prices, wages, and factor demands. In the macroeconomic framework of

which this explicit production model is a part (Helliwell et al, 1984),

inventory change is determined as production plus net imports minus final

sales, and the ratio of actual to desired inventories itself plays an

important role in determining the path of macroeconomic adjustment, chiefly

through its effects on prices, exports, and production.
                                     —15—




       One advantage of a direct explanation of the short-term production

decision in relation to an explicit long-term production function is that it

permits a consistent allocation of the proximate causes of productivity

slowdown between cyclical elements and factor substitution. To get to the

bottom of the matter, of course, requires an explanation of what causes sales,

costs, relative prices, and inventory stocks to take the values they do. This

would require complete and comparably specified macroeconomic country models,

so that shock-free histories could be constructed for each of the countries

and then actual external shocks and internal policies added to assess their

individual and collective importance in determining the extent and timing of

the productivity slowdown. This has so far only been done for the Canadian

case (Helliwell 1984);   to undertake that work on a comparative basis would

take us beyond the scope of this paper.



       We shall restrict ourselves in this paper to a comparison of the

proximate causes of the productivity slowdown.     Table S splits the overall

decline in the annual rate of growth of output per employed person (Q/NE) into

two components, normal output per employed person (QSV/NE) and the utilization

rate (Q/QSv), which is the ratio of actual output to what it would be if all

employed factors were utilized at normal rates. The growth of normal output

per employed person is dominated by the rate of growth of the labour

efficiency index, but is also influenced importantly by price-induced factor

substitution, as evidenced especially by the effects of changes in energy

prices. The first stage results assume a constant rate of increase in labour

efficiency, so that the change in the average annual growth of QSV/NE from the

pre-1973 to the post-1973 period is due to changes in relative factor prices.
                                      -16-




         The remaining columns of Table S disentangle the various causes of the

changes in Q/QSV.      In equilibrium growth, QIQSV is always equal to 1.0,

because there are no surprises to stop the planned increases in factors being

just sufficient to produce the desired level of output at normal utilization

rates.    In a period of normal growth, therefore, changes in Q/QSV would

contribute nothing, either positively or negatively, to changes in output per

employed person.    But things were not normal in either of the subperiods.

There were abnormal increases between 1962 and 1973 in the main determinants

of capacity utilization, followed by abnormal decreases from 1973 to 1982.



         Figures 2, 3 and 4 show, respectively, the sales, cost, and inventory

variables for each of the seven countries, and Table 5 shows the amount by

which changes in each of these variables contributed to the slowdown in the

average annual rate of growth of output per employed person from the 1962-1973

period to the 1973-1982 period. What do the results show? First, some common

elements. In all countries, 1973 was a year of greater capacity utilization

than either 1962 or 1982, so that changes in capacity utilization increased

the average annual rate of growth of output per employed person in the first

sub period and lowered it in the second.      In all countries, the demand and

cost variables both contributed importantly to the drop in capacity
utilization from 1973 to 1982, the former usually more than the latter. This

was quite different from the earlier period, where the increase in capacity

utilization from 1962 to 1973 was almost entirely due to sales not matched by

increases in normal output, with the cost variable usually playing a slightly

negative role.     If one then looks at the difference between the two
sub-periods, the sales term thus appears to have much the greatest importance,

as it was the primary positive contributor during the first sub-period and a

substantial negative contributor during the second.
                                     -17-




       What are the major differences in the country results? First, cyclical

factors have been much more important in the United States and Canada than in

the other countries. Second, the production equation fits best for the United

States, and least well for Germany.         Only in Germany is the unexplained

residual a substantial proportion of the overall productivity slowdown.

Inventories play an important buffer role in most countries (the sales

coefficient being significantly less than 1.0) except for the United Kingdom

where the sales coefficient is above 1.0, suggesting that desired inventory

stocks move substantially in response to current sales. The coefficient on

the cost variable is fairly well identified in the range -.16 to -.35. The

contribution of the cost variable to productivity slowdown is less uniform

since, as shown in Figure 3, the variable has behaved rather differently in

the seven countries, although generally moving in an adverse direction for all

countries since 1973. Finally, as shown in Table 2, the underlying rate of

Harrod-neutral technical progress differs very much from country to country,

being less than half as high in the United States, the United Kingdom, and

Canada as in any of the other four countries.



       As a check on our results from the first stage research, we tested for

constancy of the underlying rate of Harrod-neutral technical progress by

adding a quadratic trend term to the regression used to define the technical

progress index.    We found a significant negative coefficient for all
countries. When we added a calculated utilization rate (using exogenous

instrumental variables for all right-hand side variables) to provide a rough

cyclical adjustment, we found that the quadratic term became insignificant for

the United States, Italy, and Canada, but remained significant elsewhere. The

apparent decline in the rate of technical progress in some countries, combined

with the very large intercountry differences in the average rates of technical
                                       -18-




progress suggested the need for a framework that would permit technical

progress to be linked between countries, and possibly to converge.          This

further development is described in the following section, after which we

shall sumrnarjse our overall results and search for suitable conclusions.




5.     International Convergence of



      Our first stage results provided evidence that, for most of the seven

countries, though not for the United States, some decline in the rate of

1-larrod-neutral technical progress has occurred during the period 1962-1982,

even after due allowance for factor substitution and the effect of cyclical

changes in total factor utilization.



       Since the United States showed the highest level of output per employed

person throughout the observation period, and the least evidence of any

decline in productivity growth, after accounting for factor substitution and

utilization effects, it was used as the basis for testing the convergence

hypothesis. We chose a simple form for the hypothesis, with the rate of

change of labour efficiency being related to the previous period's ratio of

the U.S. to the domestic labour efficiency variable. Under this hypothesis,

the rate of change of labour efficiency eventually converges to the same rate

in all countries, although the unconstrained logarithmic constant term permits

the level of output per employed person to be different among countries (e.g.

because of differing social structures, hours of work, resource endowments and

education levels) even after convergence is achieved in the rates of change.
                                     -19-




       The use of a country-specific constant means that we are estimating

separate dynamic models for each country, with or without the constraint that

the catch-up coefficient be the same for each country. This differs from the

equations tested by Lindbeck (1983, p. 33) and by Giersch and Wolter (1983,

p. 40) which use only cross-section data, with the implicit assumption that in

equilibrium each country would have the same productivity growth rate and

level (4).   The Giersch and Wolter equations also differ from ours in not

adjusting the variables to reflect the effets of factor substitution.

Nordhaus (1982) includes catch-up effects as one of the elements of his

'depletion' factor, to which he attributes a large part of the post-1973

reduction in productivity growth. His estimates are not comparable to ours,

however, as he does not separate catch-up effects from other elements of his

depletion factor.



       Table 6 shows the precise form of the equations estimated, and

estimation results when applied to pooled 1961-1982 data for Germany, France,

the United Kingdom, Italy, and Canada. It is applied separately to Japan, for

which the available data cover only the 1967-1982 period.     For the pooled

data, four versions of the equation are estimated and compared with two

versions of a competing hypothesis that the rate of change of labour

productivity, after adjustment for factor substitution, is a linear function

of time. The nul hypothesis is that the efficiency index rises at a constant

rate, which would mean that none of the equations in Table 6 would have any

explanatory power except through contamination by correlation between the

included variables and the excluded cyclical variables.
                                     -20-




       The equations shown in Table 6 are all based on the two-level nested

Cobb-Douglas/CES production function and are thus directly comparable with the

production structure used in the first part of the paper.         We have also

estimated equations based on the two-level nested CES structure with an 0.6

elasticity of substitution in the outer function, and found them to be almost

identical, and that is why we need present only the first set in Table 6.



       The four pooled catch-up equations use alternatively the logarithm of

the U.S. efficiency index and the logarithm of the productivity ratio data on

which it was estimated, and either do or do not impose the constraint that the

catch-up coefficient is the same for all countries. Of the two regressions

assuming a quadratic time trend for the efficiency index, one applies the

constraint that the coefficient be the same for all countries, and the other

does not.



       There are two Japanese equations, one using the actual data for U.S.

output per employed person (after adjusting for other factor inputs, as shown

in Table 6) and the other using the estimated efficiency index (with a

constant rate of growth) based on those data.



      What do the results show? First, all of the pooled equations have

significant explanatory power relative to the nul hypothesis that the labour

efficiency index grows at a constant rate.      Second, the constraint that all

countries have the same response coefficients is generally not easily

accepted, although the catch-up coefficients are quite similar among countries

in the equation based on the estimated U.S. efficiency index. Third, none of

the equations explain a very high proportion of the year-to-year variations in

the dependent variable. This is not surprising since the latter is defined to
                                     —21—




remove the effects of long-run factor substitution, but not to remove the

short-run cyclical effects.   Finally, and probably as a consequence of the

cyclical variance, the best £ it is provided by the equation using the actual

U.S. data, the second best by the time trend, and the third best by the

computed U.S. labour efficiency index. Since the former two are more likely

to be contaminated by cyclical variance and its international simultaneity,

and since quadratic time trends for efficiency indexes have no theoretical

foundation and have forecasting properties that eventually imply negative

technical progress, we use the catch-up equations based on the computed U.S.

efficiency index as a basis for the estimated and forecast labour efficiency

indexes for each country shown in Figure 5.



       In Tables 7 and 8 we present the results of integrating the catch-up

hypothesis in the overall model of production behaviour, based on a unit

elasticity of substitution between the capital-energy bundle and efficiency

units of labour. Table 7 shows the parameters of the re-estimated production

equations, and Table 8 shows the revised model's allocation of the factors

leading to changes in output per employed person from the pre-1973 to the
post-1973 period. Table 8 is like Table S for the first stage production

model, but also decomposes the change in normal output per employed person

(QSV/NE) into two parts, one due to growth in the efficiency index and the

second due to changes in factor substitution.



      The catch-up model increases the share of the productivity slowdown

(outside the United States) that is due to slower growth of QSV/NE, and

correspondingly reduces the amount requiring explanation by cyclical factors

or left as an unexplained residual.         The catch-up effect is especially

important for Japan, Italy, France and Germany, in that order, as in each case
                                     -22-




it suggests that one-third of the slowdown of average annual increase in

output per employed person could be due to the catch-up effect. There is not,

except in Germany and the United Kingdom, any substantial increase in the

overall ability of the model to explain production and the productivity

slowdown, as both versions of the model have rather small residuals. We turn

now to a comparison of the results of the two versions of the production model.




6.     Summary and implications for future productivity growth



       In Table 9 we draw together and compare the results from both stages of

our research. The left-hand column shows the total slowdown, in each country,

of the rate of growth of GDP per employed person. The second column shows the

change in net energy imports, and the third column (equal to col. 1 minus

col. 2) is the slowdown in the rate of growth of output per employed person,

the variable directly explained by both versions of our model of production.

The remaining columns then show how the two versions of the model explain the

declining rate of productivity growth.



       Figure 5 shows the implications of the catch-up model for the past and

future growth of the labour efficiency index in each of the seven countries,

based on purchasing-power-parity exchange rates and cyclically-adjusted labour

income from two alternative base years, 1970 and 1982 (5).         For reasons

explained below, we think that the current version of the catch-up model

overstates the degree of catch-up and hence understates future efficiency

growth in Japan and some of the other countries with high rates of growth of

constant Harrod-neutral technical progress in the Model I results reported in

Table 2.
                                      -23-




         Figure 6 shows the rates of utilization of employed factors, Q/QSV, for

both versions of the model. The catch-up model, by markedly slowing the

recent rates of growth of potential output for several countries, has the

effect of reducing the amount of underutilization at the end of the sample

period, and hence the size of future increases in output per employed person

as utilization rates eventually return to normal. We should emphasise that

QSV measures the level of output, at normal utilization rates, of employed

factors, and is not intended to measure what the economy could produce if

there were increases in employment or the capital stock. In general, anything

that increases Q/QSV, if it signals profitable future output, leads to

subsequent increases in investment and employment, and hence to increases in

QSV.



         By reducing the recent growth of QSV, and hence tilting the series for

Q/QSV and S/QSV, the catch-up model has the effect, for several countries, of

transferring much of the explanation of productivity slowdown from unexpected

changes in sales to unavoidable catch-up.          We turn now to a brief
country-by-country comparison of the results from the two versions of the

model.



           For the United States, the total decline to be explained is the

smallest, (1.87 per cent), and there is only one version of the model to be

consulted, since there was no evidence of slowdown beyond that which could be

explained by cyclical factors. More than three-quarters of the total was

explained by unexpected or temporary sales changes, with more than half of

that amount due (as shown in Table 5) to unexpectedly rapid (or temporary)

increases in sales up to 1973, illustrating once more the point that the

pre-1973 period was itself an abnormal one.      The remaining change in U.S.

productivity growth was due to increases in costs, offset slightly by a fall
                                        -24-




in the level of actual relative to desired inventories. Factor substitution

plays a relatively small aggregate role in the United States (as in France,

the United Kingdom and Canada) (6).



        The Japanese slowdown is the largest of all, (5.4 per cent) and is the

most affected by application of the catch-up model. In both versions of the

model, more than 2 per cent of the 5.4 per cent is due to factor substitution,

and this amount, as in the other countries, is not materially altered by the

choice between the two models. Application of the catch-up model cuts the

estimated impact of changes in unexpected sales from 3.2 per cent per year to

about 1.2 per cent per year, while changing the effect of the cost variable

much less, reducing its contribution from .34 per cent to .24 per cent. The

unexplained residual in the catch-up model is larger than in the initial

model, but is less than .2 per cent per year in either case, a very small

fraction of the total slowdown. Which set of results is more likely to be

correct? It is most important to answer this question for the Japanese case,

for here the gap between the two sets of results is largest.          We have

deliberately set up the two models so that they are likely to bracket the

right answer.       The first stage model understates the catch-up effect by

forcing it to be zero, while model II overstates it because of the
collinearity between the included catch-up variable and the excluded cyclical

variables in the estimated equations reported in Table 6. This is especially

likely to lead to an overstatement of the catch-up effect for Japan, where the

data period is several years shorter than for the other countries. Although

it is possible to try to identify more precisely the relative impacts of the

catch-up and cyclical variables, it will be difficult to do so with much

precision without application of cross-country restrictions in regressions

that   pool   time-series and cross-country data.
                                      -25-




         The German slowdown is of about average size (2.4 per cent), with about

one-third due to factor substitution. Germany is the only country for which

the profit squeeze was worse during the pre-1973 period than during the

subsequent one;     even though the unit cost ratio (relative to the output

price) rose after 1973 (as shown in Figure 3) it did so at a slower rate than

before, so that the cost factor reduced the slowdown by .1 per cent per

annum.    In   either model, the effects of unanticipated sales changes were

smaller in Germany than in any of the other countries.      In both models, the

unexplained residual is larger than in any of the other countries, and is

almost one-third of the total slowdown.



         The French slowdown of 2.2 per cent is explained in model I by sales

and profits, with the former three times as important as the latter. Model II

shifts 1.5 per cent of slowdown to the catch-up effect, drawing most of it

from the unexpected sales term, whose importance is cut by a factor of three.

The unexplained residuals are small for the two models.



         The United Kingdom slowdown was fairly large (2.6 per cent), but not

much affected by the choice between models. Sales changes remain the most

important determinant, and the catch-up effect is small.        This is to be
expected, as the U.K. had the slowest average productivity growth 1962-1973.



         Italy has a large slowdown (4.4 per cent), of which almost 2 per cent

is attributed to catch-up in model II. Factor substitution is responsible for

more than 1 per cent in both models, and most that is not due to catch-up or

factor substitution is traced to sales. Profits effects are about average,

and the residuals are small in both models.
                                     -26-




      Canada has a moderately large slowdown (2.5 per cent). The catch-up

effect is the smallest since it was estimated to have been largely complete by

the mid-l970s. The contribution from the profits variable is larger than for

any other country reflecting (as shown in Figure 3) the sharpest post-1973

rise in costs relative to output prices.



      What do the results suggest about the usefulness of our approach, and

about the prospects for future productivity growth? Our work is still

progressing, but thus far appears to confirm our view that it is practicable

and informative to analyse and make international comparisons of growth in

aggregate labour productivity in a way that consistently accounts for factor

substitution, factor utilization, and long-run increases in labour efficiency.



       In our modelling of production and productivity, we found substantial

effects from energy prices and from cyclical forces in all seven countries in

explaining the slowdown in productivity growth since 1973. These effects were

exaggerated by the fact that the pre-1973 and the post-1973 periods were both

unusual. Relative energy prices in all countries declined substantially prior

to 1973, causing energy to be substitued for other factors, and hence raising

the average rate of growth of output per employed person. After 1973, the

process was reversed, and caused the growth of output per employed person to

be substantially less than if energy prices had remained constant, or had

continued to fall as they had prior to 1973. Given the post-1973 rises in

energy prices, that part of the productivity slowdown due to substitution of

labour for energy represents an improvement in efficiency, since it is

required to produce any given level of output at least cost.   It is therefore

important   to separate these substitution effects when analysing and
forecasting the rate of increase in output per employed person. This factor
                                     -27-




substitution exaggerated the underlying rate of productivity growth before

1973, and reduced it afterwards; future relative energy price changes are

likely to be smaller and hence to produce intermediate results.



       The pre-1973 and post-1973 periods were also both abnormal with respect

to cyclical effects on output per employed person.           Profitability and

unexpected sales, especially the latter,        were on average adding to
utilization rates between 1962 and 1973 and reducing them between 1973 and

1982. Since 1982 was an abnormally bad year for profitability and sales in

most of the seven countries, eventual restoration of normal operating rates

(which may result from reduction in factor inputs as well as from increases in

output) will mean that increases in output per employed person will be

abnormally high during the adjustment period.



       Thus, both energy prices and cyclical factors caused the 1962 to 1973

growth of output per employed person to be unusually high and the 1973 to 1982

growth to be unusually low.   If real energy prices remain fairly constant over

the rest of the decade, then energy substitution is not likely to be very

important, although the full substitution effects of the pre-1982 energy price

increases are still being worked out.       Starting from 1982, the cyclical
effects on labour productivity are bound to be positive as normal utilization

rates are restored.    Putting cyclical and energy price effects together,

output per employed person is likely to rise faster than normal in all

countries over the next few years.



      But what is the normal rate of growth of productivity? This was the

key question addressed in the second stage of our research.       In the first

stage, we assumed a constant rate of increase in long-run labour efficiency.
                                     -28-




Two features of our results suggested further work.     First, we found large

 international differences in the average rate of Harrod-neutral technical

progress, being just above 1 per cent in the United States, Canada and the

United Kingdom, and above 3 per cent in Japan, Germany,     France   and Italy.

This led us to ask what caused those differences, and to question whether they

provided a useful basis for forecasts of the future growth of supply

potential. Second, we tested for evidence of decline in the growth rate of

the underlying rate of technical progress, and found it, even after adjusting

for factor substitution and cyclical factors, in most of the countries except

the United States and the United Kingdom.



       These results from the first stage of our research led us to develop

and integrate into our production model an international catch-up hypothesis

whereby all countries eventually converge to the U.S. rate of technical

progress, which itself is unaffected by the convergence process.        We are

considering extensions of this hypothesis where the convergence could be to

some rate other than that of the United States, with that central rate subject

to stochastic evolution rather than being fixed. Any extensions of this sort

would require that cyclical and factor substitution effects be taken into

account in the pooled regressions.



       We are also including the investment/capital ratio in the catch-up

equations to test the hypothesis that there is an important element of

capital-embodiment in harnessing the benefits of technical progress.        To

facilitate these extensions, we are planning to apply the model to a larger

group of OEGD countries. This will provide a stronger empirical base for

determining the appropriate split between cyclical and catch—up effects in the

explanation and projection of productivity trends.
                                     -29-




      The projections in Figure 5 of future growth in labour efficiency in

each country, based on the catch-up model, should be treated with caution as

the results of preliminary work. As we suggested above in our discussion of

the Japanese results, our current estimates of the catch-up effect are

probably biased upwards by correlation between the catch-up variable and

cyclical factors. Thus the most likely estimate of the future rate of growth

of labour efficiency in each country but the United States is probably more

than shown in Figure 5 but less than implied by the constant rates of Harrod

neutral technical progress reported in Table 2.   Further refinements are not

likely to alter our conclusion that it is difficult but important to consider

the evolution of aggregate technical progress within a model, such as the one

we have presented, which treats long-run technical progress consistently with

factor substitution and cyclical effects.



      We have so far found the framework useful for assessing and comparing

the proximate causes of the observed productivity slowdown.   It has permitted

the residual element to be sharply reduced, and provides a coherent aggregate

supply model that can, in the context of a more complete macroeconometric

model, be used to go behind the changes in profitability, sales, and factor

prices to provide a macroeconomic analysis of the underlying domestic and

international sources of the productivity slowdown.
                                        -30-




                                        NOTES




 *     We   are grateful for helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper

       presented at INSEAD (Fontainbleau), INSEE (Paris), the Seminaire

      d'conomie montaire internationale in Paris, the OECD, l'Université

      Libre de Bruxel].es and the Central Bank of Switzerland. This version

      also reflects helpful suggestions by our discussants and other

      participants in the Perugia meeting of the International Seminar on

      Macroeconomics. Any    opinions   expressed in this paper are those of the

      authors and do not necessarily represent the official view of the OECD.



(1)   For example, in none of the 16 OECD countries studied by Maddison

      (1982, page 96) was the average annual rate of growth of GDP per man

      hour in excess of 3 per cent in either of the 40-year periods prior to

      1950, and for the group of countries it averaged 1.6% annually from

      1870 to 191.3 and 1. 8% from 1913 to 1950.     By contrast, the growth of

      GDP per man-hour averaged 4.5 per cent annually for the group between

      1950 and 1973 and it exceeded 3.0% in 14 of the 16 countries.        From

      1973 to 1979, it grew much less rapidly than 1950-73 but at an average

      rate of 2.7%, and in most countries outside North America it grew by

      more than in either of the sub periods between 1870 and 1950.



(2)   The inputs of capital and labour have not yet been correspondingly

      adjusted to remove capital and labour employed in the production and

      distribution of energy.      Earlier applications of the framework to

      adjusted Canadian data have shown the employment adjustment to be small

      and without consequence.    The adjustment of the capital stock is large
                                    -31-




      in the Canadian case, and influences the results, since investment in

      energy was a significantly larger fraction of total investment in the

      1970s than in the 1960s.   The same is likely to be true for the United

      States and the United Kingdom.       Adjustment of capital stock data for

      the other countries in the big seven is less likely to influence the

      results significantly. Efforts to adjust the capital stock data for

      all seven countries are underway.



(3)   The recursive formulation requires an initial value for EV, provided by

      making it equal to E at the beginning of the data period.          Since

      relative energy prices were moving fairly smoothly and predictably in

      the early 1960s, this assumption of initial equilibrium is not likely

      to cause problems.



(4)   Marris (1982) also applies an implicit catch-up model to cross-section

      data for a number of OECD economies by explaining each country's

      1965-73        capita GDP growth rate by an equation that includes

      positive effects from export growth and the investment ratio, and a

      negative effect from the level of GDP         capita at the beginning of

      the period.      This formulation implies the implausible equilibrium

      property that productivity growth is approaching zero in all countries,

      including the United States. (It is, however, to be preferred in this

      respect to the quadratic trend model, which implies productivity

      changes eventually turning negative).       When used to attribute the

      reasons for the 1973-79 productivity slowdown, it therefore combines

      catch-up effects with a general slow-down, thus overstating the

      catch-up   effects.
                                   -32-




(5)   The efficiency indicators plotted in Figure 5 have been computed from

      national GDP figures in U.S.-$ purchasing power parities for 1970 aid

      1982 as published in OED (1984, p. 98). These output figures were

      first adjusted for deviations from normal factor utilisation rates

      (dividing them by QIQSV), then multiplied by the equilibrium labour

      share (1-a), and divided by the number of employed persons. The 1970

      figures were then expressed in 1982 prices. The resulting base year

      figures for 1970 and 1982 were multiplied by the base-year-compatible

      labour efficiency index computed in the second stage of our research.

      Level differences between the efficiency indicators based on 1970 and

      1982 U.S.-$ purchasing power parities are due to terms-of-trade changes

      as well as to changes in inter-country differences in capital and other

      resource endowments per employed person.        The country ordering

      according to labour efficiency levels in 1973 implicit in Figure 5

      corresponds closely to a country ordering according to total factor

      productivity levels in an earlier study by Christensen et al (1980).

      Level differences in labour efficiency between the U.S. and other

      countries are, however, much bigger in our study compared to
      Christensen et al, mainly because the latter adjust their productivity

      measure also for hours worked and labour quality.



(6)   At least in part this is because the energy capital stock data are not

      yet available to permit their exclusion from the total capital stock.

      Experiments with the Canadian data, where this adjustment has been made

      for other work, show that the effect can be important.
                                             -33-


                                             Annex




                           INITIAL NESTED PRODUCFION SThJJCTURE



        This structure        features a Cobb-Douglas outer function, constant

Harrod-neutral technical progress, and           a vintage   CES   inner function for the
capital/energy     bundle.



A)      The Cobb-Douglas outer function



QSV =   A.KEVa.(pI.NE)l-a                                                             (1)




where QSV =      potential   output at normal rates of factor utilisation

        A =      scale   factor

        KEV =    vintage   capital-energy bundle (see below)

        a    =   non-labour   share in gross output

        P1 = labour       efficiency index

        NE =     total   employment.



        The factor share a was computed as the average non-labour income share

in gross output (including net energy imports), excluding the imputed labour

income of the self employed members of the labour force.



        The measured labour efficiency index, PIM, which includes cyclical

effects, was obtained by inverting equation (1) after substituting actual

output (Q)   for   potential output (QSV):
                                               -34-




      =   (Q,(KEVa))1/(l-a),NE                                                     (2)




           The efficiency bundle PIN was used as the dependent variable for
estimation of the rate of Harrod neutral technical progress as well as for the

various tests of the time invariance of the rate of technical progress and the

catch-up hypothesis. The scale parameter A is determined by normalising the

calculated efficiency index P1 to have the value 1.0 in 1971.



B)         The Inner CES function.



           The inner function which bundles energy and capital has the form:



KEV =     KEV(-l).(l-Rl-RSC)     +   [I+Rl.KNE(-])j   .   [b+c(c.PK/(b.PE))S]S1)
(3)



where KEV = vintage capital-energy bundle

           Ri =    retrofitting   parameter
          RSC = scrapping rate

           I   =   gross   fixed investment

          KNE = gross fixed capital stock

          PK = user    cost of capital

          PE = energy      price applicable to final user

          b,c =    distribution   parameters in the inner CES function

          s    =
                   elasticity   of substitution between energy and capital.



           In this equation the gross capital stock (KNE), energy consumption (E),

gross investment (I), the energy price (PE) and the scrapping rate (RSC) are

observed variables.
                                        -35-




         The user cost of capital PK is computed as



PK = PIB(RSC   + RHOR)                                                     (4)




         where PIB is the (observed) investment good deflator and R!iDR (the

long-term supply price of capital) was defined as a constant, with a value

such that on average total factor earnings exhaust total output over the

sample period.



         Assuming that the energy/capital ratio (EN) is optimal (subject to

prevailing relative prices PE/PK) on average over the sample period implies

that



  c/b = (MEAN(EK)/MEAN    [(PK/PE)])"                                      (5)




        which allows direct computation of c/b from observed variables for any

given value of s, the elasticity of substitution between capital and energy.

Thereafter b can be computed from



  b =   l/(l+(c/b)S   11EAN ((PE/PK))                                      (6)




        The elasticity of substitution Cs) and the retrofitting parameter (Ri)

are determined by estimating the energy demand function



  in(E) =   ln(EV)                                                         (7)




        where EV is the vintage energy requirement needed to operate the

capital stock KNE subject to prevailing relative energy prices PE/PK. EV is

defined by the recursive equation
                                          -36-



  EV =   EV(-l).(l-Rl-Rsc)   +   (I+Rl.K(_l)).((cpK)/(b.,pE))S             (8)



         To obtain a starting value, EV is set equal to E at the beginning of

the sample period, on the assumption that no large and surprising changes in

energy prices have occurred over the preceding few years.



         The parameter pair Cs, Ri) which maximised the likelihood function of

regression (7) was chosen as the preferred parameter combination) and results

for this double grid search as well as other relevant production function

parameters are depicted in Table 2 in the main text. The estimated values for

the capital/energy ratios, KNE/EV, are plotted in figure 1 along with the

actual ratios, KNE/E, and the relative price ratios.
5472E
                                               Table 1: bangQs    mO       tjactor Tnpits and Factor costs
                                                              (Average annual rates, per cent)



                           Real CUP          Output (Q)     Fixed         Final       Fixed capital      Final energy   Units of capital!     Labour coSt
                                                           Capital      Energy uct     per unit of      price relative    energy bundle   rel ative to price
                 Per capita   Per employed                                           final energy use   to user cost of                   of capital/energy
                                                                                                                          per employed
                                 person                (Per employed   person)                             capital           person             bundle


United States
     1962-1973      2.92              2.00      2.03           1.55          2.46            —0.91          -1.00              1.43               2.26
     1973-1982      0.87              0.19      0.15           1.46         -1.46             2.92           7.04              1.19              —1.16

Japan
     1967-1973      7.70              7.99      8.19           9.22          8.69             0.53          -1.98              9.87              10,73
     1973-1982      2.70              2.89      2.82           5.86         -0.32             6.18           9.12              4.38               3.21

Germany
     1962-1973      3.50              4.20      4.40           5.14          6.73            -1.59         -0.98               5.18               4.93
     1973-1982      1.70              2.17      2.00           3.99          0.75             3.24          4.83               3.42               0.95

France
     1962-1973      4.39              1.55      4.56          2.88           7.23            -4.35         -1.26               2.97               5.15
     1973-1982      1.95              2.10      2.35          3.66           0.28             3.39          6.87               3.29               2.33

United Kingdom
     1962-1973      2.80              3.07      3.19          3.61           3.65            -0.04         -2.12               3.75               3.10
     1973-1982      0.65              1.33      0.55          3,32           0.18             3.15          4.75               2.95               0.88


     1962-1973      4.06              5.38      5.42          5.26           8.40            -3.14         -2.93               5.44               5,73
     1973-1982      1.59              1.27      1.00          2.43          0.23              2.20          5.12               2.22              -0.10
Canada
     1962-1973      4.01              2.66      2.57          1.65          3.88             -2.22         -2.18               1.82               3.06
     1973-1982      0.85              0.02      0.05          2.56          0.40              2.17          5.05               2.33               0.14
5472E

                                     Table 2

                    FRODUCFION FUNCTION PARAMETER VALUES




Country          Rate of Harrod-     Retrofitting   Elasticity             capital
                 neutral technical    parameter     substituti on   plus energy
                                         Ri               s              a
                  progress




                       0.012             0.18            0.60            0.36
United States
                       0. 034            0. 65           0. 92           0. 38
Japan
                       0.030             0.05            0.95            0.41
Germany
                       0.042             0.05            0.95            0.41
France
                       0.010             0.95            0.70            0.38
United Kingdom
                       0.034             0. 18           0.95            0.35
Italy
                       0.015             0.20            0.88            0.40
Canada
5472E




                                         Table 3



         TD.tkTE) HPLOff'F EFFECT OF ACTUAL QWGE IN EC FRICES (a)




                                                    Contributions of energy price
                                                    changes to the reduction in the
                                                    grcth of normal output per
                                                              employee

                            Cumulated   effect

Country                  1962-1973      1973-1982          Per cent per annum
                                                    •




United States              -0.50           3.10                    0.39

Japan                      -1. 48*         5. 30                   0. 84


Germany                    -0.58           2.33                    0.31

France                     -0.67           2.98                    0.39
United Kingdom             -1.37           2.53                    0.40
Italy                      -1.7]           2.40                    0.42
Canada                     -1.10           2.07                    0.33


* 1965 1973

(a)      Assuming full adjustment of both capital and labour to optimal levels.
         and using Cobb Douglas outer functions and the CES inner function
          elasticities   of substitution shn in Table 2.
5472E
                                              Table
                                                 4
                                     OUTPJT EQJAT IONS        I
Equation specification:

         Ui(Q/QSV)        ao+ai LN((X)   • a U(S/QSV)         + a3 IN(KIB(-J)/QSV)

Where Q            = GP plus net energy imports (at constant prices).
              •
                   = Cnput with employed factors used at normal utilisation
                 rates. (with Harrod-neutral technical progress occuring at a
                 constant rate).
               = Unit cost (including normal returns to capital) relative to
                 the output price.
       S       = Fins) sales (excluding inventory change) (at constant prices).
       XIB(-l) = Inventory stock level, beginning of period.
Estimation technique    Two Stage Least Squares.


                       Es timated coefficients                    Estim-        Regression
                          Ct statistics)                          ation         Statistics
Country           a0          ai          a           a (I)       Period   R2                SEE


United       -0.148         -0.170     0.951          -0.07       62-82    0.987     1.85    0.0031
States     (-92.0)        (-17.7)    (32.9)

Japan        -0.148         -0.242       0.900        -0.07       67-82    0.965     1.10    0.0076
           (-35.1)         (-8.0)    (17.0)

Germany       -0.203        -0.345        0.687       -0.07       62-82    0.590     0.6)    0.0180
             (-9.9)        (-3.86)       (5.42)

France        -0.242        -0.292        0.94)       -0.07       62-82    0.978     1.74    0.0065
            (-52.6)       (-14.8)    (29.6)

United        -0.256        -0.319        1.166       -0.07       62-82    0.799     1.11    0.0154
}ingdom     (-13.3)        (-7.7)        (9.0)

Italy         -0.195        -0.165        0.804       -0.07       62-82    0.957     1.25 0.0)08
            (-32.3)        (-7.36)    (]9.2)
Canada        -0.231        -0.256        0.627       -0.07       62-82    0.983     1.78 0.0052
            (-47.1)       (-22.1)     (27.0)


          The coefficient for the inventory variable (KIB(-fl/QSV) is                not well
          determined statistically in the Q/V regressions except in                  the case of
          the United States. Given the importance of this coefficient for the
          dynamic behaviour of a complete model in which the Q/(V equation is
          imbedded. an intermediate value of --0.07 for a. falling between the
          estimates obtained for the two alternative U.S. equations reported in
          Tables 4 and 7, was imposed on all countries.
5472F.

                                   Table 5: Factors contributing to changes in output per employed person

                                  (Based on Harrod     neutral technicalprogress proceeding at a constant rate)
                                                           (Average annual rate, per cent)




                                                            Cyclical factors influencing Q/QSV

                     Change in    Change in      Unanticipated              Unit costs relative to    Ratio of desired over
                       nonnal      rate of       (or temporary)                 output prices          actual inventories        Unexplained
                                                changes in sales                                                                   Residual
                     output per    capacity
                      employed    utilisat-                                                                                         Change
                       person       ion                                                                                            in Q/QSV
                                  (Q/QSV)      Change       Contribution    Change    Contribution    Change      Contribution
                     (QSV/NE)
                                                 in         to change in      in      to change in      in        to change in
                                              Variable          Q/QSV      Variable     Q/V          Variable       Q/QSV
Country/period




United States
       1962-1973        1.29        0.74        0.89            0.85         0.19        -0.03          0.95          -0.07             0.01
       1973-1982        1.20       -1.05       -0.67           -0.64         2.15        -0.37         -0.38           0.03            -0.07

Japan                                                                                                   1.95          -0.14            -0.06
         1967-1973      5.95        2.24        2.72            2.45         0.04        —0.01
         1973-1982      3.88       -1.06       -0.90           -0.82         1.45        -0.35         -1.12           0.08             0.03
tnnany
         1962-1973      3.87        0.54        0.97            0.67         1.22        -0.42          1.18          -0.08             0.37
         1973-1982      3.16       -1.15       -0.42           -0.28         0.64        -0.27          0.09          -0.01            -0.59
France
         1962-1973      3.69        0.87        1.59            1.50        -0.07         0.02          8.12          -0.57            -0.08
         1973-1982      3.81       -1.41       -0.79           -0.74         2.47        -0.72          1.18          -0.08             0.13

United KinQdom
         1962-1973      2.06        1.13        1.32            1.54         1.25        -0.40          0.48          -0.03             0.02
         1973-1982      1.75       -1.20       -0.21           -0.24         2.01        -0.64          0.26          -0.02            —0.30


Italy
         1962-1973      4.08        1.34        1.82            1.46         0.70        -0.12         -0.05          .0.00            -0.00
         1973-1982      2.96       —1.96       -1.51           -1.21         3.02        -0.50          2.88          -0.20            —0.05

Canada
         1962-1973      1.61        0.96        1.58            1.04         0.08        -0.02          0.07          -0.01            -0.05
         1973-1982      1.81       -1.76       -1.41           -0.93         3.71        -0.93         -0.62           0.04             0.06
 5472E
                                                                                                       Table   6

                                              Estimation Results for Mternative Non-constant Technical
                                                                                                       Progress Specification
                                                                (assuming Harrod-nmtra1 technical progress)

                                                                                           Estimated Equations (1961-1982)
     1)   quadratic      time   trend:             LN(P1/PI(-1))      —         +           TINE
                                                                           a0          a
ii)       catch-up hypothesis        :   a) LN(PI/PT(-l))            — a0      +   aj LN(PIUS/PT(-1))          (synthetic    t-PI)
                                         b)    LN(PT/P1(-ll)         —
                                                                          a0   • ai        LN(PINUS/P1(-1)) (measured J-PJ)


                                              aj (quadratic         time   trend)                                      aj(PTIIS)                         aj(PTMtJS)
Country
                                         Constrained                      Unconstrained                   Constrained              Unconstrained     Constrained      Unconstrained



Cr.ny                                     -0.00287                             -0.00190                        0.1131                 0.0945           0.1406            0.1219
                                               (       65)                         (   2.0)                     (6.0)                  (2.0)            (7.7)             (2.8)
France                                    -0.00287                             -0.00345                        0.1131                 0.0985          0.1406            0.1052
                                            ( 11.3)                              (-6.2)                         (10.0)                 (6.0)            (11.8)            (6.7)
United      P1ngdom                      -0.00287                              -0.00180                        0.1131                 0.1393          0.1406            0.4247
                                              ( 6.3)                             (-1.8)                         (5.6)                  (1.2)            (7.1)             (3.0)

Italy                                    -0.00287                              -0.00393                        0.1131                 0.1416          0.1406            0.1663
                                              (-4.8)                             (-3.0)                         (4.4)                  (3.2)           (5.7)             (3.8)
Canada                                   -0.00287                              -0.00326                        0.1131                 0.1099          0.1406            0.3865
                                           (-7.6)                                (-3.9)                         (5.5)                  (1.1)           (7.3)             (3.8)

System R2                                 0.597                                 0.720                          0.569                  0.654           0.599             0.828
0112 (9. F. )                              20, 007           (1)                   27. 984 (5)                  18.537 (1)             23. 372 (5)     20. 085 (1)       38. 761 (5

Japan (a)                                     n    a.                          -0.00505                         n.a.                  0.236            n.a.             0.194
                                                                                 (-2.3)                                                (3.9)                             (3.5)
R2                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                0. 23                                                 0.49               -              0.43

F-stat.      (1   1'l)                             .                            5.45                               -                                     —
                                                                                                                                     15.29                             12.1



(a) Fctimntrti        s'pnrat1y hc-rmcr nf                   chnrirr snmplf'        perioi (lt)67 1)R2).
5472E
                                                 Table   7


                                        OUTRJT EQJATIONS II

Equation specification:

IN(Q/QSV.W)       a0+aj LN(C) +          a   U4(S/QSV.OJ) + a3 I1(KIB(-))/QSV.OJ)

Where: Q                G)P plus net energy imports (at constant prices).
         (V.W     =     Citput with employed factors used at normal utilisation
                   rates.
                   (with Harrod-nitral technical progress occuring at a
                   decelerating rate).
                 = Unit cost (including normal returns to capita)) relative                    to
                   the output price
         S       = Final sales (excluding inventory change) (at constant
                   prices)
         KIB(-]) = Inventory stock level, beginning of period.
Estimation   Technique: Two           Stage Least Square.

                    Es timated coefficients                       Estim-         Regression
                        (t   statistics)                          ation          Statistics
Country        a0               a1           a           a3 (1)   Period    R2                sa

Japan         -0.343          -0.172         0.808       -0.07    67-82    0.950    1.12   0.0056
            (-42.5)          (-7.2)      (16.8)

Germany       -0.182          -0. 203      0.546         -0.07    62-82    0.767    1.06      0.01]3
            (-15.3)          (-3.3)       (7.3)

France        -0.232       -0.234          0.864         -0.07    62-82    0.982    2.06      0.0044
            (-51.7)      (-10.1)         (26.8)

United        -0.267       -0.314            1.244       -0.07    62-82    0.833    1.2)      0.0)52
Kingdom     (-30.7)      (-10.0)          (7.3

Italy         -0.178          -0.103       0.651         -0.07    62-82    0.835    1.5)      0.01)0
            (-20.3)          (-4.2)       (9.6)

Canada        -0. 224         -0. 254        0.596       -0.07    62-82    0.983    2.02      0.0049
            (45.4)       (-23.3)         (25.5)


1.        The coefficient for the inventory variable (KIB(-i)/QSV) is not well
          determined statistically in the Q/V regressions except in the case of
          the United States. Given the importance of this coefficient for the
          dynamic behaviour of a complete model in which the Q/V equation is
          imbedded. an intermediate value of -0.07 for a. falling between the
          estimates obtained for the two alternative U.S. equations reported in
          Tables 4 and 7, was imposed on all countries.
5472E
                                              Table 8: Factors contributing to changes in output per employed          person
                                           (Based on Harrod-neutral     technical progress proceeding at   a   decelerating rate)
                                                                      (Average annual rate, per cent)


                                                                                          Cyclical factors influencing Q/QSV.QJ

                Change in                                Change in       Unanticipated              Unit costs relative to       Ratio of desired over
                  normal                                  rate of        (or temporary)                  output   prices            actual inventories
                               Of which due                                                                                                                   Unexplained
                output per                       to:      capacity       changes in sales                                                                      Residual
                 employed                                utilisat-                                                                                                 Change
                  person     Growth   of                   ion                                                                                                in   Q/(V.J
                (V.wi4E)      labour          Factor     (Q/QSV.QJ)    Change        Contribution Change   Contribution         Change         Contribution
Country!                     efficiency       substit-                   in          to change in     in   to change in              in        to change in
  period                       (a)             ution                  Variable         Q/QSV.OJ   Variable   Q/QSV.clJ          Variable         QIQSV.OJ


Japan
    1967-1973       6.96        3.29            3.67        1.23         1.68               1.36      0.04          -0.01            0.93          -0.06           -0.06
    1973-1982       2.78        1.13            1.65        0.04         0.20               0.16      1.44          -0.25           -0.03           0.00            0.13
Germany
    1962-1973       4.08        2.01            2.07         0.32        0.74               0.41      1.22          -0.25            0.95          -0.07            0.23
    1973-1982       2.57        1.19            1.38        -0.57        0.16               0.09      0.64          -0.13            0.68          -0.05           -0.48
France
    1962-1973       4.24        3.07            1.17         0.31        1.02               0.88     -0.07           0.02            7.25          -0.51           -0.08
    1973-1982       2.87        1.53            1.34        -0.46        0.16               0.14      2.44          -0.52            2.12          -0.15            0.07

United Kingdom
    1962-1973       2.51        1.07            1.44         0.68        0.86               1.07      1.24          -0.39            0.04          -0.00            0.00
    1973-1982       1.95        0.82            1.13        -1.40       -0.41              -0.50      1.99          -0.63            0.07          -0.00           -0.27

Italy
    1962-1973       5.00        3.16            1.84         0.42        0.88               0.57      0.70          -0.07           -0.97          0.07            -0.15
    1973-1982       1.97        1.21            0.76        -0.97       -0.53              -0.34      2.98          -0.31            3.83          -0.27           -0.05

Canada
    1962-1973       1.73        1.01            0.72         0.84        1.45               0.86      0.08          -0.02           -0.04          0.00             0.00
    1973-1982       1.74        0.82            0.92        -1.69       -1.34              -0.80      3.65          -0.93           -0.55          0.04             0.00



(a) Figures shown are computed as the average annual growth rate of the labour efficiency index (over the period specified) multiplied by the
                                                                                                                                  units in the
                                                                                                                                            efficiency
    equilibrium labour income share (1-a). This implies that labour input and cost are defined in natural rather than
    analysis of inter-factor substitution. Defining labour input and cost in efficiency units would result in allocating all of the labour
    efficiency growth to Column 2, reducing the figures in Column 3 correspondingly.
    5472E

                        Table 9:     Alternative                        of the slow-down
                                                    exnations                                   of thjrowthof lahoiproductivIty between               1962-73 and 1973-82

                                                    MT    :   Model I with technical progress at country specific constant rates.
                                                    MU    :   Model    II
                                                                       with technical progress at converging rates.


                   Total                                                                        Of which due     to
                    slow         ________
                   down
                  In the     Change In ____                                                              In gross
                                                                                                (hange                outpuUw,r.lyedperson
                  average     Relative
                  annual     Net Fiierg Total
                  rate of               slow-
                                                     ____________________________                         lixplainedhy:
                              Imports
                  growth                    (lown  change in growth of normal output per
                  of GDP                     in                                                                        _______________ Qige         in   rate of capacity utilisatlon
                                                               employed person
                                            annual ___________________________________-
                                                                                                                                              Explained by
                 employed                   growtl
                  person                     of     Total       Explained                                   Total
                                                                                        -                              Unanticipated Changes In unit Changes   ratioin Ilnexplalnel
                                            Q/NE            Change              Thrtor
                                                                                in groh                                 Changes in cost/price ratio of desired to   Residual Change
                                                               of lahxir      Substitution                               Sales                      actual lnventorIe      In Q/QSV
                                                                        efficiency
                                                     MI       Mu            MI   MI!       Ml      MI!    Ml     MI!    MI     MI!    MI      Mu             MI      MI!     MI          MU
United
    States         1.81          -0.06      1.87     0.08          -         0    -       0.08     -              -             -               -                    -
                                                                                                          1.79          1.48          0.33                  0.10             0.08         -
JapanA             5.10          -0.27      5.37     2.07      4.11          0   2.16     2.07 2.02       3.30 1.1!     3.24 1.20     0.34    0.24         -0.21   -0.07    -0.07       -0.18

Germany            2.03          -0.37      2.40     0.71      1.51          0   0.82     0.71    0.69    1.69 0.8!     0.95   0.32   -0.20   -0.12        -0.08   -0.02     1.02       0.70
France             2.15          -.0.00     2.15     0.13      1.38          0   1.54   -0.13 -0.16 2.28 0.7            2.23 0,75     0.73    0.54         -0.46 -0.36       .0.22   -0.16
United
    Kingdo.n       1.74          -0.90      2.64     0.31      0.56         0    0.25     0.31    0.31    2.33 2.01     1.77   1.58   0.24    0.23         -0.02   0.00      0.34       0.27

Italy              4.11          -0.31      4.42     1.12      3.03         0    1.95     1.12    1.08 3.30 1.3!        2.67   0.92   0.38    0.24          0.20   0.34      0.05    -0.11
Canada             2.64           0.12      2.52    .0.20 -0.01             0    0.19   -0,20 -0.20       2.72 2.5:     1.87   1.66   0.91    0.91         -0.05   -0.04    -0.01    -0.00



*     First    period   covers   1967 to 1973 only.
                   Figure 1 PRICE AND FACTOR RATIOS FOR CAPITAL AND ENERGY
200 — ________________________ __________________

              UNITED STATES
180


160
                                                                   PE/PK




        -____
140 —                                                              KNE/E

120                                                .y   •...... KNE/EV

100


 80                                     111111111
       1960 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82
240                                                                                               160

LL V
                                                                                                  150

200
                                                                                                  140
180
                                                                                                  130
160
                                                                                                  120
140

                                                                                                  110
120

100                                                                                               100

 80                                                                                               90
       1965   67   69   71    73   75    77   79   81   1960 62 64 66 68   70 72 74 76 78 80 82
160                                                                                               160


150                                                                                               150

140                                                                                               140

130                                                                                               130

120                                                                                               120

110                                                                                               110

100                                                                                               100

 90                                                                                               90

200                                                                                               160


180                                                                                               150


                                                                                                  140
160

                                                                                                  130
140
                                                                                                  120

120
                                                                                                  110

100
                                                                                                  100

 80                                                                                               90

       1960 62 64 66    68 70 72 14 76 78 80 82         1960 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82
                                       Figure 2    RATIO OF SALES TO NORMAL OUTPUT

1.32                                                                                                                            1.32


1.30                                                                                                                            1.30


1.28                                                                                                                            1.28


1.26                                                                                                                            1.26


1.24                                                                                                                            1.24
                             CANADA
1.22                                                                                                                            1.22


1.20                                                                                                                            1.20


1.18                                                                                                                            1.18

1.16                                                                                                                            1.16


1.14                                                                                                                            1.14


1.12                                                                                                                            1.12


1.10                                                                                                                            1.10


1.08                                                                                                                            1.08


1.08                                                                                                                            1.06


1.04                                                                                                                            1.04
                                                                                       UNITED STATES
1JQ                                                                                                                             1.02


1.00                                                                                                                            1.00

0.98                                                                                                                            0.98


0.96                                                                                                                            0.96


0.94                                                                                                                            0.94


       1961   62   63   64   65   66    67    68    69   70   71   72   73   74   75    76    77       78   79   80   81   82
                                             Figure 3       RATIO OF UNIT COSTS TO OUTPUT PRICE

1.35                                                                                                                                        1.35



1.30                                                                                                                                        1.30



1.25                                                                                                                                        1.25



1.20                                                                                                                                        1.20



1.15                                                                                                                                        1.15



1.10                                                                                                                                        1.10



1.05                                                                                                                                        1.05
                                             GERMANY
              UNITED STATES

1.00                                                                                                                                        1.00



                                                                                                CANADA
0.95                                                                                                                                        0.95



0.90                                                                                                                                        0.90




0.85                                                                                                                                        0.85



0.80                                                                                                                                        0.80
       1960      61   62      63   64   65      66     67    68   69   70   71   72   73   74     75     76   77   78   79   80   81   82
                                     Figure 4   RATIO OF INVENTORIES TO NORMAL OUTPUT

0.32                                                                                                                        0.32



0.30
                                                                                                                            0.30
                               UNITED KINGDOM


0.28                                                                                                                        0.28


0.26                                                                                                                        0.26



0.24                                                                                                                        0.24



0.22                                                                                                                        0.22


                                                                                             CANADA
0.20                                                                                                                        0.20
                     UNITED STATES


0.18                                                                                                                        0.18



0.16                                                                                                                        0.16



0.14                                                                                                                        0.14



0.12                                                                                                                        0.12



•0.10                                                                                                                       0.10



0.08                                                                                                                        0.08
        1961   62   63   64    65    66   67    68   69   70   71   72   73   74   75   76    77   78   79   80   81   82
                             -37-




                         B IBLIOGRAPHY




Berndt,   E.R.,, and D.O. Wood, 1979, Engineering and econometric

interpretations of energy-capital complementarity, American Economic

Review 69, 342-354



Bruno, M., 1982, World shocks, macroeconomic response, and the
productivity puzzle, in R.C.O. Matthews, ed. Slower Growth in the

Western World (Heinemann, London), 83-104.



Bruno, M., 1984, Raw materials, profits, and the productivity slowdown,

The Quarterly Journal of Economics 49, 1-29.



Christensen, L.R., D. Cummings, and D.W. Jorgenson, 1981, Relative

productivity levels, 1947-1973: An international comparison, European

Economic Review 16, 61-94.



Denison, EF., 1983, The interruption of productivity growth in the

United States, The Economic Journal 93, 56-77.



Giersch, H., and F. Wolter, 1983, Towards an Explanation of the

Productivity Slowdown, The Economic Journal 93, 35-55.



Helliwell, J. F., 1984, Stagflation and productivity decline in Canada,

1974-82, Canadian Journal of Economics 17, 191-216.
                               -38-




Helliwell, J.F., P.H. Sturm and G. Salou, 1984, Modelling Aggregate

Supply:    Empirical Estimates for the Seven Largest OEO Economies,

unpublished manuscript, (OEcD, Paris).



Helliwell, J. F., R.N. McRae, P. Boothe, A. Hansson, M. Margolick,

T. Padmore., A. Plourde, and R.   Pluinmer, 1984,   Energy and the national

economy: An overview of the MACE model, in A. D. Scott, ed., Progress

in Natural Resource Economics (Oxford University Press, Oxford).



Kouri, J.K. Pentti, J.B. de Macedo, A.J. Viscio, Profitability,
employment and structural adjustment in France, Annales de PINSEE No.

47-48, juillet-decembre 1982, 85-115.



Lindbeck, A., 1983, The recent slowdown of productivity growth, The

Economic Journal 93, 13-34.



Maddison, A., 1982, Phases of Capitalist Development (Oxford University

Press, Oxford).



Harris, R., 1982, How much of the slow-down was catch-up? in
R.C.O. Matthews, ed., Slower Growth in the Western World (Heinemann,

London), 128-144.



Mohr, M.   F.,    1980, The long-term structure of production, factor

demand, and factor productivity in U.S. manufacturing industries, in

J.W. Kendrick and B.N. Vaccara, eds., New Developments in Productivity

Measurement and Analysis (University of Chicago, Chicago IL), 137-229
                              -39-




Nelson, R. R., 1981, Research on Productivity growth and   productivity
differences   :   Dead ends and new departures, Journal of Economic

Literature, 19, September 1981, 1029-1064.



Nordhaus, W.D., 1982, Economic policy in the face of declining

productivity growth, European Economic Review, 19, Hay/June 1982,
131-157.




OEGD, 1984, National Accounts 1953-1982 (Paris).



Sylos-Labini, P., 1984, Factors affecting changes in productivity,
Journal of Post Keynesian Economics 6, 161-179.
