                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     INVENTORIES, MARKUPS, AND REAL RIGIDITIES IN MENU COST MODELS

                                          Oleksiy Kryvtsov
                                          Virgiliu Midrigan

                                        Working Paper 14651
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14651


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2009




We thank George Alessandria, Mike Dotsey, Mark Getler, Boyan Jovanovic, James Kahn and Huntley
Schaller for useful discussions, as well as seminar participants at the NBER-SITE\ Price Dynamics
Conference at Stanford, Duke Macroeconomics Jamboree, Universite du Quebec a Montreal, Universite
de Montreal, Universite Laval, University of Western Ontario, Chicago GSB, Federal Reserve Board,
the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Philadelphia, Richmond and St. Louis, as well as at the Bank
of Canada. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the Bank of Canada or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Oleksiy Kryvtsov and Virgiliu Midrigan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Inventories, Markups, and Real Rigidities in Menu Cost Models
Oleksiy Kryvtsov and Virgiliu Midrigan
NBER Working Paper No. 14651
January 2009
JEL No. E31,E32

                                              ABSTRACT

Real rigidities that limit the responsiveness of real marginal cost to output are a key ingredient of sticky
price models necessary to account for the dynamics of output and inflation. We argue here, in the spirit
of Bils and Kahn (2000), that the behavior of marginal cost over the cycle is directly related to that
of inventories, data on which is readily available. We study a menu cost economy in which firms hold
inventories in order to avoid stockouts and to economize on fixed ordering costs. We find that, for
low rates of depreciation similar to those in the data, inventories are highly sensitive to changes in
the cost of holding and acquiring them over the cycle. This implies that the model requires an elasticity
of real marginal cost to output approximately equal to the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution in order to account for the countercyclical inventory-to-sales ratio in the data. Stronger
real rigidities lower the cost of acquiring and holding inventories during booms and counterfactually
predict a procyclical inventory-to-sales ratio.


Oleksiy Kryvtsov
Bank of Canada
Research Department
234 Wellington Street
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0G9
Canada
okryvtsov@bankofcanada.ca

Virgiliu Midrigan
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th St.
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
virgiliu.midrigan@nyu.edu
1. Introduction
       Real rigidities, that is, factors that dampen the responsiveness of firms’ desired prices
to aggregate shocks, are key ingredients in New Keynesian sticky price models necessary to
account for the inertia of aggregate prices, inflation and output in the data with the fairly
rapid rate at which individual price setters update their nominal prices (once every two to
three quarters)1 .
       Two classes of models with real rigidities have received attention in recent work2 .
The first class is characterized by a set of assumptions on preferences (non-constant demand
elasticities) or technology (decreasing returns to scale) that make it costly for firms to allow
their prices to deviate too far away from those of their competitors. These assumptions
generate a complementarity in firms’ pricing so that firms that reset their nominal prices find
it optimal to not fully respond to an aggregate monetary shock3 . Although measuring price
elasticities or returns to scale in the production function is the subject of ongoing research, a
number of recent papers have argued that simple versions of models that feature these types
of pricing complementarities are difficult to reconcile with the observed dispersion of relative
prices, even in very narrowly defined product groups within outlets4 .
       In this paper we focus on a second class of models with real rigidities in which inertia
in aggregate prices and output is driven by factors that reduce the responsiveness of real
marginal cost at the aggregate level to business cycle fluctuations. In this second class of
models researchers make assumptions on preferences, the degree to which factor utilization
can vary, or frictions in the labor and intermediate inputs market that make it optimal for
firms to incompletely adjust their prices in response to a monetary shock5 . Effectively, this
second class of models is a set of assumptions about aggregate quantities, that is, about the
firms’ collective ability to hire additional labor during booms (labor supply elasticity), hoard
labor during recessions, purchase additional intermediate inputs, or vary the degree to which
they utilize the existing stock of capital and labor. Moreover, even when real rigidities take
the form of sticky wages or intermediate goods’ prices, an important assumption made is that

  1
     Bils and Klenow (2004), Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008), Nakamura and Steinsson (2008).
  2
     Ball and Romer (1990) have originally suggested this classification.
   3
     Several well-known contributions include Kimball (1995), Eichenbaum and Fisher (2004), Altig, Chris-
tiano, Eichenbaum and Linde (2004).
   4
     Klenow and Willis (2006), Dotsey and King (2005), Burstein and Hellwig (2007).
   5
     Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000), Dotsey and King (2002), Christiano, Eichanbaum and Evans (2002),
Nakamura and Steinsson (2007).


                                                   1
these prices are allocative and quantities are demand-determined. Thus, the assumption that
factor inputs can be relatively flexibly varied over the cycle is a key feature in this second class
of models. Indeed, Dotsey and King (2005) use the term “real flexibilities” to characterize
this class of models.
       Inferring the elasticity of real marginal cost to output, a key measure of the strength
of real rigidities in this second class of models, is difficult in practice. In particular, one must
take a stand on the technology with which goods are produced, the relative importance of
factor adjustment costs, the degree to which prices in long-term relationships are allocative6 ,
the cost of varying the work-week of capital and labor, as well as the degree of frictions in
the labor and intermediate goods markets7 .
       In this paper we use the insights of Bils and Kahn (2000), who relate the behavior
of inventories to that of costs, in order to study the implications of models of this second
class of real rigidities for the behavior of inventories. If the marginal cost of acquiring and
holding inventories is indeed lower in times of a monetary expansion, as in this second class
of models of real rigidities, we should see this lower cost reflected not only in a slow response
of prices to the monetary expansion, but also in an increase in firms’ inventory holdings.
Moreover, since the firm’s price reflects its shadow valuation of inventories, an increase in
the stock of inventories is necessary for the firm to find it optimal keep its price low. Thus,
for storable goods, real rigidities that dampen the elasticity of marginal cost to output must
operate through increases in the stock of inventories. If the firm is unable to purchase more
inventories, either because of quantity restrictions by suppliers, or because of other costs of
adjusting the stock of inventories, the relatively lower factor prices do not translate into a
lower shadow valuation of inventories, and the firm finds it optimal to change its price fully
in response to the monetary shock. Therefore we argue that a key empirical test of this class
of models is their ability to account for the observed behavior of inventories.
       We start by documenting that monetary expansions and business cycles in general
are associated with increases in the stock of inventories and declines in the inventory-sales
ratio: the elasticity of inventory-sales ratios to sales is equal to -0.8. This is reminiscent of
the findings of Ramey and West (1999), and Bils and Khan (2000) that, at business cycle

  6
     Stigler and Kindahl (1970), Barro (1977), Hall (2006) are several important references.
  7
     See also Solon, Barskey and Parker (1994) who document compositional biases in the measurement of
real wages.


                                                  2
frequencies, inventories are procyclical, but less so than sales. Moreover, we use detailed data
from the NBER productivity database and the Bureau of Economic Analysis to show that
this decline is not simply a compositional artifact resulting from a tendency for industries
that have on average lower inventory-to-sales ratios to expand more during booms.
       We then formulate and calibrate a model in which nominal prices change infrequently
due to fixed costs of price adjustment. Firms hold inventories in our model because of two
frictions on the technology of ordering goods. In particular, we assume that ordering a new
batch of inventories entails payment of an ordering cost that is independent of the shipment’s
size. Furthemore, the firm is assumed to order before the realization of a taste shock that
determines the consumers’ demand for its goods. As a result of these two assumptions, the
firm holds excess inventories in order to minimize both the probability of a stockout and
the ordering costs. We study these two particular inventory-holding motives because of the
attention that they have received in recent work, and we use micro-economic evidence to
inform their relative strength.8
       We use our model economy to study how the response of inventories to monetary policy
shocks depends on the elasticity of real marginal cost to output. We vary the responsiveness
of real marginal cost to output in the model by introducing a wedge in the optimal labor-
leisure choice that allows us to mimic a range of responses for the real wage without modeling
the frictions that account for these responses explicitly. Our main finding is that in the model
inventories are highly sensitive to changes in the costs of acquiring (the price of intermediate
goods or labor) and holding (the interest rate) inventories. As a result, even modest fluc-
tuations in the cost of acquiring and holding inventories generate substantial fluctuations in
inventories over the cycle. Accounting for the -0.8 elasticity of the inventory-sales ratio to
sales in the data thus requires that the cost of acquiring and holding inventories is roughly
constant over the cycle. This implies, in particular, that the elasticity of real marginal cost
to consumption must be approximately equal to the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution (IES). When the elasticity of real marginal cost to consumption is lower than
the inverse IES, the combined cost of acquiring and holding inventories decreases during a
monetary expansion, and the firm finds it optimal to raise its inventory stock by a large

  8
    See Caplin (1985), Ramey (1991), Khan and Thomas (2007) who emphasize non-convexities in the cost
of acquiring or producing inventories. Kahn (1992), Bils and Kahn (2000), Khan and Thomas (2007b), Wen
(2008) study economies with a stockout-avoidance motive.


                                                  3
amount. This in turn leads, counterfactually, to an increase in aggregate inventory-to-sales
ratio. We thus find, in our setup, that it is difficult to reconcile low elasticities of real marginal
cost to output with the behavior of inventories in the data, unless one also assumes a high
elasticity of intertemporal substitution. As a comparison, elasticities used in earlier work on
real rigidities range from 0.10-0.15 as argued for by Woodford (2003), 0.33 in Dotsey and
King (2005), and 0.34 in Smets and Wouters (2007) to 2.25 – the baseline parameterization
used by Chari, Kehoe, McGrattan (2002).
       Our work is related to a number of recent papers studying the behavior of inventories,
costs and markups over the business cycle. Our starting point is the observation of Bils and
Kahn (2000) that inventories are closely linked to markups and marginal costs and thus may
provide important information about the cyclicality of the latter. Khan and Thomas (2007)
and Wen (2008) study real business cycle models in which inventories arise respectively due
to fixed ordering costs, and a stockout-avoidance motive. These papers find that the model
is capable of accounting for the countercyclicality of the inventory-sales ratio observed in the
data. Our conjecture is that they do so because investment in capital in times of expansions
in these models drives up the cost of purchasing (through higher elasticity of real marginal
cost to output) and holding (through higher interest rates) inventories. Two closely related
papers, Khan and Thomas (2008) and Jung and Yun (2005), also study sticky price economies
with inventories and ask whether the model can account for the behavior of inventories in
the data: Khan and Thomas (2008) argue the presence of capital is a necessary ingredient
to match the countercyclicality of the inventory-to-sales ratio, while Jung and Yun (2005)
emphasize the role of high depreciation rates and adjustment costs. Finally, Chang, Hornstein
and Sarte (2007) study the responses to a productivity shock in a sticky price model with
inventories. They find that whether an industry expands or contracts employment depends
on the carrying costs of inventories: higher carrying costs prevent firms from responding to
the productivity shock by investing in inventories and as a result cut employment given that
prices are sticky and quantities are demand-determined.
       This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 documents a number of facts about invento-
ries and computes the response of inventory-to-sales ratio to measures of exogenous monetary
policy shocks. We also show that the decline in inventory-to-sales ratio is pervasive across
all industries and stages of fabrication, and not simply a compositional artifact. Section 3
presents the model and discusses optimal decision rules in this environment. Section 4 com-

                                                  4
putes impulse responses to monetary policy shocks under several assumptions regarding the
elasticity of real marginal cost with respect to output (i.e, stickiness of nominal wages) and
asks what elasticity is consistent with the decline in the inventory-to-sales ratio observed in
the data. Section 5 performs additional robustness checks and uses data on inventories, sales
and prices from a Spanish supermarket9 , in order to evaluate the microeconomic implications
of variations of the model capable of reducing the sensitivity of inventories to costs. Section
6 concludes.

2. Data
        In this section we document several salient facts regarding the cyclical behavior of in-
ventories. We employ two datasets: the (annual) NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database
with data on output, sales, inventories and price deflators in 459 4-digit manufacturing indus-
tries from 1957 to 1996; and the Bureau of Economic Analysis (NIPA) data on monthly final
sales, inventories, and inventory-to-sales ratios for Manufacturing and Trade sectors from
January 1967 to December 199710 . These data sets complement each other as they allow us
to study inventory behaviour for two business cycle frequencies - monthly and annual; and for
different levels of aggregation - industry-level and aggregate. Although we focus on a subset of
the US economy, our data accounts for most of the U.S. inventory stock. Manufacturing and
Trade inventories (value added) comprise 85% (74%) of the total private nonfarm inventory
stock (value added); the remaining industries are mining, utilities, and construction.
        Sales are defined as real final sales to domestic purchasers in NIPA data and as the
real value of industry shipments in case of the NBER data. Output is the sum of final sales
and the change in the end-of-period inventory stock. Inventory-to-sales ratio is defined as the
ratio of the end-of-period inventory stock to final sales in that period. Shipments deflators
are used for industry-level data and CPI (less food and energy) is used for aggregate data to
deflate nominal variables. All data are HP filtered.11 Output, sales and inventory-sale ratios

   9
     Aguirregabiria (1999).
  10
     The Bureau of Economic Analysis uses an inventory valuation adjustment to revalue inventory hold-
ings (reported by various companies using potentially different accounting methods) to replacement cost.
These adjustments are based on surveys that report the accounting valuation used in an industry and from
information on how long goods are held in inventories. See Ribarsky (2004).
  11
     There is a great deal of heterogeneity in industry-specific trends of sales and inventory-to-sales ratios.
Bils and Kahn (2000) argue that scale effects are small for inventory-to-sales ratio dynamics. Our work
below shows that heterogeneity across inventory-to-sales ratios is unlikely to be an important factor for the
dynamics of the aggregate inventory-to-sales ratio.


                                                      5
are defined in % deviations from respective HP trends. Inventory investment is defined in %
points-of-output-fraction deviations from its HP trend. Unless otherwise noted, inventory-
to-sales ratios, output, sales, etc. are in real units.12
       We divide the data analysis into four parts. We first document the countercyclicality
and other facts about the dynamics of the aggregate inventory-to-sales ratio over the business
cycle. Second, we show that the countercyclicality of the aggregate inventory-to-sales ratio
does not stem from compositional shifts at the disaggregate level. We then report the output
and sales elasticities of inventory-sales ratios at the aggregate and industry levels. Finally,
we show that inventory-sales ratios decline in response to (identified) exogenous monetary
expansions, and that the facts documented for business cycles in general characterize those
episodes as well.

A. Inventories and sales over the business cycle
       This section describes the behavior of inventories over the business cycle13 . Table 1 re-
ports several unconditional moments for real inventory-to-sales ratios in the data. On average
firms carry inventory stocks of about 1.4 months of sales according to the monthly data and
0.31 years of sales in the annual data (that is, 3.7 months of sales). Standard deviations of
real inventory-to-sales ratios, 2.2% in the monthly and 3.9% in the annual data, are compara-
ble to those of the aggregate output and sales. The most prominent feature of the aggregate
inventory-to-sales ratios is their countercyclicality. The correlation of real inventory-to-sales
ratios with output in the monthly data is -0.83 for Manufacturing and Trade, and -0.49 for
Retail. In the annual data that correlation is -0.52. Correlations with sales are typically
even more negative. Figure 1 reinforces this finding by plotting the aggregate (detrended)
inventory-to-sales ratio and output in the Manufacturing and Trade sector. The negative
correlation is evident.

B. Compositional bias
       There is a considerable amount of heterogeneity in the level of stock relative to sales
among firms. For example, in 1996 25th, 50th and 75th-percentile levels of inventory-to-
sales ratios across 4-digit NBER industries are 0.23, 0.31 and 0.42 respectively. One concern

  12
    Detailed descriptions of the data and definitions are available upon request.
  13
    Ramey and West (1999) and Bils and Kahn (2000) are two earlier papers that also document some of
these facts.


                                                 6
is therefore that the behavior of inventory-to-sales ratios may reflect a compositional shift.
Given that the aggregate inventory-to-sales ratio is equal to the average of industry inventory-
to-sales ratios (weighted by each industry’s sales), it may be the case that the drop of the
aggregate ratio is simply evidence that low-inventory-to-sales industries expand more during
booms.14
        To assess this hypothesis, we divide the annual data into three equally sized bins
according to the level of inventory-to-sales ratios: low, medium, and high. Table 2 reports,
for each bin, the average inventory-to-sales ratio and the bin’s sales share. The lower bin
accounts for half the sales in our sample and industries in this bin have an average inventory-
to-sales ratio of 0.18. The medium and high bins have a mean inventory-to-sales ratios of
0.31 and 0.55, respectively, and account for a quarter of total sales each.
        For compositional effects to be important, there must be large differences in how
inventory-to-sales ratios fluctuate over the business cycle. Table 2 demonstrates that these
differences, if any, are small. Specifically, correlations of bin-specific inventory-to-sales ratios
with real GDP are very similar, -0.41, -0.33 and -0.47, respectively.
        An alternative way of gauging the extent of compositional effects is to compare a
common industry-level time effect, or a fixed-weight average inventory-to-sales ratio, to the
aggregate ratio. Specifically we run the following panel regression:


                                      ln ISit = αDt + βDi + εit ,


where ln ISit is the log inventory-to-sales ratio for industry i, Dt is the vector of year dummies,
Di are 4-digit industry dummies, and εit is the residual representing industry-level distur-
bances. Coefficients for year dummies, αyear , represent the fixed-weight average inventory-
to-sales ratio. If compositional effects are important, the time series for the average and
aggregate inventory-to-sales ratios should differ substantially. Figure 2 shows that this is
not the case. Indeed the two series move together over the cycle, except for the 1994-1997
period when the aggregate ratio was somewhat smaller than the average (as in Figure 1, the
two series are HP-filtered). We conclude that compositional shifts across sectors with high

  14
    Solon, Barsky, Parker (1994) find such a compositional bias for aggregate real wages that are acyclical in
the aggregate time series because the aggregate statistics are constructed in a way that gives more weight to
low-skill workers during expansions than during recessions.


                                                      7
and low inventory-to-sales ratios do not contribute importantly to countercyclicality of the
aggregate inventory-to-sales ratio.

C. Elasticities of inventory-to-sales ratios
        To gauge the sensitivity of inventory-to-sales ratio movements to fluctuations in output
and sales, we estimate their respective elasticities at the aggregate and industry levels. Table
3 reports aggregate elasticities.
        In the monthly data, the output elasticity of inventory-to-sales ratio in Manufacturing
and Trade is -0.77, and sales elasticity is -0.86. For Retail, elasticities are somewhat smaller
(in absolute value), -0.49 and -0.77 respectively. In the NBER annual data, output and sales
elasticities are -0.42 and -0.60 respectively.15
        Elasticities are similar when we focus separately on inventories at different stages
of disaggregation (raw materials, work-in-progress, and finished goods). Around 77% of
all Manufacturing and Trade inventories are finished goods inventories, and 23% are raw
materials and work-in-progress inventories. We compute elasticities of NIPA inventory-to-
sales ratios by the stage of fabrication with respect to total Manufacturing sales (each time
series is log HP-detrended). Respective sales elasticities are -1.01 for raw materials, -0.87 for
work-in-progress, and -1.16 for finished goods inventories (-1.01 for total Manufacturing).
        Iachoviello, Schiantarelli and Schuh (2007), hereafter ISS, argue that it is important
to distinguish between output inventories (which they define as retail inventories), and the
rest - which they refer to as input inventories. They find that the ratio of output inventories
to consumption purchases is acyclical (the quarterly correlation with aggregate output is
0.10), whereas the ratio of input inventories to output is countercyclical (correlation with
output is -0.89). Moreover, they report that the output inventory-to-consumption ratio is
more volatile: between 2.5 and 4.6 times more volatile than input inventory-to-output ratio.
        We show below that our results are not inconsistent with theirs. To see this, we first
compute the elasticity of retail inventories with respect to real consumption expenditures by
regressing real retail inventory-to-consumption ratios on respective real personal consumption
of durables, non-durables and durables plus nondurables16 in the NIPA data for 1990:01-

  15
      Measured elasticities are not sensitive to our detrending method (HP-filter). For example, if the trend is
linear (in logs), output (sales) elasticities in NBER data change from -0.42 (-0.60) to -0.54 (-0.69).
   16
      We argue that consumption of durable plus nondurable goods is a reasonable proxy of ISS’s consumption.



                                                       8
2008:04. The respective elasticities are -1.02, -0.38, and -0.86 (or, at the quarterly frequency,
-0.88, -0.42, and -0.62). ISS report elasticities of input inventory-to-consumption with respect
to aggregate output, so we regress our three NIPA ratios on real GDP: respective elasticities
are -0.50, 0.63, and 0.32. Hence, the apparent discrepancy in results is accounted for by
the fact that we focus on how inventory-sales ratios within a given sector covary with that
sector’s sales or output, whereas ISS focus on how similar inventory-to-sales ratios covary
with aggregate output.
        Finally, at the industry level, across-time elasticities turn out to be of the same magni-
tude. Table 4 shows that across-time sales elasticity of inventory-to-sales ratio at the industry
level is around -0.6. When we compare the across-time sales elasticity of inventory-to-sales
ratio to its cross-section counterpart, we see that the cross-section elasticity is much smaller
than the one across time: -0.14. These estimates of industry-level across-time and cross-
sectional elasticities are not sensitive to controlling for various measures of industry inflation,
marginal cost, markup, and firm concentration. Together, these correlations suggest that the
negative correlation between inventory-sales ratios and sales is a cyclical phenomenon and
not accounted for by technological factors (e.g scale economies that allow larger firms to hold
fewer inventories). This result is reminiscent of that of Bils and Kahn (2000), who find that
for six large manufacturing industries, the inventory-to-sales ratio is insensitive to industry
size.

D. Evidence from identified monetary shocks
        Since the focus of this paper is on the real effects of monetary shocks, we extend our
data analysis to document the behavior of inventory-to-sales ratios in the wake of monetary
expansions and contractions. A necessary step here is to identify these monetary disturbances.
We use the monthly NIPA data which has the advantage of higher-frequency observations.
        We employ two available measures of monetary shocks: due to Romer and Romer
(2004) and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (1996). Both measures represent innovations
to the federal fund’s rate (in RR’s case, intended federal funds rate). The Romer-Romer
(RR) measure is based on narrative records of FOMC meetings and Federal Reserve’s internal
forecasts. The Christiano-Eichenbaum-Evans (CEE) measure corresponds to the innovation
to the federal funds rate in their VAR.
        Responses of output, inventory investment and inventory-to-sales ratios for each sector


                                                9
are obtained by estimating the following OLS regression:

                                                36
                                                X
                           yt = α 0 + α 1 t +         β s f f st−s + γyt−37 + εt ,                    (1)
                                                s=0



where yt is the dependent variable, α0 , α1 t are a full set of monthly dummies, f f st is a
measure of monetary shocks, and εt is the zero-mean normally distributed error term, which
is assumed to be AR(2):
                                        εt = ρ1 εt−1 + ρ2 εt−2 .

       Estimation of (1) yields a number of facts about impulse responses after monetary
shocks.17,18
       Figure 3 reports impulse responses to CEE shocks for output, sales, inventory invest-
ment and inventory-to-sales ratio in Manufacturing and Trade. The solid lines in the figure
denote point estimates of the different response functions, and the dashed lines report respec-
tive 95% confidence intervals. Output responses are positive for about half a year after the
shock, reflecting the fact that monetary shocks affect the economy with a lag. Output re-
sponses are negative between around 6 and 30 months, with the trough at around 24 months
after the shock. Sales responses are very similar to output responses. The response of in-
ventory investment is small and statistically almost indistinguishable from zero. Finally, the
response of inventory-to-sales ratios is negative for the first 5 months after the shock and then
positive up until 2.5 years after the shock. For Retail, inventory-to-sales ratios are somewhat
quicker to respond and less persistent – they are around zero in the first few months after
the shock, then positive coming back to zero after 18 months after the shock (versus around
30 months for the Manufacturing and Trade sector)19 .
       We conclude that inventory-to-sales ratio is countercyclical even conditional on mon-
etary disturbances, thus corroborating the results of Jung and Yung (2005). To quantify the
extent of the ratio’s comovement with output and sales, we estimate its elasticities condi-

  17
     The results are provided for estimates based on CEE measure of monetary shocks. The results based on
the RR measure are very similar.
  18
     Bils, Klenow, Kryvtsov (2003) employ a similar method for estimating impulse responses of consumption
and prices across BEA consumption sectors to CEE monetary shocks.
  19
     As a robustness check, we have estimated our own measure of monetary policy shocks and have obtained
similar results.


                                                      10
tional on monetary shock. Specifically, we regress the fitted inventory-to-sales ratio on fitted
output (sales) from regression (1). For Manufacturing and Trade, conditional output and
sales elasticities are only slightly lower, -0.64 and -0.71, than the unconditional elasticities.
For the Retail sector, elasticities conditional on monetary shocks are slightly larger than the
unconditional elasticities: -0.49 for output elasticity and -0.57 for sales elasticity.

3. Model
       The economy consists of a continuum of final goods firms, indexed by i, that each
sells a differentiated good produced using intermediate goods as inputs; a continuum of
competitive intermediate goods firms; and a representative household that derives utility
from the consumption of final goods, trades a complete set of state-contingent securities
and supplies labor to the intermediate goods sector. Given that the intermediate goods
sector is competitive, our use of the terms “retail” and “wholesale” is a matter of notational
convention, as one can reinterpret the problem we present below as that of a firm which
produces and retails the good simultaneously. In this sense, our use of inventory data from
the Manufacturing and Trade Sector, and use of both “input” and “output” inventories is
not inconsistent with the model. In particular, the fact that inventory accumulation reflects
the behavior of cost is clearly not specific to a particular sector.
       Finally, we assume that consumers, unlike firms, cannot store the good. Their problem
of choosing how much to buy of each of the differentiated goods is thus static.

       Consumers

       Consumers have preferences over a continuum of consumption goods and leisure and
maximize

                                                                ∞
                                                                X
                                             max           E0             β t U (ct , nt )
                                         ct (i),nt ,bt+1
                                                                    t=0
                              Z   1
                       s.t.           pt (i)ct (i)di + qt · bt+1 ≤ Wt nt + bt + Πt ,
                              0
                                                                                          θ
                                             Z      1                                  θ−1
                                                                1           θ−1
                                      ct =               vt (i) ct (i)
                                                                θ            θ    di           ,
                                                 0


                                                     ct (i) 6 zt (i) .


                                                                11
       Here bt+1 is a vector of state-contigent Arrow-Debreu securities that the consumer
buys and qt is a vector of security prices, bt is the quantity of the respective state’s bonds the
agent has purchased at t − 1, Πt is firm profits, Wt nt is labor income, ct (i) is consumption of
the variety i, and pt (i) is that variety’s price. ct is the CES aggregator over different varieties.
In this economy the consumer will occasionaly be turned down by stores with little inventory
available for sales. We let zt (i) be the stock of inventories that firm i has available for sale.
The consumer cannot buy more than zt (i) units.
       It follows that the consumer’s demand for each of the final goods is:

                                                     −θ                               −θ
                                             pt (i)                             pt (i)
                       ct (i) = vt (i)                       ct if vt (i)                      ct < zt (i) ,
                                              Pt                                 Pt

                                               ct (i) = zt (i) otherwise,


              hR                                              1
                                                           i 1−θ
                 1                             1−θ
where Pt =      0
                     vt (i) [pt (i) + µ̃t (i)]        di           and µ̃t (i) is the product of the multipliers on
the consumer’s budget constraint and that on the constraint that purchases do not exceed
the stock of inventories available for sale. Since µ̃t (i) > 0 for a positive fraction of goods
                                         hR                     1
                                                             i 1−θ
                                            1
in equilibrium, Pt is higher than P̂t = 0 vt (i)pt (i)1−θ di       , the usual expression for the
aggregate price index in economies without stockouts. As a result, demand for unconstrained
                                                                                            −θ
                                                                                      pt (i)
goods, ct (i), is greater than that in an economy without stockouts: ct (i) > vt (i) P̂          ct .
                                                                                                               t

The consumer thus directs expenditures towards the unconstrained goods, whenever some
goods are in limited supply. Also notice that here Pt is not equal to the aggregate price
                         R1
index, usually defined as 0 pt (i) cCt (i)
                                        t
                                           di.
       Finally, the Euler equation and intra-temporal consumption leisure choice take the
usual form:
                                                            Un,t   Wt
                                                       −         =    ,
                                                            Uc,t   Pt

and
                                                                        Uc (st+1 ) P (st+1 )
                                q(st+1 |st ) = βπ(st+1 |st )                                 .
                                                                         Uc (st ) P (st )

       Retail Firms

       Retailers buy a storable good from a perfectly competitive intermediate-goods industry


                                                                   12
at a (nominal) price ω t . One unit of the intermediate good produces at (i) units of the final
good. The productivity of the firm, at (i), is idiosyncratic and follows a Markov process to be
described below. The retailer sells the goods in the final goods market and faces a demand
curve for its product given by:

                                                                         −θ
                                                                 pt (i)
                                       ct (i) = vt (i)                          ct ,
                                                                  Pt

as well as the constraint that it does not sell more than the stock of inventories, zt (i), it has
available.
        We next discuss the frictions we impose on the retailer’s ability to change prices and
adjust inventories. Retailers face two fixed adjustment costs: of adjusting prices, κp , and of
ordering new goods from the intermediate firms, κs . A third restriction we impose is that price
and inventory decisions are made prior to the realization of that period’s demand v(i). We
assume for simplicity that v(i) is serially uncorrelated. Finally, we assume an irreversibility:
once produced, final goods cannot be returned.
        To economize on the ordering costs and to insure against the possibility of high de-
mand v(i), firms carry non-zero inventories of the final good from one period to another.
In particular, let st (i) be the retailer’s beginning-of-period inventory level, and zt (i) be the
stock of inventory available after new goods were ordered (if any). The firm’s expected sales,
given the price it chooses, p, and the inventory stock, z, is equal to

                                            Z∞                   
                                                           p −θ
                               R (p, z) =            min v      c, z dΦ(v) ,
                                                           P
                                            0



where Φ(v) is the distribution of preference shocks, assumed to be log-normal with variance
σ 2 . Let v ∗ =−θ
                      z
                  denote the lowest level of the taste parameter for which the firm stocks
                  p
            ( ) c P
out. Then we can write:


                                                σ2
                           p −θ                   
                                                         Φ log (v ∗ ) − σ 2 + z (1 − Φ (log (v ∗ ))) .
                                                                           
             R (p, z) =             c exp
                           P                    2


        We next write the firm’s dynamic program. Let V a,a (p−1 , s−1 , a) be the firm’s value of
adjusting prices and inventories, given the beginning-of-period stock of inventories s−1 , and

                                                             13
inherited price p−1 , as well as productivity a. V n,a value of not adjusting prices and adjusting
inventories, and V a,n , V n,n similarly defined. The firm’s continuation value is the envelope of
these four options: V = max(V a,a , V a,n , V n,a , V n,n ). Then



                                                                                                    
  a,a                       Uc                                                               0     0
V (p−1 , s−1 , a) = max        [pR(p, s−1 + i) − aω (z − s−1 ) − (κp + κs )W ] + βEV (p, s−1 , a ) ,
                   p,z≥s−1 P
                                                                                                
 n,a                       Uc                                                            0     0
V (p−1 , s−1 , a) = max       [p−1 R(p−1 , s−1 + i) − aω (z − s−1 ) − κs W ] + βEV (p, s−1 , a ) ,
                    z≥s−1 P
                                                                                     
            a,n                        Uc                                        0  0
          V (p−1 , s−1 , a) = max         [pR(p, s−1 ) − κp W ] + βEV (p−1 , s−1 , a ) ,
                                  p    P
                                                                                
                   n,n                   Uc                              0     0
                  V (p−1 , s−1 , a) =       pR(p−1 , s−1 ) + βEV (p−1 , s−1 , a ) ,
                                         P


where (z − s−1 ) is the amount ordered.
        The law of motion for inventories is

                                                      
                                                p −θ
                             s0−1   = z − min v      c, z    (1 − δ)
                                                P


if the firm orders, and

                                                       
                                               p −θ
                          s0−1   = s−1 − min v      c, s−1    (1 − δ)
                                               P


otherwise. Here δ is the rate at which the firm’s existing inventories depreciate.

        Intermediate good firms (wholesalers)

        We assume that a continuum of perfectly competitive intermediate good firms produce
the wholesale good using a production technology that is linear in labor


                                                y=l.




                                                   14
They sell these goods to retailers at price ω and thus earn profits equal to


                                            π = ωy − W l ,


where W is the nominal wage rate.

        Equilibrium

      In equilibrium free entry drives intermediate’s profits to zero and thus ω = W. We
                                           R1
impose a quantity-theory equation M = 0 p(i)c(i)di rather than derive the demand for
money explicitly in order to avoid introducing the labor-leisure etc. distortions associated
with other specifications (cash-in-advance or money-in-the-utility). We study an economy in
which M is constant and then compute the response to a one-time unanticipated change in
M. The equilbrium is then a path of prices, P , p(i), W, ω, as well as quantities, c, c(i), y(i),
s(i), z(i), l, n, such that firms and consumers optimize and markets clear.


A. Economy with no adjustment frictions
        To build intuition for the workings of our economy, we first consider the case when
the two adjustment costs are equal to 0 and there is no irreversibility constraint. We assume
however that the firm cannot return its excess inventories after learning its preference shock:
it can return back to the goods market only at the beginning of the next period. Finally, we
assume away variability in productivity shocks, a, for now. In the absence of frictions, and
in the absence of z > s−1 constraint, the firm’s value is linear in s−1 (with slope equal to the
replacement cost, ω), and the choice of p and z reduces to:

                                                                          
                              (1 − δ)                           (1 − δ)
                     max pt −         ω t+1 R(pt , zt ) − ω t −         ω t+1 zt ,
                     pt ,zt    1 + rt                            1 + rt


where    1
        1+rt
               = β UUc,t+1 /Pt+1
                       c,t+1 /Pt
                                 is the rate at which the firm discounts the future.
        To understand this expression, recall that the only difference now between our problem
and the standard problem of a monopolistically competitive firm is that prices and inventories
must be decided prior to the realization of demand. Thus, the choice of price is determined
by solving the standard problem of a monopolist, where R(p, z) is the (expected) demand

                                                   15
                  (1−δ)
function and            ω
                   1+rt t+1
                                     (as opposed to ω t ) is the marginal valuation of the goods the firm
sells. The difference stems from the fact that the savings from lowering sales by one unit
today only accrue next period when the firm returns to the goods market. The choice of z is
                                                                            h                 i
                                                                                   (1−δ)
also straighforward: a higher z increases expected sales, but the firm loses ω t − 1+rt ω t+1
in inventory carrying costs.
       The firm’s optimal price is then a markup over its shadow valuation of inventories:


                                                              εt (1 − δ)
                                                    p=                    ω t+1 ,
                                                           εt − 1 1 + r t


where εt = − RR(p
              p (pt ,zt )pt
                   t ,zt )
                            is the elasticity of (expected) sales. Moreover, the choice of zt satisfies

                                                                 
                                                    zt                 1 − (1−δ) ω t+1
                                                                            1+rt ω t
                                          1 − Φ   −θ              =                  .
                                                                  
                                                                      pt   (1−δ) ω t+1
                                                      pt
                                                                ct     ωt
                                                                          −  1+rt ω t
                                                      Pt



       Notice that the left-hand side of this expression is the probability that the firm stocks
out. As in Bils and Kahn (2000), the firm chooses a higher stock of inventories (a lower
                                                                  pt
stockout probability) the higher the markup                       ωt
                                                                     ,   the higher the growth rate of costs, and the
                                                       1−δ
lower the cost of holding inventories,                 1+rt
                                                            .
       To further build intuition for the mechanism at play and illustrate what is driving the
elasticity of inventories with respect to markups and costs in the full version of the model,
we find it useful to log-linearize the above expression:

                                                  h                             i
                                                                             ˆt
                                            Γq̂t = (1 − Φ) µµ̂t + β (1 − δ) Φ∆


                      zt                                                                                           pt
where qt =   
                 pt
                      −θ        is the (beginning-of-period) inventory to (expected) sales ratio, µt =            ωt
                 Pt
                            ct
                                     ω t+1
is the markup, ∆t =                (1+rt )ω t
                                                is the change in costs, Γ = Φ0 q [µ − β (1 − δ)] is a constant,
variables with a hat denote log-deviations from steady-state, and 1 − Φ is the steady state
probability of a stockout. This expression says that the inventory-to-sales ratio is much more
sensitive to changes in costs than to changes in markups. This is because in the calibration
of the model we will use, as in the data, stockout probabilities are low, i.e., Φ is close to 1


                                                                  16
and so are depreciation rates and markups. Clearly, as the rate of depreciation increases,
the sensitivity of stock of inventories to costs decreases, a point we return to below when we
study the full model.

B. Parametrization
          We next study our full model’s quantitative implications. The period is a month,
                                                 1
and thus the discount factor is equal to .96 12 . We assume preferences of the form U (ct , n) =
log ct − ψ t nt . We think of ψ t as preference shocks that in the various experiments will be
allowed to vary with the monetary shock in order to generate stickiness in nominal wages
and thus real rigidites. We assume log(a) takes one of three possible
                                                                     values: {−ā, 0, ā}.
                                                                                        The
                                                                       1−ρ  ρ   0         
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
transition matrix is Pr (a = ai |a−1       = aj ) , and it is equal to
                                                                       2
                                                                         ρ
                                                                            1−ρ  ρ          . The
                                                                                 2         
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                         0   ρ  1−ρ
firm’s log productivity is on average equal to 0 and shocks arrive with a Poisson-like process
with probability ρ. The discrete arrival of shocks allows the model to generate the large price
changes observed in the data without a large selection effect20 ; Midrigan (2008) provides
empirical evidence for this assumption. The upper bound on technology shocks, ā, is chosen
to match an average size of price changes of 10%, as documented by Bils and Klenow (2005)
and Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008). We choose ρ to match the frequency of price changes of 5
months given that our model has no motive for temporary price changes. A recent paper by
Kehoe and Midrigan (2008) shows that a model with a motive for temporary price changes
(sales) in which prices change on average every 3 weeks (as in the data on prices in retail
stores), generates real effects of money similar to those of a model without a motive for sales
in which ’regular’ prices change every 5 months. The intuition as to why real effects of money
are larger is that temporary price changes most often return to their pre-change level and, as
a result, do not respond to low frequency variations in monetary policy.
          We set κp , the fixed cost of changing prices, to 0.7% of steady-state revenue, as mea-
sured directly in grocery stores in a study by Levy et. al, 1997. Given the infrequent arrival
of idiosyncratic shocks to productivity, the level of κp has little effect on the frequency of price
changes and only affects how the fraction of price changes responds to a monetary shock.

  20
       Midrigan (2008), Gertler-Leahy (2007).


                                                     17
        The fixed ordering cost, κS , together with the volatility of demand, σ, are chosen
so that the model generates a monthly inventory-to-sales ratio of 1.4 months, as in the
U.S. retail trade sector, and a correlation between changes in prices and quantities of -0.2
at the monthly frequency. The last statistic was reported by Burstein and Hellwig (2007)
for regular price changes at the monthly frequency using Dominick’s scanner data. The
depreciation rate is set to 2.5%, a number in the range of estimates of inventory-carrying costs
reported by Richardson (1995) and Stock and Lambert (2001). We think of δ as not only
capturing physical depreciation of goods, but also obsolesence, shrinkage as well as additional
inventory carrying costs other than foregone interest, taxes, insurance or rent costs. Finally,
the elasticity of demand, θ, is set equal to 3, in the mid-range of estimates in retail markets.
        Table 5 reports the parameter values used. Table 6 reports the moments targeted.
In addition to the 4 moments we use in calibration to pin down ρ, ā, σ, κs (the rest of the
parameters are assigned), we do well at matching additional features of the data. In par-
ticular, the model predicts that firms stockout 5% of the time and that 56% of firms order
inventories in a given week. These numbers are in the range of those reported in earlier work
by Bils (2004) and Aguirregabiria (2005), who place the frequency of stockouts at 5%-8%;21
Aguirregabiria (1999), who observes a 79% frequency of orders in the data on chain-wide
orders of a Spanish supermarket, and Alessandria et. al (2008), who use data from Hall-Rust
(1999) on the orders of a large steel wholesaler and find a frequency of orders for domestic
goods of 0.33 to 0.50 per month.

C. Decision rules
        Before we proceed with experiments, we briefly discuss optimal firm policy rules in
our environment. We refer the reader to Aguirregabiria (1999) for a more detailed analysis
of how fixed costs of ordering and price changes affect a retailer’s optimal price and ordering
decisions, and proofs (that rely on the K-concavity of the value functions) of the uniqueness
of optimal policy rules.

  21
     This range for the frequency of stockouts is consistent with a large marketing literature on the incidence
and costs of stockouts. For example, in the most comprehensive worldwide study of stockouts, Gruen et al.
(2002) report a range of 5%-10%. They also find that retailers are likely to lose almost one-half of the intended
purchases when a consumer confronts an out-of-stock: around 40% of the time consumer does not buy at
all from the store, and remaining 60% of time consumers substitute the purchase (within or across brands,
or across time). Hence after taking into account the possibility of within-retailer switching and backlogged
orders, an estimate of the frequency of stockouts is 2.5%.


                                                       18
       Notice from the Bellman equations characterizing the firm’s dynamic program, that the
optimality conditions governing the choice of inventories and prices are (to simplify notation,
we write these assuming away both uncertainty about a and the irreversibility constraint):



                                          Z   ∞                                      Z    v∗
   Uc                                                   0
p:    [R(p, z) + pRp (p, z)] + β                  V1 (p, s (v))dΦ (v) = −θβ(1 − δ)             V2 (p, s0 (v))dΦ (v) ,
   P                                      0                                           0




                                Z    v∗
                                                                    Uc
                 z : β(1 − δ)             V2 (p, s0 (v)) dΦ (v) =      [ω − p (1 − Φ (v ∗ ))] ,
                                 0                                  P


where v ∗ =      z
                  −θ is the cutoff level of the taste shock for which the firm does not stockout.
            ( Pp ) C
       The firm thus orders inventories so as to equalize the marginal valuation of an addi-
tional unit of inventories next period to the marginal cost of acquiring it (which with stockouts
                                              Uc
is lower than the replacement cost,           P
                                                 ω,   as an additional unit of inventories allows the firm to
avoid a stockout). Similarly, the firm chooses the price to equalize marginal revenue (which
here includes the savings of the price adjustment cost, as measured by V1 (p)) to the marginal
valuation of inventories next period. Notice here again the sense in which inventory behavior
can be informative about the wages (wholesale prices) that the firm faces. The stickier wages
                 Uc
are (the lower   P
                    ω   in times of monetary expansion), the more incentive the firm has to in-
crease inventories s0 , so as to lower their marginal valuation (since inventory frictions imply
that V2 is (K)-concave), and to keep prices low.
       Figure 4 plots the regions of the (p−1, s−1 )-state space in which the firm finds it optimal
to adjust both inventory and price (heavy-shaded regions in the upper and lower left corners),
adjust only inventory (medium-shaded region to the left), or adjust only price (light-shaded
regions to the right). We fix the productivity, a, to its mean here. The region where inaction
along both margins is optimal is the unshaded center region. We also plot the optimal price
(solid line) and order decisions (we plot z, the inventory available for sale, using dotted lines)
conditional on the firm adjusting both prices and inventories. The figure corresponds to the
medium level of retailer’s productivity (higher/lower levels of productivity would shift the
graph to the south-east/north-west corners of the figure).
       Given the fixed costs, the adjustment regions are of the (S, s) type: the firm adjusts


                                                            19
its price or orders inventories when its old price or current inventories are too far out of line.
Conditional on ordering, the return point for inventories is independent of (p−1 , s−1 ) as both
of them are reset (the order decision is drawn for a firm with a stock s−1 sufficiently low so
that the irreversibility constraint does not bind). Finally, notice that the firm’s optimal price,
conditional on adjustment, is approximately equal to its frictionless optimum up to a point
at which the irreversibility constraint on inventories binds and the firm’s stock s−1 exceeds
the return point. As s−1 increases above this point, the firm finds it optimal to run down its
inventories by decreasing its price so as to sell more rapidly and avoid paying the depreciation
cost.22 Not reported here is the optimal price of the firm, conditional on not ordering new
inventories. This price is strictly decreasing in the amount of inventories available (and in
particular, above the price conditional on ordering in Figure 4, except in the region to the
right of the vertical line in which the two are equal) as a firm that does not order has higher
shadow valuation of inventories.
       Given that our focus is on the behavior of the inventory-to-sales ratio, we report in
Figure 5 the (expected) inventory-to-sales ratio given the optimal inventory decisions in the
                                                             z−R(p,z)
p−1 space, again for a = 0. In particular, we report          R(p,z)
                                                                        conditional on ordering (left
panel) and not ordering (right panel), as a function of the firm’s past price and given the
firm’s optimal price adjustment decision. Notice in the left panel of Figure 5 that when
the past price is sufficiently out of line, the firm adjusts it and orders an amount that is
independent of the past price. If the firm’s past price is close to its optimum, the firm leaves
it unchanged, but chooses an inventory level that, although decreasing in the past price,
results in an expected inventory-to-sales ratio that increases in the firm’s price. As in the
simpler example we presented above, a higher price makes an additional unit of sales more
valuable as the gains from avoiding a stockout are larger. In the right panel of the Figure we
plot the same inventory-sales ratio conditional on the firm not ordering. In this case increases
in the firm’s price increase the inventory-sales ratio to an even greater extent by reducing
sales without affecting inventories. This figure thus illustrates that in response to a decrease
in markups, induced by a monetary expansion, firms would, holding all else constant, hold
less inventories relative to sales, even conditional on ordering inventories.

  22
    Alessandria, Kaboski, Midrigan (2008) study how this feature of the model can account for the slow
pass-through of imported goods prices at the retail level following a large devaluation.



                                                 20
4. Experiments
       We consider a one-time 2% increase in the stock of money in period 1. This increase
is announced at date 1 before firms make their price/inventory decisions. We derive decision
rules for firms that take into account this increase in the stock of money, and the transition
path for aggregate prices and quantities. This path is in turn solved for by using a shooting
algorithm in which we require that the transition path implied by firms’ decision rules is
consistent with the path used to derive those decision rules.

A. No real rigidities
       In the benchmark economy the disutility from work, ψ t , is constant and equal to ψ.
The real wage in this model is thus equal to


                                      Wt    Un,t
                                         =−      = ψCt ,
                                      Pt    Uc,t


and responds one-for one to changes in aggregate consumption. Moreover, the price of whole-
                                                                                     ω t Uc,t       Wt Uc,t
sale goods faced by firms, expressed in units of marginal utility of consumption,       Pt
                                                                                                =    Pt

(recall that this is the relevant price that affects ordering decisions) is irresponsive to the mon-
etary shock: absent the drop in markups (and in the absence of the fixed costs of ordering
which generate inaction for a subset of firms), the inventory-to-sales ratio would not respond
to the monetary shock as the real cost of purchasing goods from the wholesale is constant
during the transition.
       Figure 6 plots impulse responses in this benchmark economy. Here the inventory-sales
ratio drops, mainly because of the unexpected increase in consumption, but also because new
orders drop below their steady-state level due to the drop in markups. Notice that inventories
oscillate: the initial drop in the fraction of firms ordering increases the mass of firms that find
it optimal to order next period, etc. These echo effects can be smoothed out by introducing
heterogeneity in the size of ordering costs. Table 7 reports the average deviation of the real
       W
wage   P
           from its steady state level, relative to the deviation of consumption, C, from its
steady-state value in the first 5 periods after the shock, as well as a similar measure for the
elasticity of inventory-to-sales to sales. As seen above, the real wage moves one for one with
consumption, whereas the price of purchasing inputs from wholesalers (normalized by Uc ) is
constant. This leads to a drop of inventory-to-sales ratio that is 2.66 larger than the increase

                                                21
in sales. Clearly, this elasticity is too high (in absolute value) relative to the data.

B. Real rigidities
          We next assume that the marginal disutility from work, ψ t , changes in response to the
monetary expansion. In particular, we choose the path for ψ t so that the nominal wage rate
follows


                                                    ∗(1−λ)     λ
                                           Wt = Wt           Wt−1 , where

                                                  Wt∗ = ψPt Ct


is the wage rate absent shocks to the marginal disutility from work. We interpret positive
values of λ as features of the labor (or intermediate good’s market) that imply real rigidities
that are stronger than in our Benchmark setup. Larger values of λ correspond to stronger
real rigidities.
          Figure 7 reports impulse responses computed assuming λ = 12 . Notice that in this case
real wages increase much less than consumption, C, and as a result, the price of intermediate
          ω t Uc,t
goods,       Pt
                   ,   drops initially and then rises. Firms thus find it optimal to purchase inventories
immediately, rather than wait. This is seen in the lower panels of the Figure which show that
orders increase by 20%, whereas inventories increase on impact by 13%. Table 7 shows that
the elasticity of real wages to consumption is 0.53, while that of inventory-to-sales relative to
sales increases to 4.56, much higher than in the data. To conserve space, we do not report
the model’s implications for other macroeconomic variables (output, hours etc.). Briefly,
given that output includes inventory investment, the counterfactual inventory response also
implies counterfactually large increases in real output (in this calibration output is an order
of magnitude more volatile than consumption).
          We next ask: what degree of real rigidities, as parameterized by the value of λ, is
necessary for the model to account for the elasticity of the inventory-sales ratio to output
in the data of -0.8? A search over λ yields a value of λ = 0.15, thus not too far from the
benchmark case with no real rigidities. As Table 7 indicates, in this case the elasticity of real
wages to consumption is equal to 0.92 and that of the inventory-sales ratio with respect to
sales is equal to -0.79, as in the data.


                                                       22
       As in the example above with no adjustment costs, these results are in large part
driven by the fact that inventories in this economy are highly sensitive to variation in costs
                          
  as captured by UPc,tt ω t . Inventories are sensitive to costs because in the parametrization we
considered above the inventory carrying cost (the rate of depreciation) is fairly low, 2.5% per
month on average. Firms thus find it optimal to raise the stock of inventories in response to a
decline in the cost of acquiring them as little of the extra purchase will be lost to depreciation.
To see this, recall that the optimality condition for inventory investment is:

                              Z   v∗
                                                                 Uc
                   β(1 − δ)            V2 (p, s0 (v)) dΦ (v) =      [ω − p (1 − Φ (v ∗ ))]
                              0                                  P


In models with no frictions, V is linear in the stock of inventories, s, and the shadow value
                                                                      Uc
of inventories is equal to their replacement cost, V2 =               P
                                                                         ω,   as the firm can buy and sell
inventories freely at the market price, ω. The economy we study allows for several sources
of concavity in V : a fixed cost of ordering, a stockout probability, and an irreversibility.
However, what really matters is the curvature of V at the return point (the inventory level
that satisfies the first order condition) at which the stock of inventories is high and the first
two frictions are muted (as the probability of a stockout or re-ordering again next period is
low). Moreover, the irreversibility is quantitatively important only if the rate of depreciation
is sufficiently high. As a result, the firm’s valuation of inventories, V (s) is close to linear, and
                                                 Uc
small changes in the cost of inventories,        P
                                                    ω,   require large changes in the stock of inventories
to satisfy the optimality condition. As above, changes in markups, as captured by p, play
little role as the stockout probability, 1 − Φ, is close to 0, in the model and in the data.
       This argument is reminiscent of two findings in recent work in related contexts. House
(2007) shows that the sensitivity of investment in capital to its price in real business cycle
models is high because of low capital depreciation rates. He argues that this feature of
the model explains the Thomas (2002) and Khan and Thomas (2007) “irrelevance” result
that an economy with fixed costs of adjusting capital is virtually indistinguishable from an
economy without fixed costs. In the inventory literature, Jung and Yun (2005) study a sticky
price model with inventories in which real rigidities are due to partial indexation of prices to
inflation and the use of intermediate inputs as a factor of production. They show that one
needs to assume high (in excess of 50% per quarter) depreciation rates in order to allow the


                                                         23
model’s impulse responses of inventories to a monetary shock to be in line with those in the
data. Our results above suggest that this sensitivity of inventories to aggregate shocks in the
presence of low rates of depreciation is not specific to the exact reason that makes it optimal
for firms in the model to hold inventories.
         Our finding that an elasticity of real wages (marginal cost) to output of 0.92 is nec-
essary to account for the behavior of inventories in the data stems from the assumption on
preferences (log-utility) that we have made. More generally, given the lack of the curvature
in V implied by our parametrization of the inventory frictions, what the model requires in
order to prevent large fluctuations of inventories in response to business cycle shocks is the
                       Uc
cost of inventories,   P
                          ω,   that is roughly constant over the cycle, or that the real marginal
cost be roughly proportional to
                                               ω  1
                                                 ∼ .
                                               P  Uc

In other words, the elasticity of real marginal cost to consumption (which is typically assigned
a value of one or higher) in order to account for the joint behavior of consumption and interest
rates.
                                           d log Pw    Ucc
                                                    ∼−     c.
                                           d log c     Uc

5. Extensions
         In this section, we consider several extensions to the analysis above in order to gauge
the robustness of our results.


A. No fixed costs of ordering
         We first show that the sensitivity of inventories to costs is not driven to a great extent
by the fixed costs of ordering. To see this, we reproduce the experiments above for an economy
without fixed costs of ordering. We parameterize most parameters in this economy as we do
above; the only difference is that we set κs = 0 and choose the volatility of taste shocks,
σ v = 0.56, somewhat higher then earlier, in order to match an inventory-to-sales ratio of
1.40, as in the data. Table 8 reports the results of the experiments. Clearly, without fixed
costs of ordering the sensitivity of inventories to the monetary shock under various degrees
of real rigidities is reduced. The reason is that now that firms order each period there are
no variations in inventory investment along the extensive margin (fraction of firms ordering).

                                                  24
Nevertheless, we still find that an economy with an elasticity of real wages to consumption
of one-half generates a procyclical inventory-to-sales ratio (the elasticity is 0.67, smaller than
the 4.56 in the economy with fixed ordering costs). A search over the value of λ that allows
the model to exactly replicate the elasticity of the inventory-sales ratio of -0.8 in the data
implies an elasticity of real marginal cost to consumption of 0.77, somewhat smaller than the
earlier 0.92.

B. Elasticity of inventories to costs in the micro-data
       We next ask, does the model predict a counterfactually large sensitivity of inventories
to costs relative to what we observe in the micro data? To do so, we employ a dataset of
prices, inventories, sales, and costs in a Spanish supermarket dataset used by Aguirregabiria
(1999) in his microeconomic study of markups and inventories in retail firms. We refer the
reader to the original study for a description of the data. Here it suffices to say that we use
a panel of monthly observations inventories and wholesale costs for 534 products (brands)
sold by the supermarket chain for a period of 29 months from January 1990 to May 1992.
Products are mostly non-perishable foodstuffs, e.g. beans, chocolate, canned fish, olive oil,
dried fruits, and household goods, e.g., laundry detergents, soap, batteries. To gauge the
sensitivity of inventories to costs, we estimate the following regression:


                                 log (sit ) = αi + β log (cit ) + εit


where sit is the end-of-period stock of inventories for product i in period t, and cit is the
wholesale price at which the retailer purchases the good from a supplier and αi is a product-
specific fixed effect. Table 9 reports the results of this regression in the data, as well as in the
model with fixed costs we study above. The elasticity of inventories to costs in the model is
roughly three times greater than in the data.
       There are two potential interpretations of this result. One interpretation is that rela-
tionships between wholesalers are far more complex than what we have assumed here. Recall
that we have assumed that quantities are demand-determined and that the wholesaler stands
ready to sell whatever amount of the good the retailer demands. Nakamura (2008) cites evi-
dence to support this interpretation and argues that wholesale prices are substantially more
difficult to interpret than retail prices. Indeed, a typical pattern observed in microeconomic

                                                 25
data on wholesale and retail prices is that high-frequency variation in wholesale prices is typ-
ically highly correlated with high-frequency variation in retail prices. For example, Goldberg
and Hellerstein (2008) and Eichenbaum, Jaimovich and Rebelo (2008) report that the retail
price closely follows high-frequency movements in the wholesale price: a temporary price cut
at the wholesale level is most likely also accompanied by a temporary price cut by the retailer,
and vice versa: when the wholesaler raises his price back, the retailer follows. Such evidence
is difficult to reconcile with the assumption that quantities are demand-determined. If this
were indeed the case, the retailer would find it optimal to buy when the wholesale price is
low, and gradually raise its retail price as the stock of inventory is depleted: the wholesaler’s
decision to raise its price after a temporary sale should have little consequence in this case
on the retailer’s price.
       A second interpretation is that our model indeed understates the degree of curvature
of the firm’s shadow valuation of inventories. For example, higher rates of depreciation than
what we have assumed may make it costlier for firms to raise the amount of inventories it
carries in response to favorable cost shocks. This would also be able to reconcile the findings
above that wholesale and retail prices are highly correlated at high frequencies with the
assumption that quantities are demand-determined. Hence, we ask next: can increasing the
rate of depreciation (inventory-carrying cost) account for the low sensitivity of inventories to
costs in the data?
       To conserve space, we briefly summarize the results of our experiments here. We have
found that with depreciation rates of roughly 25% per month the model can indeed account
for the elasticity of inventories to costs in the data at the micro-level. Clearly, this implies
a lower elasticity at the aggregate level as well. However, we also find that with such high
rates of depreciation it is difficult to account for the relatively high inventory holdings we
observe in the data (0.70 in grocery stores, 1.30 at the retail level and 1.40 for Manufacturing
and Trade as a whole). In the model, one needs excessively large volatility of idiosyncratic
shocks to induce firms to hold inventories, which in turn generates counterfactual quantity
implications. For example, with a δ = 0.25 the model implies that firms stockout 30% of the
time (5-8% in the data), most price changes are temporary price increases due to stockouts
(in the data most price changes are temporary price cuts), as well as that price changes are
much larger than in the data (10%). Thus, simply raising the rate of depreciation in the
model allows one to account for one set of microeconomic facts only at the expense of others.

                                               26
         Jung and Yun (2005) suggest an alternative solution that may in principle reduce the
sensitivity of inventories to costs: penalizing deviations of the firm’s inventory-sales ratio from
a given fixed target. We argue that modifications of the model along these lines would again
produce counterfactual microeconomic implications. In particular, in Table 10 we report the
volatility of the inventory-to-sales ratio in the Spanish supermarket data and compare it to
that in the model. We measure volatility using the ratio of the interquartile range to the
median, a statistic similar to the coefficient of variation, but less susceptible to outliers. As
                                                                                       sit
the Table reports, our model implies a volatility of the inventory-to-sales ratio,     qit
                                                                                           ,   slightly
lower than that in the data (the ratio of the interquartile range to the median is 1.24 in the
model vs. 1.35 in the data). Thus introducing additional features of the model to reduce the
unconditional volatility of the inventory-to-sales ratio would again produce counterfactual
microeconomic implications.


C. Calvo time-dependent pricing and adjustment costs
         In a companion paper23 we extend the analysis above to a Calvo-type time-dependent
setting with inventories. We show there that the results above are robust to this extension.
In particular, we find again that inventories are highly sensitive to cyclical fluctuations in the
cost of acquiring and holding them. This is true both in a simple Calvo model with a stockout-
avoidance motive for holding inventories, as well as in a richer Smets-Wouters (2007) - type
model. Thus even modest degrees of real rigidities (elasticities of real marginal cost to output
lower than the inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution) predict a counterfactually high
increase in the inventory-to-sales ratio in response to monetary expansions. We also consider
extensions in which we allow for adjustment costs on inventory investment (or more generally
factors of production). These do allow the model to simultaneously match the behavior of real
wages and other time-series in the data. These modifications imply, however, that a firm’s
shadow valuation of inventories increases sharply during booms despite the sluggishness of
factor prices. As a result, the model’s implications for the behavior of inflation resemble those
of a model with little real rigidities and no adjustment costs.


 23
      Kryvtsov and Midrigan (2008).




                                                27
6. Conclusions
        As pointed out by Bils and Kahn, the behavior of inventories is informative about
how markups and real marginal costs vary with the cycle. We show here that a model
which combines the stockout-avoidance and (s,S) motives for holding inventories, calibrated
to match salient features of the microeconomic data, requires an elasticity of real marginal cost
with respect to output of slightly less than the inverse intertemporal elasticity of substitution,
in order to account for the behavior of inventories in the aftermath of monetary policy shocks.
A greater degree of real rigidities implies a counterfactually high increase in the inventory-to-
sales ratio in response to monetary expansions. In contrast, in the data this ratio persistently
declines during booms. These results are robust to a number of variations of the model and
are mainly driven by the relatively low inventory carrying costs (rates of depreciation) that
are observed in the data (and are necessary to reconcile the model with the relatively large
average inventory-to-sales ratios). We conclude that the data on inventories pose a challenge
for models in which real rigidities take the form of low sensitivity of real marginal cost to
output.
        To us, the most promising approach to resolving the challenge posed by the data on
inventories for models of real rigidities are frictions in the asset market that disconnect the
real interest rate implied by consumer’s pricing kernel from the opportunity cost of funds
of the firms. In particular, Blinder and Maccini (1991) review evidence that suggests that
inventories are insensitive to real interest rates24 . Allowing for frictions that limit the firms’
ability to transform inventories into interest-paying balances in the asset market, as in the
segmented asset market model of Alvarez, Atkeson and Kehoe (2002) or in the model of
regime-switching and learning by Maccini, Moore and Schaller (2004), may be promising in
tackling this challenge. Other potentially useful extensions include a) allowing additional
sources of countercyclical markups (other than nominal price rigidities) that would decrease
the benefits of carrying inventories during booms, and b) additional frictions on the firms’
ability to purchase and carry inventories (e.g., non-linear rates of depreciation, capacity con-
straints) that reduce the sensitivity of inventories to costs. Exploring alternative mechanisms

  24
    Although, as our model suggests, this evidence must be interpreted with caution, as it is the interest
rates times the expected change in the cost of purchasing inventories, that determines the cost of holding
inventories. In our Benchmark model, inventories are also fairly insensitive to variations in interest rates
because costs of purchasing inventories rise sufficiently in booms to offset the drop in the real interest rate.



                                                      28
that can address the disconnect between inventory data and models of real rigidities is an
interesting avenue for future research.



References
 [1] Alvarez, Fernando, Andrew Atkeson and Patrick Kehoe, 2002, “Money, Interest Rates,
    and Exchange Rates with Endogenously Segmented Markets,” Journal of Political Econ-
    omy, 110: 73-112.

 [2] Aguirregabiria, Victor, 1999. “The Dynamics of Markups and Inventories in Retailing
    Firms,” The Review of Economic Studies, 66(2), 275-308.

 [3] Aguirregabiria, Victor, 2005. “Retail Stockouts and Manufacturer Brand Competition,”
    mimeo.

 [4] Alessandria, George, Joseph Kaboski, and Virgiliu Midrigan, 2008. “Inventories, Lumpy
    Trade, and Large Devaluations,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper
    08-3.

 [5] Ball, Laurence and David Romer, 1990. “Real Rigidities and the Non-Neutrality of
    Money,” The Review of Economic Studies, 57(2), 183-203.

 [6] Barro, Robert, 1977, “Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 3: 305-316

 [7] Bils, Mark, 2004. “Studying Price Markups from Stockout Behavior,” mimeo.

 [8] Bils, Mark and James A. Kahn, 2000. “What Inventory Behavior Tells Us About Business
    Cycles,” American Economic Review, 90(3), 458-481.

 [9] Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow, 2004. “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky
    Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 947-985.

[10] Bils, Mark, and Klenow, Peter J. and Oleksiy Kryvtsov, 2003. “Sticky Prices and Mon-
    etary Policy Shocks,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Winter,
    2-9.



                                           29
[11] Blinder, Alan and Louis Maccini, 1991, “Taking Stock: A Critical Assessment of Recent
    Research on Inventories,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5(1): 73-96.

[12] Burstein, Ariel and Christian Hellwig, 2007. “Prices and Market Shares in a Menu Cost
    Model,” mimeo.

[13] Caplin, Andrew, 1985. “The Variability of Aggregate Demand with (S,s) Inventory Poli-
    cies,” Econometrica, 53(6), 1395-1409.

[14] Chang, Yongsung, and Hornstein, Andreas and Pierre-Daniel Sarte, 2006. “Understand-
    ing How Employment Responds to Productivity Shocks in a Model with Inventories,”
    Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 2006-06.

[15] Chari, V. V. and Patrick J. Kehoe and Ellen R. McGrattan, 2000. “Sticky Price Models
    of the Business Cycle: Can the Contract Multiplier Solve the Persistence Problem?,”
    Econometrica, 68(5), 1151-1180.

[16] Christiano, Lawrence J. and Eichenbaum, Martin and Charles L. Evans, 1999. “Monetary
    policy shocks: What have we learned and to what end?,” Handbook of Macroeconomics,
    in: J. B. Taylor & M. Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, edition 1, volume
    1, chapter 2, pages 65-148 Elsevier.

[17] Christiano, Lawrence J. and Eichenbaum, Martin and Charles L. Evans, 2005. “Nominal
    Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political
    Economy, University of Chicago Press, 113(1), 1-45.

[18] Dotsey, Michael and Robert J. King, 2005. “Implications of state-dependent pricing for
    dynamic macroeconomic models,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(1), 213-242.

[19] Dotsey, Michael and Robert G. King, 2006. “Pricing, Production, and Persistence,”
    Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(5), 893-928.

[20] Eichenbaum, Martin, Nir Jaimovich and Sergio Rebelo, 2008. “Reference Prices and
    Nominal Rigidities, ” mimeo.

[21] Eichenbaum, Martin and Jonas Fisher, 2004. “Evaluating the Calvo Model of Sticky
    Prices,” mimeo.

                                             30
[22] Erceg, Christofer, Dale Henderson and Andrew Levin, 2000, “Optimal Monetary Policy
    with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46: 281-313.

[23] Fisher, Jonas and Andreas Hornstein, 2000. “(S, s) Inventory Policies in General Equi-
    librium,” The Review of Economic Studies, 67(1), 117-145.

[24] Gertler, Mark and Leahy, John, 2006. “A Phillips Curve with an Ss Foundation,” NBER
    Working Paper 11971.

[25] Gruen, Thomas W and Corstein, Daniel S. and Sundar Bharadwadj, 2002. “Retail Out-
    of-Stocks: A Worldwide Examination of Extent, Causes and Consumer Responses,” the
    Grocery Manufacturers of America.

[26] Hall, Robert, 2005, “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,”
    American Economic Review, 95(1): 50-65.

[27] Hall, George and John Rust, 2000. “An Empirical Model of Inventory Investment by
    Durable Commodity Intermediaries,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
    Policy, 52, 171-214.

[28] Hall, George and John Rust, 2002. “Econometric Methods for Endogenously Sampled
    Time Series: The Case of Commodity Price Speculation in the Steel Market,” mimeo.

[29] House, Christopher, L., 2008. “Fixed Costs and Long-Lived Investments.” NBER Work-
    ing Paper, No. W14402.

[30] Iacoviello, Matteo, Fabio Schiantarelli and Scott Schuh, 2007. “Input and Output In-
    ventories in General Equilibrium,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper No.
    07-16.

[31] Jung Yongseung and Tack Yun, 2005, “Monetary Policy Shocks, Inventory Dynamics,
    and Price Setting Behavior ” mimeo

[32] Kehoe, Patrick J. and Virgiliu Midrigan, 2007. “Sales and the real effects of monetary
    policy,” Working Papers 652, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

[33] Khan, Aubhik and Julia Thomas, 2007a. “Inventories and the business cycle: An equi-
    librium analysis of (S,s) policies.” American Economic Review, 97(4), 1165-88.

                                            31
[34] Khan, Aubhik and Julia Thomas, 2007b. “Explaining Inventories: A Business Cycle
    Assessment of the Stockout Avoidance and (S,s) Motives,” Macroeconomic Dynamics,
    11(5), 638-64.

[35] Khan, Aubhik and Julia Thomas, 2008. “Inventories and State-Dependent Pricing,”

[36] Kimball, Miles, 1995. “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model,”
    Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 27(4), 1241-1277.

[37] Klenow, Peter J. and Oleksiy Kryvtsov, 2008. “State-Dependent or Time-Dependent
    Pricing: Does It Matter for Recent U.S. Inflation?” forthcoming in The Quarterly Journal
    of Economics.

[38] Klenow, Peter J. and Jon Willis, 2006. “Real Rigidities and Nominal Price Changes,”
    mimeo.

[39] Kryvtsov, Oleksiy and Virgiliu Midrigan, 2008, “Inventories, Markups and Real Rigidi-
    ties in New Keynesian Business Cycle Models,” mimeo.

[40] Levy, Daniel, and Bergen, Mark, and Dutta, Shantanu, and Robert Venable, 1997. “The
    Magnitude of Menu Costs: Direct Evidence from Large U.S. Supermarket Chains,” The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3), 791-825.

[41] Maccini, Louis J., and Bartholomew J. Moore, and Huntley Schaller, 2004. “The Interest
    Rate, Learning, and Inventory Investment,” The American Economic Review, 94(5),
    1303-1327.

[42] Nakamura, Emi and Jón, Steinsson, 2007. “Monetary Non-Neutrality in a Multi-Sector
    Menu Cost Model,” mimeo.

[43] Nakamura, Emi and Jón, Steinsson, 2008. “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation of
    Menu Cost Models,” forthcoming in The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

[44] Nakamura, Emi, 2008, “Pass-Through in Retail and Wholesale,” American Economic
    Review, 98(2), 430-437.

[45] Ramey, Valerie A and Daniel J. Vine, 2004. “Why Do Real and Nominal Inventory-Sales
    Ratios Have Different Trends?,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 36(5), 959-63.

                                            32
[46] Ramey, Valerie A. and Kenneth D. West, 1999. “Inventories,” Handbook of Macroeco-
    nomics, in: J. B. Taylor & M. Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, edition 1,
    volume 1, chapter 13, pages 863-923

[47] Ribarsky, Jennifer, 2004, “Real Inventories, Sales, and Inventory-Sales Ratios for Man-
    ufacturing and Trade, 1997:I-2003:III,” Survey of Current Business, February 1, 2004.

[48] Richardson, H. 1995. ”Control Your Costs then Cut Them” Transportation and Distri-
    bution, 94-96.

[49] Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer, 2004. “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks:
    Derivation and Implications,” The American Economic Review, 94(4), 1055-1084.

[50] Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters, 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles:
    A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” The American Economic Review, 97(3), 586-606.

[51] Stigler George and James Kindhal, 1970, “The Behavior of Industrial Prices,” Columbia
    University Press.

[52] Solon, Gary and Barsky, Robert and Jonathan A. Parker, 1994. “Measuring the Cycli-
    cality of Real Wages: How Important is Composition Bias,” The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 109(1), 1-25.

[53] Stock, James R. and Douglas M. Lambert, 2001. “Strategic Logistics Management,”
    McGraw-Hill, 4th edition.

[54] Wen, Yi, 2008. “Input and Output Inventory Dynamics,” Federal Reserve Bank of St.
    Louis Working Paper 2008-008A.

[55] Woodford, Michael, 2003, “Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory o Monetary
    Policy,” Princeton University Press.




                                            33
                   Table 1: Moments for Aggregate Inventory-to-Sales ratio


                                          Mean         Std   Serr corr   Correlation with
                                                                         output    sales

                                                             NIPA monthly

            Manufacturing and Trade        1.41    2.19        0.88      -0.83     -0.83
                    Retail                 1.31    2.08        0.72      -0.49     -0.61

                                                             NBER annual

                  Manufacturing            0.31    3.90        0.31      -0.52     -0.66


Note: Data are from the BEA National Income and Product Accounts monthly data from January
1967 to December 1997 and the NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database from 1957 to 1996.
Sales are defined as real final sales to domestic purcharsers in NIPA data and real value of industry
shipments for NBER data. Output is the sum of final sales and the change in the end-of-period
real inventory stock. Inventory-to-sales ratio is defined as the ratio of the end-of-period inventory
stock to final sales in that period. All data are HP filtered. Output, sales and inventory-to-sales
ratio are defined in % deviations from respective HP trends. Inventory investment is defined in %
points-of-output-fraction deviations from its HP trend.




                                                  34
                Table 2: Inventory-to-sales ratio by low, medium and high bins


                                               Level of Inventory-to-Sales Ratio
                                               Low Medium High Aggregate


                                                                Mean

                 Inventory-to-sales ratio      0.18      0.31      0.55       0.31
                             Sales share       0.47      0.27      0.26         1

                                                   Correlation with real GDP

                 Inventory-to-sales ratio -0.41         -0.33     -0.47      -0.47


Note: The NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database from 1957 to 1996. The panel of inventory-
to-sales ratios is divided into 3 bins corresponding to low, medium or high ratio. Means are un-
weighted. Sales share is the fraction of total sales for inventory-to-sales in the bin to total sales in
the panel.




                                                  35
                   Table 3: Elasticities of aggregate inventory-to-sales ratio


                                               output elasticity    sales elasticity


                                                NIPA monthly

                 Manufacturing and Trade              -0.77              -0.86
                         Retail                       -0.49              -0.70

                                                NBER annual

                       Manufacturing                  -0.42              -0.60


Note: Data are from BEA National Income and Product Accounts monthly data from January 1967
to December 1997 and the NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database from 1957 to 1996. Elas-
ticities are regression coefficients with log inventory-to-sales as dependent variable and log output
(or log sales) as independent variable, in addition to fixed time effects.




                                                 36
              Table 4: Sales elasticities of industry-level inventory-to-sales ratio


                                              Across time         Cross-section


                          sales elasticity         -0.57              -0.12


Note: The NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database from 1957 to 1996. Across time elasticity
is a panel regression coefficient with log industry inventory-to-sales as dependent variable and log
industry sales as independent variable. Cross-section elasticity is a regression coefficient with mean
log industry inventory-to-sales as dependent variable and mean log industry sales as independent
variable. All regressions include fixed time and industry effects.


                                    Table 5: Parameter values

                           κp       κs       ā      ρ       θ        δ        σ

                         0.007    0.019   0.09     0.21       3      0.025    0.47




                                Table 6: Moments in data and Model


                                                           Data                Model

                                                  Used in calibration

                       Frequency ∆p                        0.20                    0.20

                    Mean |∆p| if adjust                    0.10                    0.10

                    Inventory-sales ratio                  1.40                    1.40

                  Correlation ∆ log p, ∆y                  -0.23                -0.22

                                                  Additional moments

                     Fraction stockouts                  0.05-0.08                 0.05

                      Frequency orders                   0.33-0.79                 0.56

                                                    37
       Table 7: Elasticities of real wages and I/S to sales

                                                      [
                                              mean W/P                 I/S
                                                                       d
                                                    C
                                                    b          mean     S
                                                                        b


        Benchmark                λ=0             1              -2.66

                                      1
   Large real rigidities         λ=   2
                                                0.53            4.56

IS-consistent real rigidities   λ = 0.15        0.92            -0.79




          Table 8: Economy without adjustment costs

                                      [
                                      W/P      I/S
                                               d
                                       C
                                       b        S
                                                b    no cost

                 Benchmark                1          -2.29

           Smaller real rigidities    0.92           -1.29

            Large real rigidities     0.53           0.67

            Inventory-consistent      0.77           -0.79




                                 38
 Table 9: Inventories and Costs in a Spanish Supermarket


                             Data        Model

              Dependent     log(sit )    log(sit )



                log(cit )    -2.38        -7.41



                # obs.       14325

                  R2         0.02



Table 10: Inventory-to-Sales ratio in a Spanish supermarket


                            Data        Model

                             sit         sit
                             qit         qit




                 median     0.65        1.44
                   iqr
                  median
                            1.35        1.24



                  # obs.    14182




                             39
               Figure 1: Inventory-Sales Ratio and Output
                           in US Manufacturing
15                                                   inventory-sales ratio
                                                     output

10

 5

 0

 -5

-10

-15
      1959   1965    1971       1977      1983      1989         1995
                                      Figure 2: Role of compositional effects
                             15


                             10
% deviations from HP trend




                              5


                              0


                              -5


                             -10
                                                                         Aggregate IS
                                                                         Average IS
                             -15
                               1959    1967         1975          1983            1991
                                           Figure 3: Response to +1% innovation to Fed Funds Rate
                                                Manufacturing and Trade, Jan '67 - Dec '96
                                                Output                                                                     Sales
                         1                                                                           1


                       0.5                                                                         0.5




                                                                                        % points
% points




                         0                                                                           0




                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                          3

                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                  9
                                                                                                                      12

                                                                                                                           15

                                                                                                                                18

                                                                                                                                     21

                                                                                                                                          24

                                                                                                                                               27

                                                                                                                                                    30

                                                                                                                                                         33

                                                                                                                                                              36
                          0

                              3

                                  6

                                       9
                                           12

                                                15

                                                     18

                                                          21

                                                               24

                                                                    27

                                                                         30

                                                                              33

                                                                                   36
                       -0.5                                                                        -0.5


                        -1                                                                          -1


                       -1.5                                                                        -1.5
                                           Months after CEE shock                                                     Months after CEE shock


                                      Inventory Investment                                                    Inventory-to-sales ratio
                       0.3                                                                         1.5

                       0.2                                                                           1
% of industry output




                       0.1
                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                        % points

                         0
                                                                                                     0
                          0

                              3

                                  6

                                       9
                                           12

                                                15

                                                     18

                                                          21

                                                               24

                                                                    27

                                                                         30

                                                                              33

                                                                                   36




                       -0.1
                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                          3

                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                  9
                                                                                                                      12

                                                                                                                           15

                                                                                                                                18

                                                                                                                                     21

                                                                                                                                          24

                                                                                                                                               27

                                                                                                                                                    30

                                                                                                                                                         33

                                                                                                                                                              36
                                                                                                   -0.5
                       -0.2

                       -0.3                                                                         -1

                       -0.4                                                                        -1.5
                                           Months after CEE shock                                                     Months after CEE shock
                            Figure 4: Inaction regions and decision rules

               0.2
                                                                         adjust s & p
                                                                         adjust p
                                                                         adjust s
              0.15                                                       p if adjust both
                                                                         z if adjust both


               0.1
log (price)




              0.05



                 0



              -0.05



               -0.1



                  0   0.5     1     1.5   2     2.5     3     3.5    4      4.5       5
                                  inventories (relative to mean sales)
                                                                     Figure 5a: Expected I/S cond. on ordering &                                                                                      Figure 5b: Exected I/S cond. on not ordering &
                                                                                  optimal price decision                                                                                                         optimal price decision
                                                                  0.3                                                                                                                               0.3
expected I/S (relative to that conditional on price adjustment)




                                                                  0.2                                                                                                                               0.2




                                                                                                                                  expected I/S (relative to that conditional on price adjustment)
                                                                  0.1                                                                                                                               0.1




                                                                    0                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                  -0.1                                                                                                                              -0.1




                                                                  -0.2                                                                                                                              -0.2




                                                                  -0.3                                                                                                                              -0.3
                                                                    -0.15   -0.1    -0.05      0      0.05     0.1   0.15   0.2                                                                       -0.15   -0.1    -0.05      0     0.05     0.1    0.15   0.2
                                                                                            past price, p-1,                                                                                                                  past price, p-1
                                                                                   log-deviation from frictionless                                                                                                   log-deviation from frictionless
                                                                            Figure 6: Benchmark
                                                   M, P, W                                  Consumption and real wages
                                                                                    1.2
                                                                             M                                                C
                                2                                            P        1                                       W/P
% deviation from SS




                                                                             W                                                UcW/P
                                                                                    0.8
                      1.5
                                                                                    0.6
                                1                                                   0.4

                                                                                    0.2
                      0.5
                                                                                      0

                                0                                                   -0.2
                                 0        5             10             15               0    5           10          15           20


                                                 Inventories                                           Orders
                                2                                                     8
                                                                             I/S                                       Orders
                                                                             I        6                                Fract. ordering
          % deviation from SS




                                0                                            S
                                                                                      4

                                                                                      2
                                -2
                                                                                      0

                                                                                     -2
                                -4
                                                                                     -4

                                -6                                                   -6
                                  0   5               10          15         20        0     5            10          15          20
                                              Periods after shock                                 Periods after shock
                                                                        Figure 7: Large RR
                                              M, P, W                                   Consumption and real wages
                                                                                 1.5
                           2
% deviation from SS




                                                                  M               1                            C
                                                                  P                                            W/P
                      1.5
                                                                  W              0.5                           UcW/P

                           1                                                      0

                      0.5                                                       -0.5

                           0                                                      -1
                            0        5             10             15                0    5          10          15     20



                                            Inventories                                           Orders
                           15                                                    20

                                                                                                    Orders
     % deviation from SS




                                                                  I/S
                           10                                                    10                 Fract. ordering
                                                                  I
                                                                  S
                           5                                                      0


                           0                                                    -10


                           -5                                                   -20
                             0   5               10          15          20        0     5           10          15    20
                                         Periods after shock                                 Periods after shock
