                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SOME NEW PERSPECTIVES ON INDIA'S APPROACH TO CAPITAL ACCOUNT
                            LIBERALIZATION

                                            Eswar S. Prasad

                                         Working Paper 14658
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14658


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2009




I thank the participants at the Brookings-NCAER India Policy Forum, and especially the discussants
for this paper, John Williamson and Partha Sen, for their helpful comments. I am grateful to Arvind
Panagariya for his detailed and constructive comments, which have greatly improved the paper. Rahul
Anand provided excellent research assistance on this paper. I also thank Vinay DCosta for help with
gathering and interpreting data on India’s capital controls. A revised version of this paper is forthcoming
in the "Brookings India Policy Forum". The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Eswar S. Prasad. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Some New Perspectives on India’s Approach to Capital Account Liberalization
Eswar S. Prasad
NBER Working Paper No. 14658
January 2009
JEL No. F3,F4,O2

                                            ABSTRACT

In this paper, I analyze India’s approach to capital account liberalization through the lens of the new
literature on financial globalization. India’s authorities have taken a cautious and calibrated path to
capital account opening, which has served the economy well in terms of reducing its vulnerability
to crises. By now, the capital account has become quite open and reversing this is not a viable option.
Moreover, the remaining capital controls are rapidly becoming ineffective, making the debate about
capital controls rather moot. Managing de facto financial integration into international capital markets
and aligning domestic macroeconomic policies in a manner that maximizes the indirect benefits and
reduces the risks is the key challenge now facing India’s policymakers on this front.


Eswar S. Prasad
Department of Applied Economics and
Management
Cornell University
440 Warren Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
eswar.prasad@cornell.edu
                                                  1

                                       I. Introduction


Capital account liberalization remains a highly contentious issue. Proponents argue that it
fosters financial globalization—a term that broadly encompasses cross-border flows of
financial capital in various forms. This phenomenon, in principle, should allow for a more
efficient allocation of financial resources across countries and also permit countries to
share their country-specific income risk more efficiently, thereby increasing economic
welfare on both counts. Detractors have blamed capital account liberalization as being the
root cause of the financial crises experienced by many countries and argue that the deck is
particularly stacked against non-industrial countries, which have experienced few benefits
but exposed themselves to considerable risks (see, e.g., Bhagwati, 1998; Rodrik, 1998).


The recent financial crisis has brought this debate into even sharper relief. Emerging
market economies and even some low-income countries are having to cope with volatile
capital flows—sharp surges in inflows in the last couple of years followed by outflows in
recent months. Before the crisis hit, major economies like China and India were
contemplating further opening of their capital accounts, generating a sharp polemical
debate about the advisability of this strategy.


Meanwhile, there have been important advances in the academic literature. Even before the
recent crisis, researchers had begun to develop a more nuanced approach to the issue and to
frame the debate in terms of a complex set of cost-benefit tradeoffs. One of the key
conclusions of the new literature is that the principal benefit of financial openness for
developing economies may not be access to foreign capital that helps increase domestic
investment by relaxing the constraint imposed by a low level of domestic saving. Rather,
the main benefits may be indirect ones associated with openness to foreign capital,
including the catalytic effects of foreign finance on domestic financial market
development, enhanced discipline on macroeconomic policies, and improvements in
corporate governance as well as other aspects of institutional quality.
                                               2

A major complication, however, is that economies that have weak initial conditions in
certain dimensions seem to have much worse outcomes from their integration into
international financial markets, in terms of both lower benefits and higher risks. For
countries below these “threshold” conditions, the benefit-risk tradeoff becomes
complicated and a one-shot approach to capital account liberalization may be risky and
counter-productive. Some of these threshold conditions (e.g., level of financial
development, quality of domestic institutions) are similar to the list of indirect benefits,
pointing to a difficult tension faced by low- and middle-income countries that want to use
financial openness as a catalyst for those benefits but would then face the risks associated
with being below the threshold conditions.


At the same time, the practical reality is that emerging market countries are having to adapt
to rising financial globalization. Capital controls are being rendered increasingly
ineffective by the rising sophistication of international investors, the sheer quantity of
money flowing across national borders, and the increasing number of channels (especially
expanding trade flows) for the evasion of these controls. Hence, emerging market
economies like China and India are perforce grappling with the new realities of financial
globalization, wherein capital controls are losing their potency as a policy instrument (or at
least as an instrument that creates more room for monetary and other macro policies).


Developments in international financial markets also have a bearing on this issue. In recent
years, emerging markets had been getting more capital inflows than they could
comfortably handle, causing complications for domestic macroeconomic policies and also
exposing these economies even more to the volatility of foreign capital. International
investors, especially from industrial economies, had turned up in droves at the shores of
emerging markets in recent years but are now retreating due to the recent global financial
turmoil. It is likely that, once financial markets settle down, they will again be lured by the
strong growth prospects of many emerging markets as well as weak growth and low
interest rates in their home countries. The same forces are also likely to cause domestic
investors in emerging markets to resume repatriation of their capital from abroad.
                                               3

Against this background, the objective of this paper is to analyze India’s approach to
capital account liberalization program through the lens of the new literature on financial
globalization. In recent years, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has taken what it calls a
calibrated approach to capital account liberalization, with certain types of flows and
particular classes of economic agents being prioritized in the process of liberalization (see
Reddy, 2007). I will evaluate the effectiveness of this approach in terms of the narrow
objectives of influencing the quantity and composition of flows, and also in terms of
macroeconomic consequences. This will involve an empirical characterization of the
evolution of financial openness based on de jure measures of capital account openness as
well as de facto measures of financial integration. I will also examine the evolution and
structure of inflows and outflows. I will then relate these to the literature on the
determinants and effects of external capital structure.


The cautious and calibrated approach has meant that India’s capital account liberalization
has proceeded in fits and starts but the net effect is that, over time, the capital account has
become increasingly open and India has been rapidly integrating into international capital
markets. While this approach has to some extent helped protect the country from the
volatility induced by financial flows, a key question is whether this approach may have
subtle costs in terms of efficiency and welfare that outweigh this benefit.


In the next section, I provide an overview of the new literature on the benefits and risks of
financial globalization. In Section III, I describe the evolution of India’s financial openness
based on a wide range of indicators. In the subsequent three sections, I provide a detailed
analysis of the structure of and changes in India’s balance of payments, cross-border
financial flows, and international reserves. In the final section of the paper, I discuss the
implications of India’s approach towards capital account liberalization for monetary and
exchange rate policies and for financial sector reforms.
                                              4

            II. Paradoxical Results, But Composition of Liabilities Matters


Despite the strong theoretical presumption that financial openness should boost growth in
developing countries, macroeconomic evidence of the growth benefits of financial
openness remains elusive (see Kose et al., 2006; Kletzer IPF 2005 for surveys). Although
there is a positive correlation between measures of financial openness and growth, this
correlation vanishes once one controls for other determinants of growth such as financial
development, quality of institutions, and macroeconomic policies. More recent evidence
based on better measures of de facto financial openness or specific types of liberalization
(such as equity market liberalizations) does show more positive effects. Analysis based on
industry- or firm-level data is also more supportive of the efficiency and growth benefits of
financial globalization. But this evidence is hardly conclusive.


Indeed, there is some remarkable new evidence that non-industrial countries that rely less
on foreign capital have on average posted better long-run growth outcomes (see Aizenman,
Pinto and Radziwill, 2008; Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2007; Prasad, Rajan and Subramanian,
2007). This result is not just limited to the recent period of rising global imbalances, when
some fast-growing economies like China have on net been exporting massive amounts of
capital. This result holds up over much longer periods of time and is not specific to
countries in any particular region. Rodrik (2008) interprets these new findings as
suggesting that the real constraint to growth in many less-developed economies is
investment not savings. Ineffectual financial systems may not be up to the task of
efficiently intermediating domestic savings into investment, let alone being able to
intermediate foreign capital efficiently.


Given these empirical findings, a new paradigm is emerging that the main benefits of
financial globalization may not be through the direct channel of providing more financing.
Rather, the main benefits may be in terms of catalyzing financial market and institutional
development, stimulating gains in efficiency through competition and access to new
technologies, and disciplining macroeconomic policies (see Schematic 1). There is
                                                  5

accumulating evidence for this paradigm, although it is by no means conclusive yet.1
Nevertheless, this paradigm has important implications for empirical analysis of the effects
of capital account liberalization and also for designing such liberalization programs.


A complication, however, is that there appear to be some threshold conditions that
influence the cost-benefit tradeoff. Indeed, factors such as financial market development
and the quality of institutions also seem to play a crucial role in determining the extent of
benefits a country can derive from financial openness and also how vulnerable it is to the
risks associated with capital flows. These thresholds are considerably lower for certain
types of financial flows—FDI and portfolio equity, in particular—and higher for debt
inflows.2 Indeed, there are many examples of how underdeveloped or poorly regulated
financial markets and weak institutions can interact in ways that result in misallocation of
foreign capital and make countries vulnerable to financial crises.3


This framework clearly highlights some deep tensions in the process of capital account
liberalization that cannot easily be avoided. But the collateral benefits-thresholds
framework also suggests a way forward. If one can prioritize the indirect “collateral”
benefits that a country needs, it should in principle be possible to undertake a controlled
capital account liberalization that helps attain these benefits while reducing the risks. Thus,
the framework encompasses a general approach that can still take account of country-

1
  Kose et al. (2006) develop this framework and survey the evidence on each of these potential
indirect (or “collateral”) benefits. There is a growing body of evidence—based on country case
studies as well as cross-country analysis using both macroeconomic and microeconomic (firm- and
sector-level) data—that financial openness tends to positively influence financial development and
institutional quality. The evidence that it boosts macroeconomic discipline remains sparse,
however. For skeptical views about the notion that financial integration delivers such indirect
benefits, see Eichengreen (2007) and Rodrik and Subramanian (2008).
2
  Kose, Prasad and Taylor (2008) review the theoretical basis for such threshold effects and
provide some quantitative evidence that thresholds matter, even though it proves difficult to pin
down precisely the exact levels of various thresholds. Mukerji (2009) provides evidence that higher
levels of financial development and stable macroeconomic policies enable countries to gain modest
growth benefits from capital account convertibility, while weak financial systems and
macroeconomic vulnerabilities increase growth instability without raising average growth.
3
    See Krueger and Yoo (2002) and Desai (2003) for interesting narrative accounts.
                                                6

specific circumstances and initial conditions. For instance, Prasad and Rajan (2008)
propose a method for countries experiencing sustained large inflows to securitize their
reserve accumulation. This would, in a controlled way, help balance the inflows by
encouraging outflows, and would deliver the indirect benefits of broadening financial
markets and allowing citizens of these countries to benefit from international portfolio
diversification.


Risk sharing


It is also worth considering other potential benefits of financial openness rather than just its
effects on GDP growth. One of the main presumed benefits of international financial
integration is that it should facilitate international trade in financial assets, thereby enabling
countries to diversify away their income risk and thereby smooth their consumption
growth. Remarkably, the evidence shows that financial integration has, on average, led to
worse risk sharing outcomes for emerging market economies during the period of
globalization. Only industrial countries have been able to more efficiently share risk
through the process of financial integration. Kose, Prasad and Terrones (2007) document
these patterns in the data. They also probe more deeply into why financial integration
seems to hurt emerging markets on this dimension.


They find that stocks of FDI and portfolio equity liabilities are in fact associated with
better risk sharing outcomes while stocks of external debt liabilities are not. Indeed, this
goes a long way towards explaining the paradoxical outcomes for emerging markets. Until
recently, financial integration for these economies largely took place in the form of debt
accumulation. Not only are debt flows themselves procyclical, interest payments on
external debt are typically not indexed to the business cycle, so they have a procyclical
element to them as well. FDI and portfolio equity flows by their very nature involve a
sharing of risk between foreign investors and their host countries. They have also tended to
be more stable than debt flows. Interestingly, advanced economies do not seem to suffer
similar problems from debt flows, which still dominate cross-border flows among these
economies. This could be because they have better-developed financial markets and,
                                               7

typically, more flexible exchange rates, both of which act as shock absorbers in the face of
capital flow volatility.


Productivity growth


The literature about the indirect benefits of financial integration emphasizes that the main
benefits of financial integration are in terms of TFP growth. Interestingly, while there has
been a vast literature examining the effects of integration on output growth, scant attention
has been paid to its effects on TFP growth. In a recent contribution, Kose, Prasad and
Terrones (2008) find that de jure capital account openness is positively associated with
TFP growth. Surprisingly, however, overall de facto financial integration is not correlated
with TFP growth. This turns out to mask a novel and interesting result. FDI and portfolio
equity liabilities are in fact associated with much higher productivity growth, while stocks
of debt liabilities are negatively correlated with TFP growth, especially in economies with
underdeveloped financial systems. What explains this difference? The indirect “collateral”
benefits of financial flows tend to flow from FDI, in terms of technological and skill
spillovers, and from portfolio equity, in the form of increased depth and innovations in
equity markets. Financial sector FDI has also been found to help in the import of good
governance practices and financial innovations (Goldberg, 2004).


A common theme that emerges from this new literature is that, in terms of evaluating the
potential benefits and risks of financial integration, the composition of the stock of external
liabilities is highly relevant in a number of dimensions. This is of course not a big
surprise—for instance, it is in line with the earlier literature on sequencing of capital
account liberalization. But it is nevertheless comforting that some of the theoretical
predictions about the benefits of financial integration can be recovered with a suitable
disaggregation of the data.


This brief overview of the new literature on the benefits and costs of financial openness
will help us in understanding the implications of India’s rising financial openness. To
begin with, we need to know how open India’s capital account actually is.
                                                    8

                            III. How Open is India’s Capital Account


The traditional approach to measuring financial openness is to use measures of legal
restrictions on cross-border capital flows. The conventional binary indicator of capital
account openness is based on information contained in the International Monetary Fund’s
Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER) for
each of the IMF’s member countries (Schindler, 2007). Authors such as Miniane (2004),
Chinn and Ito (2006), and Edwards (2007) have developed finer measures of capital
account openness using disaggregated information from the AREAER.4


An alternative approach is to use a de facto measure that tries to take into account how
much a country is integrated into international capital markets in practice.5 A measure of
gross flows as a ratio to GDP captures two-way flows, which one would expect to see if
economies were in fact sharing risk efficiently in a world with multiple financial
instruments and agents with different risk profiles. Using the sum of gross inflows and
outflows as a ratio to national GDP also yields a nice symmetry with the widely-used
measure of trade openness, which is the sum of imports and exports as a ratio to GDP.


However, such annual flows tend to be quite volatile and are prone to measurement error.
To mitigate (but obviously not eliminate) these problems, Kose et al. (2008) propose using
the sum of gross stocks of foreign assets and liabilities as a ratio to GDP. For some
purposes--particularly risk sharing--the stock measures are more appropriate. For instance,
if countries have large gross stocks of assets and liabilities, small exchange rate changes
can have large valuation effects and serve as a mechanism for risk-sharing even if net asset
positions are small. For emerging market countries, another relevant measure of de facto
financial integration is the ratio of gross stocks of external liabilities to GDP—a cumulated

4
    See Mohan (2008, Annex 1) for a comprehensive listing of capital controls still in place in India.
5
  Another approach has been to look at price-based measures of asset market integration. However,
there are serious practical problems in using such measures for developing economies. Returns on
financial instruments in those economies may incorporate a multitude of risk and liquidity premia
that are difficult to disentangle. Even interest parity conditions sometimes do not hold because of
inefficiencies and lack of depth in some of these markets.
                                               9

measure of inflows that is most closely related to the notion of openness to foreign capital
that could be associated with technological and other spillovers. We take these measures of
de facto financial integration from the widely-used database created by Lane and Milesi-
Ferretti (2006).


There is important information in both the de jure and de facto measures. De jure measures
are relevant for analysis of the effects of capital account liberalization policies. But the
existence of capital controls often does not accurately capture an economy’s actual level of
integration into international financial markets. These measures do not capture the degree
of enforcement of capital controls (or the effectiveness of that enforcement), which can
change over time even if the legal restrictions themselves remain unchanged. Many
countries with extensive capital controls have still experienced massive outflows of private
capital, while some economies with open capital accounts have recorded few capital
inflows or outflows. For instance, despite its extensive regime of capital controls, China
has not been able to block inflows of speculative capital in recent years (Prasad and Wei,
2007). A further complication is that, despite the extensive coverage of the IMF’s annual
AREAER publication, there could be other regulations that effectively act as capital
controls but are not counted as controls. For instance, prudential regulations that limit the
foreign exchange exposure of domestic banks could, under certain circumstances, have the
same effect as capital controls.


The de facto measure may be conceptually more appropriate to the extent that one is
interested in the effects of an outcome-based measure of financial integration. On the other
hand, many of the indirect benefits of financial integration may be vitiated by the presence
of capital controls. Efficiency gains from competition, technology transfers, spillovers of
good corporate and public governance practices etc. may be associated with an open
capital account. Inward flows that manage to circumvent capital account restrictions are
much less likely to convey many of the indirect benefits of financial integration. Many
authors have also pointed out that capital controls can impose significant distortionary
costs at the microeconomic (firm or industry) level, even if economic agents find ways to
evade those controls (see the survey by Forbes, 2005).
                                                10

How does India stack up on these different measures of financial openness? Table 1
presents some summary statistics on each of the measures of de jure capital account
openness discussed above at different points of time. For each measure and each date, the
table shows the median value for the full sample of countries, different values for emerging
market countries, and the value assigned to India. By any of these measures, it looks like
India is at the low end of the distribution of the respective capital account openness
measure in 1995. There is a trend increase over time in average capital account openness
for the full sample of countries. By 2005, India remains near the bottom of the distribution
of Chinn-Ito measures but moves up significantly per the Edwards measure.6 These are all
relatively crude measures of de jure openness, based on a reading of the IMF’s annual
AREAER reports on each country. But in India’s case they do signal that there are some
restrictions on capital account transactions even in categories of flows that have been
liberalized (even minimal registration requirements do get counted as restrictions).


More substantively, the RBI has in fact eased a number of controls, both on inflows and
outflows. For instance, although capital outflows by individuals are in principle still
restricted, each individual is allowed to take up to $200,000 of capital out of India each
year, a generous ceiling by any standards.7 The restrictions on outflows by Indian
corporates are even weaker. As for inflows, FDI inflows into certain sectors such as retail
and banking are restricted, and foreign investors are not allowed to participate in the
government debt market. These restrictions are gradually being lifted. Equity market
investments are permitted by registered foreign institutional investors (although there are
limits on their ownership shares in certain types of Indian firms), and those who do not



6
  A different measure of de jure capital account openness is the equity market liberalization
indicator created and used by Bekaert and Harvey (2000) and Henry (2000). This is considered a
one-off liberalization that occurs when domestic equity markets are opened up to foreign investors.
These authors list India as having liberalized its equity markets in 1992 (and China as having done
so in 1994).
7
  There are a few minor and relatively innocuous restrictions on these outflows (e.g., money cannot
be taken abroad without RBI permission for margin calls; to a small group of neighboring
countries; and to countries identified as not cooperating with international anti-money laundering
regulations).
                                               11

wish to register can invest only indirectly through an instrument called participatory notes,
which are tightly regulated by the government.


We now turn to India’s de facto integration with international capital markets. Figure 1
shows that gross external liabilities, gross external assets, and the sum of these two
variables (expressed as ratios to GDP) have all increased significantly in recent years,
indicative of the rapid pace at which India has been integrating into international capital
markets. From 1980 to the mid-1990s, the total integration measure rose by about 25
percentage points, with almost this entire increase accounted for by an increase in external
liabilities. In the mid-1980s, especially with the onset of the Asian financial crisis, de facto
integration leveled off, although it is interesting to note that foreign assets continued to
increase gradually during this period. From 2000 to 2006, the integration measure shot up
by nearly 26 percentage points, with accumulation of external liabilities and assets
accounting in almost equal part for this increase.


Nevertheless, on a cross-country comparison and relative to its size, India appears to have
one of the least financially open economies amongst the group of emerging markets.
Figure 2 shows that India was near the bottom of the distribution of the preferred de facto
integration measure; its relative position among emerging markets remains quite stable
despite the rapid increase in its absolute level of integration. Thus, in terms of both de jure
and de facto measures, India’s low level of financial openness puts it well below the levels
attained by most other emerging market economies, including the other large BRIC
economies—Brazil, China and Russia. This perspective is useful to keep in mind while
discussing whether India has exposed itself to considerable risks from rapid integration
into international capital markets.


                               IV. The Balance of Payments


In order to dissect the forces behind the accumulation of foreign assets and liabilities, we
now turn to an analysis of the underlying flows. India’s engagement with the world
economy through both trade and financial linkages can best be seen through the prism of
                                                12

the balance of payments. There have been dramatic changes in the evolution of India’s
balance of payments since the currency crisis of the early 1990s (Table 2). During and
right after the period of the Asian financial crisis, the current account and capital account
roughly balanced each other. In the early part of this decade, the current account balance
turned slightly positive, despite a trade deficit. Indeed, this has been a consistent story in
India during this decade—that the trade deficit has been offset to a considerable extent by a
surplus on invisibles trade and remittances from Indian workers abroad.


Reserve accumulation gradually picked up speed during the early 2000s. There has been a
marked shift in the structure of the balance of payments during the last two years (2006-07
and 2007-08). The merchandise trade deficit has risen sharply (to 8 percent of GDP) and
the current account deficit is now 1.5 percent of GDP, both larger than at any other time
during the past decade. But large capital inflows have more than offset the current account
deficit, leading to rapid reserve accumulation.


At the end of financial year 2008, gross international reserves stood at $310 billion,
representing about 27 percent of nominal GDP. Figure 3 shows that reserve accumulation
has hardly been a steady and unrelenting process in India (unlike in China, where it has).
There were a number of months, even during this period of unprecedented reserve
accumulation, when reserves actually fell. But the overall trend until the summer of 2008
was clearly one of not just a rising level of reserves but also a rising pace of reserve
accumulation. The global financial turmoil that swept on to India’s shores in September
2008 led to depreciation pressures on the rupee and the RBI has used up about $30 billion
of its stock of reserves to limit the depreciation of the rupee. It is too early to tell if the era
of large capital inflows to India is past or if inflows will recover when the global financial
system settles down.


It is instructive to break down the reserve buildup into its components to examine what
factors can explain the increase in the rate of accumulation. For this exercise, I split the
nine-year period since the Asian financial crisis into three periods: 1998-99 to 2000-01;
2001-02 to 2005-06; and 2005-06 to 2007-08. For many Asian and other emerging market
                                               13

economies, the pace and sources of reserve accumulation differ markedly across these
three periods (see, e.g., Prasad and Wei, 2007, for the case of China). The first three
columns of Table 3 show the average annual increase in foreign exchange reserves during
each of these periods and the breakdown of this increase into the main components. The
next two columns show the changes in these averages across periods.


The rate of reserve accumulation was higher by an average of $17 billion per year in the
second period relative to the first. The current account balance shifted from an average
deficit of $4 billion per year in the first period to a surplus of $2 billion per year in the
second period, implying that the current account contributed about $6 billion to the
increase in the rate of reserve accumulation in the second period compared to the first. The
change in the non-FDI capital account balance, which mainly constitutes portfolio flows,
accounts for most of the remainder.


During 2006-08, the rate of reserve accumulation jumps by a further $57 billion per year
relative to the preceding period. The forces driving the reserve buildup in this period are
very different from the previous period. The current account switches back into a deficit,
resulting in a negative contribution of nearly $16 billion per year from the current account.
FDI and valuation changes account for $9 billion and $13 billion, respectively. The latter
factor represents an increase in the dollar value of reserve assets held in currencies other
than dollars as a consequence of the significant depreciation of the dollar against other
major reserve currencies during this period. The big story during the last two years has
clearly been the surge in portfolio inflows and various other debt inflows, which together
meant that the non-FDI capital account balance contributed nearly $51 billion per year to
the faster pace of reserve accumulation during this period.


To better understand the implications of these patterns in the balance of payments, it is
important to examine in more detail the structure of inflows and external liabilities.
                                                14

                 V. Composition of Gross Flows and External Liabilities


I now provide a disaggregated perspective on India’s de facto financial integration. As
discussed in the review of the academic literature in Section II, the costs and benefits of
financial openness are crucially dependent on the nature of financial integration. In this
section, I review the composition of India’s capital inflows and outflows, the structure of
its external liabilities, and the implications for the benefit-cost trade-off.


V.1 Gross Flows


Table 4 indicates that gross inflows have risen sharply since the early 2000s, from an
average level of about 2 percent of GDP over the previous decade, to nearly 9 percent in
2007-08. The shares of the components of gross inflows fluctuate markedly from year to
year and it is difficult to detect any clear trends over the full sample of data. Focusing on
the last four years, it is clear that FDI and portfolio inflows have together become a major
constituent of overall inflows. The trend in outflows, which still remain at very low levels
(2 percent of GDP in 2007-08), is much clearer, with FDI accounting for the lions’ share of
outflows in recent years and portfolio flows barely registering on the scale.


V.2 Composition of External Liabilities


As discussed earlier, stocks of external liabilities are more reliable measures of the benefits
that emerging markets can potentially attain from financial integration, and also the
potential risks. For this part of the analysis, we turn again to the dataset of Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2006). Figure 4 shows that the ratio of FDI and portfolio liabilities in gross
external liabilities risen steadily, from a level below 10 percent in the early 1990s to 60
percent at present. Based on the discussion in Section II about the relative merits of
different forms of capital, this is clearly a positive development.


Figure 5, which provides a cross-country comparison of this ratio for emerging markets,
shows that India is now in the middle of the pack and not too far off the level of the
                                                 15

leading country. Indeed, India has moved up quite significantly from its position near the
bottom of this cross-country distribution in 1995. It is also interesting to note that the
dispersion of this ratio across emerging markets has decreased considerably over the past
decade. This is of course consistent with other evidence that the composition of private
capital flows to emerging markets has shifted markedly towards FDI and portfolio flows in
recent years.8 Thus, in India, as in most other emerging markets, the structure of external
liabilities has become quite favorable in terms of attaining the risk sharing and TFP growth
benefits of financial openness.


V.3 Structure of External Debt


One component of foreign liabilities that is of particular interest is the stock of external
debt. The size of the stock of short-term external debt denominated in foreign currencies
has been identified as an important factor triggering many emerging market financial crises
of the last two decades. Moreover, short-term debt flows tend to be highly procyclical and
so do the financing terms for these flows (Kaminsky, Reinhart and Vegh, 2004).
Consequently, countries that rely to a great extent on short-term foreign-currency debt face
a double whammy when they are hit with negative shocks and when external financing is
in principle even more important to smooth domestic consumption.


India has taken a cautious approach to allowing the accumulation of foreign-currency
denominated external debt, resulting in a low level of vulnerability on this front. The ratio
of external debt to GDP has fallen from levels of around 38 percent in the early 1990s to
under 20 percent in the last five years (see Table 5). The share of short-term debt in total
external debt has risen to 20 percent, although this number should be interpreted with some
caution as there appears to be a discontinuity in the split between short- and long-term debt




8
  Kose et al. (2006) report that, in 2000-04, debt accounted for about 52 percent of gross external
liabilities of emerging markets, while FDI accounted for 37 percent. Portfolio equity liabilities
accounted for most of the remainder. Back in 1980-84, the corresponding shares for debt and FDI
were 85 percent and 14 percent, respectively.
                                              16

in 2005. Between 2005 and 2008, the share of short-term debt in total debt has risen by
nearly 7 percentage points, so the trend is clear at any rate.


With the opening up to capital inflows, the share of deposits by Indians who live abroad
and other foreign currency deposits in total debt rose from 12 percent in the early 1990s to
28 percent in 2004, before declining to 20 percent by 2008. External commercial
borrowings by corporates have risen to about 28 percent of total debt, from about 12
percent in the early 1990s.


Consider adding together three elements of the debt structure that could represent potential
flight capital--foreign currency deposits, external commercial borrowings and short-term
debt. If one adds all of these together, for 2007 the total amounts to about 13 percent of
GDP. Some authors such as Williamson (2007) have expressed concerns that the
liberalization of debt inflows may bode ill for India. The levels of debt are not high enough
to warrant significant concern, although of course one could make the legitimate argument
that this relatively benign outcome is because the government has limited external
commercial borrowings and short-term debt. The problem is that it is now relatively
straightforward to evade controls on this type of flow by bringing in capital as portfolio
equity and swapping it for other instruments (including over-the-counter debt instruments).


In any event, the surge in external commercial borrowings does bear further consideration.
Given the practically nonexistent domestic corporate debt market, firms interested in
issuing debt may have been pushed to issue debt abroad. Moreover, the RBI’s attempts to
resist exchange rate appreciation during 2006-07 may in fact have created incentives for
firms to seek capital abroad using debt denominated in foreign currencies. Firms may have
been using this financing instrument to effectively place bets on an eventual currency
appreciation. Thus, rather than viewing foreign debt as the problem to be dealt with, it
would be more appropriate to think about aspects of the financial system and macro
policies that may be creating incentives for firms to obtain financing through foreign-
currency debt. I will return to this theme in the concluding section.
                                                 17

                           VI. Does India Have Enough Reserves?


In determining a country’s vulnerability to external shocks, the structure of external assets
and liabilities is an important indicator. I now examine the evolution of India’s official
international investment position (IIP) and its implications for India’s financial openness.9
The IIP effectively represents a country’s balance sheet vis a vis the rest of the world.
Table 6 shows that, at the end of financial year 2007-08, India had a net negative IIP
position of $53 billion. This represents a significant improvement from the level of minus
$81 billion in 1996-97, just before the Asian financial crisis. The stock of external assets
has grown six-fold from $62 billion in 2000-01 to $381 billion in 2007-08. A substantial
portion of this stock is accounted for by reserves. At the end of FY 2007-08, the total stock
of reserve assets was $310 billion, of which foreign exchange reserves amounted to $299
billion.


From an insurance perspective, the adequacy of the stock of foreign exchange reserves is
typically measured relative to a country’s imports or level of short-term external debt.
Table 7 shows that, by both these measures, India has more than adequate reserves. Even
as of 2007, reserves were sufficient to cover more than a year’s worth of imports, well
above the conventional threshold of six months of imports. Moreover, reserves even
exceed the level of total external debt; recall that short-term debt is only 20 percent of
external debt (Table 5), so reserves are many multiples of the level of short-term external
debt.


From the perspective of capital account liberalization, an even more stringent criterion than
the coverage of external debt is whether reserves cover a major portion of the stock of all
non-FDI foreign liabilities, on the assumption that all liabilities other than FDI are

9
  Due to some differences in how valuation effects are computed for various components of
external assets and liabilities, there are some discrepancies between the values of these stocks in
the official IIP data and the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) dataset. These discrepancies have
grown in the last few years as the stocks have increased, along with the magnitude of fluctuations
in the value of the U.S. dollar. Hence, I use the official IIP data here but have used the Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti in other sections to facilitate international comparisons.
                                                 18

relatively liquid and could fly out of a country at short notice. The IIP numbers show that,
at the end of 2007-08, India’s foreign exchange reserves ($299 billion) were nearly
adequate to cover its entire stock of non-FDI liabilities, which amounted to $318 billion.


A different criterion suggested by some authors is whether reserves are sufficient to cover
a significant portion of a broad monetary aggregate such as M2.10 Demand deposits and
currency can in principle flee a country at short notice; protecting the economy from the
financial instability that could arise from such an event could be an important benchmark
for policymakers to gauge a “safe” level of reserves. By this criterion, India, like many
other emerging market economies (including China) does not have an excessively high
level of reserves. The last column of Table 7 shows that India’s reserves cover about 30
percent of an even broader aggregate M3. This is a large share but obviously not enough to
offset a complete financial collapse and the accompanying loss of confidence in the
domestic banking system. Given the relative prudence of the RBI and the large banks
themselves, this seems a highly unlikely scenario.11


The basic conclusion of this section is that India has accumulated a level of foreign
exchange reserves that exceeds most standard norms of reserve adequacy from an
insurance perspective. Indeed, the fact that India has accumulated an additional $110
billion of reserves during 2007-8 makes this picture look even more benign than indicated
by the ratios in Table 7. The traditional risks faced by emerging markets with open capital
accounts—sudden stops or reversals of capital flows—are therefore not a major concern.
Nevertheless, there is clearly an important difference relative to China, which has been




10
   Obstfeld, Shambaugh and Taylor (2008) argue that concerns about domestic financial stability
could be a key motive for the massive amount of reserve accumulation by emerging market
economies in recent years. Given their current levels of imports and external debt, the levels of
reserves in many of these countries are well above those that could be justified on precautionary
grounds based on these standard criteria. These authors find that a model that includes the ratio of
M2 to GDP does a much better job of fitting cross-country variations in reserve levels.
11
  Indian banks, both private and public, are well capitalized and the ratio of nonperforming loans
to total deposits in the banking system is estimated to be less than 2 percent.
                                               19

accumulating reserves at a hectic pace through current account as well as capital account
surpluses.


While China is running a current account surplus in excess of 12 percent of GDP, India
registered a current account deficit of 1.5 percent in 2007-08. Is India vulnerable on this
dimension? Since foreign exchange reserves amount to about a quarter of GDP, a sudden
stop of capital inflows by itself isn’t going to create major problems for financing the
current account deficit. Moreover, as recent developments have indicated, the RBI is
willing to let the rupee depreciate quite significantly to prevent the current account deficit
from rising. Nevertheless, current account deficits that reflect consumption booms have
often ended disastrously—is this a risk for India? On this score, there isn’t a strong case for
concern. Figure 6 shows that both the national savings and investment rates have been
rising since the early 2000s, although the investment rate has risen a little faster,
accounting for the current account deficit. Thus, India seems to fit the textbook example of
a developing country borrowing from abroad to finance investment as its capital to labor
ratio is low and its productivity growth is high relative to its major trading partners.12


One aspect in common with China is the risk of a banking crisis—a significant tremor in
the banking system may trigger a surge of outflow of deposits from the banking system
and into foreign currency assets (see Prasad, 2008). Accumulating enough reserves to deal
with this potential source of financial instability may seem prudent. But the costs of
accumulating such a large stock of reserves—especially in terms of the other distortions in
the system needed to maintain a rapid pace of accumulation—implies that this insurance
may have costly welfare consequences. On the other hand, a different—and less
sanguine—perspective comes from the rapid loss of nearly $50 billion worth of reserves in
recent weeks as the global financial turmoil led to a flight to quality (and out of emerging
markets, including India) and the RBI sought to slow down a sharp depreciation of the
rupee. I will return to this issue in the concluding section.

12
  Bosworth and Collins (2008) conduct a growth accounting exercise for India and China. They
conclude that India has in recent years been experiencing higher productivity growth than most
industrial countries (but less than China).
                                              20

               VII. India’s Position in the International Financial System


With its strong growth prospects, India will remain an attractive destination for capital
inflows once global financial markets settle down. And its emergence as an economic
power will mean that the economy is likely to continue to export private capital. But what
forms these inflows and outflows take will of course determine the effects on
macroeconomic outcomes. While such prognostications are difficult, a first step is to
evaluate how much of various types of flows to emerging markets can be accounted for by
India. For this exercise, I use IMF data on total gross inflows into and outflows from all
emerging markets and other developing countries. This includes not just flows between
these countries and advanced industrial economies but also flows amongst these countries
themselves.


Figure 7 shows India’s share in total gross flows to emerging markets and other developing
countries. This share was just 2 percent in 1997 but shot up to 8 percent in 1998, the
second year of the Asian financial crisis, mainly because the overall quantum of flows to
emerging markets shrank substantially and economies like China and India that were not
devastated by the crisis got more of whatever flows there were. The share has averaged
about 5 percent during the 2000s and has been quite stable. India’s share of FDI has been
quite low over the last decade and inched up to just over 4 percent in 2006. Likewise,
India’s share of portfolio flows to non-industrial countries hit 12 percent in a couple of
years (2001 and 2003) but has otherwise been rather low, amounting to only 4 percent in
2006 (based on the strong portfolio inflows in 2007-08, it has no doubt gone up by at least
a couple of percentage points).


In parallel with the inflows it has been receiving, India has of course been investing
abroad. Encouraged by the RBI’s easing of restrictions on outward FDI, Indian corporates
have ramped up these flows, which now account for more than 6 percent of total gross FDI
flows emanating from all non-industrial countries (including flows going to other emerging
markets). The share of portfolio flows, by contrast, has remained at minuscule levels.
                                                21

Its low share of total inflows into emerging markets suggests that, despite its growth story,
India has a considerable way to go in terms of even obtaining a significant share of total
flows to non-industrial countries. It also suggests that, unless there is a fundamental shift in
the structures of world financial markets, there could be a lot more capital coming into
India if growth prospects remain strong and other international investors “discover” it.13
Factors that could lure more capital into India include its relatively high productivity
growth, well-developed equity markets, and the profit opportunities from rising income
levels and a rapidly expanding domestic market.


At the same time, India’s growth is also likely to unleash resources that will result in more
capital outflows. As household income levels rise, the demand for international portfolio
diversification will increase. Indian institutional investors will also be looking for a wider
range of investment opportunities, both domestically and abroad, as their asset pools
increase. And Indian companies will almost certainly continue to expand their reach
abroad.


The net implication is that there are powerful forces that will impel a substantially higher
degree of integration into international financial markets, with capital controls becoming
increasingly irrelevant even if they remain on the books. Given India’s financial structure
and changes in the structure of international financial flows, much of this integration is
likely to take the form of inflows and outflows of FDI and portfolio equity, which would of
course be a favorable outcome. But it is likely that it will become increasingly difficult to
bottle up specific types of flows if the economic incentives favoring them are powerful
enough. In that case, the best that macroeconomic policies can do is to foster
macroeconomic and financial stability, which could serve to promote the right kinds of
flows in both directions.



13
  Patnaik and Shah (2008) note that India’s actual weight in the global equity portfolio is only
about one-sixth the predicted weight that India should have according to a standard international
capital asset pricing model (ICAPM). This is in fact an improvement relative to 2001, when the
actual weight was only about one-tenth the predicted weight (and, of course, India’s ICAPM
weight has risen substantially--almost four-fold--from 2001 to 2007).
                                               22

        VIII. Implications for Policies Towards Capital Account Liberalization


India has moved slowly and steadily towards capital account convertibility. The capital
account has become quite open and restrictions on both inflows and outflows have been
eased significantly over time.14 Nevertheless, there is a residual element of government
control that is maintained on many types of flows—sometimes as modest as registration
requirements on foreign investors but also some as onerous as virtually keeping foreign
investors out of the government debt market. These elements are part of a strategy of
cautious and calibrated capital account liberalization that has served India well in at least
one dimension—reducing its vulnerability to crises.


In terms of overall de facto financial integration, India has come a long way and has
experienced significant volumes of inflows and outflows in recent years. Relative to the
size of its economy, however, these flows are rather modest, putting India at the low end of
the distribution of de facto financial integration measures in an international comparison
across emerging market economies.


The RBI’s calibrated approach to capital account opening has resulted in a preponderance
of FDI and portfolio liabilities in India’s stock of gross external liabilities. All elements of
the literature point to this as being a favorable outcome in terms of improving the benefit-
risk tradeoff of financial openness. But at the same time the limited degree of openness has
probably limited the indirect benefits that seem to accrue from financial integration.


The recent global financial turmoil suggests that a high degree of caution is warranted in
further opening of the capital account. The question is where to strike the balance—this is
a judgment call as the benefits of caution need to be weighed against the possibility that
excessive caution in further capital account opening may be holding back financial sector
reforms and reducing the independence and effectiveness of monetary policy.


14
  For a chronology, see Bery and Singh (2006). Patnaik and Shah (2008) discuss a few recent steps
towards more openness, some remaining restrictions, and their consequences.
                                               23

One of the main concerns about capital account liberalization is that it makes exchange rate
management harder. Some authors have argued that opening of India’s capital account
should be resisted as that would make it harder to maintain an undervalued exchange rate
and thereby promote export-led growth (e.g., Bhalla, 2007; Subramanian, 2007). Although
India does not have a formal exchange rate target, the Indian rupee has been managed to
varying degrees at different times. Even though the nominal exchange rate relative to the
U.S. dollar has fluctuated over a wide range in the last decade (Figure 8), the effective
exchange rate—measured in either nominal or real terms—has been managed within a
much narrower range (Figure 9). Has this constrained the independence of monetary
policy, which now involves a mix between inflation and exchange rate objectives? The
RBI does in fact seem to have an implicit medium-term inflation objective (or at least a
tolerance level) but also focuses on the exchange rate when needed. As recent events have
indicated, this has made the central bank more susceptible to political pressures and might
have made it harder for the RBI to manage inflationary pressures.15


Resisting exchange rate appreciation has resulted in large costs of sterilizing inflows that
are recycled into foreign exchange reserves, which are usually held in low-yield industrial
country government bonds. Figure 10, which shows the interest rate differential between
Indian and U.S. government securities, drives home this point. The stock of sterilization
bonds (Market Stabilization Bonds) also rose sharply during 2006 and 2007 (Figure 11),
implying that the quasi-fiscal costs of the RBI’s sterilization operations have mounted
rapidly. Clearly, tight exchange rate management is difficult as the capital becomes more
open in de facto terms over time. This is also evident in developments since the summer of
2008--the RBI has been unable to hold back pressures for the exchange rate to depreciate
significantly despite large-scale intervention in the foreign exchange market.


The Rajan Committee report (2008) makes the point that monetary policy would be far
more effective if it was focused on the objective of a low and stable inflation rate. Indeed,

15
  Some authors such as Panagariya (2008, see Chapter 10) argue forcefully that the RBI has in fact
been very successful with its “pragmatic” approach to monetary and exchange rate policies,
delivering a high rate of GDP growth as well as low inflation.
                                                24

the evidence suggests that making an inflation objective the key priority of monetary
policy would be the best contribution that monetary policy can make to stabilizing
domestic business cycles, maintaining financial stability, and even reducing exchange rate
volatility (Rose, 2006). An implication of this literature is that maintaining capital controls
as a device to try and manage the exchange rate better could weaken overall monetary
policy implementation and credibility, especially in terms of managing inflation
expectations.


One key issue is whether India falls below the threshold conditions that seem to make a big
difference to the benefit-risk tradeoff of financial openness. Kose, Prasad and Taylor
(2008) report that, while it is difficult to precisely identify the critical levels of the
threshold conditions that influence the outcomes of financial openness, there are a few
general propositions that do come out of the analysis for particular countries such as India.
Given India’s level of financial and institutional development, the accumulation of FDI
and portfolio equity liabilities is relatively “safe” as the levels of these two thresholds for
such liabilities are rather low. As for debt accumulation, India is moving towards the
threshold in terms of financial development but is not there yet.


Another important threshold condition is related to trade integration. Many authors have
found that greater openness to trade not only reduces the risks of financial crises but also
makes it easier for a country to recover quickly if it does get hit by a crisis (see, e.g.,
Frankel and Cavallo, 2004, and references therein). On this dimension, it is encouraging
that there has been a rapid increase in India’s external trade, with the standard trade
openness measure (ratio of the sum of exports and imports to GDP) nearly doubling from
its level of 25 percent in 2000 (see Figure 12).


Thus, in terms of the collateral benefits-thresholds framework, India is a good example of
a country where the benefit-risk tradeoff of further capital account is finely balanced. It
turns out that there is another important threshold condition, which is the level of financial
integration itself. Countries that are more integrated into international financial markets
                                               25

seem to achieve better risk sharing outcomes and also seem to suffer few ill effects of even
a stock of external liabilities that is tilted towards more debt.


A specific recommendation of the Rajan Committee (2008) is that allowing foreign
investors to invest in government bonds could improve the liquidity and depth of this
market. A deep and well-functioning government bond market is a prerequisite for serving
as a benchmark for pricing corporate bonds, which could allow that market to develop. By
providing an additional source of debt financing, it would create some room for the
government to reduce the financing burden it currently imposes on banks through the
statutory liquidity ratio—the requirement that banks hold a certain portion of their deposits
in government bonds. And it might even have the beneficial effect of imposing some
discipline on fiscal policy since foreign investors could pull out and raise the cost of debt
financing if the government budget deficit were to start rising again.


An opportunistic approach to liberalization of outflows during a period of surging inflows
would also help attain multiple objectives. If undertaken in a controlled manner along the
lines suggested by Prasad and Rajan (2008), it would generate a variety of collateral
benefits—sterilization of inflows, securities market development, international portfolio
diversification for households—without the risks of a full and irrevocable opening of the
taps for outflows. During the recent financial turmoil in world capital markets, the RBI has
indeed taken an opportunistic approach to liberalizing inflows by raising ceilings on
external commercial borrowings in order to compensate for capital outflows.


Panagariya notes (2008) that liberalizing all types of short-term flows in a precipitous
manner could heighten the risk of financial crisis, which in turn would put paid to a whole
host of other essential reforms. Williamson (2007) argues that India may have liberalized
its capital account too quickly and that it should slow down the process noting, in
particular, that liberalizing debt flows could be risky and would have few benefits. In short,
while there is an emerging consensus--that more openness (eventually) is good for the
                                                26

Indian economy but that the capital account should not be opened at one fell swoop--there
is still a set of open questions about the ideal pace of capital account liberalization.16




16
  The reports of the Mistry Committee (2007) and Rajan Committee (2008) lay out a fairly
aggressive timetable, noting the large benefits that could be gained from financial openness,
including how it could foster more effective monetary policy and boost financial sector reforms.
The Tarapore Committee (2006) recommends a much slower pace of liberalization. Rajan and
Zingales (2003) note that capital account liberalization can also be useful as a framework for
building consensus around reforms and for thwarting coalitions that try to block reforms.
                                            27

                                       References

Aizenman, Joshua, Brian Pinto and Arthur Radziwill. 2007. “Sources for Financing
      Domestic Capital--Is Foreign Saving a Viable Option for Developing Countries?”
      Journal of International Money and Finance, 26(5): 682-702.

Aoki, Kosuke, Gianluca Benigno and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2005. “Adjusting to Capital
       Account Liberalization.” Working Paper, London School of Economics.

Arteta, Carlos, Barry Eichengreen, and Charles Wyplosz. 2003. “When Does Capital
        Account Liberalization Help More than It Hurts?” in Economic Policy in the
        International Economy: Essays in Honor of Assaf Razin, edited by Elhanan
        Helpman and Efraim Sadka. Cambridge University Press.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad. 2005. “Does Financial
       Liberalization Spur Growth?” Journal of Financial Economics, 77(1): 3–55.

Bery, Suman, and Kanhaiya Singh. 2006. “Domestic Financial Liberalization and
      International Financial Integration: An Indian Perspective.” In China and India:
      Learning from Each Other, edited by Jahangir Aziz, Eswar Prasad, and Steven
      Dunaway. International Monetary Fund: 145-180.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1998. “The Capital Myth: The Difference Between Trade in Widgets
     and Trade in Dollars.” Foreign Affairs, 77:7-12

Bhalla, Surjit S. 2007. “Second Among Equals: The Middle Class Kingdoms of India and
        China.” Peterson Institute of International Economics.

Bosworth, Barry and Susan M. Collins. Winter 2008. “Accounting for Growth: Comparing
     China and India.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(1):45-66.

Chinn, Menzie, and Hiro Ito. 2006. “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital
       Controls, Institutions and Interactions.” Journal of Development Economics, 81(1):
       163-192.

Claessens, Stijn, Aslí Demirgüç-Kunt, and Harry Huizinga. 2001. “How Does Foreign
       Entry Affect Domestic Banking Markets?” Journal of Banking and Finance, 25(5):
       891–911.

Claessens, Stijn, and Luc Laeven. 2004. “What Drives Bank Competition? Some
       International Evidence.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 36(3): 563-83.

Clarke, George R. G., Robert Cull, Maria Soledad Martinez Peria, and Susana M. Sanchez.
       2003. “Foreign Bank Entry: Experience, Implications for Developing Economies,
       and Agenda for Further Research.” World Bank Research Observer, 8(1): 25–59.
                                           28

Desai, Padma. 2003. Financial Crisis, Contagion, and Containment: From Asia to
       Argentina. Princeton University Press.

Edwards, Sebastian. 2007. “Capital Controls, Sudden Stops and Current Account
      Reversals.” in International Capital Flows, edited by Sebastian Edwards.
      University of Chicago Press.

Eichengreen, Barry. 2007."The Cautious Case for Capital Flows." Presented to Rating
      Agency Malaysia's conference on “Free Capital Mobility: What's in Store for Asia?”
      held in Singapore, August 1.

Forbes, Kristin J. 2007. “The Microeconomic Evidence on Capital Controls: No Free
       Lunch.” in International Capital Flows, edited by Sebastian Edwards. University of
       Chicago Press.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Eduardo A. Cavallo. 2004. “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries
       More Vulnerable to Sudden Stops or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality.”
       NBER Working Paper 10957.

Goldberg, Linda. 2004. “Financial-Sector Foreign Direct Investment and Host Countries:
      New and Old Lessons.” NBER Working Paper 10441.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne. 2007. “Capital Flows to Developing
      Countries: The Allocation Puzzle.” NBER Working Paper No. 13602.

Henry, Peter B. 2000. “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging
       Market Equity Prices.” Journal of Finance, 55(2): 529–64.

Jeanne, Olivier. 2007. “International Reserves in Emerging Market Countries: Too Much
       of a Good Thing?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2001(1): 1-80.

Kaminsky, Graciela, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Vegh. 2004. “When it Rains, it
      Pours: Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies.” NBER
      Macroeconomics Annual 2004.

Klein, Michael, and Giovanni Olivei. 2008. “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial
       Depth, and Economic Growth.” Journal of International Money and Finance,
       27(6): 861-875.

Kletzer, Kenneth M. 2004. “Liberalizing Capital Flows in India: Financial Repression,
       Macroeconomic Policy, and Gradual Reforms.” India Policy Forum 2004, edited
       by Suman Bery, Barry Bosworth, Arvind Panagariya. Brookings Institution Press
       and NCAER: 227-263.
                                            29

Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff and Shang-Jin Wei. 2006. “Financial
      Globalization: A Reappraisal.” NBER Working Paper No. 12484. Forthcoming in
      IMF Staff Papers.

Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2008. “Financial
      Globalization and Economic Policies.” Forthcoming in Handbook of Development
      Economics. edited by Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig.

Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Marco Terrones. 2007. “How Does Financial
      Globalization Affect Risk Sharing? Patterns and Channels.” Forthcoming in Journal
      of Development Economics.

Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Ashley Taylor. 2008. “Thresholds in the Process of
      Financial Integration.” Manuscript, IMF and Cornell University.

Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Marco Terrones. 2008. “Does Openness to
      International Financial Flows Contribute to Productivity Growth.” Manuscript,
      IMF and Cornell University.

Krueger, Anne O., and Jungho Yoo. 2002. “Chaebol Capitalism and the Currency-
      Financial Crisis in Korea.” in Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets,
      edited by Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel. University of Chicago Press:
      461–501.

Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2007. “The External Wealth of Nations
       Mark II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970–
       2004.” Journal of International Economics, 73(2):223-250.

Lane, Philip R., and Sergio L. Schmukler. 2007. “The International Financial Integration
       of China and India.” in Dancing with Giants: China, India and the World
       Economy, The World Bank.

Levine, Ross, and Sara Zervos. 1998. “Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market
       Development.” World Development, 26(7): 1169–83.

Mishkin, Frederick. 2006. The Next Great Globalization: How Disadvantaged Nations
      Can Harness Their Financial Systems to Get Rich. Princeton University Press.

Mohan, Rakesh. 2007. “Recent Financial Market Developments and Implications For
      Monetary Policy.” Valedictory Address at IIF's Inaugural Asia Regional Economic
      Forum on September 20.

Mohan, Rakesh. 2008. “Capital Flows to India.” Manuscript, Reserve Bank of India. Paper
      presented at annual meeting of Deputy Governors at BIS, February.
                                           30

Mukerji, Purba, 2009, “Ready for Capital Account Convertibility.” Forthcoming in
      Journal of International Money and Finance.

Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2008. “Financial Stability, the
       Trilemma, and International Reserves.” CEPR Discussion Papers No. 6693.

Panagariya, Arvind. 2008. India: The Emerging Giant. Oxford University Press.

Patnaik, Ila. 2004. “India’s Experience with a Pegged Exchange Rate.” India Policy Forum
       2004, edited by Suman Bery, Barry Bosworth, Arvind Panagariya. Brookings
       Institution Press and NCAER: 189-216.

Patnaik, Ila, and Ajay Shah. 2008. “Managing Capital Flows: The Case of India.” NIPFP
       Working Paper 2008-52.

Prasad, Eswar. 2008. “Is China’s Growth Miracle Built to Last?” IZA Discussion Paper
       No. 2995. Forthcoming in China Economic Review.

Prasad, Eswar, Raghuram Rajan, and Arvind Subramanian. 2007. “Foreign Capital and
       Economic Growth.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2007(1): 153-230.

Prasad, Eswar, and Raghuram Rajan. 2008. “A Pragmatic Approach to Capital Account
      Liberalization.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(3):149-172.

Prasad, Eswar, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2007. “The Chinese Approach to Capital Inflows:
       Patterns and Possible Explanations.” in Capital Controls and Capital Flows in
       Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices, and Consequences, edited by Sebastian
       Edwards. University of Chicago Press.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales. 2003. “The Great Reversals: The Politics of
       Financial Development in the 20th Century.” Journal of Financial Economics, 69:
       5–50.

Reddy, Yaga V. 2005. “Overcoming Challenges in a Globalising Economy: Managing
       India’s External Sector,” Lecture delivered at the Foreign Policy Center, London,
       on June 23. (www.rbi.org.in [June 2005]).

Reddy, Yaga V. 2007. “Converting a Tiger.” Finance & Development, 44(1): 20-23.

Report of the Committee on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility (S. S. Tarapore). 2006.
      (www.rbi.org.in/scripts/PublicationReportDetails.aspx?UrlPage=&ID=468)

Report of the Committee on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility (Chairman: S.S.
      Tarapore). 1997.
      (www.rbi.org.in/scripts/PublicationReportDetails.aspx?UrlPage=&ID=169)
                                          31

Report of the High Level Committee on Financial Sector Reforms (Chairman: Raghuram
      Rajan). 2008. (http://planningcommission.nic.in/reports/genrep/report_fr.htm)

Report on Making Mumbai an International Financial Center (Chairman: Percy Mistry).
      2007. (http://finmin.nic.in/reports/index.html)

Rodrik, Dani. 1998. “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?” Essays in International
       Finance 207. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University.
Rodrik, Dani, 2007. “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth: Theory and
       Evidence.” Manuscript, Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.

Rodrik, Dani, and Arvind Subramanian. 2008. “Why Did Financial Globalization
      Disappoint?” Manuscript, Harvard University. Forthcoming in IMF Staff Papers.

Rose, Andrew. 2007. “A Stable International System Emerges: Bretton Woods, Reversed.”
       Journal of International Money and Finance, 26(5):663-681.

Shah, Ajay. 2008. “New Issues in Indian Macro Policy.” Forthcoming in Business
       Standard India, 2008 edited by T.N. Ninan. (Business Standard Books).

Williamson, John. 2006. “Why Capital Account Convertibility in India Is Premature.”
       Economic and Political Weekly May 13:1848-1850.
                   Table 1. De Jure Capital Account Openness

             Full Sample              Emerging Markets                India     China
               Median        Minimum       Median     Maximum
 Chinn Ito
  1985          -1.13          -1.80       -1.13         2.54         -1.13      -1.13
  1995          -0.09          -1.80       -0.09         2.54         -1.13      -1.13
  2006          0.14           -1.13        0.03         2.54         -1.13      -1.13
 Edwards
  1985          50.00         12.50        37.50       75.00          25.00     37.50
  1995          75.00         25.00        50.00       100.00         25.00     37.50
  2000          81.25         37.50        62.50       100.00         75.00     37.50
 Miniane
  1985          0.86           0.83         0.86         1.00         0.83
  1995          0.43           0.71         0.86         1.00         0.83
  2000          0.36           0.71         0.86         0.86         0.86


Note: The Chinn-Ito index goes from -2.54 to 2.54, with a higher number indicating a
more open capital account. The Edwards index goes from 0 to 100, with a higher number
indicating a more open capital account. The Miniane index goes from 0 to 1, with a lower
number indicating a more open capital account.

Source: Edwards (2007), Chinn and Ito (2006), Miniane (2004) and author’s calculations.
                                                          Table 2. The Balance of Payments
                                                             (in billions of U.S. dollars)

                                    1997-98    1998-99    1999-00    2000-01    2001-02   2002-03   2003-04   2004-05    2005-06    2006-07    2007-08 2008-09*


Gross international reserves           29.7       33.2       38.7       42.9      54.7      76.1      113.0     141.5      151.6      199.2      309.7    312.1
(in percent of GDP)                     7.2        8.0        8.6        9.3      11.4      15.0       18.8      20.3       18.8       21.6       27.2

Change in international reserves        2.9        3.5        5.5        4.2       11.8      21.4      36.9      28.5       10.1       47.6      110.5      2.4

  A. Current account balance            -5.5       -4.0       -4.7       -2.7      3.4        6.3      14.1       -2.5       -9.9       -9.8     -17.4    -10.7
    (in percent of GDP)                -1.3       -1.0       -1.0       -0.6       0.7        1.2       2.3      -0.4       -1.2       -1.1       -1.5
      Merchandise trade balance       -15.5      -13.2      -17.8      -12.5      -11.6     -10.7     -13.7     -33.7      -51.9      -63.2      -90.1    -31.6
     (in percent of GDP)               -3.8       -3.2       -4.0       -2.7       -2.4      -2.1      -2.3      -4.8       -6.4       -6.8       -7.9
  B. Capital account balance            9.8        8.4       10.4        8.8        8.6      10.8      16.7      28.0       25.5       45.8      108.0     13.2
      FDI, net                          3.5        2.4        2.1        3.3        4.7       3.2       2.4       3.7        3.0        8.5       15.5     10.1
      portfolio flows, net              1.8       -0.1        3.0        2.6        2.0       0.9      11.4       9.3       12.5        7.1       29.3     -4.2

  C. Errors and omissions, net          0.2       -0.2        0.7       -0.3       -0.2      -0.2       0.6       0.6       -0.5        0.6        1.5     -0.3

  D. Valuation change                  -1.6       -0.7       -0.9       -1.7        0.0       4.5       5.5       2.4       -5.0       11.0       18.4      0.2

Memorandum Items:
Non-FDI capital account balance
 (including errors and omissions)       6.5        5.9        9.0        5.3        3.6       7.4      14.9      24.9       22.0       37.9       94.0      2.8
Nominal GDP                           410.0      414.0      450.0      460.0      478.0     508.0     602.0     696.0      806.0      922.7     1140.0



Sources: CEIC, RBI and author's calculations.

Notes: The data for 2008-09 are end June data.The non-FDI capital account balance is the capital account balance minus net FDI plus
net errors and omissions.
             Table 3. A Decomposition of the Recent Reserve Buildup
                           (in billions of U.S. dollars)

                                           Annual averages                   Changes
                                    1998-2001 2001-06 2006-08            2001-06    2006-08
                                                                      -1998-2001 -2001-06
                                          (1)       (2)        (3)        (2) - (1)   (3) - (2)

Increase in foreign reserves             4.4       21.7       79.1            17.3       57.3

 Current account balance                 -3.8       2.3      -13.6             6.1       -15.9

 Capital account balance                 9.2       17.9       76.9             8.7       59.0
   FDI, net                              2.6        3.4       12.0             0.8        8.6

 Errors and omissions, net               0.1        0.1        1.1             0.0         1.0

Valuation Changes                        -1.1       1.5       14.7             2.6       13.2

Non-FDI capital account balance
 (including errors and omissions)        6.7       14.6       66.0             7.8       51.4



Sources: CEIC, RBI and author's calculations.

Notes: The non-FDI capital account balance is the capital account balance minus net FDI plus
net errors and omissions.
          Table 4. Composition of Gross Inflows and Gross Outflows

                                        Inflows
                   Gross Inflows                            Components
                                                   FDI Portfolio        Loans       Other
          (USD billions)   (percent of GDP)           (as percent of gross inflows)

1995-96              7.8                2.1        27.6       34.3       28.4        9.6
1996-97             13.6                3.5        20.9       24.4       35.3       19.4
1997-98             14.0                3.3        25.4       13.1       34.3       27.2
1998-99             10.8                2.5        23.0       -0.6       41.0       36.7
1999-00             10.8                2.4        20.0       28.0       14.8       37.2
2000-01             14.9                3.2        27.0       18.5       35.3       19.2
2001-02              9.2                1.9        66.7       22.0      -13.7       25.0
2002-03              4.0                0.8       125.7       24.4      -96.1       46.0
2003-04             16.3                2.8        26.4       69.5      -26.7       30.8
2004-05             35.4                5.1        16.9       26.3       30.9       25.9
2005-06             35.2                4.3        25.3       35.4       22.4       16.9
2006-07             61.3                6.7        35.9       11.4       40.1       12.6
2007-08             98.1                8.6        18.3       33.5       28.9       19.3



                                       Outflows
                  Gross Outflows                            Components
                                                    FDI Portfolio       Loans       Other
          (USD billions)   (percent of GDP)          (as percent of gross outflows)

1995-96             3.5                 0.9          5.4                   0.2      94.4
1996-97             3.1                 0.8          6.1                   0.0      93.9
1997-98             2.5                 0.6          1.5                   0.4      98.0
1998-99             2.9                 0.7          3.4                   0.5      96.0
1999-00             2.9                 0.6          2.5                  -0.3      97.8
2000-01             3.5                 0.8         21.6        4.8        0.6      72.9
2001-02             3.1                 0.6         45.4        2.3        2.7      49.6
2002-03             3.1                 0.6         57.9        1.1        0.7      40.2
2003-04             4.3                 0.7         44.9        0.0        2.3      52.7
2004-05             6.8                 1.0         33.5        0.4        4.9      61.2
2005-06            10.9                 1.3         53.9        0.0        2.9      43.2
2006-07            17.5                 1.9         77.0       -0.3        1.8      21.5
2007-08            26.0                 2.3         64.6       -0.6        0.1      35.9


Note: Prior to 2000-01, outward FDI and portfolio outflows were not reported separately.

Source: CEIC, RBI and author’s calculations.
                                   Table 5. External Debt Stocks: Levels and Composition

                 Total            By Maturity                                  Composition of Long Term Debt

                                                                                                                         Non
                                                                                                                    Residents
                                                                                                                  and Foreign
                                   Long       Short                                           Export   Commercial   Currency    Rupee
                                   Term       Term    Multilateral   Bilateral      IMF       Credit    Borrowing    Deposits    Debt

              (USD     (percent
           billions)   of GDP)                                          (as percent of total debt)

   1990       75.9        26.7      90.1       9.9           25.3        17.9       2.0          6.1         12.3       12.0     14.5
   1991       83.8        28.6      89.8      10.2           24.9        16.9       3.1          5.1         12.2       12.2     15.3
   1992       85.3        38.6      91.7       8.3           27.1        18.1       4.0          4.7         13.7       11.8     12.2
   1993       90.0        37.3      93.0       7.0           27.8        17.9       5.3          4.8         12.9       12.4     11.8
   1994       92.7        33.5      96.1       3.9           28.3        18.8       5.4          5.6         13.3       13.7     10.9
   1995       99.0        30.7      95.7       4.3           28.8        20.5       4.3          6.7         13.1       12.5      9.7
   1996       93.7        26.9      94.6       5.4           30.5        20.5       2.5          5.7         14.8       11.7      8.8
   1997       93.5        24.4      92.8       7.2           31.3        18.7       1.4          6.3         15.3       11.8      8.0
   1998       93.5        24.2      94.6       5.4           31.6        18.1       0.7          7.0         18.2       12.7      6.3
   1999       96.9        23.5      95.6       4.4           31.5        18.1       0.3          7.0         21.7       12.2      4.9
   2000       98.3        22.0      96.0       4.0           32.0        18.5       0.0          6.9         20.3       13.8      4.5
   2001      101.3        22.5      96.4       3.6           30.7        15.8       0.0          5.8         24.1       16.4      3.7
   2002       98.8        21.2      97.2       2.8           32.3        15.5       0.0          5.4         23.6       17.4      3.1
   2003      104.9        20.3      95.5       4.5           28.6        16.0       0.0          4.8         21.4       22.1      2.7
   2004      111.6        17.8      96.0       4.0           26.2        15.5       0.0          4.2         19.7       28.0      2.4
   2005      133.0        18.5      86.7      13.3           23.9        12.8       0.0          3.8         19.9       24.6      1.7
   2006      138.1        17.2      85.9      14.1           23.6        11.4       0.0          3.9         19.1       26.3      1.5
   2007      169.7        17.8      84.5      15.5           20.8         9.5       0.0          4.2         24.6       24.3      1.1
   2008      221.2        18.8      80.0      20.0           17.8         8.9       0.0          4.6         28.0       19.7      0.9



Note: 2005 onwards, Short term debt is the difference between the total and long term debt.

Source: CEIC, Ministry of Finance, Govt. of India and author’s calculations.
                                      Table 6. India’s International Investment Position
                                                 (in billions of U.S. dollars)
                                  1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-00 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08

Net Position                         -81     -81     -79     -77     -76     -69     -60     -47     -54     -60      -62     -53

A. Assets                             38      42      47      55      62      74      96     136     166     184     246     381

 1. FDI                                1       1       2       2       3       4       6       8      10      16      29      46
 2. Portfolio                          0       0       0       0       1       1       1       0       0       1       1       1
      Equity                           0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       1       1       1
      Debt                             0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0       0
 3. Other investment                  10      11      12      14      16      14      13      15      14      15      16      25
 4. Reserve assets                    27      30      33      39      43      55      76     113     142     152     199     310
      Foreign exchange reserves       22      26      30      35      40      51      72     107     136     145     192     299

B. Liabilities                       119     122     126     132     139     143     156     183     220     244     308     434

 1. FDI                               11      14      15      18      20      25      31      38      44      52      76     116
 2. Portfolio                         19      20      23      25      31      32      32      44      56      64      79     119
      Equity                          14      14      13      16      17      19      20      34      43      55      63      98
      Debt                             5       6      10       9      14      13      12      10      13      10      16      21
 3. Other investment                  89      88      87      89      87      86      92     101     119     128     152     199


Source: Reserve Bank of India and CEIC.
                  Table 7. Reserve Adequacy
            (ratio of reserves to relevant variables)


              Non-FDI
                external     External Months of
              liabilities       Debt   imports          M3

    1992                           0.1          3.3     0.1
    1993                           0.2          6.6     0.1
    1994                           0.2          7.6     0.1
    1995                           0.2          4.8     0.1
    1996             0.2           0.2          6.0     0.1
    1997             0.2           0.3          6.7     0.1
    1998             0.3           0.3          6.7     0.1
    1999             0.3           0.4          6.9     0.1
    2000             0.3           0.4          7.4     0.1
    2001             0.4           0.5          9.6     0.2
    2002             0.6           0.7         10.8     0.2
    2003             0.7           0.9         12.6     0.2
    2004             0.8           1.0         11.4     0.3
    2005             0.8           1.1          9.5     0.2
    2006             0.9           1.1          9.6     0.3
    2007             0.9           1.4         12.5     0.3


Source: CEIC, RBI and author’s calculations.
                        Figure 1. De Facto Financial Openness
70
                       External Liabilities (ratio to GDP)

60                     External Assets (ratio to GDP)

                       External Assets + Liabilities (ratio to GDP)
50


40


30


20


10


0
 1980    1982   1984    1986    1988     1990    1992    1994    1996   1998   2000   2002   2004   2006

     Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) dataset and author’s calculations.
                                                                                            H




                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                                                       100
                                                                                                                             150
                                                                                                                                   200
                                                                                                                                         250
                                                                                                                                               300
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                          40
                                                                                                                                                                                                               60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               120
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     140
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           160
                                                                                               un                                                                                  Jo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 180
                                                                                                   ga                                                                                 rd
                                                                                                        ry                                                                     M
                                                                                                                                                                                         an
                                                                                                Is                                                                              al
                                                                                                    ra                                                                             ay
                                                                                                                                                                                         si
                                                                                                        el
                                                                                                                                                                              H             a
                                                                                               Jo                                                                                un
                                                                                                   rd                                                                                 ga
                                                                                                       an                                                                                  ry
                                                                                            M
                                                                                               al                                                                                 Eg
                                                                                                 ay
                                                                                                       si                                                                               yp
                                                                                                          a                                                                  Th              t
                                                                                                  C                                                                               ai
                                                                                                                                                                                      la
                                                                                                     hi
                                                                                          Ar            le                                                                               nd
                                                                                   C
                                                                                    ze gen
                                                                                       ch            tin                                                                            C
                                                                                                                                                                                       hi
                                                                                            R             a                                                                                le
                                                                                              ep                                                                                M
                                                                                      So           ub                                                                              ex
                                                                                                        lic                                                                             ic
                                                                                           ut
                                                                                              h
                                                                                                                                                                                            o
                                                                                                Af                                                                                   Pe
                                                                                                     ric
                                                                                                          a                                                                  M            ru
                                                                                               R                                                                                 or
                                                                                                 us                                                                                  oc
                                                                                                       si
                                                                                                          a                                                                              co
                                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                Eg                                                                   ze            I
                                                                                                      yp                                                                ch sra
                                                                                        Ph
                                                                                                                                                                             R             e
                                                                                            ilip t                                                                              ep l
                                                                                                 pi                                                                                  ub
                                                                                                     ne
                                                                                                          s                                                              Ph               l
                                                                                                                                                                              ilip ic
                                                                                                Ko                                                                                 pi
                                                                                                      re                                                                               ne
                                                                                            Th a                                                                            Ar              s
                                                                                                ai                                                                              ge




                                                                                                                                                     2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1995




                                                                                                   la                                                                               nt
                                                                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                       nd                                                                                   a
                                                                                            M
                                                                                               or                                                                                R
                                                                                                  oc                                                                               us
                                                                                                       co                                                                   In          si
                                                                                               Tu                                                                             do a
                                                                                                   rk                                                                              ne
                                                                                                       ey                                                                               si
                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                              Po                                                                                 Tu
                                                                             C                     la                                                                  So             rk
                                                                              hi
                                                                                 na                    nd                                                                   ut           e  y
                                                                                   ,P                                                                                          h
                                                                                     .R           Pe                                                                              Af
                                                                                        .:              ru                                                                             ric
                                                                                           M                                                                                                a
                                                                                              ai                                                                                Po
                                                                                                 nl                                                                                   la
                                                                                                     an                                                                                  n
                                                                                           C              d                                                                 C               d
                                                                                             ol                                                                               ol
                                                                                                om                                                          C                     om
                                                                                                      bi
                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                                              hi
                                                                                                                                                                 na                     b  ia
                                                                                              M                                                                     ,P P a k
                                                                                                 ex                                                                   .R             is
                                                                                                      ic                                                                 .:             ta
                                                                                                         o                                                                   M              n
                                                                                                Br                                                                              ai
                                                                                                                                                                                  nl
                                                                                                     az                                                                                an
                                                                                          In                                                                                                d
                                                                                             do il
                                                                                                 ne                                                                               Ko
                                                                                                       si                                                                               re
                                                                                                          a                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 2. De Facto Financial Openness: Emerging Markets




Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) dataset and author’s calculations.
                                                                                                  In                                                                               Br
                                                                                                      di                                                                                az
                                                                                            Pa a                                                                                            il
                                                                                                ki                                                                                   In
                                                                                                   st                                                                                   di
                                                                                                       an                                                                                   a
           Figure 3. Foreign Exchange Reserves: Flows and Stocks
                          (in billions of U.S. dollars)
20                                                                         350
                        Monthly Changes
15                      Stock of Reserves                                  300

                                                                           250
10
                                                                           200
 5
                                                                           150
 0
 Jan-95      Jan-97     Jan-99     Jan-01       Jan-03   Jan-05   Jan-07   100

 -5                                                                        50

-10                                                                        0
      Note: The data in this figure go through August 2008.

      Source: CEIC and author’s calculations.
                  Figure 4. Share of FDI and Portfolio Liabilities
                            in Gross External Liabilities
70


60


50


40


30


20


10


 0
 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006

     Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) dataset and author’s calculations.
                                                                             C         S
                                                                              hi                                                                                                    M




                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      70
                                                                                 na out




                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                        50
                                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                                                                       80
                                                                                                                                                            90
                                                                                   ,P         h                                                                                      al
                                                                                                                                                                                       ay
                                                                                      .R         Af
                                                                                                                                                                                         si
                                                                                         .:           ric
                                                                                                           a                                                                               a
                                                                                            M
                                                                                               ai
                                                                                                  nl                                                                                    C
                                                                                                                                                                                          hi
                                                                                                      an                                                                                     le
                                                                                                           d
                                                                                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                 Br                                                                           So         hi
                                                                                                      az                                                                          ut        na
                                                                                                           il                                                              C        h
                                                                                               M                                                                             ze        Af
                                                                                                  ex                                                                           ch         ric
                                                                                                       ic
                                                                                                           o                                                                       R          a
                                                                                             M                                                                                       ep
                                                                                               al                                                                                        ub
                                                                                                  ay
                                                                                                       s                                                                  Eg
                                                                                                                                                                                             lic
                                                                                             Th ia
                                                                                                 ai                                                                         yp         Br
                                                                                                    la                                                                         t,
                                                                                                        nd                                                                        Ar azil
                                                                                             M                                                                                       ab
                                                                                                or
                                                                                                   oc                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                                                           ep
                                                                                                         co                                                                        Th           .
                                                                                   C                                                                                                   ai
                                                                                     ze           C                                                                                      la
                                                                                        ch            h  ile                                                                                nd
                                                                                             R                                                                                     H
                                                                                               ep                                                                                     un
                                                                                                   ub                                                                                    ga
                                                                                                         lic                                                                    Ph           r
                                                                                                                                                                                   ilip y
                                                                                               R                                                                                        pi
                                                                                                  us                                                                                      ne
                                                                                                       si
                                                                                                           a                                                                      Ar           s
                                                                                               Jo                                                                                    ge
                                                                                                   rd                                                                                   nt
                                                                                                                                                                                           in
                                                                                                        an                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                                                                                     M
                                                                                                 Ko                                                                                     ex
                                                                                                      re                                                                                   ic
                                                                                                           a                                                                      C           o
                                                                                                                                                                                    ol
                                                                                                                                                                                       om
                                                                                                  In




                                                                                                                                                                 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1995




                                                                                                                                                                                           bi
                                                                                                       di
                                                                                                           a                                                                                  a
                                                                                             H
                                                                                                un
                                                                                                   ga                                                                           Ko Pe
                                                                                                          ry                                                                      re     ru
                                                                                                                                                                                    a,
                                                                                                   Pe                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                        ep
                                                                                            C            ru                                                                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Emerging Markets




                                                                                              ol
                                                                                                 om                                                                                   Is
                                                                                                       bi                                                                               ra
                                                                                                           a                                                                        M
                                                                                                                                                                                          el
                                                                                                                                                                                     or
                                                                                                 Eg                                                                                    oc
                                                                                                       yp                                                                                 co
                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                 Is                                                                                   In
                                                                                                     ra                                                                                  di
                                                                                                          el                                                                     In         a
                                                                                               Po                                                                                  do
                                                                                                                                                                                     ne
                                                                                                    l                                                                                     si
                                                                                         Ph and                                                                                             a
                                                                                             ilip                                                                                   Tu
                                                                                                  pi                                                                                   rk
                                                                                                      ne                                                                                  ey
                                                                                            Ar             s
                                                                                               ge                                                                                   Po
                                                                                                  nt
                                                                                                                                                                        R              la
                                                                                                       in                                                                                 nd
                                                                                           In              a                                                             us       P
                                                                                              do                                                                           si
                                                                                                  ne                                                                          an akis
                                                                                                       si                                                                       Fe tan
                                                                                                           a                                                                       de




Source: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) dataset and author’s calculations.
                                                                                               Tu                                                                                    ra
                                                                                                    rk                                                                                   tio
                                                                                                         ey                                                                                  n
                                                                                             Pa
                                                                                                 ki                                                                                 Jo
                                                                                                    st                                                                                 rd
                                                                                                        an                                                                                an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 5. Ratio of FDI and Portfolio Liabilities to Gross External Liabilities:
                      Figure 6. The Savings-Investment Balance
                                 (in percent of GDP)
40                                                                                                 2
                         Savings (LHS)
35                       Investment (LHS)
                         Current Account (RHS)
                                                                                                   1
30

25                                                                                                 0

20
                                                                                                   -1
15

10
                                                                                                   -2

5

0                                                                                                  -3
     90

          91

               92

                    93

                          94

                               95

                                    96

                                         97

                                                 98

                                                      99

                                                           00

                                                                01

                                                                     02

                                                                          03

                                                                               04

                                                                                    05

                                                                                         06

                                                                                              07
19

       19

            19

                 19

                      19

                             19

                                  19

                                       19

                                            19

                                                  19

                                                       20

                                                            20

                                                                 20

                                                                      20

                                                                           20

                                                                                20

                                                                                     20

                                                                                          20
      Source: World Development Indicators (World Bank)
Figure 7. India’s Share of Gross Inflows to and Outflows from Emerging
                Markets and Other Developing Countries

                            India’s Share of Gross Inflows
16
                           Total
                           FDI
12                         Portfolio




8


4


0
1996       1997     1998     1999      2000    2001     2002     2003     2004     2005    2006

-4


-8



                           India’s Share of Gross Outflows
10
                                                                    Total
9                                                                   FDI
                                                                    Portfolio
8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

 0
 1996      1997     1998     1999      2000    2001     2002     2003     2004     2005    2006
-1

     Note: The top panel shows the volume of gross inflows into India in specific categories
     of capital flows as a ratio of the corresponding total gross inflows into all emerging
     markets and other developing countries. The denominator includes flows amongst
     emerging markets and other developing countries since these are counted as part of
     gross inflows of the recipient countries. The bottom panel shows India’s share of total
     gross outflows from all emerging markets and other developing countries (including to
     other countries within this group).

     Source: CEIC, Global Financial Stability Report 2008 and author’s calculations.
                        Figure 8. Nominal Exchange Rate
70
                                                Rupee per $
65
                                                Rupee per Euro

60

55

50

45

40

35

30
Jan-02       Jan-03      Jan-04     Jan-05     Jan-06         Jan-07   Jan-08

     Note: The data in this figure are up to November 2008.

     Source: CEIC.
           Figure 9. Real and Nominal Effective Exchange Rates
110

              REER        NEER
105


100


 95


 90


 85


 80
  Jan-01 Jan-02 Jan-03 Jan-04 Jan-05 Jan-06 Jan-07 Jan-08
      Notes: The effective exchange rates here are trade-weighted and measured
      against 36 currencies.

      REER =100 (1993-94), NEER =100 (1993-94)

      Source: CEIC
               Figure 10. Interest Rates in India Relative to U.S.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3                                               Govt. Security 1-year
2                                               U.S. 3-month t-bills
1                                               U.S. 3-year t-bonds
0
 Apr-03          Apr-04        Apr-05          Apr-06        Apr-07     Apr-08

     Note: The data in this figure go through August 2008.

     Source: CEIC and author’s calculations.
       Figure 11. Outstanding Stock of Market Stabilization Bonds
                      (in billions of Indian rupees)
1800

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200
  Apr-04          Apr-05       Apr-06        Apr-07       Apr-08
       Source: CEIC
                               Figure 12. Trade Openness Ratio
0.50

0.45

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
  90

        91

              92

                    93

                          94

                                95

                                      96

                                            97

                                                  98

                                                        99

                                                              00

                                                                    01

                                                                          02

                                                                                03

                                                                                      04

                                                                                            05

                                                                                                  06

                                                                                                        07

                                                                                                              08
19

       19

             19

                   19

                         19

                               19

                                     19

                                           19

                                                 19

                                                       19

                                                             20

                                                                   20

                                                                         20

                                                                               20

                                                                                     20

                                                                                           20

                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                             20
       Note: This figure shows the sum of imports and exports of goods and services as a
       ratio to GDP.

       Source: CEIC and authors’ calculations.
