NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE AND THE GROWING INEQUALITY IN MANAGERIAL
COMPENSATION
Hanno Lustig
Chad Syverson
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 14661
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14661

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2009

We are grateful to Jason Faberman, Carola Frydman, Enrichetta Ravina, and Scott Schuh for generously
sharing their data with us. Lorenzo Naranjo and Andrew Hollenhurst provided outstanding research
assistance. For helpful comments we would like to thank Andy Atkeson, Jonathan Berk, Nick Bloom,
Murray Carlson, Xavier Gabaix, Ron Giammarino, Francois Gourio, Fatih Guvenen, Hugo Hopenhayn,
Boyan Jovanovic, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Adriano Rampini, Kjetil Storesletten, and participants at
the UCL conference on income and consumption inequality, the NBER Asset Pricing meetings in
Cambridge, the Western Finance Association in Hawaii, Society for Economic Dynamics in Cambridge,
the CEPR conference in Gerzensee, the AEA Meetings in San Francisco and seminar participants at
Duke finance, NYU Stern finance, HBS finance, UBC finance, Wharton finance, INSEAD finance,
Stanford economics, Kellogg finance, and the NYU macro lunch. This work is supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No 0550910. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Hanno Lustig, Chad Syverson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Technological Change and the Growing Inequality in Managerial Compensation
Hanno Lustig, Chad Syverson, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 14661
January 2009, Revised April 2009
JEL No. E2,G3
ABSTRACT
Three of the most fundamental changes in US corporations since the early 1970s have been (1) the
increased importance of organizational capital in production, (2) the increase in managerial income
inequality and pay-performance sensitivity, and (3) the secular decrease in labor market reallocation.
Our paper develops a simple explanation for these changes: a shift in the composition of productivity
growth away from vintage-specific to general growth. This shift has stimulated the accumulation of
organizational capital in existing firms and reduced the need for reallocating workers to new firms.
We characterize the optimal managerial compensation contract when firms accumulate organizational
capital but risk-averse managers cannot commit to staying with the firm. A calibrated version of the
model reproduces the increase in managerial compensation inequality and the increased sensitivity
of pay to performance in the data over the last three decades.

Hanno Lustig
UCLA Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C413
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
hlustig@anderson.ucla.edu
Chad Syverson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago GSB
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
syverson@uchicago.edu

Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W 4th Street, Suite 9-120
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
svnieuwe@stern.nyu.edu

1

Introduction

Three of the most fundamental changes in US corporations since the early 1970s have been (1)
the apparent increase in the importance of organizational capital in production, (2) the increase
in managerial income inequality and pay-performance sensitivity and (3) the secular decrease in
labor market reallocation. Our paper provides an explanation for these changes.
This evidence is consistent with a shift in the composition of productivity growth away from
vintage-specific growth, which only affects new firms, to more general productivity growth, which
makes all firms more productive. In our model, the vintage-specific growth rate is the depreciation
rate of organizational capital in existing firms. The shift allows successful firms to grow larger
because their organizational capital effectively depreciates at a slower rate. This results in fewer
firm exits and less labor reallocation from old to new firms. The growth composition shift allows
our model to match the secular decline in the job reallocation rate in the US economy since the
early 1970s, as documented by Davis, Haltiwanger, Jarmin and Miranda (2006) and Faberman
(2006).1 We attribute the change in the composition of productivity growth, the key driving force
in the model, to the diffusion of information technology. However, our model applies to any other
explanation for this shift, such as a change in the composition of the work force.
The change in productivity growth composition and the widespread accumulation of organizational capital that resulted creates a new problem for successful firms: how to distribute the rents
from organizational capital? The firms’ managers have de facto ownership rights on organizational
capital, which makes it different from physical capital. These ownership rights arise from their
ability to leave the firm, and to take some of its organizational capital to a new firm. Our paper
studies the distribution of organizational rents between the owners and the managers in such an
environment.
In the data, the dispersion of managerial compensation across firms is much wider now than
35 years ago. In large, successful firms, which accumulate a lot of organizational capital, managerial compensation has increased substantially, while it has not in small firms. We propose an
equilibrium theory that ties the accumulation of organizational capital, induced by the shift in
the composition of productivity growth, to managerial compensation. A calibrated version of the
model can quantitatively account for a large share of these changes in the US economy.
The key element of the model is the optimal managerial compensation contract. This contract
insures the risk averse manager against shocks to the firm’s productivity. Insurance is provided
because the manager can only work for one firm while the owner invests in a diversified portfolio of
firms. But there is only partial insurance because the manager can quit and transfer some of the
1

The declining volatility of firm growth rates, documented by Davis et al. (2006) for the entire universe of
privately-held and publicly-traded firms, is consistent with this decline. Our model also implies that the fraction
of output produced in older establishments increased, also consistent with the findings of Davis et al. (2006). The
model of Jovanovic and Rousseau (2007) also relies on the decline in labor reallocation.

1

organizational capital to a new firm. The degree of portability of organizational capital governs
the value of the manager’s outside option and determines how much risk sharing can be sustained
between the manager and the owner. Dunne, Foster, Haltiwanger and Troske (2004) document
a sizeable increase in within-industry between-establishment wage dispersion, while Frydman and
Saks (2006)’s data show that this increase in dispersion is even higher for executives. A calibrated
version of our model can match most of the increase in compensation inequality if we assume that
half of the organizational capital is portable. However, this calibration can only match half of the
observed increase in Tobin’s q. Lowering the portability increases Tobin’s q by more, but reduces
the impact on compensation inequality. In the extreme case where organizational capital is not
portable and managers can commit to stay, the change in the composition of productivity growth
has no impact on compensation inequality.
Why does the growth composition shift increase the dispersion of managerial compensation?
As long as firms are small, the manager’s outside option constraint does not bind, and the optimal
contract prescribes constant managerial compensation (relative to aggregate output). However,
when a firm’s size exceeds a threshold, optimal management compensation is increasing in the
firm’s organizational capital. The increased accumulation of organizational capital, resulting from
the growth composition change, improves the manager’s outside option in successful firms. To
retain the manager, the owner of the firm increases compensation in response to high productivity. At the aggregate level, the change in the firm size distribution that results from the growth
composition shift triggers an endogenous shift from low-powered to high-powered incentive compensation contracts. Such a shift seems consistent with the increased pay-performance sensitivity
of employment contracts since the 1970s. If the manager is more impatient then the owner, this
shift is further amplified.
In our model, the firm shuts down when its managerial team leaves. Hence, the rate of firm
entry and exit equals the rate of managerial turnover. Since the model matches the declining firm
exit rate in the data, the model also predicts a declining managerial turnover rate. However, in
the data, at least in the last ten years, there seems to be an increase in turnover of CEO’s. Data
on managerial turnover broadly defined is hard to come by. The link between CEO turnover and
performance has decreased over time, according to Murphy (1998), who argues that turnover in
large firms is driven mostly by executive age and not by performance. A number of explanations
for the apparent increase in CEO turnover have been put forward: increased diligence of the board
of directors (Hermalin (2005)) or an increase in business education which promoted managerial
mobility across firms (Frydman and Saks (2006) and Murphy and Zabojnik (2004)). Our model
abstracts from all of these issues and focuses only on that part of managerial turnover that is
driven by firm exit and entry only.2
2

An extension of the model could allow for a partial separation of firm exits and managerial turnover by introducing additional manager-specific productivity shocks. We do not pursue such an extension here.

2

Our model has several additional, “out-of-sample” implications which are borne out in the data.
First, it matches the sensitivity of log compensation to log firm size in the US (see Edmans, Gabaix
and Landier (2007)). Second, it matches the cross-sectional correlation between valuation and
wage dispersion in the data. We identify high vintage-specific growth industries as those with low
managerial wage dispersion. As predicted by the model, we find that these industries accumulate
less organizational capital, using Tobin’s q as our measure. The effects are large. We find that a
one standard deviation increase in wage dispersion increases Tobin’s q by 6 basis points using a
broad measure of wage dispersion and by 14 basis points for executive compensation dispersion.
These effects of executive wage compensation are stronger in industries with more intangibles.
Wheeler (2005) shows that within-industry wage inequality is much higher in industries with higher
frequency of computer usage, which are industries with lower vintage-specific growth in our model.

Related Literature Our model combines the technology side of the vintage capital model of
Atkeson and Kehoe (2005, 2007) with an optimal compensation contract for managers. The literature on optimal compensation contracts builds on Harris and Holmstrom (1982)’s seminal paper
on optimal long-term wage contracts with learning about the manager’s productivity. As in Harris
and Holmstrom (1982), our optimal compensation dynamics display downward rigidity, relative to
the benchmark compensation, determined by the productivity of the average establishment in the
industry. This rigidity is generated by the inability of managers to commit to staying in the firm, as
in Krueger and Uhlig (2005). There is scope for insurance when at least some of the organizational
capital is specific to the match between the owner and the manager. Neal (1995) provides empirical
evidence on the importance of match-specific capital.3 Most of the work on optimal compensation
contracts examines the optimal capital structure of the firm in the presence of moral hazard in
partial equilibrium. Instead, our paper examines the optimal management compensation contract
in the presence of portable capital in a general equilibrium model.
We use these contracts to connect changes in the distribution of firm size to changes in the
distribution of managerial compensation. In closely related work, Gabaix and Landier (2008) explain the increased dispersion of CEO compensation in a matching model with an exogenously
changing size distribution. Our paper endogenizes both the evolution of the size and the managerial compensation distribution and explicitly models the compensation contract. The optimal
compensation contract that we derive entails benchmarking. As long as the CEO’s outside option
constraint does not bind, his compensation is kept fixed relative to that of the average firm’s CEO
compensation. This is a feature of the data (see Bizjak, Lemmon and Naveen (forthcoming)). In
3

Related applications of optimal compensation contracts in finance are Berk, Stanton and Zechner (2005),
Clementi, Cooley and Wang (2006), DeMarzo and Fishman (2007), Clementi and Hopenhayn (2002), and Albuquerque and Hopenhayn (2004), Falato and Kadyrzhanova (2008), DeMarzo and Sannikov (2006), Biais, Mariotti
and Rochet (2007), Opp (2007), He (2007), and DeMarzo, Fishman, He and Wang (2007).

3

addition, we derive a theoretical link between the size and book-to-market ratio of a firm and its
labor compensation contracts.4 In recent work, Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2008) study the risk
characteristics of organizational capital, while Panageas and Yu (2006) and Garleanu, Panageas
and Kogan (2008) study the asst pricing implications of technological change.
A large literature documents the increase of wage inequality in the US in the last three decades
and its relation to technological change (Violante (2002), Guvenen and Kuruscu (2007), Autor,
Katz and Kearny (2007), and Acemoglu (2002) for a survey). Our paper contributes to this literature by generating an endogenous switch to high-powered incentives contracts and by connecting
the changing distribution of payouts to workers to the payouts to the owners of the capital stock,
and ultimately to firm value. With the exception of Merz and Yahsiv (2003), Papanikolaou (2007),
Bazdrech, Belo and Lin (2008), and Parlour and Walden (2008), the link between labor compensation and firm value is usually ignored in the literature. Parlour and Walden (2008) characterize
optimal compensation contracts in the presence of moral hazard and derive predictions relating
workers compensation, firm productivity, firm size and firm value.
One prominent example of the technological change we have in mind is the information technology revolution after 1973. As its efficiency improved and its price dropped, the use of IT spread,
and its adoption affected all sectors of the economy. By now, there is overwhelming evidence that
computers have fundamentally altered firms’ business processes, relationships with customers and
suppliers, and internal organization. E.g., Brynjolfsson and Hitt (1997, 2000), Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002), and an entire volume of contributions on organizational capital in the new
economy by Corrado, Haltiwanger and Sichel, eds (2005). The literature convincingly argues that
the gradual adoption of IT, a General Purpose Technology (Bresnahan and Trachtenberg (1996)),
has increased the productivity of successful establishments of all vintages, not only the new ones.
There is indirect evidence that organizational capital is more important in production than three
decades ago from the stock market’s valuation of US corporations; see e.g. Hall (2001). Moreover, organizational capital and IT are complementary inputs, and investment in IT has increased
substantially since the 1970s (Bresnahan et al. (2002)). Finally, there is direct evidence on the
link between IT and organizational capital and the increased importance of organizational capital.
Using micro data, Bloom, Sadun and Van Reenen (2008) explain the productivity miracle in the
US and its absence in Europe by means of a US advantage in IT that is “primarily due to its people
management practices on promotions, rewards, hiring and firing”.
Our paper is organized as follows. Section 2 defines the technology side of the model and the
compensation contract between manager and owner, and defines an equilibrium with a continuum
of managers and firms along a steady-state growth path. Section 3 highlights the properties of the
4

A related literature studies the relationship of firm characteristics such as leverage and riskiness of cash-flows
to firm valuation in dynamic settings; see Gomes and Livdan (2004), Gomes and Schmid (2007), Hennessy and
Whited (2007), Strebulaev (2007), Gourio (2007), Chen (2008).

4

optimal compensation contract along a steady-state growth path. Its dynamics are fully captured
by the current and the highest-ever productivity level of the firm. Managerial compensation increases whenever a new maximum productivity level is reached. These two state variables have
a natural interpretation as the size and market-to-book ratio of the firm. Our model ties these
two characteristics to the value of the firm and the compensation of its management. Section 4
describes the calibration of the model. We introduce a gradual increase in general productivity
growth and an offsetting reduction in vintage-specific productivity growth so that the total growth
rate is constant. The magnitude of this compositional shift is calibrated to match the observed
decline in labor reallocation. A second key parameter is the portability of organizational capital. It
is calibrated to match the increase in income inequality. Interestingly, the model’s cross-sectional
distribution of managerial pay shares many features with the observed distribution: it is skewed,
fat-tailed, and has the correct relation with firm size. The model also delivers an increase in
pay-performance sensitivity similar to the one in the data. Finally, Section 5 provides additional
cross-sectional evidence for the effect of managerial compensation inequality on valuations.

2

Model

We set up a model with a fixed population (mass 1) of managers. Each manager is matched to an
owner to form an establishment.5 The formation of a new establishment incurs a one-time fixed
cost St . Establishments accumulate knowledge as long as the match lasts. We refer to this stock
of knowledge as organizational capital At . This organizational capital affects the technology of
production; it is a third factor of production besides physical capital and unskilled labor, earning
organizational rents.
We assume that a part of the establishment’s organizational capital is embodied in the manager.
It is neither fully match-specific, as in Atkeson and Kehoe (2005), nor fully manager-specific. The
main innovation of our work is to find the optimal division of organizational rents between the
owner and the manager, as governed by an optimal long-term risk-sharing contract in the spirit
of Harris and Holmstrom (1982). We solve for the optimal contract recursively (e.g., Thomas
and Worall (1988) and Kocherlakota (1996)), but we use a different state variable from the one
commonly used in the literature. The optimal contract maximizes the present discounted value of
the organizational rents flowing to the owner subject to the manager’s promise keeping constraint
and a sequence of participation constraints that reflect the manager’s inability to commit to the
current match. We deviate from Krueger and Uhlig (2005) by assuming that the owner has limited
liability. Separation occurs whenever there is no joint surplus left in the match. Upon separation,
a fraction 0 < φ < 1 of the organizational capital can be transferred to the manager’s next match,
5

We use the words establishment and firm interchangeably. The manager can be interpreted as the entire
management team.

5

while the remainder of the organizational capital in the old establishment is destroyed. This can
be interpreted as the management team being dissolved. Hence, in our model, firm entry and exit
is identical to managerial turnover. We will calibrate the model to match entry/exit rates in the
data.
If the manager could commit to staying in the match or if none of the organizational capital was
destroyed when the manager left the firm, then the changing composition of productivity growth
would have no effect on the distribution of compensation.
We start by setting up the model and defining a steady-state growth path. In Section 4, we
trace out the transition between two steady-state growth paths.

2.1

Technology

On the technology side, our model follows Atkeson and Kehoe (2005). Each establishment belongs
to a vintage s. An establishment of vintage s at time t was born at t−s. An establishment operates
a vintage-specific technology that uses unskilled labor (lt ), physical capital (kt ), and organizational
capital (At ) as its inputs. Output generated with this technology is yt :
yt = zt (At )1−ν F (kt , lt )ν .
Following Lucas (1978), ν is the ‘span of control’ parameter of the manager. It governs the
decreasing returns to scale at the establishment level.
There is no aggregate uncertainty in our model. There are two sources of productivity growth,
which we label general and vintage-specific growth. The general productivity level zt grows at a
deterministic and constant rate gz :
zt = (1 + gz )zt−1 .
General productivity growth affects establishments of all vintages alike. General productivity
growth is often referred to as disembodied technical change. In addition, it is skill-neutral because
it affects all three production inputs symmetrically.
Following Hopenhayn and Rogerson (1993), the match-specific level of organizational capital,
At , follows an exogenous process. It is hit by random match-specific shocks ε, which are lognormally distributed N(0, σ 2 ):
log At+1 = log At + log εt+1 .

(2.1)

We do not explicitly model the learning process that underlies the accumulation process of organizational capital. However, the ε shocks can be interpreted as productivity gains derived from
active or passive learning, from matching, or from adoption of new technologies in existing firms,
6

as Atkeson and Kehoe (2005) point out.6
A new establishment can always start with a blue print or frontier technology level θt : At ≥ θt .
The productivity level of the blue print grows at a deterministic and constant rate gθ :
θt = (1 + gθ )θt−1 .
This vintage-specific growth is often referred to as embodied technical change.

2.2

Contract Between Owner and Manager

Owner There is a stand-in owner who is perfectly diversified.7 He maximizes the expected
present discounted value of aggregate payouts from all establishments Dt using a discount rate rt :
E0

∞
X
t=0

e−

Pt

s=0 rs

Dt = V t + K t .

(2.2)

This object is the value of the aggregate capital stock Vt + Kt , which consists of the physical capital
Kt and the owner’s residual claim to the aggregate rents from organizational capital, denoted Vt .
The owner’s value of organizational capital is the expected present discounted value of the aggregate
stream of cash flows {Πt } that not already claimed by the other factors:
Πt = Yt − Wt Lt − Rt Kt − Ct − Sta ,

(2.3)

where Wt Lt is the aggregate compensation of unskilled labor, Rt Kt that of physical capital, Ct the
aggregate compensation of all the managers of the establishments, and Sta ≡ Nt St the total sunk
costs incurred for starting Nt new establishments. Since we assume that the owner also owns the
physical capital stock Kt , aggregate payouts to the owner Dt are the sum of organizational rents
and the factor payments to physical capital less physical investment:
Dt = Πt + Rt Kt − It , ∀t.
Since the sunk cost is lost, value-added is defined as Yt − Sta .
An individual establishment’s organizational rents (before sunk costs and physical capital in6

Additionally, they can be interpreted as reduced-form for heterogeneity across managers, or for the outcomes
from good or bad decisions made by the manager. Bertrand and Schoar (2003), Bennedsen, Perez-Gonzalez and
Wolfenzon (2007), and Bloom and Van Reenen (2006) show that heterogeneity across managers leads to heterogeneity
in firm outcomes. Jovanovic and Nyarko (1982) explicitly model learning-by-doing and McGrattan and Prescott
(2007) and Carlin, Chowdhry and Garmaise (2008) explicitly model the accumulation of intangible capital.
7
Equivalently, there is a continuum of atomless and identical owners.

7

come) accruing to its owners are defined with lower-case letters:
πt = yt − Wt lt − Rt kt − ct .
Manager The owner offers the manager a complete contingent contract {ct (ht ), βt (ht )} at the
start of the match, where ct (ht ) is the compensation of the manager as a function of the history of
shocks ht = (εt , εt−1 , ...) and βt (ht ) is a governs whether the match is dissolved or not in history
ht . This contract cannot be renegotiated. The manager can always accept a job at another
establishment, while the owner has limited liability.
The optimal contract maximizes the total expected payoff of the owner subject to delivering
initial utility v0 to the manager:
v0 (h0 ) = Eh0

"∞
X

#
τ 1−γ
c
(h
)
τ
e−ρm t
.
1−γ
τ =0

The manager is risk averse with CRRA parameter γ and his time discount rate is denoted ρm . In
general, the history-dependence of the manager’s compensation makes this a complicated problem.
However, as is common in the literature on dynamic contracts, we use the manager’s promised
utility as a state variable to make the problem recursive. The contract delivers vt in total expected utility to the manager today by delivering current compensation ct and state-contingent
compensation promises vt+1 (·) tomorrow. These promised utilities lie on a domain [v, v].
We use Vt (At , vt ) to denote the value of the owner’s equity in an establishment with current
organizational capital At , and an outstanding promise to deliver vt to the manager. It is the value
of the owner’s claim to the rents from organizational capital. This does not include the value of
income from physical capital. Importantly, the owner has limited liability; the option to terminate
the contract when there is no joint surplus in the match. Limited liability implies the constraint:
Vt (At , vt ) ≥ 0.
Finally, we use ωt (At ) to denote the outside option of a manager currently employed in an
establishment with organizational capital At . When a manager switches to a new match, a fraction
φ of the organizational capital is transferred to the next match and a fraction 1 − φ is destroyed.
Free disposal applies: If the manager brings organizational capital worth less than the current
blue print θt , then the new match starts off with the blue print technology for the new vintage.
Taken together, the organizational capital of a match of vintage t is max{φAt , θt }. The value of
the outside option ω is determined in equilibrium by a zero-profit condition for new firm entry.
Recursive Formulation For given outside option {ωt } and discount rate {rt } processes, the
optimal contract in an establishment that has promised vt to its manager maximizes the owner’s
8

value V

h
i
Vt (At , vt ) = max Vbt (At , vt ), 0 ,

and

Vbt (At , vt ) = max

ct ,vt+1 (·)



πt +

Z

−rt

e

(2.4)


V (At+1 , vt+1 )Γ(εt+1 )dεt+1 ,

(2.5)

by choosing the state-contingent promised utility schedule vt+1 (·) and the current compensation
ct , subject to the law of motion for organizational capital (2.1), a promise keeping constraint
−ρm

Z

vt = u(ct ) + e
βt+1 (vt , εt+1 )vt+1 (At+1 )Γ(εt+1 )dεt+1
Z
−ρm
+e
ωt+1 (At+1 )(1 − βt+1 (vt , εt+1 ))Γ(εt+1 )dεt+1

(2.6)

and a series of participation constraints
vt+1 (At+1 ) ≥ ωt+1 (At+1 ).

(2.7)

The indicator variable β is one if continuation is optimal and 0 elsewhere:
βt+1 = 1 if vt+1 (At+1 ) ≤ v ∗ (At+1 )
βt+1 = 0 elsewhere.
The minimum at zero in equation (2.4) for the owner’s value reflects limited liability of the
owner: The match is terminated if the joint surplus of the match is negative. If the match is
dissolved, the manager receives ωt+1 (At+1 ) in promised utility. To obtain this recursive formulation,
we have used the fact that Vt (At , ·) is non-increasing in its second argument. For each At , there
exists a cutoff value v ∗ (At ) that satisfies Vbt (At , v ∗ (At )) = 0. The match is dissolved when the
compensation promised to the manager exceeds the cutoff level: βt+1 = 0 if and only if vt+1 (At+1 ) >
v ∗ (At+1 ). Put differently, only establishments with high enough productivity At > At (vt ) survive.

2.3

Equilibrium

A competitive equilibrium is a price vector {Wt , Rt , rt }, an allocation vector {kt , lt , ct , βt }, an
outside option process {ωt }, and a sequence of distributions {Ψt,s , λt,s , Nt } that satisfy optimality
and market clearing conditions spelled out below.
Physical Capital and Unskilled Labor Unskilled labor l and physical capital k can be reallocated freely across different establishments. Hence, the problem of how much l and k to rent at
factor prices W and R, is entirely static. We use Kt and Lt to denote the aggregate quantities,
9

and we use At to denote the average stock of organizational capital across all establishments and
vintages:
∞ Z
X
At =
AΦt,s dA,
s=0

A

where Φt,s denotes the measure over organizational capital at the start of period t for vintage s.
Physical capital and unskilled labor are allocated in proportion to the establishment’s organizational capital level At :
At
Kt
At
At
lt (At ) =
Lt .
At

kt (At ) =

This allocation satisfies the first order conditions and the market clearing conditions for capital and
labor. The fact that establishments with larger organizational capital A have more physical capital
and hire more unskilled labor suggests an interpretation of A as the size of the establishment. In the
model, employment in a firm varies with At ; labor reallocates every period. Firm exits, however,
only occur when At falls below a critical threshold which is determined by the sunk cost of starting
a new firm.
The equilibrium wage rate Wt for unskilled labor and rental rate for physical capital Rt are
determined by the standard first order conditions:
1−ν

Wt = νzt At

1−ν

FL (Kt , Lt )ν−1 , Rt = νzt At

FK (Kt , Lt )ν−1

The factor payments to unskilled labor and physical capital absorb a fraction (1 − ν) of aggregate
output Yt , where Yt is given by:
1−ν

Yt = zt At

F (Kt , Lt )ν .

In the remainder, we assume a Cobb-Douglas production function F (k, l) = k α l1−α .

Organizational Rents A fraction ν of aggregate output Yt goes to organizational capital. These
organizational rents are split between the owners Πt , managers Ct , and sunk costs Sta = Nt St :
∞ Z Z
X
s=0

v

πt (A, v)Ψt,s (A, v)d(A, v) − Nt St = Yt − Wt Lt − Rt Kt − Ct − Sta = Πt ,
A

where the measure Ψt,s (A, v) is defined below. The second equality follows from (2.3) and ensures
that the goods market clears.
10

Discount Rate The payoffs are priced off the inter-temporal marginal rate of substitution
(IMRS) of the representative owner. Just like the manager, the owner has constant relative risk
aversion preferences with parameter γ. His subjective time discount factor is ρo . Let gt denote the
rate of change in log Dt . Then, the equilibrium log discount rate or “cost of capital” rt is given by
the owner’s log IMRS:
rt = ρo + γgt .

(2.8)

Because there is no aggregate uncertainty and the owner holds a diversified portfolio of establishments, the cost of capital evolves deterministically. Thus, our setting is equivalent to one with a
risk neutral owner who discounts future cash-flows, as in equation (2.2).

Managerial Compensation Having solved for the value function {Vt (·, ·)} that satisfies the
Bellman equation above for given {ωt (·), rt }, we can construct the optimal contract for a new
match starting at t {ct+j (ht+j ), βt+j (ht+j )} in sequential form.
Outside Option We assume the sunk cost St grows at the same rate as output. Free entry
stipulates that the equilibrium value of a new establishment to the owner is equal to the sunk cost
St :
Vt (max(φAt , θt ), ωt (At )) = St ,
(2.9)
The first argument indicates that a new establishment starts with organizational capital equal to
the maximum of the frontier level of technology θt and the organizational capital φAt that the
manager brought from the previous match. The total utility ωt (At ) promised to the manager at
the start of a new match is such that the value of the new match is zero in expectation. Therefore,
equation (2.9) pins down the equilibrium outside option ωt (At ).
Law of Motion for Distributions We use χ to denote the implied probability density function
for At+1 given At . κ is an indicator function defined by the policy function for promised utilities:
κ (A′ ; A, v) = 1 if v ′ (A′ ; A, v) = v ′ , and equals 0 elsewhere. Using this indicator function, we can
define the transition function Q for (A, v):
Q ((A′ , v ′), (A, v)) = χ(A′ |A)κ(A′ ; A, v).
We use Ψt,s to denote the joint measure over organizational capital A and promised utilities v for
matches of vintage s. Its law of motion is implied by the transition function:
′

′

Ψt+1,s+1 (A , v ) =

Z

0

∞

Z

v

Q((A′ , v ′ ), (A, v))λt,s (A, v)d(A, v),

v

11

(2.10)

where λt,s (A, v) is the measure of surviving establishments in period t of vintage s:
λt,s (A, v) =

Z

A
0

Z

v

β(a, u)dΨt,s(a, u) ≥ 0.

(2.11)

v

In equilibrium, the mass of new establishments created in each period Nt (entry) equals the mass
of matches destroyed in that same period (exit):
Nt =

∞ Z
X

0

s=0

2.4

∞

Z

v

(1 − βt,s (A, v))Ψt,s (A, v)d(A, v) ≥ 0.

v

Back-loading

The free entry condition implies that the expected net present discounted value of a start-up is
exactly zero:
Z ∞Z vX
∞
Pj
e− 0 rs ds πt+j (A, v)Ψt+j,s (A, v)d(A, v) − St = 0
0

v

j=0

Importantly, this does not imply that the organizational rents that flow to the owners are zero. As
long as discount rates r are strictly positive, the zero profit condition in (2.9) implies that expected
net payouts are strictly positive:
Z

∞
0

Z

v

∞
vX

πt+j (A, v)Ψt+j,s (A, v)d(A, v) − St > 0,

j=0

for two reasons. The first reason is a back-loading effect (see Atkeson and Kehoe (2005)). The
owners are compensated for waiting in the form of positive payouts. The more back-loaded the
payments are, the higher the expected payments. The expected payout profile of an establishment
is steeply increasing: the first payout is a large negative number (-St ), the establishment then grows
and starts to generate higher and higher profits (in expectation). Most of the organizational rents
are paid in the future. Second, there is a selection effect operative. Only the establishments that
have fast enough organizational capital growth (high enough ε shocks) survive. When we compute
aggregate (or expected) payouts, we are only sampling from the survivors who satisfy At > At (vt ).
As pointed out by Hopenhayn (2002), selection among establishments can explain why Tobin’s
(average) q is larger than one on average. The aggregate value of establishments is given by the
present discounted value of a claim to {Dt }. It equals the sum of all equity values across all
establishment minus sunk costs plus the value of the physical capital stock Kt :
Vta

=

∞ Z
X
s=0

0

∞

Z

v

Vt (A, v)Ψt,s (A, v)d(A, v) − Sta + Kt ≥ Kt ,

v

12

Va

Tobin’s q, qt = Ktt , is larger than one on average, in spite of the fact that new matches are valued
at zero (net of their physical capital). The reason is again selection: when we compute q, we only
sample survivors. For future reference, we also define aggregate managerial wealth in the economy
as:
Mt =

∞ Z Z
X
s=0

A

vt (A, v)Ψt,s (A, v)d(A, v).

v

It is the value of a claim to all the rents from organizational capital that flow to the managers.

2.5

Steady-State Growth Path

In a first step, we solve for a steady-state growth path in which all aggregate variables grow at a constant rate. Aggregate establishment productivity {At } and the productivity of the newest vintage
{θt } grow at a constant rate gθ , the variables {rt , Rt , Nt } are constant, the general productivity-level
grows at a constant rate gz , and all other aggregate variables grow at a constant rate
g = (1 + gz )(1 + gθ )1−ν
We normalize the population of unskilled labor L to one.

1
 1−αν

.

(2.12)

Definition 1. A steady-state growth path is defined as a path for which aggregate establishment
productivity {At } and the productivity of the newest vintage {θt } grow at a constant rate gθ , the
variables {rt , Rt , Nt } are constant, the economy-wide productivity-level grows at a constant rate gz ,
and all aggregate variables {Yt , Kt , Wt , St , Ct , Dt , Vta } grow at a constant rate
g = (1 + gz )(1 + gθ )1−ν

1
 1−αν

.

Along the steady-state growth path, the measure over establishment productivity and promised utilities satisfies:
Ψt+1,s+1 (A, v) = Ψt,s




A
,v ,
1 + gθ

the measure of active establishments satisfies:
λt+1,s (A, v) = λt,s




A
,v ,
1 + gθ

and the value of an establishment of vintage s evolves according to:
Vt+1 (A, v; s + 1) = (1 + g)Vt




A
1−γ
, v(1 + g) , s .
1 + gθ

To construct the steady-state growth path, we normalize organizational capital by the frontier
13

bt = At /θt . By construclevel of technology, and we denote the resulting variable with a hat: A
b ≥ 1 for a new establishment. A key insight is that the organizational capital of existing
tion, A
establishments, expressed in units of the frontier technology, shrinks at a rate (1 + gθ ):
 
 
′
b
b − log (1 + gθ ) + log (ε′ ) .
log A = log A

(2.13)

b Below,
The prime denotes next period’s value. The lower gθ , the higher the growth rate of A.

we introduce a secular decline in gθ . We normalize variables in efficiency units. This allows us to
restate the production technology as follows :
yet = e
ktαν ,

where a variable with a tilde, x
et , denotes the variable, x, expressed in per capita terms and in
adjusted efficiency units of the latest vintage (blueprint):
x
et =

xt

1
1−αν

zt

1−ν
1−αν

.

θt

This notation allows us to reformulate the optimal contract along the steady-state growth path.
be
The owner maximizes his value Vb (A,
v ) by optimally choosing current compensation e
c and future
promised utilities e
v ′ (·):
h
i
be
be
v), 0
Ve (A,
v) = max Vb (A,
and

be
Vb (A,
v) = max
′

c,e
e
v (·)

"

f − Re
ye − W
k−e
c
R
−(ρo −(1−γ)b
g)
′
′
b,e
+e
Ve (A
v )Γ(ε′ )dε′,

#

(2.14)

subject to the law of motion for organizational capital in (2.13), the promise keeping constraint
−(ρm −(1−γ)b
g)

v = u(e
e
c) + e

Z

′

′

b′

′

′

b′

βs′ (e
v, ε )e
v (A )Γ(ε )dε + ω
e (A )

b′ :
and subject to participation constraints for all A

b′ ) ≥ ω
b′ ).
ve′ (A
e (A

Z

 
b′ ≤ ve∗ (A
b′ )
β = 1 if ve A

β = 0 elsewhere

14

′

′



(1 − β(e
v , ε ))Γ(ε )dε ,(2.15)

The indicator variable β is one if continuation is optimal and zero elsewhere:
′

′

The outside option process is determined in equilibrium by the zero-profit condition for new
entrants:


b 1), ω(A)
b = S,
Vb max(Aφ,
(2.16)
bt ) is constant in the range A ∈ [0, φ−1 ]. We
Equation (2.16) implies that the outside option ω(A
refer to this range as the insensitivity region, because the outside option does not depend on the
organizational capital accumulated in the current establishment. When the fraction of capital φ
that is portable is zero, the outside option is constant for all A > 0.

3

Properties of Compensation Contract

Although the managerial compensation contract allows for complicated history-dependence, the
optimal contract along a steady-state growth path turns out to have intuitive dynamics. Two
state variables summarize all necessary information: the current level of productivity At , which we
have given an interpretation as the size of the establishment, and the highest level of productivity
recorded thus far Amax,t , which we will give an interpretation as the book-to-market ratio of the
establishment.

3.1

No Discount Rate Wedge

First, we consider the case in which the manager and the owner are equally impatient (ρm =
ρo ). The promised utility state variable vt can be replaced by the running maximum of the
bmax,t = max{A
bτ , τ ≤ t}. We let T denote the random stopping time
productivity process: A
when the establishment is shut down:

bτ , e
T = inf {τ ≥ 0 : Vb (A
vτ ) = 0}.

Proposition 2. Optimal management compensation along a steady-state
n
 growth path is determined
o
b
bmax,t ), A
bmax,t
by the running maximum of productivity: c̃t (Amax,t ) = max c0 , C ω(A
for all


b is defined such that the implied compensation stream
0 < t < T where the function C e
v, A
{e
cτ } ∞
et to the manager.
τ =t delivers total expected utility v
Management compensation is constant in efficiency units as long as the running maximum is
unchanged. The constancy is optimal because of the concavity of the manager’s utility function,

and arises as long as the participation constraint does not bind. This amounts to benchmarking,
because the manager’s compensation simply keeps up with the industry’s productivity growth
as long as the manager’s participation constraint does not bind. When the productivity process
reaches a new high, the participation constraint binds, and the compensation is adjusted upwards.
15

bt and the
Armed with this result, we can define the owner’s value recursively as a function of A
bmax,t :
running maximum A
h
i
bA
bmax ) = max Vb (A,
bA
bmax ), 0
Ve (A,

and

bA
bmax ) = ye − W
f l − Re
bmax ) + e
Vb (A,
k−e
c (A

−(ρo −(1−γ)g)

Z

b′ , A
b′ )Γ(ε′ )dε′ ,
Ve (A
max

subject to the law of motion for organizational capital in (2.13) and the implied law of motion for
the running maximum.
b on the vertical axis
Figure 1 illustrates the dynamics of the optimal compensation. It plots A
bmax on the horizontal axis. By definition, A
b ≤ A
bmax , so that only the area on and
against A
b= A
bmax ≥ 1. When an
below the 45-degree line is relevant. New establishments start with A
establishment grows and this growth establishes a new maximum productivity level, it travels
along the 45-degree line. When its productivity level falls or increases but not enough to establish
bmax , A)
b space. The region [0, 1/φ] for A
bmax is
a new record, it travels along a vertical line in the (A
an insensitivity region. Managerial compensation is constant (c̃ = c0 ) in this region. Compensation
is constant in efficiency units for small establishments because of the sunk cost. The manager will

not leave because his productivity level is insufficiently high to justify a new sunk cost. To the
right of this region, managerial compensation is pinned down by the binding outside option that
bmax ). As long as current productivity stays below the running maximum,
was last encountered: c̃(A
the manager’s compensation is constant in efficiency units. Along this ∆c̃ = 0 locus, the variation
in current productivity is fully absorbed by the net payouts to owners, as long as At stays above
the Vb = 0 locus. The owner bears all downside idiosyncratic productivity risk. When productivity
falls below this locus, the match is terminated.

[Figure 1 about here.]
bmax , A)
b space, there is a line with slope φ along which the owner’s
Growth and Value In the (A
b This is the locus of pairs for which A
b = φA
bmax . On this locus, an
value is constant: Vb = S.
existing establishment pays the same compensation as a new establishment and it has the same
productivity:



bmax , ω(A
bmax ) = S,
b
Vb φA

(3.1)

This means that the firm’s market-to-book ratio, or average q ratio, on this line is given by:
q =1+

bA
bmax )
Vb (A,
Sb
=1+
b A)
b
b
b
k(
k(A)

This suggests a natural interpretation of the ratio of current productivity relative to the running
maximum as an indicator of the market-to-book ratio. Compare two establishments with the same
16

b The establishment with the lower ratio of A/
b A
bmax has the same physical capital stock
size A.
b
b but higher (current and future) managerial compensation. This is because the manager
k(A),
is compensated for the best past performance, which is substantially above current productivity.
bA
bmax ) is lower. These low
Hence, the value of its organizational capital going to the owners Vb (A,
b A
bmax firms have a low market-to-book ratio 1 + Vb /b
b A
bmax firms
A/
k. They are value firms. High A/
are growth firms. In Figure 1, firms with the same market-to-book ratio are on the same line
through the origin. Value firms are farther from the 45-degree line, growth firms are closer.

Organizational Capital as Collateral The limited portability of organizational capital creates
the collateral in the matches necessary to sustain risk sharing. Two extreme cases illustrate this
point. In the first case, there is no capital specific to the match and there are no other frictions,
as in Krueger and Uhlig (2005). The manager can transfer 100% of the organizational capital of
the establishment to a future match (φ = 1) and there are no sunk costs (Sb = 0). When φ = 1
in Figure 1, the Vb = Sb line coincides with the 45-degree line. Therefore, Vb ≤ Sb = 0 everywhere.
Limited liability then implies that Vb = 0. Because there is no relationship capital, no risk sharing

can be sustained, and the managers earn all the rents from organizational capital. The value of
the owner’s stake in the organizational capital is zero. This implies that Tobin’s q equals one for
all t.

In the second case that we consider, φ = 0: all of the organizational capital is match-specific.
This is the case considered by Atkeson and Kehoe (2005). The insensitivity regions extends over
b The manager’s outside option is constant so that perfect risk sharing
the entire domain of A.
can be sustained. There is zero dispersion in managerial compensation. The owner receives all
organizational rents, which is reflected in high q ratios.

Compensation and Payout Dynamics We use a random 300-period simulation from a calibrated version of the model to illustrate the compensation dynamics; the details of the calibration
are in section 4.2. Figure 2 tracks a single, successful establishment through time. The left panel
bmax,t , A
bt ) values, as in Figure 1. The right panel shows the corresponding
plots the realized (A
b (solid line, measured against the left axis) and managerial
time series for productivity (or size) A
compensation e
c (dashed line, measured against the right axis). Because φ = 0.5, the insensitivity
b = 2. In that region the compensation is constant. When the establishment
regions extends until A

size exceeds 2, around period 50, and leaves the insensitivity region, managerial compensation
b i.e. every time a new running maximum for A
b is atstarts to increase in response to increases in A,
bmax,t , A
bt ) space.
tained. The establishment moves along the 45-degree line in the left panel in the (A
The manager’s compensation does not track the downward movements in productivity/size that
occur between periods 75 and 100. This is the first vertical locus of points in the left panel. The
second big run-up in productivity increases the manager’s compensation once more. Eventually,
17

when the productivity level drops below the lower bound A(v), the owner’s residual value equals
zero Vb = 0, the match is dissolved, and the manager switches to a new match. This
 endogenous

b 1 . This
break-up is indicated by an arrow. A new match start off at productivity level max φA,

second match only lasts for about 20 periods because of poor productivity shock realizations. The
third match on the figure lasts longer, but the establishment never leaves the insensitivity region,
so that wages are constant.
[Figure 2 about here.]
Figure 3 compares the managers payouts c̃ (left panel) and the owner’s payouts π̃ (right panel)
for the same history of shocks as the previous figure. The left panel is identical to the right panel
in Figure 2. The key message of the figure is that the owner’s payouts are more sensitive to
productivity shocks than the manager’s compensation. The dashed line in the right panel is more
volatile than the dashed line in the left panel. In the insensitivity region, the owner bears all the
risk from fluctuating productivity. In addition, whenever the productivity level falls below the
running maximum, the owner’s payouts absorb the entire decline in output. This is because the
owner provides maximal insurance to the risk-averse manager.
[Figure 3 about here.]

3.2

Discount Rate Wedge

In the benchmark case with equal rates of time preference for the managers and the owners, managerial compensation does not respond to decreases in firm size and productivity. The management
is completely “entrenched”. In the quantitative section of the paper, we consider a less extreme
version, by allowing for a wedge between the discount rates of the management and the owners.
In particular, we consider the case in which the manager discounts cash flows at a higher rate
than the owner (ρm > ρo ). This is the relevant case when the manager faces binding borrowing
constraints, has a lower willingness to substitute consumption over time, or simply has a higher
rate of time preference. This is a standard assumption in this literature; see DeMarzo et al. (2007)
for a recent example.
Proposition 3. Let tmax denote the random stopping time that indicates when the participation
bτ ) = e
constraint was last binding: tmax = sup{τ ≥ 0 : ω(A
vτ }. Optimal management compensation
btmax )e−γ(ρm −ρo )(t−tmax ) for all 0 < t. We define c(A
btmax ) such that
evolves according to: e
ct = c(A
b
{e
cτ } ∞
τ =tmax delivers total expected utility ω(Atmax ) to the manager.

bmax , the new state variable is a discounted version of the running maximum; it
Instead of A
depreciates at a rate that is governed by the rate of time preference gap between the manager and
18

the owner. In the absence of binding participation constraints, managerial compensation c grows
at a rate smaller than the rate of value-added on the steady-state growth path. Put differently,
whenever the current productivity of the establishment declines below its running maximum, the
manager’s scaled compensation c̃ drifts down. The left panel of Figure 4 illustrates this downward
drift, for example between periods 150 and 200. Management is less “entrenched”. This feature
will help to match equilibrium entry and exit rates in the data. Without it, the model generates
too much entry and exit.
[Figure 4 about here.]

4

Transition Experiment

We feed a gradual increase in general productivity growth into the model: gz ↑. To keep the
analysis tractable, we assume that the total productivity growth rate of the economy gt is constant
at its initial steady-state growth path value:8

 1
g = (1 + gt,z )(1 + gt,θ )1−ν 1−αν .

(4.1)

Holding fixed g, the increase in gz corresponds to a decrease in the rate of depreciation of organib in the stationary version of the model: gθ ↓. The growth composition change
zational capital A
allows existing firms in traditional industries to remain competitive longer, and grow larger. Their
organizational capital depreciates less quickly in 2005-2008 than in 1970-74 (see equation 2.13).
b drifts down
In Figure 1, a lower gθ has two distinct effects. First, it reduces the rate at which A

bmax . So,
along a vertical line. Second, it shifts more probability mass to higher realizations of A
a decrease in gθ shifts more probability mass closer to the 45-degree line, and more mass in the
northeast quadrant. Thus, the the growth composition change creates larger establishments and
more of them are growth rather than value firms. The increased importance of growth firms seems
intuitively consistent with the notion of the IT revolution.
Establishments accumulate more organizational capital and are longer-lived in the new steady
state. Because more establishments grow larger, the managers’ outside option constraint binds
more frequently. This increases the sensitivity of pay to performance. In addition, the arrival
of more large establishments increases the back-loading of the owner’s payouts. This raises the
owner’s average payouts in the cross-section as a fraction of output. Managerial compensation, in
contrast, is more front-loaded.
We study the transition between a low and a high general-purpose innovation growth path.
At t = 0, agents know the entire future path for {gt,θ }Tt=0 , although the arrival of the GPT itself
8

First, there is little evidence that the last 35 years have seen higher average GDP growth g than the 35-year
period that preceded it. Second, changing GDP growth along the transition path is computationally challenging.

19

at t = 0 is not anticipated at t = . . . , −2, −1. Appendix C defines the constant cost-of-capital
transition. It also explains the reverse shooting algorithm we use to solve for prices and quantities
along the transition path. This is a non-trivial problem because we need to keep track of how the
cross-sectional distribution of (A, v) evolves over time. We then simulate the economy forward for
a cross-section of 5,000 establishments, starting in the initial steady state. We assume the change
in the relative importance of growth rates is accomplished in 20 years. However, the economy
continues to adjust substantially afterwards on its way to the final steady state.

4.1

Target Moments in the Data

Several of the model’s parameters were chosen to match moments of the data we describe below.
This is true for the decline in job reallocation, the increase in wage dispersion, and the initial exit
rate.
Increased Dispersion in Compensation We provide three sources of data, all of which document a large increase in wage inequality. The first and broadest measure studies wages of all
workers. The data are from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) collected
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The unit of observation is an establishment, and the
data report the average wage. We calculate the within-industry wage dispersion from a panel of
55 2-digit SIC-code industries, and average across industries. Panel A of Table VI shows that the
cross-sectional standard deviation of log wages increased by 7.3, the IQR by 5.4, and the IDR by
14.7 percentage points between 1975-1979 and 2000-2004.9
The second body of evidence comes from managerial wages. While our model has implications
for overall wage inequality, managerial data arguably provide a cleaner match. We use wage
income data from the March Current Population Survey and select only workers in managerial
occupations (See Appendix A.4). Panel B of Table VI shows that in this sample, the cross-sectional
standard deviation of log wages increased by 9.4, the IQR by 11.3, and the IDR by 19.6 percentage
points between 1975-1979 and 2000-2004. Hence the increase in managerial compensation is more
pronounced than for the population at large.
The third and most narrow metric focusses on the top of the compensation scale. Measure
total compensation (salaries, bonuses, long-term bonus payments, and the Black-Scholes value of
stock option grants) for the three highest-paid officers in the largest 50 firms, Frydman and Saks
(2006) documents a strong increase in executive compensation. Panel C of Table VI uses the same
9

According to Dunne et al. (2004), increasing within-industry, between-establishment wage dispersion accounts
for a large fraction of the increase in overall income inequality in the US. This is true especially for non-production
workers, which includes managers. They study US manufacturing establishments. Between 1977 and 1988, the
between-plant coefficient of variation for non-production worker’s wages increased from 44% to 56%, while the
within-plant dispersion actually decreased. They also document a similar increase in the dispersion of productivity
between plants.

20

data to show an equally spectacular increase in the dispersion of top managers’ compensation.10
Since the mid-1970s, the cross-sectional standard deviation of log compensation increased by 43
log points, the IQR and IDR more than doubled to 1.5 and 2.6, respectively. The inequality and
the increase in inequality are strongest for this group of executives.
[Table 1 about here.]
Declining Excess Job Reallocation The excess job reallocation rate is a direct measure of the
cross-sectional dispersion of establishment growth rates. It is defined as the sum of the job creation
rate plus the job destruction rate less the net employment growth rate. Before 1990, we only have
establishment-level reallocation data for the manufacturing sector. Figure 5 shows that the excess
reallocation rate in manufacturing declined from 10.9% in 1965-1969 to 8.4% in 2000-2005, and
further to 7.8% between 2006 and 2007.III. After 1990, the BLS provides establishment-level data
for all sectors of the economy. Over the 1990-2007 sample, the excess reallocation rate declined from
10.6 to 7.2% in manufacturing, from 15 to 12.4% in services, and from 15.6 to 12.3% in the entire
private sector. Half of this decline is due to a decline in entry and exit rates for establishments,
from 4% to 2.5%. The other half is due to a decline in expansions and contractions of existing
establishments.
[Figure 5 about here.]
Similar trends have been documented in firm-level (rather than establishment-level) data. Davis
et al. (2006) document large declines in the dispersion and the volatility of firm growth rates for the
US economy, either measured based on employment or sales growth. The employment-weighted
dispersion of firm growth rates declined from .70 in 1978 to .55 in 2001, while the employmentweighted volatility of firm growth rates declined from .22 in 1980 to .12 in 2001. The former
measures the cross-sectional standard deviation of firm growth rates, while the latter measures the
standard deviation of firm growth rates over time.11 This decline in volatility is present across
sectors.
Finally, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1999) constructs a proxy for establishment-level reallocation
by studying intra-industry job flows. This is the only economy-wide series that is continually
available for our sample period. The excess reallocation rate for the non-financial sector declines
from 19% in 1960 to an average of 11.5% in 2000. This 19-11.5% change is what we calibrate to
in our benchmark model.
10

We thank Carola Frydman for graciously making these data available to us.
Comin and Philippon (2005) show that there is an increase in volatility for the sub-sample of publicly traded
firms. Our analysis is for the entire non-financial sector, publicly-traded and privately-held. The discrepancy
between the findings for public and for all firms may have to do with private firms that go public earlier. The IPO
decision is outside of our model.
11

21

Valuation The increase in the payouts to securities holders over the last 30 years coincided with
a doubling of Tobin’s average q and the value-output ratio. Tobin’s q is measured as the market
value of US non-financial corporations, constructed from the Flow of Funds data divided by the
replacement cost of physical capital:
qt = 1 +

Vta
.
Kt

We construct the replacement cost of physical capital using the perpetual inventory method with
FoF investment and inventory data (see Appendix A.1). The first column in Table VII shows that
Tobin’s q decreased from 2.0 in the 1965-1969 period to 1.0 in the 1975-1979 period. After that,
it gradually increases to 2.6 in the 1995-1999 period and then it levels off to 2.3 and 2.0. The
value-output ratio for the US corporate sector, reported in Column (2), is computed as the ratio
of Vta to gross value-added Yt . It tracks the evolution of Tobin’s q almost perfectly.
The value of US corporations per unit of physical capital has more than doubled since the
late seventies. The increase in valuations seems to be linked to the accumulation of organizational
capital rather than physical capital. Note that the secular increase in Tobin’s q cannot be explained
solely by a decrease in taxes. Indeed, in a model without organizational capital and no adjustment
costs, Tobin’s q is always one. In a world with reasonable adjustment costs, a decrease in taxes
could increase Tobin’s q above one, but only temporarily. Finally, the large deviations of Tobin’s
q from one occur in the second half of the sample when the average tax rate is slightly increasing.
[Table 2 about here.]

4.2

Benchmark Parameter Choices

In order to assess its quantitative implications, we calibrate the model at annual frequency. Table
I summarizes the parameters.
Production Technology and Preferences The parameter ν governs the decreasing returns
to scale at the establishment level. It is set to .75, at the low end of the range considered by
Atkeson and Kehoe (2005). The other technology and preferences parameters are chosen to match
the depreciation, the average capital-to-output ratio and the average cost of capital for the US
non-financial sector over the period 1950-2005. The depreciation rate δ is calibrated to .06 based
on NIPA data. Next, we calibrate the Cobb-Douglas productivity exponent on capital, α. Because
there is no aggregate risk, the rate of return on physical capital is deterministic in the model. In
equilibrium, that rate equals the discount rate. Both are fixed along the transition path. From the
Euler equation for physical capital, we get:
r=



Y
1 − δ + αν
K
22



We compute the cost of capital r in the data as the weighted-average realized return on equity and
corporate bonds; it is 5.5%. The weights are given by the observed leverage ratio.12 The average
capital-to-output ratio is 1.77. The above equation then implies αν = 0.23. As a result, α = 0.30.
We choose the rate of time preference of the owner ρo = .02 such that his subjective time
discount factor is exp(−ρo ) = .98. In our benchmark results, we assume that the manager is less
patient: ρm = .03. Finally, we choose a coefficient of relative risk aversion γ = 1.6. This is the
value that solves equation (2.8) given our choices for r, ρo , and given the average growth rate of
real aggregate output of g = 0.022.

Organizational Capital Accumulation and Portability To calibrate the organizational capital accumulation, its portability, and the sunk costs of forming a new match, we match the excess
job reallocation rate and the firm exit rate in the initial steady state to those observed in the data
in 1970-74, and we match the increase in managerial wage inequality to that in the data.
Following Atkeson and Kehoe (2005), we assume the ε shocks are log-normal with mean ms
and standard deviation σs . We abstract from the dependence on these parameters on the vintage
s. For parsimony, the mean ms is set zero. However, younger matches (lower s) will grow faster
in equilibrium because of selection, even without age-dependence in ms . The standard deviation
σs = σ of these shocks is chosen to generate an excess job reallocation rate of 19% in the initial
steady state. This choice matches the 1970-74 reallocation rate in the data. The size of the sunk
cost (S) is chosen to match the entry-exit rates in the initial steady state. The sunk cost is equal
to 6.5 times the annual cash flow generated by the average firm. This delivers an entry/exit rate
of 4.3% in the initial steady-state, again matching the 1970-74 data. The portability or matchspecificity parameter φ governs the increase in wage dispersion in the model. We set it equal to
0.5, which means that 50% of organizational capital is transferable to a next match. This value of
the parameter enables the model to match the increase in intra-industry wage inequality.
Productivity Growth Composition In the baseline experiment, we assume the change in
the composition of growth to gnew,z occurs over 20 years, and we assume it starts in 1971. After
20 years, in 1990, productivity growth settles down at (gnew,z , gnew,θ ). The actual transition to
a new steady-state growth path takes much longer. The change in the composition of growth
is calibrated to match the decline in reallocation rates in the data from 19% to 11%. General
productivity growth increases from gold,z = 0.3% in the initial steady state to gnew,z = 1.45%
in the new steady-state. Correspondingly, vintage-specific productivity growth decreases from
gold,θ = 5.5% to gnew,θ = 0.8%.
12

Since the model has no taxes, but there are taxes in the data, we take into account the corporate tax rate (28%)
in the calculation of the cost of capital. Appendix D provides more details on the cost of capital calibration.

23

4.3

Main Results: Compensation and Size Distribution

We start by comparing the size and compensation distribution in the initial and final steady states,
as well as its evolution during the transition.
Figure 6 illustrates how a relatively modest change in the size distribution of firms, brought
about by a change in the composition of productivity growth, translates in a much larger change
in the distribution of compensation. The left panel plots the log compensation of managers (log c̃)
b in the initial steady-state growth path of the model.
against the log of establishment size (log A)
The right panel shows the same plot for the final steady state growth path. Each dot represents
one establishment in the cross-section. The key to the amplification is the compensation contract.

The optimal contract features a lower bound on size below which the manager’s compensation does
not respond to changes in size. Above a certain size, the manager’s compensation only responds to
good news about the establishment’s productivity. In the initial steady state, few establishments
become large enough to exceed the insensitivity range. Managerial compensation hardly responds
to changes in size; there is little cross-sectional variation in compensation. The right panel shows
that this is no longer true in the new steady-state. Establishments live longer on average and the
successful ones grow larger. The log size distribution is more skewed than in the initial steadystate. The figure shows a strong positive cross-sectional relationship between size and managerial
compensation. Thus, the model endogenously generates a shift from low-powered to high-powered
incentive compensation contracts.
[Figure 6 about here.]
On the new steady-state growth path, the distribution of managerial compensation has much
fatter tails than the size distribution, as shown in Figure 7. Its left panel shows the histogram of
log compensation in the new steady state; the right panel is the histogram of log size. Both were
demeaned. The distribution of managerial compensation is more skewed and it has fatter tails
than the size distribution. The kurtosis of log compensation is 19.82, compared to 3.38 for log size.
The skewness is 3.81 for log compensation, compared to .47 for log size.
[Figure 7 about here.]
There is a large finance literature that studies compensation for top managers (e.g., Frydman
and Saks (2006) and Kaplan and Rauh (2007)). Gabaix and Landier (2008) and other studies have
documented that managerial compensation is well-described by a power function of size, a finding
referred to as Roberts’ law. In our model too, the compensation distribution has much fatter tails
than a log-normal. On average, the relation between compensation and size in the new steady
b The slope coefficient κ is .24 in the new steady-state, close to the
state satisfies log e
c = α + κ log A.

value of 1/3 found in the empirical literature. Our model therefore not only provides a rationale
24

for the large and skewed increase in managerial compensation, but is also quantitatively consistent
with the observed size-compensation distribution.
The model has implications for the size distribution of firms. Luttmer (2005) and others show
that the size distribution for large firms follows a Pareto distribution. The same is true for the
large firms in our new steady-state. Figure 8 shows that the relation between log rank and log size
is linear for large establishments. Quantitatively, the model’s Pareto coefficient is 1.5 whereas the
tails in the data are slightly thicker with a Pareto coefficient of 1.13 For small firms, the relationship
is less steep, a finding reminiscent of the city-size literature.
[Figure 8 about here.]
Table II reports the impact of the change in the composition of growth on the distribution
of compensation and productivity. The log of establishment productivity (TFP) is given by (1 −
b The log of the manager’s wage is given by log e
ν) log A.
c. The left panel reports the cross-

sectional standard deviation, the inter-quartile range (IQR or 75th minus 25th percentiles), and
the inter-decile range (IDR or 90th minus 10th percentiles) for log wages; the right panel does the
same for log TFP. The first (last) line shows the values in the initial (final) steady-state. The
numbers in between are five-year averages computed along the transition path. Small changes in
the productivity (or size) distribution cause big changes in the distribution of compensation. The
standard deviation of managerial compensation increases by 7.3 percentage points in the first 35
years of the transition, similar to what we report later for the increase in within-industry wage
dispersion in the data.14 In the next ten years from 2006-2015, the standard deviation of log wage
dispersion is predicted to increase by another 4.5 percentage points and the IDR by as much as
11.5 percentage points.15 In sum, the shift towards high-powered incentives leads to a substantial
increase in income inequality.
To summarize, in the benchmark version of the calibrated model, the standard deviation of
log managerial compensation increases by 11 log points, the IQR by 8 log points and the IDR
by 9 log points over the same period. The IDR increases another 11 log points in the following
five years. This compares favorably to the data for workers and managers in Panel A and B in
Table VI. Finally, the model produces and increase of 50 log points in the IDR for the largest
500 establishments, 58 log point for the largest 50 establishments (see Table III). Of course, this
number still falls short of the 130 log points increase for top management in the largest 50 firms.
In the high portability case, the increase in the IDR is 80 log points. This massive increase in
compensation inequality is generated by a modest increase in productivity dispersion. As the right
13

We follow Gabaix and Ibragimov (2007) who estimate the Pareto coefficient b from a regression of the form
log(Rank-1/2)=a-b log(Size).
14
In the model, unskilled wages are equalized across establishments and do not affect the dispersion.
15
In the new steady-state, compensation becomes very skewed: the IDR increases so much that the IQR actually
decreases.

25

columns show, the standard deviation of productivity increases by only 1.5 percentage points in
the first 35 years of the transition. The IQR for increases from 18.3 to 18.4% and the IDR from
29.2 to 31.8% over the same period. Overall, productivity dispersion in our model is somewhat
smaller than what is found in the data. Using 1977 US manufacturing data at the 4-digit industry
level, Syverson (2004) reports a within-industry IQR of log TFP between 29 and 44%. Increasing
log TFP dispersion in the model would give rise to too much reallocation, absent other frictions.
Table III reports the sensitivity of managerial compensation to size for the 500 largest and
50 largest establishments in the model’s simulated panel. The top panel looks at the benchmark
calibration. We measure the sensitivity of managerial compensation to size by running a separate
cross-sectional regression of ∆ log ci on ∆ log Ai in each time period. The slope of that regression
is referred to as the pay-performance elasticity. Columns (1) and (5) report the slope coefficients
(multiplied by 100) for the 500 and 50 largest firms, respectively. Columns (2) to (4) and (6) to (8)
report the dispersion of log compensation for these two samples. For the 500 largest firms, the payperformance elasticity increases from 0 to 5.86. I.e., every percent increase in size translates into
.056 percent increase in compensation. However, for the 50 largest establishments, the elasticity
increases from 3.4 to 46. The model makes predictions only about the compensation of the entire
management team. In the data, most studies focus exclusively on CEO’s. Murphy (1998) finds
that the cash compensation elasticity for CEOs of S&P500 companies increases from 8 in 1972 to
40 in 1996.16 Our model fails to match this increase in the CEO compensation elasticity, except
when we look at the largest establishments.

4.4

Labor Reallocation, Exit, and Firm Valuation

The right panel of Table II summarizes the other main aggregates of interest. The first column
shows the excess job reallocation rate. We calibrate the shift in the composition of productivity
so as to match the initial steady-state value of 19% as well as the subsequent decline to 12.2%
over the ensuing 35 years. The model successfully matches the decline in entry/exit rate (on a
steady-state growth path those are identical). The exit rate starts from 4.3% (chosen to match the
sunk costs) and declines to 3.0% by 2001-05. In the data, it declined from 4% to 2.5%. The exit
rate is highest in the first ten years of the transition because there is a shake-out of establishments
that are no longer profitable under the increased managerial compensation.
The last three columns of Table II report valuation ratios. As establishments start to live longer
and accumulate more organizational capital, the aggregate value of organizational capital starts to
increase. This is the same selection effect: We are only sampling the survivors when computing
16

These elasticities are based on annual regressions of ∆ log(Cash Compensation) on log(1+Shareholder Return).
Cash compensation includes salaries, bonuses, and small amounts of other cash compensation. Data prior to 1992
are from Forbes Annual Compensation Surveys; data for 1992 and later are from Compustats ExecuComp database.

26

the market value of matches. Correspondingly, Tobin’s q increases from 1.4 in 1971-75 to 1.6 in
2001-05 (Column (9)). The value of organizational capital as a fraction of value-added Vt /(Yt − Sta )
increases from 0.83 to 1.18, a 42% increase (Column (10)). The increase in the data from 1.54 to
2.41 represents a 45% increase (See Section 4.1).
Managerial workers capture only part of this increase in organizational rents because of the
sunk costs and limited portability of organizational capital. The sunk costs create an insensitivity
range in which managerial compensation does not respond to productivity shocks. In addition, the
discount rate wedge imputes a downward drift to the managerial compensation. As matches live
longer, managers end up with a smaller share of the surplus. Managerial wealth declines from 8.3%
of value-added to 7.2% (Column 7, M/(Y −S a )). The model thus implies a large transfer of wealth
from the managers to the owners. However, there is an enormous amount of heterogeneity in the
evolution of managerial wealth to value-added (M/(Y − S a )), echoing the increase in managerial
compensation dispersion documented earlier. We sort all managers by their final steady-state
M/(Y − S a )- ratio. Managers in the 95th percentile saw a large increase, managers in the 90th
percentile maintained the status quo, while all other managers (especially those in the smaller
establishments) suffered a decline in wealth. Managers in the 5th see their wealth decline from 8
to 6.5 times (per capita) value added.

4.5

Robustness

The degree of portability φ governs several key aspects of the model. We studied both a higher
value (φ = .75) and a lower value (φ = 0) than our benchmark case (φ = .50). These results are
reported in Table IV and Table V. More portability amplifies the dispersion effect of the shift in
productivity growth composition, but lowers the increase in the valuation ratios.
The left panel of Table IV shows the compensation and productivity distribution along the
transition for the case in which all of the organizational capital is match-specific (φ = 0). As
we expected, the model no longer generates any increase in managerial compensation inequality.
Indeed, the managers are fully insured and the owners capture a larger share of the organizational
rents. The same results obtain in the case in which managers can fully commit to staying in the
match.
This all translates into to larger increases in the owners’ wealth relative to value-added and in
Tobin’s q ratio. These results are reported in the left panel of Table V. Tobin’s q goes up from
1.38 to 1.84, a substantially larger increase than in the benchmark case. In sum, the predictions
for valuation ratios improve, but the predictions for wage dispersion are counter-factual.
In contrast, increasing φ to a value of 0.75 gives managers more ownership rights to organizational capital. The right panel of Table IV shows the compensation and productivity distribution.
As a result, not only is initial income dispersion higher (the standard deviation of log wages is
27

9.6% instead of 0.9% in the initial steady-state), the increase in dispersion is also higher. The
standard deviation increases by 15, the IQR by 8 and the IDR by 42 percentage points from the
initial situation to 2001-05. These increases are much larger than in the benchmark case and fit
the increase in managerial income inequality in the data better. Some other desirable features of
the φ = .75 calibration are that (i) Robert’s coefficient, which measures the elasticity of managerial
compensation to firm size, is 0.32, now matching the data exactly, and (ii) the Pareto coefficient
of the firm size distribution is 1.05, also matching the empirical estimates around 1. However, the
increase in valuation ratios is only half as big as in the benchmark case.

5

Additional Evidence from the Cross-Section

This section explores the cross-sectional relationship between managerial compensation dispersion
on the one hand and firm valuation on the the other hand, first in the model and then in the data.
The empirical evidence for the cross-sectional link between wage dispersion and firm valuation
in the data, and the model’s ability to generate a similar link, lend further credibility to the
organizational capital accumulation mechanism we have put forward. While there are many other
potential explanations for cross-sectional differences in firm value, such as external and internal
governance, RD, investment opportunities, etc, it is nevertheless important to document that the
cross-sectional correlations implied by the model hold up in the data.
Our analysis so far focused on the time-series relationship between the composition of productivity growth, the reallocation rate, and Tobin’s q. In the model, these same relationships hold
in the cross-section. We use the calibrated model to illustrate this mechanism. We compute 13
different steady-state growth paths for 13 different economies, we label “industries.” All parameters are constant across economies except for the vintage-specific growth rate gθ , which we vary in
equally-spaced increments from a low value of 0.00% to a high value of 6.82%. Figure 9 plots the
Tobin’s q ratio for each industry against its dispersion of managerial compensation. Reading from
the left to the right, as the vintage-specific growth rate declines, the average Tobin’s q increases
and so does the dispersion in managerial wage dispersion. Recalling Figure 2, a larger mass of
firms stays closer to the 45 degree line in such low vintage-specific growth industries.
The sensitivity of the valuations to changes in the reallocation rate is much higher for industries
with a low gθ area. Moving from the point labeled “1” to point “2” on Figure 9, Tobin’s q decreases
by 50 basis points in response to a 100 log points decrease in the dispersion of compensation. In
the data discussed below, estimates of the corresponding decrease in Tobin’s q vary between 111
and 70 basis points if we use a broad measure of wage dispersion and between 50 and 80 basis
points if we focus only on executive compensation dispersion. The same size increase in gθ , such
as the change from point 3 to 4, has smaller effects on q and wage dispersion when gθ is higher.
28

[Figure 9 about here.]
In the data, we identify high vintage-specific growth (gθ ) industries, who experience faster depreciation of organizational capital, as those with lower cross-sectional dispersion in managerial
compensation. The key question then becomes whether industries characterized by higher dispersion also have lower valuation ratios. We build a panel of 55 industries at the 2-digit SIC
level covering the 1976-2005 sample. As before, we exclude the financial sector to end up with 47
industries; see Appendices A.2 and A.3 for details. We examine the cross-sectional relationship
between compensation dispersion and the average Tobin’s q in this panel of 47 industries. We use
two different measures for the average Tobin’s q. The first measure (Tobin’s q1) uses total assets
less financial assets at book value in the denominator. The second measure (Tobin’s q2) uses the
book value of total assets in the denominator. The numerator in both ratios is the market value
of the firm. Appendix A.2 provides more details.
Our first estimation uses the cross-sectional standard deviation of log wages among the establishments within an industry from QWEC. We include fixed effects for time and industry in these
regressions. The results are reported in Table VIII. Our second estimation uses individual-level
wage data for executives from Execucomp to form the wage dispersion in an industry. These results
are reported in Table IX. For ease of comparison, we focus on the common sample 1992-2005. The
establishment-level data are available at quarterly frequency, while the executive data analysis is
at annual frequency. In the latter case, we average Tobin’s q across the quarters in a year.
Columns (1) and (3) of Table VIII show that there is a significantly positive covariation between
wage dispersion and Tobin’s q1 and q2 using the establishment-level data. The point estimates
imply that a one standard-deviation increase in the wage dispersion of a region (within-region
variation) increases Tobin’s q1 by 0.063 and Tobin’s q2 by 0.046. A region with a one standard deviation higher wage dispersion (across-region variation), has a Tobin’s q1 (q2) that is 0.417 (0.303)
higher. In specifications (2) and (4), we control for intangibles and continue to find strong positive correlation between the wage dispersion in an industry and its q ratio. While the interaction
effect is negative, the overall effect of wage dispersion is positive (last row). We find similarly
strong effects if we use the inter-quartile range of log wages instead of the standard deviation (not
reported).
[Table 3 about here.]
Table IX repeats the same analysis using a measure of wage dispersion for executives (See
appendix A.5). Wage dispersion is the cross-sectional standard deviation of the log wage among
executives within an industry. Executive wage dispersion in an industry is significantly positively
related to both measures of Tobin’s q (Columns (1) and (3)). A one standard deviation increase in
the within-industry wage dispersion (0.161) translates into a 0.123 increase in Tobin’s q1 and a 0.076
29

increase in Tobin’s q2. The marginal effect of wage dispersion on Tobin’s q slightly increases after
controlling for the intangibles ratio of the industry (Columns (2) and (4)). In this specification, the
effect of executive wage dispersion on Tobin’s q is stronger in industries with a higher intangibles
ratio. For example, in Column 2, the industry with the average intangible ratio shows a sensitivity
to a (within) one standard deviation increase in WDISP of 0.133, whereas that sensitivity increases
to 0.143 for an industry with an intangible ratio that is one standard deviation above the average.
The results are very similar when using the value of options exercised instead of options granted
in the wage definition (not reported). The results using the inter-quartile range of log wages are
also similar (not reported), suggesting a robust correlation between managerial wage dispersion
and Tobin’s q.
[Table 4 about here.]
To sum up, we find that firms in high wage dispersion, low reallocation industries tend to have
higher Tobin’s q, as predicted by the model. In these industries, successful firms accumulate more
organizational capital.

6

Conclusion

In the last three decades, there has been a marked increase in managerial compensation inequality
and in the sensitivity of compensation to performance. This paper argues that both changes
can be tied to a compositional change in the nature of productivity growth and the increases in
organizational capital that resulted from it. In our model, establishments combine organizational
capital, physical capital and unskilled labor to produce output. The division of organizational rents
between the owner and the manager of the establishment is governed by a long-term compensation
contract. The well-diversified owner offers insurance to the risk averse manager, but this insurance
is limited by the manager’s ability to leave and by the owner’s limited liability. Because the manager
can transfer a fraction of the organizational capital to a future employer, the increased accumulation
of organizational capital improves the outside option of managers in successful firms, and the
manager’s compensation increases in response to positive performance. In small, unsuccessful
firms, compensation is insensitive to performance. The change in the composition of productivity
growth allows successful establishments to accumulate more organization capital and grow larger.
Together they account for the increase in compensation inequality. In addition, the model generates
an increase in firm valuation relative to the physical capital or to output, which reflects the higher
value of organizational capital. It is also broadly consistent with trends in labor reallocation, the
firm size distribution, and firm exit and entry.

30

References
Acemoglu, Daron, “Technical Change, Inequality and the Labor Market,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 2002, 40(1), 7–72.
Albuquerque, Rui and Hugo Hopenhayn, “Optimal Lending Contracts and Firm Dynamics,”
Review of Economic Studies, 2004, 71(2), 285–315.
Atkeson, Andrew and Patrick Kehoe, “Modeling and Measuring Organizational Capital,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2005, 113, 1026–1053.
and

, “Modeling the Transition to a New Economy: Lessons from Two Technological

Revolutions,” American Economic Review, 2007, Forthcoming.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearny, “Trends in U.S. Wage
Inequality: Revising the Revisionists,” March 2007. NBER Working Paper No. 11627.
Bazdrech, Santiago, Frederico Belo, and Xioajin Lin, “Labor Hiring, Investment, and
Stock Return Predictability in the Cross-Section,” October 2008. Working paper University
of Minnesota.
Bennedsen, Morten, Francisco Perez-Gonzalez, and Daniel Wolfenzon, “Do CEOs Matter?,” March 2007. Working Paper NYU Stern.
Berk, Jonathan, Richard Stanton, and Josef Zechner, “Human Capital, Bankruptcy and
Capital Structure,” 2005. Working Paper University of California at Berkeley.
Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, “Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers
on Firm Policies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1169–1208.
Biais, Bruno, Thomas Mariotti, and Jean-Charles Rochet, “Dynamic Security Design:
Convergence to Continuous Time and Asset Pricing Implications,” Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (2), 345–390.
Bizjak, John M., Michael L. Lemmon, and Lalitha Naveen, “Does the Use of Peer Groups
Contribute to Higher Pay and Less Efficient Compensation?,” Journal of Financial Economics,
forthcoming.
Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen, “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices
Across Firm and Countries,” May 2006. NBER Working Paper No 12216.
, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen, “Americans Do I.T. Better: U.S. Multinationals And The Productivity Miracle,” April 2008. Stanford University.
31

Bresnahan, Tim and M. Trachtenberg, “General Purpose Technologies: Engines of Growth,”
Journal Of Econometrics: Annals of Econometrics, 1996, 65, 83–108.
, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Lorin M. Hitt, “Information Technology, Workplace Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2002, 117(1), 339–76.
Brynjolfsson, Erik and Lorin M. Hitt, “Information Technology and Internal Firm Orgaanization: An Exploratory Analysis,” Journal of Management Information Systems, 1997, 14(2),
81–102.
and
, “Beyond Computation: Information Technology, Organizational Transformation
and Business Performance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2000, 14(4), 23–48.
Carlin, Bruce Ian, Bhagwan Chowdhry, and Mark J. Garmaise, “Investment in Organizational Capital,” June 2008. Working Paper UCLA Anderson.
Chen, Hui, “Macroeconomic Conditions and the Puzzles of Credit Spreads and Capital Structure,” January 2008. Working Paper MIT.
Clementi, Gian Luca and Hugo A. Hopenhayn, “A Theory of Financing Constraints and
Firm Dynamics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 121(1), 229–265.
, Thomas Cooley, and Cheng Wang, “Stock Grants as a Commitment Device,” Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 2006, 30 (11), 2191–2216.
Comin, Diego and Thomas Philippon, “The Rise in Firm-Level Volatility: Causes and Consequences,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2005.
Corrado, Carol, John Haltiwanger, and Daniel Sichel, eds, Measuring Capital in the New
Econommy, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2005.
Davis, Steven J., John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Volatility and
Dispersion in Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded Vs. Privately Held Firms,” NBER
Working Paper, 2006, 12354.
DeMarzo, Peter and Michael Fishman, “Optimal Long-Term Financial Contracting with Privately Observed Cash Flows,” Review of Financial Studies, 2007, 20(6), 2079–2128. Working
Paper Stanford University.
and Yuliy Sannikov, “A Continuous-Time Agency Model of Optimal Contracting and
Dynamic Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance, 2006, 61 (6), 2681–2724.
32

, Michael Fishman, Zhiguo He, and Neng Wang, “Dynamic Agency and the q Theory
of Investment,” 2007. Working Paper Stanford University.
Dunne, Timothy, Lucia Foster, John Haltiwanger, and Kenneth R. Troske, “Wage and
Productivity Dispersion in United States Manufacturing: The Role of Computer Investment,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 2004, 22(2), 397–428.
Edmans, Alex, Xavier Gabaix, and Augustin Landier, “A Calibratable Model of Optimal
CEO Incentives in Market Equilibrium,” September 2007. Working Paper Wharton and New
York University.
Eisfeldt, Andrea L. and Dimitris Papanikolaou, “Organization Capital and the Cross-Section
of Expected Returns,” November 2008. Working paper Kellogg School.
Faberman, Jason, “Job Flows and The Recent Business Cycle: Not All Recoveries Are Created
Equal.,” BLS Working Paper, 2006, 391.
Falato, Antonio and Dalida Kadyrzhanova, “Optimal CEO Incentives and Industry Dynamics,” February 2008. Working Paper University of Maryland.
Frydman, Carola and Raven E. Saks, “Executive Compensation: A New View from a LongRun Perspective, 1936-2005,” 2006. Working Paper MIT Sloan.
Gabaix, Xavier and Augustin Landier, “Why Has CEO Pay Increased so Much?,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2008, Forthcoming.
and Rustam Ibragimov, “Rank-1/2: A Simple Way to Improve the OLS Estimation of
Tail Exponents,” September 2007. NBER Technical Working Paper No 342.
Garleanu, Nicolae, Stavros Panageas, and Leonid Kogan, “The Demographics of Innovation
and Asset Returns,” 2008. Wharton School.
Gomes, Joao and Dmitry Livdan, “Optimal Diversification: Reconciling Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Finance, 2004, 59, 507–535.
and Lukas Schmid, “Levered Returns,” 2007. Working Paper Wharton.
Gourio, Francois, “Labor Leverage, Firm’s Heterogeneous Sensitivities to the Business Cycle,
and the Cross-Section of Expected Returns,” October 2007. Working Paper Boston University.
Guvenen, Fatih and Burhanettin Kuruscu, “A Quantitative Analysis of the Evolution of the
U.S. Wage Distribution: 1970-2000,” September 2007. Working Paper University of Texas at
Austin.
33

Hall, Robert E., “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation,” American Economic Review,
2001, 91, 1185–1202.
Haltiwanger, John C. and Scott Schuh, “Gross job flows between plants and industries,” New
England Economic Review, 1999, March/April.
Harris, Milton and Bengt Holmstrom, “A Theory of Wage Dynamics,” Review of Economic
Studies, 1982, 49, 315–333.
He, Zhiguo, “Dynamic Compensation Contract with Private Savings,” December 2007. Working
Paper Northwestern University.
Hennessy, Christopher A. and Toni Whited, “How Costly is External Financing? Evidence
from a Structural Estimation,” Journal of Finance, 2007, 62 (4), 1705–1744.
Hermalin, Benjamin E., “Trends in Corporate Governance,” The Journal of Finance, 2005,
60(5), 2351–2384.
Hopenhayn, Hugo, “Exit, selection, and the value of firms,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 2002, 16(3-4), Pages 621–653.
and Richard Rogerson, “Job Turnover and Policy Evaluation: A General Equilibrium
Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, 1993, 101, 915–38.
Jovanovic, Boyan and Peter Rousseau, “Specific Capital and Technological Variety,” December 2007. Working Paper New York UNiversity.
and Yaw Nyarko, “Learning by Doing and the Choice of Technology,” Econometrica, 1982,
50 (6), 1345–70.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Joshua Rauh, “Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes to
the Rise in the Highest Incomes?,” July 2007. Working Paper University of Chicago.
Kocherlakota, Narayana, “Implications of Efficient Risk Sharing Without Commitment.,” Review of Economic Studies, 1996, 63, 595–610.
Krueger, Dirk and Harald Uhlig, “Competitive Risk Sharing with Costly Recontracting,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 2005, Forthcoming.
Lucas, Robert, “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,” Econometrica, 1978, 46 (6), 1429–54.
Luttmer, Erzo, “Growth and the Size Distribution of Firms,” Working Paper Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, 2005.
34

McGrattan, Ellen and Edward C. Prescott, “Unmeasured Investment and the Puzzling Boom
in the 1990s,” October 2007. NBER Working Paper No 13499.
Merz, Monika and Eran Yahsiv, “Labor and the Value of the Firm,” CEPR Discussion Paper,
2003, 965.
Murphy, Kevin J., “Executive Compensation,”
http://ssrn.com/abstract=163914.

April 1998.

Available at SSRN:

and Jan Zabojnik, “CEO Pay and Appointments: A Market-Based Explanation for Recent
Trends,” Papers and Proceedings American Economic Review, 2004, 94(2), 192–196.
Neal, Derek, “Industry-Specific Capital: Evidence Form Displaced Workers,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 1995, 13, 653–77.
Opp, Marcus M., “Expropriation Risk and Technology,” November 2007. Working Paper University of Chicago.
Panageas, Stavros and Jianfeng Yu, “Technological Growth, Asset Pricing, and Consumption
Risk,” 2006. Wharton School.
Papanikolaou, Dimitris, “Investment-specific Technology Shocks and Asset Prices,” April 2007.
Working Paper Kellogg.
Parlour, Christine A. and Johan Walden, “Capital, Contracts and the Cross Section of Stock
Returns,” May 2008. Working Paper Haas School of Business.
Strebulaev, Ilya, “Do Tests of Capital Structure Theory Mean What They Say?,” Journal of
Finance, 2007, 62, 1747–1787.
Syverson, Chad, “Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 2004, 86(2), 534–550.
Thomas, Jonathan and Tim Worall, “Self-Enforcing Wage Contracts,” Review of Economic
Studies, 1988, 15, 541–554.
Violante, Giovanni L., “Skill Transferability, Technological Acceleration and the Rise in Residual
Wage Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (1), 297–338.
Wheeler, Christopher H., “Evidence on Wage Inequality, Worker Education, and Technology,”
Federal Reserve Bank Of St. Louis Review, 2005, May/June, 375–394.
35

A

Data Appendix

A.1

Using Flow of Funds Data

The computation of firm value returns is based on Hall (2001). The data to construct our measure of
returns on firm value were obtained from the Federal Flow of Funds, henceforth FoF.

17

We use the

(seasonally-unadjusted) flow tables for the non-farm, non-financial corporate sector, in file UTABS 102D.
We calculate the market value of the corporate sector V a as the market value of equity (item 1031640030)
plus net financial liabilities. Net financial liabilities are defined as financial liabilities (item 144190005)
minus financial assets (item 144090005). Because outstanding bonds (a part of financial liabilities) are
valued at book value, we transform them into a market value using the Dow Jones Corporate Bond Index.
We construct the levels from the flows by adding them up, except for the Market Value of Equity. This
series is downloaded directly from the Balance series BTABS 102D. (item 103164003).
Net (aggregate corporate) pay-outs is measured as dividends (item 10612005) plus the interest paid on
debt (from the NIPA Table 1.14 on the Gross Product of Non-financial, Corporate Business, line 25) less
the net issuance of equity (item 103164003) less the increase in net financial liabilities (item 10419005).
The same NIPA Table 1.14 is used to obtain gross value-added (line 17), Yt − Sta .
Finally, capital expenditures (item 105050005) are obtained from the Flow of Funds.
Tobin’s q for the non-financial sector is constructed as the ratio of the market value of the corporate sector
V a and the replacement cost of physical capital (K). We construct the replacement cost of physical capital
using the perpetual inventory method with FoF investment data (item 105013003) and inventory data
(item 10502005). To deflate the series, we use the implicit deflator for fixed non-residential investment
from NIPA, Table 7.1. The depreciation rate is set to 2.6% per quarter.

A.2

Using Compustat Data

We use annual and quarterly data from Compustat.18 If an item from Compustat is not available quarterly,
we use its annual figure for each quarter, dividing by four if it is a flow variable. For each industry, the net
payout ratio is defined as the ratio of payouts to security holders over payouts to workers plus security
holders.

Payouts Payouts to security holders are computed as the sum of interest expense (item 22), dividends
from preferred stock (item 24), dividends from common stock (item 20) and equity repurchases, computed
as the difference between the purchase (annual item 115) and the sale (annual item 108) of common and
preferred stock. If there is no information available on the purchase and sale of stock, we assume that it
is zero.
Payouts to workers are computed as the product of number of employees (Compustat, annual item 29)
and wages per employee (see Appendix A.3 below). We only include those firms for which the payouts to
17
18

Data are available at http://www.federalreserve.gov/ RELEASES/z1/current/data.htm
Data are available at http://wrds.wharton.upenn.edu/

36

security holders is less than the firm assets (annual item 6).
The intangibles ratio is defined as the ratio of intangibles (annual item 33) to net property, plant and
equipment (PPE, annual item 8). We filter out those firms whose intangibles ratio is greater than 1000.
The intangibles ratio for each industry is then computed as the total intangibles over the total PPE for
each industry.

Tobin’s q The variable q1 is computed first for all firms having the following items available from COMPUSTAT: DATA1 (Cash and Short-Term Investments), DATA2 (Receivables - Total), DATA6 (Assets Total), DATA9 (Long-Term Debt - Total), DATA34 (Debt in Current Liabilities), DATA56 (Preferred
Stock - Redemption Value), DATA68 (Current Assets - Other), and the following items available from
CRSP: PRC (Closing Price of Bid/Ask average), SHROUT (Number of shares outstanding). For each
firm, Tobin’s q is defined as follows
totalvaluefirm
,
DATA6 - fin assets

q1 =
where:

totalvaluef irm = mcap + totaldebt − f in assets
totaldebt = DAT A9 + DAT A34 + DAT A56
f in assets = DAT A1 + DAT A2 + DAT A68
mcap = P RC ∗ SHROU T /1000.
We select only those firms for which 0 < q1 < 100. For the selected firms, we compute industry I’s Tobin’s
q as :

P

totalvaluefirmi
.
i∈I DATA6i − fin assetsi

q1,agg = P

i∈I

We use a second definition of Tobin’s q. The variable q2 is defined as :
q2 =

firm value
,
DATA6

where
f irm value = mcap + DAT A6 − DAT A60 − DAT A74
mcap = P RC ∗ SHROU T /1000
and computed for all firms having the necessary items available in COMPUSTAT. We select only those
firms for which 0 < q2 < 100. For the selected firms, we compute industry I’s average q as:
q2,agg

P
i∈I firm valuei
= P
i∈I DATA6 i

37

A.3

Labor Reallocation

We use data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages
(QCEW) program.19 This program reports monthly employment and quarterly wages data at the SIC
code level from 1975 to 2000, and at the NAICS code level from 1990 to 2005. Since there is no one-to-one
correspondence between SIC and NAICS codes, we form industries at the 2-digit SIC code level that
match industries at the 3-digit NAICS code level. We finally end up with 55 different industries, that
match to only 47 different Compustat industries. We exclude the financial sector from our calculations.
The employment data from the QCEW program is spliced in 1992.
We first compute the change in employment from month to month at the SIC and NAICS code level.
If it is positive it is recorded as Job Creation, otherwise it corresponds to Job Destruction. We then
aggregate Job Creation, Job Destruction and Employment by quarter, and de-seasonalize each of these
series separately using the X12-arima from the Census. Job Reallocation is then computed as the sum
of Job Creation and Job Destruction, divided by Employment. Excess Job Reallocation is computed
as the sum of Job Creation and Job Destruction minus the absolute change in Employment, divided by
Employment.

A.4

Managerial Wage Data from Current Population Survey

We use the IPUMS-CPS data on respondents’ annual wage earnings from 1971-2006. Managerial occupations are defined as follows: for 1971-82, (previous year) occupation codes 220-246 except 221 and 226;
for 1983-1991, codes 003-019; for 1992-2002, codes 003-022; and codes 001-043 after 2002. We restrict
the sample to managers who were over 21 years old, were employed in the private sector, and who were
full-time workers in the previous year (i.e., they averaged at least 35 hours per week). We drop observations with annual earnings less than $2000 in 1983$. Finally, because wages are subject to top-coding,
we follow Autor et al. (2007) and multiply top-codes by 1.5 (this adjustment only affects the reported
standard deviations, not the IQR or IDR). The final sample size is about 3000 managers in the 1970s and
grows to around 6000 managers in the 2000s.

A.5

Managerial Wage Data from Execucomp

We use the Compustat Executive Compensation (Execucomp) data, which contains annual compensation
for top executives of over 2500 companies from 1992 to 2005, to compute the dispersion in managerial pay
within industries. Compensation is measured using Execucomp’s ”tdc1” and ”tdc2” variables. Both are
the sum of the manager’s salary, bonus, restricted stock grants, LTIP payouts, all other annual payments,
and value of options. The difference between the two compensation measures is in what they use for the
last term in the sum. Tdc1 uses the value of options grants, while tdc2 uses the value of options exercised.
We compute the standard deviation of the logs of these two compensation measures within each industryyear in our data. This is then matched to our dataset on industries’ Tobin’s q and intangible ratios. We
19

Data are available at http://www.bls.gov/

38

are left with a total of 644 observations (46 industries over 14 years).

B

Steady-State Growth Path

Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. The first-order condition implies that compensation e
c is constant as long as the participation

constraint does not bind. When a new match is formed, the normalized promised utility ve starts off
bt ). The dynamics of the optimal wage contract can be characterized by setting up the
at ve0 = ω(A
b′ ) denote the
Lagrangian. Let µ denote the multiplier on the promised utility constraint and let λ(A
b′ . We assume Vb (·) is strictly concave and twice
multiplier on the participation constraint in state A
continuously differentiable. Note that the non-differentiability introduced by the max operator in Ve (·)

is integrated out by averaging over the idiosyncratic shocks to construct Ve (see equation 2.14). When
b′ does not bind (λ(A
b′ ) = 0), conditional on continuation of the relationship
the participation constraint A

(β = 1), the law of motion for the promised utility in efficiency units ve satisfies the first order condition:
µ=

b′ , ve′ )
−∂ Vb (A
∂ ve′

The left hand side is the cost to the owner of increasing the manager’s compensation today. It equals
µ, the shadow price of a dollar today, from the envelope condition. From the first order condition for
c). The right-hand side is the cost of increasing the manager’s
consumption we know that µ = 1/uc (e
compensation tomorrow, from the first-order condition for ve′ . From the envelope condition, this equals
µ′ = 1/uc (e
c′ ). So, the first order condition implies that consumption e
c must be constant over time, as long

as the manager’s participation constraint does not bind. As a result, actual managerial compensation c
grows at the rate of output growth g on the steady-state growth path. When the participation constraint
does bind, the following inequality obtains:
µ<

b′ , ve′ )
−∂ Vb (A
∂ ve′

The utility cost of increasing the manager’s compensation to the owner increases. From the concavity of
u(·), it follows that the manager’s promised utility and current compensation (in efficiency units) increase
when the participation constraint binds. When the constraint does bind, we increase e
c to make sure the

constraint holds with equality. This is optimal (see Kuhn-Tucker conditions).

 Thissuggests a simple consumption rule is optimal. We conjecture the optimal consumption function
b such that:
C ve, A


b = u−1 (1/µ)
C ve, A
c
where µ =

b v)
−∂ Vb (A,e
.
∂e
v

b as A
bmax,t = max{A
bτ , τ ≤ t}. In addition, let T
Define the running maximum of A

39

denote the random stopping time when the match gets terminated because of zero surplus:
bτ , veτ ) = 0}
T = inf {τ ≥ 0 : Vb (A

Compensation is determined by the running maximum of productivity for all 0 < t < T :
n

o
bmax,t ) = max c0 , C ω(A
bmax,t ), A
bmax,t .
ct = c(A

This consumption function satisfies the necessary and sufficient Kuhn-Tucker conditions if the continuation
b This being the case, the participation constraint only binds if
probability β is non-increasing in A.

b exceeds it previous maximum. It is easy to verify that β is indeed non-increasing in A
b given this
A
consumption function.

Proof of Proposition 3
Proof. The discount rate wedge induces a downward drift in the manager’s consumption and promised
utility. When the participation constraint does not bind, the envelope condition and the first order
condition for ve′ imply the following:

b ve)
b′ , ve′′ )
−∂ Vb (A,
−∂ Vb (A
= µ = e(ρm −ρo )
∂e
v
∂ ve′

Because eρm −ρo > 1, the owner’s utility cost of providing compensation tomorrow is lower than µ, the
c), this
cost today. As a result, the optimal promised utility is decreasing over time. Because µ = u−1
c (e
also implies that current consumption drifts down. By construction, this consumption policy satisfies the
necessary and sufficient first order conditions for optimality.

C

Transition Experiment

Definition 4. A constant-discount rate transition between two steady state growth paths is defined as a
path for which the productivity of the newest vintage grows at rate gt,θ , the economy-wide productivity-level
grows at a rate gz,t , and all aggregate variables {Yt , Kt , wt , Ct }t=0,T have a constant trend growth rate
g = (1 + gz )(1 + gθ )1−ν

1
 1−αν

.

The rental rate on capital Rt and the discount rate rt are constant. The measure over promised utilities
and establishment productivity satisfies (2.10) and (2.11) during the transition. At t = T , this economy
reaches its new steady-state growth path. So for i > 1:



A
ΨT +i,s (A, v) = ΨT +i−1,s
,v
1 + gθ


A
λT +i,s (A, v) = λT +i−1,s
,v .
1 + gθ

40

(C.1)
(C.2)

Output deviates from its trend growth path during the transition because the average establishment
productivity level deviates from its initial steady-state growth path {Aold,t }. The average productivity
levels changes, because the joint measure over establishment-specific productivity and promised utility is
changing. Along the transition path, we check that the rental rate for physical capital is constant:

et =
where K


αν−1
e αν−1 = αv K
e old,t
Rt = αv K
,
new,t

Kt
1−ν

1

denotes the capital stock in adjusted efficiency units. The aggregate capital stock

At1−αv zt1−αν

is adjusted such that

b new,t  Anew,t  1−αv
K
ϕt =
=
.
b old,t
Aold,t
K
1−ν

Capital is supplied perfectly elastically at a constant interest rate. Along the transition path, all aggregate
variables {Ynew,t , Knew,t , Wnew,t , Cnew,t }t=0,T are scaled up by ϕt . This is the productivity adjustment
relative to the old steady-state growth path. Once we have computed {ϕt }, we can back out the transition
path for all the other variables.

Reverse Shooting Algorithm The objective is to compute the transition for the value function,
aggregate productivity, the outside option function and the joint measure over promised consumption
and productivity {Vt , At , ωt , Ψt,s , λt,s }. We start in the new steady state with the new vintage-specific
growth rate gθ,T at T , and the “stationary” joint measure ΨT,s over organizational capital and promised
consumption, which satisfy the conditions in equation (C.2). We conjecture a {ϕt }Tt=0 sequence. Because
we know VbT , the owner’s value of an establishment at the beginning of period t can be constructed
recursively, starting in i = 1:

b ve; s) = max
VbT −i (A,
′

c,e
e
vt (·)

"

eT −i+1 − e
yeT −i+1 − W − Rk
cT −i+1
R
b′ , ve′ ; s + 1) Qs′ (ε′ )dε′
+R−1 (1 + g) VeT −i+1 (A

#

,

subject to the law of motion for capital in (2.13), the promised consumption constraint in (2.15), and a
series of participation constraints:
ve′ ≥ ω
eT −i+1 (A′ )

and, finally, the value of the firm is defined as:

h
i
b ve) = max VbT −i (A,
b ve), 0 .
VeT −i (A,

We solve for {Vt , At , ωt , Ψt,s , λt,s }Tt=1 starting in the last period T .

Simulating Forward Next, we simulate this economy forward, starting at the initial values for


V0 , A0 , ω0 , Ψ0,s , λ0,s in the old steady-state growth path, using our solution for the transition path

{Vt , At , ωt , Ψt,s , λt,s }Tt=1 . We use a sample of N = 5000 establishments. This gives us a new guess for the

41

aggregate establishment productivity series and hence for {ϕ′t }Tt=0 . We continue iterating until we achieve
convergence.

D

Calibration Details

To calibrate the depreciation rate, the tax rate and the capital share αν, we used mostly NIPA data.
Let CF C denote the consumption of fixed capital. Let KIN V denote the stock of inventories, obtained
from NIPA Table 5.7.5B. (Private Inventories and Domestic Final Sales by Industry). Let KES denote
fixed assets, obtained from NIPA Table 6.1. (Current-Cost Net Stock of Private Fixed Assets by Industry
Group and Legal Form of Organization). The depreciation rate is computed as
δ = CF C/(KES + KIN V ).
The average tax rate τc is computed as follows. Let CT denote corporate taxes, let N P denote net product,
let ST denote Sales Taxes, and let SLP T R denote state and local taxes. The tax rate is computed as
τc = CT /(N P − CE − ST ),
where we compute ST as CT − RAT IO × SLP T R and RAT IO is the average ratio of fixed assets held
by non-farm, non-financial corporations to total fixed assets.
To compute the average cost of capital r, we computed the weighted-average of the average return
on equity and the average return on corporate bonds over the period 1950-2005. The average return on
corporate bonds was computed using the Dow Jones corporate bond index.20 . The average return on
equity is computed from the log price/dividend ratio and a constant real growth rate for dividends of
1.8%, the average growth rate over the sample.21 The dividend series and the price/dividend ratio from
CRSP are adjusted for repurchases. The weights in the average are based on the aggregate market value
of equity and corporate bonds. The resulting average cost of capital is 5.5%.

20
21

Data are available at http://www.globalfinancialdata.com
Data are available at http://wrds.wharton.upenn.edu

42

Table I: Benchmark Calibration

43

Parameter
ν
δ
α
r
ρo
ρo
γ
g
ms
σs
S
φ

Value
.75
.06
.30
.055
.02
.03
1.6
.022
0
19% exc. reall. rate
4.3% exit rate
0.5

Source
Atkeson and Kehoe (2005)
N IP A
K/Y = 1.77
F oF, CRSP, DJCBI
equation (2.8)
N IP A
job reallocation - QCEW BLS
entry and exit
wage inequality - QCEW BLS

Notes: This Table lists our benchmark parameter choices. Section 4.2 justifies these choices and Appendix D provides more details on the data we used. NIPA stands for
National Income and Products Accounts, CRSP for Center for Research in Securities Prices, DJCBI for Dow Jones Corporate Bond Index, QCEW stands for Quarterly Census
of Employment and Wages, and BLS for Bureau of Labor Statistics. The abbreviation “exc. reall. rate” stands for excess reallocation rate in the initial steady state.

Table II: Main Results-Benchmark Calibration

Log Productivity

Aggregates

Std

IQR

IDR

Std

IQR

IDR

EREALL

EXIT

Tobin’s q

V
(Y −S a )

M
(Y −S a )

before

0.94

0.01

0.08

10.69

18.27

29.16

18.96

4.33

1.40

0.83

8.27

1971-1975
1976-1980
1981-1985
1986-1990
1991-1995
1996-2000
2001-2005

1.48
1.24
1.75
2.31
4.34
6.41
8.22

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.09
0.13

0.09
0.08
0.10
0.11
0.13
11.77
9.73

10.80
11.00
11.09
11.26
11.67
11.79
12.22

18.32
18.25
18.42
18.32
18.43
18.05
18.36

28.99
29.13
29.38
29.80
30.76
30.84
31.78

17.83
16.62
15.30
13.52
12.87
12.70
12.26

7.74
6.65
5.62
4.08
3.56
3.53
3.05

1.40
1.43
1.46
1.50
1.54
1.56
1.59

0.83
0.89
0.93
1.00
1.07
1.12
1.18

8.04
7.88
7.72
7.51
7.37
7.29
7.22

2006-2010
2011-2015

11.03
12.78

8.63
8.82

8.94
21.47

12.58
12.57

18.53
18.50

32.58
32.52

12.02
11.90

2.94
2.84

1.62
1.62

1.23
1.22

7.17
7.11

after

26.98

0.09

35.07

15.36

21.14

38.98

11.35

1.20

1.64

1.26

6.47

Notes: The panel on the left reports the cross-sectional standard deviation (Std), inter-quartile range (IQR) and the inter-decile range (IDR) for log
b in percentage points. The panel on the right reports the excess job reallocation rate (EREALL), the
compensation log e
c and log productivity (1−ν) log A
entry/exit rate (EXIT), Tobin’s q, the ratio of aggregate firm value to output (V /(Y − S a )), and the ratio of managerial wealth to output (M/(Y − S a )).
The economy transitions from high vintage-specific growth gθ,0 before 1971 to low vintage-specific growth gθ,T after 1971. The transition takes place
over T = 20 years. The results are for the benchmark parameters.

44

Log Compensation

Table III: Compensation Sensitivity in Large Firms-Benchmark Calibration

Top 500

45

1971-1975
1976-1980
1981-1985
1986-1990
1991-1995
1996-2000
2001-2005
2006-2010
2011-2015

Top 50

∆c/∆A

Std

IQR

IDR

∆c/∆A

Std

IQR

IDR

−1.68
0.14
0.48
1.03
1.76
3.72
6.08
5.86
8.72

3.76
3.55
4.86
6.98
10.36
13.90
19.22
24.12
29.04

0.20
0.27
0.41
0.43
0.49
0.49
2.41
11.18
20.97

3.51
0.53
0.61
0.65
3.77
25.14
39.25
52.04
66.64

3.35
1.08
6.59
15.87
18.86
37.58
53.67
49.89
46.63

8.99
10.83
13.71
16.80
22.19
23.88
25.07
28.03
31.11

0.39
0.57
1.95
12.83
28.02
28.30
31.83
32.85
37.41

0.86
4.79
27.05
36.25
52.99
54.81
54.92
62.17
86.63

Notes: This table reports the sensitivity of compensation to size, the cross-sectional standard deviation (Std), inter-quartile range (IQR) and the
inter-decile range (IDR) for log compensation log e
c for the 500 and 50 largest establishments. The economy transitions from high vintage-specific growth
gθ,0 before 1971 to low vintage-specific growth gθ,T after 1971. The transition takes place over T = 20 years. The table reports the ratio of market
value of the establishment to the aggregate capital stock, at different percentiles of the cross-sectional market value distribution. The results are for the
benchmark parameters.

Table IV: Robustness: Compensation and Productivity

Log Compensation

High Portability

Log Productivity

Log Compensation

Log Productivity

Std

IQR

IDR

Std

IQR

IDR

Std

IQR

IDR

Std

IQR

IDR

before

0.00

0.00

0.00

10.77

18.52

29.45

9.61

0.46

5.24

13.73

23.33

38.51

1971-1975
1976-1980
1981-1985
1986-1990
1991-1995
1996-2000
2001-2005
2006-2010
2011-2015

0.02
0.00
0.00
1.12
2.00
3.18
3.46
4.27
4.47

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.83
4.57
6.43
7.68

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
4.86
6.50
8.07
8.70
11.41

10.06
9.49
9.33
9.41
9.72
10.08
10.50
10.99
11.31

17.46
15.85
15.12
14.87
14.24
14.38
14.64
15.17
15.54

26.41
24.67
24.46
24.54
25.50
26.34
27.21
28.34
28.74

14.79
12.74
13.52
14.99
19.57
23.21
25.68
29.12
31.32

0.51
5.47
10.74
8.60
8.27
8.29
8.37
8.69
9.29

19.54
16.50
14.46
16.32
19.30
36.65
49.22
53.04
56.28

13.63
13.87
14.17
14.47
14.84
15.14
15.60
16.07
16.52

23.57
23.61
23.58
23.48
23.88
24.04
24.20
24.75
25.27

37.50
37.62
38.09
38.50
38.98
39.55
41.01
42.01
43.21

after

0.00

0.00

0.00

13.43

16.81

33.17

48.56

29.45

98.49

21.19

32.19

55.35

Notes: The panel on the left shows results for φ = 0 (no portability). The panel on the right shows results for φ = .75 (high portability). The economy
transitions from high vintage-specific growth gθ,0 before 1971 to low vintage-specific growth gθ,T after 1971. The transition takes place over T = 20
years. The table reports the cross-sectional standard deviation (Std), inter-quartile range (IQR) and the inter-decile range (IDR) for log compensation
b in percentage points. The results are for the benchmark parameters.
log e
c and log productivity (1 − ν) log A

46

No Portability

Table V: Robustness: Aggregate Variables

Low Portability

High Portability

47

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

EREALL

EXIT

Tobin’s q

V
(Y −S a )

M
(Y −S a )

EREALL

EXIT

Tobin’s q

V
(Y −S a )

M
(Y −S a )

before

18.93

4.32

1.36

0.74

6.02

17.67

3.40

1.37

0.76

4.99

1971-1975
1976-1980
1981-1985
1986-1990
1991-1995
1996-2000
2001-2005
2006-2010
2011-2015

21.78
18.49
16.26
14.59
13.20
12.64
11.92
12.05
11.87

11.68
9.07
7.06
5.67
4.29
3.85
3.03
3.22
2.98

1.38
1.43
1.49
1.58
1.66
1.72
1.77
1.81
1.84

0.82
0.89
1.01
1.16
1.32
1.43
1.52
1.60
1.66

7.61
7.59
7.51
7.42
7.24
7.12
6.97
6.92
6.84

18.03
14.94
14.37
12.15
12.27
11.86
11.32
11.63
10.75

7.14
4.70
4.33
2.46
2.52
2.40
1.74
2.21
1.36

1.35
1.38
1.40
1.44
1.45
1.46
1.47
1.47
1.48

0.72
0.76
0.80
0.86
0.88
0.91
0.92
0.92
0.93

4.48
4.54
4.61
4.58
4.59
4.54
4.49
4.50
4.46

after

11.50

1.48

2.11

2.19

5.77

11.24

0.84

1.45

0.89

4.09

Notes: The panel on the left shows results for φ = 0 (low portability). The panel on the right shows results for φ = .75 (high portability). The
economy transitions from high vintage-specific growth gθ,0 before 1971 to low vintage-specific growth gθ,T after 1971. The transition takes place over
T = 20 years. The table reports the excess job reallocation rate (EREALL), the entry/exit rate (EXIT), Tobin’s q, the ratio of aggregate firm value to
output (V /(Y − S a )), and the ratio of managerial wealth to output (M/(Y − S a )). The results are for the benchmark parameters.

Table VI: Increasing Wage Dispersion

Std

IQR

IDR

Panel A: All Workers
1975-1979
1980-1984
1985-1989
1990-1994
1995-1999
2000-2004

21.4
22.9
24.2
25.1
26.9
28.7

29.1
29.3
30.8
31.6
32.8
34.5

53.2
57.2
58.5
61.1
65.7
67.9

Panel B: All Managers
1975-1979
1980-1984
1985-1989
1990-1994
1995-1999
2000-2004

59.4
61.3
62.9
64.8
67.2
68.8

72.9
79.8
82.5
83.8
83.3
84.2

140.8
147.5
152.7
156.6
157.7
160.4

Panel C: Top-3 Managers
1975-1979
1980-1984
1985-1989
1990-1994
1995-1999
2000-2004

55.7
58.3
69.7
76.9
92.6
99.4

74.1
74.0
90.2
100.0
124.0
149.5

135.1
146.7
172.6
186.8
231.7
260.9

Notes: All three panels plot the cross-sectional standard deviation, inter-quartile range, and inter-decile range of log
wages. Statistics are averaged over 5-year periods. In Panel A, we measure intra-industry, between-establishment
wage inequality. The data are from the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW) collected by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The unit of observation is an establishment, for which we know the average
wage. We calculate the within-industry wage dispersion from a panel of 55 2-digit SIC-code industries, and average
across industries. In Panel B, we use individual-level data from the Current Population Survey, March issue. We
select only the managerial occupations. Finally, Panel C uses data from Frydman and Saks (2006) for the three
highest-paid officers in the largest 50 firms in 1960 and 1990.

48

Table VII: Valuation Ratios for US Corporate Sector

(1)

(2)

Tobin’s q

V /(Y − S a )

1.96
1.49
0.97
0.94
1.33
1.70
2.58
2.33
2.04

1.80
1.54
1.13
1.16
1.49
1.82
2.53
2.41
2.19

1965-1969
1970-1974
1975-1979
1980-1984
1985-1989
1990-1994
1995-1999
2000-2004
2005-2008.I

Notes: Tobin’s q is the ratio of the market value of US corporations V a divided by the replacement cost of the
physical capital stock K. The value-output ratio (V /(Y − S a )) is the market value of US corporations V a divided
by value-added Y − S a of the non-financial corporate sector.

Table VIII: Cross-sectional Results: Tobin’s q and Establishment-Level Wage Dispersion

Constant

(1)
-0.401
(0.296)

(2)
-0.341
(0.293)
0.117
(0.167)

(3)
0.232
(0.187)***

(4)
0.264
(0.185)***
0.086
(0.105)

1.113
(0.196)***

1.131
(0.194)***
-0.275
(0.129)**

0.789
(0.123)***

0.801
(0.122)***
-0.174
(0.064)*

INTAN
WDISP
WDISP*INTAN
∆ Tobin q / ∆ WDISP

0.981
(0.199)***

Number of Industries
Observations

0.706
(0.125)***
47
2632

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. This table reports fixed effects estimates of
Tobin q1 and Tobin q2 on wage dispersion (WDISP) for the periods 1992-2005. Wage dispersion is measured as the
cross-sectional standard deviation of log wages across establishments within an industry. The regressions include
year and industry fixed effects. The definition of these variables is detailed in Appendix A.2. Robust standard
errors are shown in parentheses.

49

Table IX: Cross-sectional Results: Tobin’s q and Executive Wage Dispersion

Constant

(1)
0.627
(0.163)***

(2)
0.750
(0.175)***
-0.453
(0.103)***

(3)
1.039
(0.101)***

(4)
1.117
(0.104)***
-0.276
(0.066)***

0.765
(0.174)***

0.756
(0.184)***
0.122
(0.061)**

0.469
(0.108)***

0.459
(0.112)***
0.077
(0.045)*

INTAN
WDISP
WDISP*INTAN
∆ Tobin q / ∆ WDISP

0.823
(0.172)***

Number of Industries
Observations

0.502
(0.105)***
46
644

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. This table reports fixed effects estimates
of Tobin q1 and Tobin q2 on wage dispersion (WDISP) for the periods 1992-2005. Wage dispersion is measured as
the cross-sectional standard deviation of log wages across individual executives within an industry. Wages are the
sum of the manager’s salary, bonus, restricted stock grants, LTIP payouts, all other annual payments, and value of
options granted (“tdc1”). The regressions include year and industry fixed effects. Further detail on the data is in
Appendix A.2 and A.5. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses.

50

Figure 1: Optimal Compensation and Size
bmax,t against current productivity,
This figure plots the running maximum of productivity on the horizontal axis, A
b
At , on the vertical axis. It considers the case in which managers and owners share the same rate of time preference
ρm = ρo .

Â

'ct

V !S
0

'Vt

gT

V

0;Vt

S

0

I
1

Termination

45.

1

cˆ t

c0

1

I

Âmax
cˆt

C ( Aˆ max ) ! c0

51

Figure 2: Optimal Compensation Contract
The left panel plots the current productivity At (y-axis) against the running maximum Amax,t (x-axis). The right
panel figure plots the evolution of the optimal current consumption of the manager e
c (dashed line) alongside the
b (full line). The latter is a measure of size and productivity
evolution of the establishment’s organizational capital A
of the establishment. The two time-series are produced by simulating model for 300 periods (horizontal axis) under
the benchmark calibration described below (φ = .5), except that the time discount rates of owners and managers
are held equal: ρo = ρm .

Manager
10

10

2

5

1

9

8

7

At

6

5

4

V=0

3

2

1

0

0

2

4

6

8

0

10

0

100

200

0
300

A

max

Figure 3: Payouts to Manager and Owner
The left panel plots the evolution of the optimal current consumption of the manager e
c (dashed line, measured
b (full line, measured
against the right axis) alongside the evolution of the establishment’s organizational capital A
against the left axis). The right panel plots the payouts to the owner π
e. The two time-series are produced by
simulating the model for 300 periods (horizontal axis) under the benchmark calibration described below, except
that the time discount rates of owners and managers are held equal: ρo = ρm .
Manager

Owner
2

10

2

5

0

1

Compensation

1

5

0

−1
2

0

−1
2

0

100

200

−2
300

time

0

0

100

200
time

52

−2
300

Compensation

10

Figure 4: Payouts to Manager and Owner: Discount Rate Wedge
The left panel plots the evolution of the optimal current consumption of the manager e
c (dashed line, measured against
b (full line, measured against
the right axis) alongside the evolution of the establishment’s organizational capital log A
the left axis). The right panel plots the payouts to the owner π
e. The two time-series are produced by simulating
the model for 300 periods (horizontal axis) under the benchmark calibration described below, except that the time
discount rates of owners and managers are held equal: ρo < ρm .
Manager

Owner

10

2

10

2

5

1

5

0

0
300

0

0

0

50

100

150

200

250

0

50

100

150

200

250

−2
300

Figure 5: Excess Reallocation Rate
The blue bars show the excess reallocation rate for the manufacturing sector, constructed by Faberman (2006). The
excess job reallocation rate is a direct measure of the cross-sectional dispersion of establishment growth rates. It is
defined as the sum of the job creation rate plus the job destruction rate less the net employment growth rate. The
Faberman data are extended to 2007.III using BLS data. The red bars show the excess reallocation rate for the
private sector (BLS).

Excess

Reallocation

16

15

Manufacturing
Private

14

13

12

11

10

9

8

1965−1969 1970−1974 1975−1979 1980−1984 1985−1989 1990−1994 1995−1999 2000−2004 2005−2008

53

Figure 6: From Low-Powered to High-Powered Incentives
Plot of log compensation against log size of establishment. The left panel shows the initial steady-state growth path
(high vintage-specific growth). The right panel shows the new steady-state growth path (high general productivity
growth). The data are generated from the model under its benchmark calibration.
Initial SS Growth Path

New SS Growth Path

3

1

2.5
2

0.5

log(Compensation)

log(Compensation)

1.5
1
0.5
0

0

−0.5

−0.5
−1

−1

−1.5
−2
−1

−0.5

0

0.5
log(Size)

1

−1.5
−2

1.5

−1

0

1

2

3

log(Size)

Figure 7: Compensation and Size Distribution on the New Steady State Growth Path
Histogram of log compensation and log size of establishments. The data are generated by simulating the model’s
new steady-state growth path(high general productivity growth) under its benchmark calibration.

log(Compensation)

log(Size)

4500

1200

1000

1000

800

800

600

600

400

400

200

200

0
−1.5

−1

−0.5

0

0.5

0
−2

1

54

−1

0

1

2

3

Figure 8: Size Distribution in the New Steady State
The figure plots the relationship between the log size of establishments on the horizontal axis and the rank in the
distribution log(Rank − .5) on the vertical axis. The figure is for the new steady state growth path under our
benchmark calibration.

Size Distribution
9

8

7

6

log(Rank−.5)

5

4

3

2

1

0

−1
−2

−1.5

−1

−0.5

0

0.5
log(Size)

1

1.5

2

2.5

Figure 9: Cross-section
Scatter plot of steady-state growth path Tobin’s q against the standard deviation of log compensation for 13
industries with gθ varying from low (.00%) on the right side to high (6.82%) on the left side. The results are for the
benchmark parameters.

2

1

1.9
2

Tobin’s q

1.8

3

1.7
4
1.6

1.5

1.4

1.3

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
Stdev(log(compensation)

55

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

