NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW GLOBALIZATION AFFECTS TAX DESIGN
James R. Hines, Jr.
Lawrence H. Summers
Working Paper 14664
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14664

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2009

We thank Fan Fei and Owen Kearney for outstanding research assistance, and the University of Michigan
for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by James R. Hines, Jr. and Lawrence H. Summers. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How Globalization Affects Tax Design
James R. Hines, Jr. and Lawrence H. Summers
NBER Working Paper No. 14664
January 2009
JEL No. H20
ABSTRACT
The economic changes associated with globalization tighten financial pressures on governments of
high-income countries by increasing the demand for government spending while making it more costly
to raise tax revenue. Greater international mobility of economic activity, and associated responsiveness
of the tax base to tax rates, increases the economic distortions created by taxation. Countries with
small open economies have relatively mobile tax bases; as a result, they rely much less heavily on
corporate and personal income taxes than do other countries. The evidence indicates that a ten percent
smaller population in 1999 is associated with a one percent smaller ratio of personal and corporate
income tax collections to total tax revenues. Governments of small countries instead rely on consumption-type
taxes, including taxes on sales of goods and services and import tariffs, much more heavily than do
larger countries. Since the rapid pace of globalization implies that all countries are becoming small
open economies, this evidence suggests that the use of expenditure taxes is likely to increase, posing
challenges to governments concerned about recent changes in income distribution.

James R. Hines, Jr.
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
621 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
jrhines@umich.edu
Lawrence H. Summers
JFK School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Littauer 242
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
lawrence_summers@ksg.harvard.edu

1.

Introduction
There is a discomfort current in high income countries, as governments face excess

demand for the services they provide together with difficulty raising revenue needed to finance
greater expenditures or even to maintain services at levels to which their populations have grown
accustomed. The mismatch of desires and means is an old and common story, hardly unique to
governments, and not any easier for its banality. Changing world economic conditions, the
globalization of production and markets, and the economic awakening of much of the world’s
population, have contributed to the problems confronting governments of affluent countries even
as they have made possible some of the most exciting developments of modern times.
Economic theory offers insights chiefly into the dire consequences of possible methods
that governments might use to address their financial difficulties. Efforts to tax mobile economic
activity stimulate mobility and thereby create economic distortions as business activities, capital
and labor are reallocated for tax rather than productivity reasons. Sophisticated tax avoidance
through financial and other means reduces the revenue potential of high rates of income taxation
and further contributes to the economic cost of taxation. Taxes on capital income distort the
intertemporal allocation of consumption due to the compounding of effective tax rates over time.
And redistributive taxation that subjects income to high marginal rates of effective taxation
creates its own economic distortions.
The economic costs of raising tax revenue are particularly worrisome in an environment
in which governments face significant demands on their resources. Despite the greater general
affluence associated with globalization, some segments of industrial societies, particularly those
relying on returns to less-skilled labor, may be adversely affected by resulting price changes.
The accompanying social dislocations put pressures on governments to soften the impact of
global economic changes,1 and, if possible, respond in ways that help their populations thrive in
more globally competitive markets. Social welfare programs have for many years served the
first of these functions and education and training programs the second; all of these are

1

Rodrik (1998) offers evidence that open economies have larger government sectors than do closed economies,
which he attributes to their greater demand for public expenditures that cushion the effects of globalization.

1

expensive, so there is understandable interest in the ability of governments to maintain their
funding in an era in which most large countries have open economies.
One of the potential challenges for governments that are eager to maintain and possibly
strengthen their spending programs is that the same forces that are responsible for recent
economic changes might also raise the cost of financing government programs with certain types
of taxes. The relative ease of international trade, capital movement and communication makes it
possible for production to locate in many places around the world and for tax burdens to be
avoided through international transactions. Since location choices, activity levels, and taxable
incomes are sensitive to local tax rates, it stands to reason that governments would feel
intensifying international pressure to reduce tax burdens on business activities, investors, and
possibly high net worth individuals. If tax rates fall without other compensating changes, then
government tax revenues will decline, and with them government expenditures. A general
reduction in government expenditures entails reduced outlays on social welfare and education
programs, particularly since there are no countervailing international pressures on governments
to maintain this spending. 2
How then can governments find revenues to finance social spending and other programs
without creating enormous economic distortions? Distortions are minimized by taxing bases that
are least responsive to taxation. Land is the classic example of a factor inelastic in supply and
therefore nondistortionary to tax, though taxing land raises other issues and in any case modern
governments require far more revenue than is feasible to obtain from land taxes alone.
A good part of the problem facing governments is the mobility and potential mobility of
economic activity. Some aspects of this mobility are clearly observable, taking the form of
foreign direct investment by multinational firms, portfolio investment by individuals and
financial institutions, international trade, immigration of individuals, international licensing of
intangible property, and other forms of international factor mobility. Other features of mobility
are more subtle, taking the form of businesses that thrive in locations that heretofore would not
have been suitable for them, workforces that need not move because markets come to them, and
ideas that are adopted everywhere. In the absence of coordinated government policies, the
2

See Avi-Yonah (2000) for an elaboration of this argument.

2

potential mobility of economic activity makes it extremely difficult for governments to exploit
monopoly positions over much of their tax bases, thereby greatly contributing to the distortions
created in the course of raising tax revenue.
The behavior of governments during the era of globalization offers clues to the likely
course of future developments. Small countries with their relatively more open economies have
always faced greater international pressures than have large countries, and their fiscal systems
therefore had to adapt earlier than did large countries to the greater mobility that open markets
create. Globalization means that in some sense all countries are becoming smaller. In order to
explore the likely consequences for large countries of globalizing trends, it is therefore useful to
consider the tax policies that small countries use, and in particular the way that their tax policies
have differed from those in larger countries.
The evidence indicates that small counties rely much less than other countries do on
income taxes imposed on individuals and corporations. While small and more open economies
certainly use income taxes, their governments rely much less on these taxes than they do on
expenditure-type taxes such as excise, sales and value-added taxes as well as tariffs on imported
goods. The cross-sectional evidence for 1999 is that a ten percent smaller national population is
associated with a one percent lower ratio of income taxes to total tax revenue, and panel
evidence points to even stronger effects of changes in country size on the use of income taxes.
Expenditure-type taxes have risen in popularity everywhere in the world, as reflected in
the fact that more than 130 countries now impose significant value-added taxes, and there is
widespread reliance on excise taxes on gasoline and other commodities. The popularity of
expenditure taxes is due in part to their administrative and enforcement features, and in part to
their efficiency properties. In a globalizing world, expenditures have relatively clear geographic
associations, reducing the potential for international tax avoidance and generally reducing the
mobility of the tax base compared to alternatives such as personal income taxes or source-based
business taxes including the corporate income tax. Expenditure taxes do not directly tax capital
returns, but do so indirectly by taxing all returns when spent on goods and services, which has
the effect of taxing pure profits on capital investments while effectively exempting normal
returns to saving.

3

Heavy use of expenditure taxation in place of income taxation can carry serious
implications for tax progressivity, since in practice many expenditure taxes have flat rates that
make them much less progressive than income tax alternatives. Absence of tax progressivity is
not intrinsic to taxing expenditures, since it is possible to tax lightly goods purchased
disproportionately by low income families, though there are serious limits to the amount of
redistribution that can be achieved that way. 3 It is possible to couple the adoption of new
expenditure taxes with offsetting distributional changes in income taxation, as proposed by
Graetz (2002) and others, though there are realistic questions about whether countries in practice
are capable of enacting such sweeping reforms. Furthermore, there are serious proposals to
institute progressive expenditure-type taxes, which could be implemented by countries such as
the United States through relatively minor adjustments to existing taxes. In the absence of
compensating adjustment to other taxes and expenditures, however, the most likely outcome of
greater reliance on expenditure type taxation is reduced overall fiscal progressivity. Given recent
changes in income distributions, governments may be dissatisfied with such an outcome, and
seek creative alternatives that permit fiscal progressivity to accompany sufficient revenue
generation.
2.

Tax policy pressures on the United States
The world economy has grown considerably more open and integrated in every decade

since the Second World War. During the period from 1950 to 2004, total world exports and
imports grew by an average of 5.9 percent a year. 4 While this reflects in part the growth of the
world economy, it also reflects the impact of reduced transportation and communication costs,
falling tariff rates, and reductions in other impediments to international business. From 1950 to
1975, world exports and imports grew by 2.2 percent a year relative to world output, and trade in
manufacturing grew by 2.6 percent a year relative to output. From 1975 to 2004 the rate of
growth of international trade relative to world output quickened for all goods to 2.3 percent a
year, and for manufacturing to 3.0 percent a year. The openness of world economies is likewise
reflected in a marked growth of foreign direct investment.

3
4

See, for example, the analysis in Sah (1983).
See Hummels (2007) for detailed evidence of the growth of world trade since 1950.

4

Changes to the world economy have coincided with significant changes to the
distribution of income in the United States and other high-income countries. Table 1 presents
data compiled by the Congressional Budget Office on shares of pretax income accounted for by
different income groups in the United States. The highest quintile of the income distribution
received 45.5 percent of household income in 1979, a figure that rose to 55.1 percent by 2005.
The top one percent of families had 9.3 percent of total income in 1979, whereas the
corresponding figure for 2005 is 18.1 percent. At the other end of the income distribution, the
lowest quintile in 1979 received 5.8 percent of family income, a ratio that fell to just 4.0 percent
by 2005. By just about any measure income has become significantly less evenly distributed in
the United States over the past three decades. There is considerable controversy over the extent
to which changes to income distributions in wealthy countries can be attributed to the growth of
international trade and investment, though the evidence reviewed by Feenstra and Hanson (2004)
strongly suggests that globalization has contributed significantly to income inequality.
The changing income distribution creates demands for the U.S. government to improve
the economic prospects of the disadvantaged with education, training, and other programs, and to
modify the after-tax distribution of income through the tax and transfer system. Creating
meaningful new national economic opportunities with education and training programs requires
significant expenditures that entail substantial new financing sources, typically in the form of
higher taxes. Redistributing income through the tax system also requires high tax rates,
including not only taxes on affluent individuals and families but high implicit tax rates on
means-tested transfers to low-income individuals and families.
Perhaps the most significant sectoral shift of modern times is the rising fraction of
national resources devoted to health spending. The government is heavily involved in all matters
concerning health, so rising health costs together with limits to the ability of private individuals
and their employers to finance adequate health coverage put enormous potential burdens on
governments to make up any differences. Table 2 presents recent estimates from the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services of historical and projected health care expenditures by private
individuals and the public sector in the United States. As is evident from this table, annual
federal government health spending is projected to rise from its 2006 level of $664 billion to
$1.471 trillion by 2017, thereby more than doubling per capita annual federal government

5

spending from $2,217 in 2006 to $4,505 in 2017. Over the same period state and local
governments are projected to increase their per capita annual health spending from $826 to
$1,568. Even with this growing support from different levels of government, total per capita
private health expenditures, including private health insurance, out-of-pocket payments, and
other private expenditures, are anticipated to grow from $3,517 in 2006 to $6,203 by 2017.
Significantly increased public spending on health care requires greater resources for all
levels of government. In addition, rising per capita private health care costs contribute to
financial burdens on private individuals, particularly those without access to generous employerprovided health insurance. This, in turn, adds to the demand for public support of low-income
individuals and families.
Changes to the distribution of income and rising health care expenditures are just two of
several trends that contribute to U.S. government revenue needs in the coming years. An aging
population requires greater spending on public pensions, including social security and disability
insurance, and an aging public infrastructure creates significant needs for greater spending on
roads and highways, sewer systems, port and airport facilities, telecommunications, and other
elements of public infrastructure. At the same time that the U.S. government faces greater
expenditure demands, its ability to finance expenditures is limited by greater mobility of the tax
base and competition from other parts of the world for mobile economic activity.
Rising levels of worldwide foreign direct investment have the potential to trigger rounds
of competitive business tax reductions, as countries seek to attract the employment opportunities,
productivity spillovers, and other economic benefits commonly associated with greater
investment, particularly foreign investment. Countries have incentives to reduce business tax
rates if they believe that lower tax rates will be associated with greater economic activity, higher
tax base, or both. While evidence of growing foreign direct investment does not by itself
demonstrate that tax policies influence the magnitude and performance of international
investment, there is ample separate evidence that they do.

6

A substantial body of research considers how taxation influences the activities of
multinational firms. 5 This literature considers the effects of taxation on investment and on tax
avoidance activities. With respect to investment, tax policies are obviously capable of affecting
the volume and location of foreign direct investment, since all other considerations equal, higher
tax rates reduce after-tax returns, thereby reducing incentives to commit investment funds. This
literature identifies the effects of taxes through time-series estimation of the responsiveness of
foreign direct investment to annual variation in after-tax rates of return and cross-sectional
studies that exploit the large differences in corporate tax rates around the world to identify the
effects of taxes on foreign direct investment. The first generation of these studies, reviewed in
Hines (1997, 1999), reports tax elasticities of investment in the neighborhood of –0.6. What this
means is that a ten percent tax reduction (for example, reducing the corporate tax rate from 35
percent to 31.5 percent) should be associated with six percent greater inbound foreign
investment. More recent evidence suggests that foreign direct investment is even more tax
sensitive than this. 6
Contractual arrangements between related parties located in countries with different tax
rates offer numerous possibilities for sophisticated tax avoidance. It is widely suspected that
firms select transfer prices used for within-firm transactions with the goal of reducing their total
tax obligations. Multinational firms typically can benefit by reducing prices charged by affiliates
in high-tax countries for items and services provided to affiliates in low-tax countries. OECD
governments require firms to use transfer prices that would be paid by unrelated parties, but
enforcement is difficult, particularly when pricing issues concern differentiated or proprietary
items such as patent rights. Given the looseness of the resulting legal restrictions, it is entirely
possible for firms to adjust transfer prices in a tax-sensitive fashion without violating any laws.
Multinational firms can structure a variety of transactions – intrafirm debt, royalty payments,
dividend repatriations, and intrafirm trade – in a manner that is conducive to tax avoidance.

5

See Gordon and Hines (2002), Devereux (2006) and Hines (2006), from which some of this material is drawn, for
recent surveys. For a fuller discussion of the tax rules facing U.S. multinational firms and the evidence on
behavioral responses to international taxation of U.S. multinationals, see Hines (1997, 1999) and Desai, Foley and
Hines (2003).
6
For example, Altshuler, Grubert and Newlon (2001) compare the tax sensitivity of aggregate capital ownership in
58 countries in 1984 to that in 1992, reporting estimated tax elasticities that rise (in absolute value) from –1.5 in
1984 to –2.8 in 1992. Altshuler and Grubert (2004) offer evidence of a -3.5 tax elasticity of investment in a sample
of 58 countries in 2000.

7

Studies of the responsiveness of firms to taxes on these margins examine reported profitabilities,
tax liabilities, and specific measures of financial and merchandise trade in order to identify the
effects of taxes. 7
Taken together, this evidence implies that the volume of foreign direct investment, and
accompanying economic activity and corporate tax bases, is highly responsive to local tax
policies. It follows that countries contemplating lowering their corporate income tax rates can
reasonably expect to receive significantly greater foreign investment as a consequence. Active
tax avoidance on the part of international investors implies that taxable income conditional on
investment levels also responds strongly to tax rate changes. The combination of these two
effects reduces the budgetary cost to a single country that reduces its tax rate, since a lower tax
rate is accompanied by a larger tax base due both to greater investment and to greater taxable
income associated with local investment. The incentive to reduce corporate tax rates in order to
attract foreign direct investment has increased since the early 1980s, as levels of world foreign
direct investment rose sharply during that time.
3.

Economic globalization and tax competition
It stands to reason that countries eager to attract tax bases might compete with each other

by reducing tax rates, as a result of which taxes, and therefore government expenditures, are
driven to inefficiently low levels. The likelihood of such an outcome depends on the tax
instruments available to governments and the nature of the competitive environment. In order to
evaluate this prospect it is helpful to consider the incentives that countries face.
Our understanding of the tax rate implications of international capital mobility dates to
Diamond and Mirrlees (1971), who demonstrate that efficient taxation in a small open economy
entails zero taxation of income earned by foreign investors. The explanation for their result is
that any positive taxation distorts the economy more than would other tax alternatives, without

7

For evidence on intrafirm trade, see Clausing (2001, 2003) and Swenson (2001). For evidence on intrafirm debt,
see Desai, Foley and Hines (2004), Huizinga, Laeven and Nicodeme (2006), and Grubert (1998). For evidence on
royalties, see Grubert (1998) and Hines (1995). For evidence on dividend repatriations, see Desai, Foley and Hines
(2001) and Hines and Hubbard (1990). See Grubert and Mutti (1991) and Hines and Rice (1994) for evidence on
differences in reported profitability in response to tax rates. While these studies exclusively use data on U.S.
multinationals, Bartelsman and Beetsma (2003) use country level data within the OECD to identify the prevalence
of profit-shifting activities more generally.

8

shifting any of the tax burden to foreign investors. 8 If international capital flows are increasingly
sensitive to tax rate differences, then incentives to reduce tax rates are presumably rising as well.
The analysis also implies that countries that nevertheless persist in taxing income earned by
foreign investors will have lower incomes than those that do not.
The Diamond and Mirrlees result is commonly thought to imply that small countries have
the least to gain from attempting to impose taxes on investment. Small countries are believed to
face the most elastic corporate tax bases, and therefore to have the strongest incentives to offer
low corporate tax rates, despite possible mitigating factors such as strategic behavior and
distortions induced by other policies. While there are few tests of the proposition that the supply
of capital to small countries is more elastic than the supply of capital to large countries, this is
more than a matter of faith, since, in most models, it follows as an implication of their relatively
small domestic business tax bases. 9 Whether countries actually design their policies based on
these presumed elasticities is another matter.
Larger countries have stronger incentives to tax foreign investors, since they are able to
extract some rents by virtue of the fact that prices in their economies need not respond to tax
policies in a way that maintains unchanged the investors’ after-tax profit margins. Possibly
weighing against this is strategic competition among large countries, whose tax policies may be
designed in a way that reflects their likely effects on the policies of other countries. Another
consideration is that the inability to tailor tax and other policies perfectly might change efficient
levels of taxation from what they would be in the absence of other distortions. For example,
trade barriers may distort local prices and thereby influence the efficient taxation of foreign
direct investment. If countries are unable to impose corrective taxes or subsidies on externalityproducing activities of corporations, then modifications to corporate income tax rates might
serve as indirect remedies. Similarly, if personal income taxation cannot be tailored to achieve
efficient redistribution, then there may be circumstances in which efficient third-best tax policies
might include distortionary corporate taxes. Finally, large countries might have personal income
tax rates that differ from those in small countries. Efforts to align top personal and corporate tax
rates in order to prevent tax arbitrage would then produce correlations between corporate tax
8
9

See Gordon (1986) for an elaboration of this argument, and Gordon and Hines (2002) for a further exposition.
See, for example, Bucovetsky (1991).

9

rates and country sizes that stem from the determinants of personal income tax rates rather than
efficient taxation of inbound foreign investment.
Several country-specific considerations therefore affect the consequences of taxing
internationally mobile capital. It is noteworthy that, even in the absence of special
considerations, international tax competition may produce outcomes in which capital taxes are
higher than they would be in the absence of competition. This can happen when there is foreign
ownership of productive factors, when competing countries differ greatly in size, or when
multiple governments attempt to tax the same income sources.
The case of foreign ownership is clear: governments that care only about the welfares of
domestic residents have incentives to adopt policies that enrich residents at the expense of
foreigners. Foreign ownership of local firms may encourage governments to raise local capital
tax rates above the levels they would impose in the absence of economic openness, since much
of the tax burden is borne by owners to whom the taxing government is largely indifferent. Even
foreign ownership of local land may trigger higher corporate tax rates, if the burden of corporate
taxes is in part borne by landowners in the form of lower prices. Finally, governments may have
incentives to overtax the foreign earnings of domestic companies, since doing so discourages
foreign investment and thereby directs resources to the home economy, a valuable exchange in
the presence of tax or other distortions. 10 If all governments respond to these incentives then the
result is that capital can be overtaxed in equilibrium.
Competition among countries of differing sizes creates incentives for jurisdictions to
choose tax policies strategically to manipulate international prices to their own advantage. As
DePater and Myers (1994) note, large capital importing countries have incentives to tax capital
heavily in order to reduce capital demand and therefore depress the world price of capital that
domestic importers must pay. By the same reasoning, capital exporting countries have
incentives to subsidize capital investment in order to raise prices, but if the exporting countries
are smaller than the importers, it may not be in the interest of any individual exporter acting on

10

Huizinga and Nielsen (1997) analyze incentives to increase corporate tax rates when foreigners make local
corporate investments, Richter and Wellisch (1996) consider the case of foreign-owned land, and Mintz and Tulkens
(1996) analyze incentives to overtax foreign income.

10

its own to offer such subsidies. The result is that international tax competition produces higher
average capital tax rates than in the absence of competition.
What is the likely impact of tax competition on tax rates and government revenues? In a
simple setting of symmetric countries, no special considerations or distortions, no foreign
ownership, and governments that must finance all of their expenditures with capital income
taxation, Bucovetsky and Wilson (1991) confirm that international competition reduces
government revenue and expenditures below efficient levels that would be chosen in the absence
of competition. Oates and Schwab (1988) note that this conclusion depends critically on the
assumption that governments do not have access to revenue sources other than capital income
taxes, since the availability of nondistortionary alternatives eliminates any impact of capital taxes
on government spending levels. Since governments rely on many revenue sources other than
capital income taxes, since foreign ownership is common, countries differ in size, and tax
policies are often used to correct economic distortions that cannot be more easily addressed some
other way, it is possible for greater international economic mobility not to depress total
government revenues.
Governments unable to raise significant amounts of revenue by taxing mobile business
income may be able to use other taxes, but the revenue potentials of some alternatives to
business taxes are to a lesser degree also limited by international considerations. In the case of
personal income taxes, the ability to use international financial transactions may facilitate tax
avoidance by high income taxpayers, and international mobility of individuals and their earnings
increases the mobility of the personal income tax base. 11 Furthermore, downward pressure on
business tax rates created by international competition is likely to exert downward pressure on
top personal income tax rates also, due to the ability of taxpayers to select the forms of business
organization. Top personal income tax rates that greatly exceed top corporate income tax rates
create incentives for individuals to create corporations financed with personal investments that
effectively convert personal income into corporate income, thereby undermining the revenue
potential of high personal tax rates and in the process inefficiently directing their investments

11

See, for example, Gordon and Nielsen (1997), who note that individuals have greater international tax avoidance
opportunities under income taxation than under value-added taxation, and who use Danish data to estimate the
magnitude of the difference.

11

(Gordon and Mackie-Mason, 1995). In response to this possibility, many governments are loath
to introduce significant distinctions between top personal and business tax rates.
Taxing personal income entails taxing the returns to capital, which in turn reduces
incentives to save and invest. The modern theory of capital accumulation notes that the
imposition of capital income taxes creates inefficiencies by introducing growing tax wedges
between consumption early in life and consumption many years later. 12 The inefficiencies
associated with taxing capital income are in no way mitigated, and are quite possibly increased,
by the availability of international capital markets that make the supply of capital investment
opportunities close to perfectly elastic. 13 Consequently greater access to world capital markets
increases the efficiency costs associated with income taxation.
4.

World patterns
The United States has a smaller government than many of its peer nations in the OECD,

and the composition of U.S. tax revenues likewise differs significantly from those of other
countries. Table 3 presents OECD data on government finances of OECD countries in 2004. In
that year U.S. tax revenues were 25.5 percent of GDP, significantly lower than the OECD
average of 35.9 percent and the European Union average of 39.7 percent. Personal income taxes
accounted for 34.7 percent of U.S. tax receipts, significantly higher than the OECD average of
24.6 percent. The United States raised 8.7 percent of its total tax receipts from corporate income
taxes, a shade lower than the OECD average of 9.6 percent, but raised only 18.3 percent of total
tax revenue from taxes on goods and services, compared with 32.3 percent for OECD countries
as a whole.
A major reason that the United States relies so much less than other countries do on
taxing goods and services is that, alone among OECD nations, the United States does not have a
value-added tax, which is a sophisticated form of a sales tax. For most of the world the major
tax event of the late twentieth century is the widespread adoption of value-added taxes. Whereas
by 1966 only two countries had introduced value-added taxes, by 1985, 35 countries had done
so, and in 2004, 134 countries collected significant tax revenue with value-added taxes. Every
12
13

See, for example, Chamley (1986) and the discussion in Auerbach and Hines (2002).
See the discussion in Correia (1996).

12

OECD country other than the United States taxes value-added, at rates that average 17.7 percent,
and that range from Denmark, Hungary, and Sweden at the high end imposing 25 percent valueadded tax rates, and Japan, Canada, and Switzerland at the low end all using value-added tax
rates in the 5.0 – 7.5 percent range.
Table 4 presents information on top personal and corporate tax rates among OECD
countries in 2004. The U.S. top personal tax rate of 41.4 percent is almost identical to the OECD
average of 41.3 percent, though the U.S. corporate tax rate of 39.3 percent is the highest among
OECD countries, significantly exceeding the OECD average of 29.8 percent. By the OECD’s
calculations, the U.S. tax burden on an average production worker reduces disposable income to
76.6 percent of take-home pay for single individuals and 95.5 percent of income for families
with two children, in both cases representing smaller tax burdens than the OECD average.
4.1

Income taxes
The United States is typical among large countries in relying heavily on personal income

taxes and corporate income taxes to finance government expenditures. Figure 1 presents
information from the IMF Government Finance Statistics on fractions of total national tax
revenue accounted for by the sum of personal income taxes and corporate income taxes. The top
panel of Figure 1 presents two loci: the triangles represent averages for the quarter of the sample
of countries with the largest populations, whereas the diamonds represent averages for the
quarter of the sample of countries with the smallest populations. This is an unbalanced panel,
since country coverage in the IMF data varies a bit from year to year; and to a lesser degree,
differential population growth rates change the identities of the largest and smallest countries
over time.
It is clear from the bottom panel of Figure 1 that large countries rely most heavily on
income taxes. In a typical early year, such as 1972, the average large country drew 41.6 percent
of its total tax revenue from personal and corporate income taxes, whereas the comparable figure
for the average small country was 34.5 percent. These differences have not narrowed over time:
by 2003, income taxes accounted for 43.9 percent of tax revenue in large countries, and only
27.5 percent of revenue in small countries.

13

One of the difficulties of interpreting the information in the top panel of Figure 1 is that
the composition of large and small countries in the sample changes over time as populations
change and IMF data availability fluctuates. The bottom panel of Figure 1 presents the same
information for a balanced panel of countries between 1973 and 2001, a span of time over which
the IMF data are most plentiful. Countries in this sample are assigned to the top size quartile and
bottom size quartile based on their 1973 populations. As is evident from the figure, differences
in the extent to which small and large countries rely on personal income taxes have increased
over time. In 1973 the larger countries in this sample raised an average of 41.5 percent of their
tax revenue from personal and corporate income taxes, whereas smaller countries raised only
31.2 percent of their tax revenue from income taxes. By 2001, larger countries relied on
personal and corporate income taxes for 48.9 percent of their tax revenues, and smaller countries
relied on income taxes for 29.9 percent.
The reason to distinguish countries by size is that economic openness is commonly
thought to be a function of country size: there are good reasons to believe that large countries
have internal markets that are larger as fractions of their total markets than is the case for smaller
countries. The IMF evidence is consistent with this interpretation, as the standard measure of
economic openness (the ratio of a country’s exports plus imports divided by its GDP) is
negatively correlated with country size. Appendix Table 1 presents annual cross-sectional
correlations between country sizes (as measured by log population) and the standard measure of
economic openness; between 1972 and 2006, this correlation varies between -0.32 and -0.22, and
is always statistically significant.
It is possible to compare the tax policies of countries with differing degrees of openness,
though one of the difficulties of such a comparison is that import and export performance is
arguably affected by a country’s tax policies, and therefore not entirely appropriate as an
independent source of variation. It is nevertheless instructive to consider such a comparison, as
presented in Figure 2. The evidence in the top panel of Figure 2 is that since the early 1980s
countries with less open economies (as measured by ratios of exports plus imports to GDP) have
relied more heavily on income taxes than do countries with more open economies. This
difference is more pronounced in the balanced panel comparison presented in the bottom panel

14

of Figure 2, where if anything the difference between reliance on income taxes by countries with
open and closed economies has if anything has widened over time.
The IMF data distinguish income tax revenues by personal and corporate taxes, though
with spotty coverage and some uncertainty over which revenues are allocated to each category.
As a result, any analysis of corporate or personal income taxes in isolation must be treated with
some caution. The top panel of Figure 3 presents information on differences in the extent to
which a balanced panel of large and small countries rely on corporate tax revenue over the 19731999 period for which data are most plentiful; this evidence illustrates the persistent pattern that
smaller countries collect significantly less corporate tax revenue as fractions of total taxes. The
bottom panel of Figure 3 presents similar information for open and closed economies over the
1975-1998 period, with less open economies relying to greater degrees on corporate tax sources.
Table 5 presents evidence of the impact of country size and affluence on the extent to
which countries rely on personal and corporate income taxes. The table presents six crosssectional regressions, two for 1973, two for 1985, and two for 1999; the dates were chosen with
the goals of covering a wide range of years and also maintaining sizeable country coverage for
the regressions. The regression in column one suggests that larger and more affluent countries
may have relied more heavily than other countries on personal and corporate income taxes in
1973, though the estimated coefficients are not statistically significant. In the regression for
1985 presented in column three country sizes and levels of affluence have more statistical power
in explaining the use of income taxes. The 0.019 coefficient implies that doubling a country’s
population is associated with a 1.9 percent higher ratio of income taxes to total tax collections,
and the 0.053 coefficient implies that wealthier countries rely more heavily on income taxes.
The regressions reported in columns 5 and 6 of Table 5 indicate that the effect of country
size became stronger by 1999. The 0.051 coefficient in column 5 of Table 5 is very similar to
the corresponding 0.053 coefficient in column 3, but the statistically significant 0.042 coefficient
in column 5 indicates that doubling a country’s population is associated with a 4.2 percent higher
ratio of income taxes to total taxes, corresponding to roughly a ten percent greater reliance on
income taxes. The regression reported in column six reveals that the effects of country size and
affluence are concentrated in their interaction: the 0.015 coefficient on the interaction term is

15

large and statistically significant, whereas the estimated coefficients on the uninteracted
population and per capita income variables are negative.
It is possible to use the panel nature of the data to identify the impact of changes in
population and income levels on the use of personal and corporate income taxes. The panel
estimates include country and year fixed effects, which absorb the impact of persistent
differences between countries and common effects of changes over time. In estimating these
relationships in a panel framework it is necessary to normalize for the persistent increases in
population and income levels that characterize the experience of most countries between 1972
and 2006. In the panel regressions that follow, the log income, log population, and interaction of
log income and log population variables are normalized by dividing them by annual means of
these variables, as a result of which the means of the regression variables are (by construction)
one in each year (and for the sample as a whole).
Table 6 presents panel estimates of the determinants of personal and corporate income
tax collections as a fraction of total taxes. These regressions include year and country fixed
effects, and represent an unbalanced panel, in that not every country is included every year. 14 At
a first look the evidence in the first column of Table 6 gives a rather different impression than the
cross sectional regressions in Table 5. As in the cross sectional regressions, higher income levels
are associated with greater use of personal income taxes, the 0.257 coefficient in column one
implying that doubling a country’s income level is associated with a 25.7 percent higher ratio of
personal taxes to total taxes. The striking -2.985 coefficient in the same column, however,
implies that high levels of national population growth are associated with reduced use of
personal income taxes. Introduction of a variable capturing the interaction of country size and
affluence in the regression reported in column 2 changes these results rather little.
One question raised by these regression results is the extent to which the effects of
income and population may change over the 1972-2006 time period. The regression reported in
column three introduces additional variables that interact starting (1972) population and income
levels with time, where time is a variable taking the value one in 1972 and 35 in 2006.
Introduction of these time interaction variables somewhat enhances the estimated size of income

16

effects, as reflected in the 0.418 coefficient in column 3. The 0.011 coefficient on the interaction
of time and normalized income indicates that countries that were more affluent in 1972 tended to
increase their use of income taxes over the sample period compared to other countries.
Introducing time interactions has a more striking effect on estimated population effects.
The estimated coefficient on normalized population is small and insignificant in the regression
reported in column three, whereas the 0.021 coefficient on the interaction of time and initial
population indicates that countries with small populations in 1972 relied to declining degrees on
income taxes over time. Introducing interactions between population and income in the
regression reported in column four reveals that wealthy large countries made greater use of
income taxes over time, as reflected in the estimated 0.052 coefficient.
4.2

Expenditure taxes
Figure 4 presents ratios of expenditure taxes – the sum of indirect taxes on goods and

services and international trade taxes (chiefly tariffs) – to total tax revenue. It is evident from
both the unbalanced and balanced panels displayed in Figure 4 that small countries finance much
more of their governments through expenditure taxes than do large countries. The information in
the lower panel of Figure 4 suggests that differences related to country sizes have not fallen over
time, but instead remain quite substantial. 15
Figure 5 compares the use of expenditure taxes by countries with more and less open
economies. The evidence presented in the top panel of Figure 5 suggests that more open
economies have relied relatively heavily on expenditure taxes since the early 1980s, though this
was not true prior to that. Evidence from the balanced panel of countries displayed in the bottom
panel of Figure 5, however, indicates that more open economies have consistently used
expenditure taxes to greater degrees than less open economies. 16

14

Results for a balanced panel of data covering a smaller number of countries for 1973-1999 are very similar to
those reported for the larger unbalanced panel.
15
The expenditure tax patterns displayed in Figure 4, and the subsequent regressions, are more than simply the
mirror images of the income tax evidence, since countries have access to many taxes other than income and
expenditure taxes, including property taxes, estate and inheritance taxes, stamp duties, payroll taxes, and others.
16
This evidence in Figure 5 must be interpreted with caution, since expenditure taxes include trade taxes that
themselves are likely to influence economic openness.

17

Table 7 presents evidence that country size and per capita income are consistently
associated with smaller ratios of expenditure taxes to total tax revenues. The -0.041 coefficient
in column 1 implies that doubling a country’s population in 1973 is associated with 4.1 percent
smaller ratio of expenditure taxes to total tax revenue; and the -0.048 coefficient similarly
implies that doubling a country’s per capita income is associated with a 4.8 percent smaller ratio
of expenditure taxes to total tax revenue. These effects persist in the regressions for 1985 and
1999, presented in columns 3-6 of Table 4, indicating that expenditure taxes are most heavily
used by small and poor countries.
The panel evidence, reported in Table 8, is quite consistent with the cross sectional
evidence appearing in Table 7. The -0.442 coefficient reported in column one implies that
growing income levels are associated with reduced reliance on expenditure taxes, and the -1.435
coefficient indicates that population growth is likewise associated with less use of expenditure
taxes. Inclusion of an interaction between population and income in the regression reported in
column two changes these results very little, though the estimated income effect becomes
statistically insignificant. And adding interactions between time and initial income and
population levels in the regressions reported in columns 3 and 4 again does little to change the
implications of the regression reported in column 1, that countries whose populations and income
levels grow smaller make greater relative use of expenditure taxes.
5.

Implications
The international evidence indicates that governments of countries with smaller and more

open economies rely less on personal and corporate income taxes, and more on expenditure and
trade taxes, than do other governments. Doubtless this reflects many aspects of their economic
and political situations, including that properly designed expenditure-type taxes (though typically
not trade taxes) can create fewer economic distortions than many income taxes.
The United States currently taxes personal and corporate income at high rates compared
to other countries, particularly given the relatively small size of the U.S. public sector. As the
world economy becomes more integrated, the cost of this type of income taxation will grow
relative to the cost of expenditure tax alternatives. There has been consistent U.S. resistance to
the prospect of introducing extensive expenditure taxation of the type embodied in value-added

18

taxes or reform of the personal income tax that would give it explicit expenditure tax features.
One of the political obstacles that a value-added tax or any other broad based consumption tax
must overcome in the United States is the concern, in some circles, that such taxes are too
efficient at raising revenue, that they too easily accommodate big government. While there is
little in the way of econometric support for the notion that the adoption of a value-added tax
encourages government growth (see, e.g., Metcalf, 1995), it is noteworthy that Michigan, the
only state in the country to use a value-added tax instead of a corporate income tax, taxed
businesses more heavily than did any other state during in the years when its value-added tax
was in place (Hines, 2003). In an era in which governments face growing demands for their
services, and in which other sources of tax revenue confront growing challenges and are
increasingly inefficient, it may not be surprising that governments all over the world have come
to rely more heavily on expenditure taxes to meet their revenue needs.
Distributional issues present some of the greatest challenges of globalization, since
growing international trade and investment affect income distributions directly by changing
relative prices and indirectly by affecting the range of feasible government policies. In practice
many expenditure taxes are considerably less progressive than income tax alternatives, so
movement away from income taxation and in the direction of greater expenditure taxation is
typically associated with less equal after-tax distributions of income. Governments that are
concerned about growing income inequality and that feel pressured to move their tax systems
more strongly in the direction of expenditure taxation therefore can be expected to look for
progressive alternatives to standard policy choices. Such alternatives may include progressive
forms of expenditure taxation and expenditure policies, such as education and training programs,
that support income creation by less affluent members of the population.
The fiscal challenges facing governments in the era of globalization are unlikely to be
addressed with single answers such as expanded education programs, but instead strategies that
include broad ranges of government policy initiatives. International agreements have the
potential to play significant roles in these strategies. It is already the case that governments
cooperate in international settings such as the World Trade Organization to promote international
trade and investment, and bilateral and multilateral tax agreements and initiatives serve the
function of facilitating tax enforcement and avoidance of double taxation of international

19

income. Doubtless governments will come to rely more heavily on international agreements in
the years to come, but it remains to be seen whether they will accelerate or offset the recent trend
in the direction of expenditure taxation.

20

References
Altshuler, Rosanne and Harry Grubert, Taxpayer responses to competitive tax policies and tax
policy responses to competitive taxpayers: Recent evidence, Tax Notes International, 28
June 2004, 34 (13), 1349-1362.
Altshuler, Rosanne, Harry Grubert, and T. Scott Newlon, Has U.S. investment abroad become
more sensitive to tax rates?, in James R. Hines Jr., ed. International taxation and
multinational activity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001), 9-32.
Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. Hines Jr., Taxation and economic efficiency, in Alan J.
Auerbach and Martin Feldstein eds., Handbook of public economics, volume 3
(Amsterdam: North-Holland, 2002), 1347-1421.
Avi-Yonah, Reuven, Globalization, tax competition and the fiscal crisis of the welfare state,
Harvard Law Review, May 2000, 113 (7), 1573-1676.
Bartelsman, Eric J. and Roel M.W.J. Beetsma, Why pay more? Corporate tax avoidance through
transfer pricing in OECD countries, Journal of Public Economics, 2003, 87, 2225-2252.
Bucovetsky, Sam, Asymmetric tax competition, Journal of Urban Economics, September 1991,
30 (2), 167-181.
Bucovetsky, Sam and John D. Wilson, Tax competition with two instruments, Regional Science
and Urban Economics, 1991, 21, 333-350.
Chamley, Christophe, Optimal taxation of capital income in general equilibrium with infinite
lives, Econometrica, May 1986, 54 (3), 607-622.
Clausing, Kimberly A., The impact of transfer pricing on intrafirm trade, in James R. Hines Jr.,
ed. International taxation and multinational activity (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2001), 173-194.
Clausing, Kimberly A., Tax-motivated transfer pricing and U.S. intrafirm trade prices, Journal of
Public Economics, 2003, 87, 2207-2223.
Correia, Isabel H., Dynamic optimal taxation in small open economies, Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control, April 1996, 20 (4), 691-708.
DePater, James A. and Gordon M. Myers, Strategic capital tax competition: A pecuniary
externality and a corrective device, Journal of Urban Economics, July 1994, 36 (1), 6678.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., Repatriation taxes and dividend
distortions, National Tax Journal, September 2001, 54 (4), 829-851.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., Chains of ownership, tax competition,
and the location decisions of multinational firms, in Heinz Herrmann and Robert Lipsey,
eds. Foreign direct investment in the real and financial sector of industrial countries
(Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2003), 61-98.

21

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr., A multinational perspective on capital
structure choice and internal capital markets, Journal of Finance, December 2004, 59 (6),
2451-2487.
Devereux, Michael P., The impact of taxation on the location of capital, firms and profit: A
survey of empirical evidence, mimeograph, University of Warwick, April 2006.
Diamond, Peter A. and James Mirrlees, Optimal taxation and public production, I: Production
efficiency; II: Tax rules, American Economic Review, March and June 1971, 61 (1, 2), 827, 261-278.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, Global production sharing and rising inequality: A
survey of trade and wages, in E. Kwan Choi and James Harrington eds., Handbook of
international trade, volume 1 (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 2004), 146-185.
Gordon, Roger H., Taxation of investment and savings in a world economy, American Economic
Review, December 1986, 76 (5), 1086-1102.
Gordon, Roger H. and James R. Hines Jr., International taxation, in Alan J. Auerbach and Martin
Feldstein, eds. Handbook of public economics, volume 4 (Amsterdam: North-Holland,
2002), 1395-1995.
Gordon, Roger H. and Jeffrey K. Mackie-Mason, Why is there corporate taxation in a small open
economy? The role of transfer pricing and income shifting, in Martin Feldstein, James R.
Hines Jr. and R. Glenn Hubbard eds., The effects of taxation on multinational
corporations (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995).
Gordon, Roger H. and Soren Bo Nielsen, Tax evasion in an open economy: Value-added vs.
income taxation, Journal of Public Economics, November 1997, 66 (2), 173-197.
Graetz, Michael J., 100 million unnecessary returns: A fresh start for the U.S. tax system, Yale
Law Journal, November 2002, 112 (2), 261-310.
Grubert, Harry, Taxes and the division of foreign operating income among royalties, interest,
dividends and retained earnings, Journal of Public Economics, May 1998, 68 (2), 269290.
Grubert, Harry and John Mutti, Taxes, tariffs and transfer pricing in multinational corporate
decision making, Review of Economics and Statistics, May 1991, 73 (2), 285-293.
Hines, James R., Jr., Tax policy and the activities of multinational corporations, in Alan J.
Auerbach, ed. Fiscal policy: Lessons from economic research (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1997), 401-445.
Hines, James R., Jr., Lessons from behavioral responses to international taxation, National Tax
Journal, June 1999, 52 (2), 305-322.
Hines, James R., Jr., Michigan’s flirtation with the Single Business Tax, in Charles L. Ballard et
al. eds, Michigan at the millennium (East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press,
2003), 603-628.

22

Hines, James R., Jr., Will social welfare expenditures survive tax competition? Oxford Review
of Economic Policy, Fall 2006, 22 (3), 330-348.
Hines, James R., Jr., Corporate taxation and international competition, in Alan J. Auerbach,
James R. Hines Jr. and Joel Slemrod eds., Taxing corporate income in the 21st century
(Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 268-295.
Hines, James R., Jr. and R. Glenn Hubbard, Coming home to America: Dividend repatriations by
U.S. multinationals, in Assaf Razin and Joel Slemrod, eds. Taxation in the global
economy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990), 161-200.
Hines, James R., Jr., and Eric M. Rice, Fiscal paradise: Foreign tax havens and American
business, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1994, 109 (1), 149-182.
Huizinga, Harry, Luc Laeven, and Gaetan Nicodeme, Capital structure and international debt
shifting in Europe, mimeograph, Tilburg University, April 2006.
Huizinga, Harry and Soren Bo Nielsen, Capital income and profit taxation with foreign
ownership of firms, Journal of International Economics, February 1997, 42 (1-2), 149165.
Hummels. David, Transportation costs and international trade in the second era of globalization,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2007, 21 (3), 131-154.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., Value-added taxation: A tax whose time has come? Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Winter 1995, 9 (1), 121-140.
Mintz, Jack M. and Henri Tulkens, Optimality properties of alternative systems of taxation of
foreign capital income, Journal of Public Economics, June 1996, 60 (3), 373-399.
Oates, Wallace E and Robert M. Schwab, Economic competition among jurisdictions: Efficiency
enhancing or distortion inducing? Journal of Public Economics, April 1988, 35 (3), 333354.
Richter, Wolfram and Dietmar Wellisch, The provision of local public goods and factors in the
presence of firm and household mobility, Journal of Public Economics, April 1996, 60
(1), 73-93.
Rodrik, Dani, Why do more open economies have bigger governments? Journal of Political
Economy, October 1998, 106 (5), 997-1032.
Sah, Raaj Kumar, How much redistribution is possible through commodity taxation? Journal of
Public Economics, February 1983, 20 (1), 89-101.

23

Figure 1: Income Taxes in Small and Large Countries

Income taxes trend, unbalanced panel
Income taxes %
(1972‐2003)
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

Year

0%
1972

1977

1982

1987

Bottom 1/4 by population

Income taxes %

1992

1997

2002

Top 1/4 by population

Income taxes trend, balanced panel
(1973‐2001)

60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

Year

0%
1973

1978

1983

1988

Bottom 1/4 by population

1993

1998

Top 1/4 by population

Note: the two panels of Figure 1 depict the sum of personal and corporate income taxes as
fractions of total national tax revenue for samples of small and large countries.

24

Figure 2: Income Taxes in Countries with Open and Closed Economies

Income taxes trend, unbalanced panel
Income taxes %
(1972‐2003)
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%

Year

10%
1972

1977

1982

1987

Bottom 1/4 by openness

Income taxes %

1992

1997

2002

Top 1/4 by openness

Income taxes trend, balanced panel
(1973‐2001)

50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%

Year

10%
1973

1978

1983

1988

Bottom 1/4 by openness

1993

1998

Top 1/4 by openness

Note:

25

Figure 3: Corporate Income Taxes in Countries with Small and Open Economies

Corporate
income tax %
25%

Corporate income tax trend, balanced panel
(1973‐1999)

20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1973

1978

1983

1988

Bottom 1/4 by population

Corporate
income tax %

1993

1998

Year

Top 1/4 by population

Corporate income tax trend, balanced panel
(1975‐1998)

20%
18%
16%
14%
12%
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%

Year
1975

1980

1985

Bottom 1/4 by openness

1990

1995

Top 1/4 by openness

Note:

26

Figure 4: Expenditure taxes in Small and Large Countries

Spending taxes
%

Spending taxes trend, unbalanced panel
(1972‐2003)

80%
70%
60%
50%
40%

Year

30%
1972

1977

1982

1987

Bottom 1/4 by population

Spending taxes
%

1992

1997

2002

Top 1/4 by population

Spending taxes trend, balanced panel
(1973‐2001)

70%
65%
60%
55%
50%
45%
40%
35%

Year

30%
1973

1978

1983

1988

Bottom 1/4 by population

1993

1998

Top 1/4 by population

27

Figure 5: Expenditure taxes in Countries with Open and Closed Economies

Spending taxes
%

Spending taxes trend, unbalanced panel
(1972‐2003)

75%
70%
65%
60%
55%
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%

Year
1972

1977

1982

1987

1992

Bottom 1/4 by openness

Spending taxes
%

1997

2002

Top 1/4 by openness

Spending taxes trend, balanced panel
(1973‐2001)

70%
65%
60%
55%
50%
45%
40%
35%

Year

30%
1973

1978

1983

1988

Bottom 1/4 by openness

1993

1998

Top 1/4 by openness

28

Table 1

Source: Congressional Budget Office.
Note: the income concept is comprehensive family income, that includes an adjustment for
family size.

29

Table 2

30

Table 3.

2004
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovak
Republic
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United
Kingdom
United States
EU Average
OECD Average

Total tax
receipts as %
of GDP
31.2
42.6
45.0
33.5
38.4
48.8
44.2
43.4
34.7
35.0
38.1
38.7
30.1
41.1
26.4
24.6
37.8
19.0
37.5
35.6
44.0
34.4
34.5

% of total tax receipts from
Taxes on
Personal
Corporate
Goods and
Income Tax
Income Tax
Services
40.2
18.2
28.5
22.7
5.4
28.2
30.6
8.0
25.0
35.1
10.3
25.9
12.7
12.4
31.2
50.7
6.5
32.7
30.5
8.1
31.7
17.0
6.3
25.6
22.8
4.5
29.2
13.8
9.4
37.1
17.8
5.8
40.8
36.9
3.3
41.1
27.4
11.9
37.8
25.4
6.9
26.4
17.8
14.2
20.0
13.6
14.3
36.3
17.8
15.3
30.4
24.6
.
55.5
16.4
8.2
32.0
41.0
15.5
33.8
23.5
22.6
29.7
12.0
5.8
36.0
15.9
8.3
38.6

30.3
34.8
50.4
29.2
31.3

9.3
17.7
31.4
34.8
14.9

8.1
9.8
6.3
8.6
7.3

39.8
28.0
25.8
23.7
47.7

36.0
25.5
39.7
35.9

28.7
34.7
24.6
24.6

8.1
8.7
8.2
9.6

32.0
18.3
30.7
32.3

. Not available or not applicable.
31

Table 4.

2004
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czech Republic
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Korea
Luxembourg
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Slovak
Republic
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United
Kingdom
United States
EU Average
OECD Average

Highest rates of income taxes
Personal
Corporate
income tax
income tax
(%)
(%)
48.5
30.0
42.9
34.0
45.1
34.0
46.4
36.1
28.0
28.0
55.0
30.0
50.3
29.0
36.7
35.4
47.5
38.9
33.6
35.0
56.0
16.0
42.0
18.0
42.0
12.5
41.4
33.0
47.2
39.5
36.6
29.7
33.9
30.4
26.4
33.0
52.0
34.5
39.0
33.0
47.5
28.0
26.2
19.0
35.6
27.5

Disposable income of average
production worker (% of gross
pay)
Single person

Married with
two children

76.3
67.0
58.1
76.1
76.2
59.1
68.9
71.2
56.5
77.5
65.6
74.7
83.1
72.7
81.8
90.1
73.5
94.8
67.5
80.0
69.9
68.2
78.2

89.9
82.1
78.1
87.8
95.9
71.0
76.9
83.0
76.7
77.0
80.3
94.6
102.5
85.7
84.9
91.3
99.6
94.8
77.7
82.0
79.2
70.1
89.8

16.5
45.0
56.5
37.8
40.6

19.0
35.0
28.0
24.1
33.0

77.8
80.0
68.5
78.4
69.5

97.2
87.6
75.9
90.6
69.5

40.0
41.4
43.8
41.3

30.0
39.3
31.1
29.8

73.4
76.6
70.3
73.7

80.5
95.5
82.9
84.9

32

Table 5
Dependent Variable: fraction total tax revenue from income taxes,
personal and corporate

ln(population)
ln(per capita GDP)

1973

R‐squared

1999

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.025

0.049

0.019

‐0.063

0.042

‐0.081

(0.015)

(0.090)

(0.010)

(0.059)

0.009

(0.053)

0.016

0.069

0.053

‐0.117

0.051

‐0.197

(0.016)

(0.196)

(0.015)

(0.122)

0.011

(0.106)

ln(pop)*ln(p.c. GDP)
N

1985

‐0.003

0.011

0.015

(0.012)

(0.008)

(0.007)

64

64

77

77

71

71

0.0531

0.0542

0.1787

0.2003

0.3492

0.3984

33

Table 6
Fraction from Income Taxes

normalized ln (population)
normalized ln (GDP)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

‐2.985

‐2.789

‐0.006

2.996

(0.358)

(0.530)

(0.457)

(0.753)

0.257

0.447

0.418

2.976

(0.043)

(0.383)

(0.044)

(0.529)

Interaction of normalized population and GDP

‐0.183

‐2.447

(0.366)

(0.507)

normalized ln (population)*time
normalized ln (GDP)*time

0.021

‐0.031

(0.002)

(0.012)

0.011

‐0.043

(0.001)

(0.012)

Interaction of normalized population and GDP*time

0.052
(0.011)

N

2,353

2,353

1,891

1,891

R‐squared

0.8063

0.8063

0.8201

0.8243

Note: The dependent variable is the fraction of total tax
collections from income taxes. Population and income
variables are normalized to have unit means in each year.
The data are an unbalanced panel covering 1972‐2006, and
the regressions include year and country dummy variables
(not reported). The time variable takes the value 1 in 1972
and 35 in 2006.

34

Table 7
Dependent Variable: fraction total tax from expenditure taxes
(sum of goods and trade taxes)

ln(pop)
ln(p.c. GDP)

1973

R‐squared

1999

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

‐0.041

0.012

‐0.033

0.072

‐0.044

0.022

(0.013)

(0.075)

(0.010)

(0.058)

(0.010)

(0.058)

‐0.048

0.069

‐0.098

0.121

‐0.054

0.078

(0.014)

(0.164)

(0.015)

(0.120)

(0.012)

(0.116)

ln(pop)*ln(p.c. GDP)
N

1985

‐0.007

‐0.014

‐0.008

(0.010)

(0.007)

(0.007)

64

64

77

77

70

70

0.2627

0.2690

0.4221

0.4477

0.3500

0.3627

35

Table 8
Fraction from Expenditure Taxes

normalized ln (population)
normalized ln (GDP)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

‐1.435

‐1.584

‐1.210

‐2.533

(0.382)

(0.565)

(0.509)

(0.847)

‐0.442

‐0.587

‐0.397

‐1.552

(0.046)

(0.407)

(0.049)

(0.593)

Interaction of normalized population and GDP

0.139

1.110

(0.389)

(0.568)

normalized ln (population)*time
normalized ln (GDP)*time

‐0.008

‐0.005

(0.002)

(0.013)

‐0.0004

0.003

(0.001)

0.013

Interaction of normalized population and GDP*time

‐0.003
(0.013)

N

2,345

2,345

1,883

1,883

R‐squared

0.8109

0.8109

0.8045

0.8049

Note: The dependent variable is the fraction of total tax
collections from expenditure taxes. Population and income
variables are normalized to have unit means in each year.
The data are an unbalanced panel covering 1972‐2006, and
the regressions include year and country dummy variables
(not reported). The time variable takes the value 1 in 1972
and 35 in 2006.

36

Apppendix Table 1: Annual correlations between country size and measured openness.

Year
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

N
96
100
102
108
110
111
114
113
119
119
120
121
122
124
125
126
127
127
130
134
136
143
145
147
148
151
149
147
147
146
145
142
139
130
106

Correlation
(r)
‐0.3221
‐0.3231
‐0.3254
‐0.3127
‐0.3002
‐0.3113
‐0.3274
‐0.3247
‐0.3098
‐0.3049
‐0.2998
‐0.2895
‐0.2881
‐0.3126
‐0.3010
‐0.2994
‐0.2877
‐0.2858
‐0.2817
‐0.2657
‐0.2525
‐0.2786
‐0.2982
‐0.2910
‐0.2804
‐0.2449
‐0.2369
‐0.2552
‐0.2563
‐0.2593
‐0.2545
‐0.2558
‐0.2452
‐0.2380
‐0.2161

p‐
value
0.0014
0.0010
0.0008
0.0010
0.0014
0.0009
0.0004
0.0005
0.0006
0.0007
0.0009
0.0013
0.0013
0.0004
0.0006
0.0007
0.0010
0.0011
0.0012
0.0019
0.0030
0.0008
0.0003
0.0003
0.0006
0.0024
0.0036
0.0018
0.0017
0.0016
0.0020
0.0021
0.0036
0.0064
0.0261

37

Appendix Table 2
Means and Standard Deviations for Cross‐Sectional Regressions in Table 5
Specification(s)

Variable

Mean

Median

Standard
Deviation

N

(1), (2)

ln(pop)

15.650

15.712

1.697

64

(1), (2)

ln(p.c. GDP)

6.757

6.828

1.601

64

(2)

ln(pop)*ln(p.c. GDP)

105.67

99.67

28.20

64

(3), (4)

ln(pop)

15.573

15.807

2.078

77

(3), (4)

ln(p.c. GDP)

7.614

7.596

1.366

77

(4)

ln(pop)*ln(p.c. GDP)

118.54

117.51

26.79

77

(5), (6)

ln(pop)

16.069

15.913

1.718

71

(5), (6)

ln(p.c. GDP)

8.037

8.204

1.447

71

(6)

ln(pop)*ln(p.c. GDP)

128.82

126.17

25.78

71

38

Appendix Table 3
Means and Standard Deviations for Cross‐Sectional Regressions in Table 6
Specification(s)

Variable

Mean

Median

Standard
Deviation

N

(1), (2)

normalized ln (population)

1

1.003

0.117

2,353

(1), (2)

normalized ln (GDP)

1

1.001

0.171

2,353

(2)

Interaction of normalized population and GDP

1

0.981

0.202

2,353

(3), (4)

normalized ln (population)

1

0.999

0.109

1,891

(3), (4)

normalized ln (GDP)

1

1.002

0.172

1,891

(4)

Interaction of normalized population and GDP

1

0.974

0.197

1,891

(3), (4)

normalized ln (population)*time

15.5

14.73

9.250

1,891

(3), (4)

normalized ln (GDP)*time

15.5

14.40

9.722

1,891

(4)

Interaction of normalized population and GDP*time

15.5

14.24

9.891

1,891

39

