                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY AND WELL-BEING IN CANADA

                                         Michael Baker
                                        Jonathan Gruber
                                        Kevin S. Milligan

                                       Working Paper 14667
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14667


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2009




This research was supported by the National Institute on Aging, Grant P01-AG005842. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Michael Baker, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin S. Milligan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Retirement Income Security and Well-Being in Canada
Michael Baker, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin S. Milligan
NBER Working Paper No. 14667
January 2009
JEL No. H55,J14,J26

                                                ABSTRACT

A large international literature has documented the labor market distortions associated with social
security benefits for near-retirees. In this paper, we investigate the ‘other side’ of social security programs,
seeking to document improvements in wellbeing arising from the provision of public pensions. To
the extent households adjust their savings and employment behavior to account for enhanced retirement
benefits, the positive impact of the benefits may be crowded out. We proceed by using the large variation
across birth cohorts in income security entitlements in Canada that arise from reforms to the programs
over the past 35 years. This variation allows us to explore the effects of benefits on elderly well-being
while controlling for other factors that affect well-being over time and by age. We examine measures
of income, consumption, poverty, and happiness. For income, we find large increases in income corresponding
to retirement benefit increases, suggesting little crowd out. Consumption also shows increases, although
smaller in magnitude than for income. We find larger retirement benefits diminish income poverty
rates, but have no discernable impact on consumption poverty measures. This could indicate smoothing
of consumption through savings or other mechanisms. Finally, our limited happiness measures show
no definitive effect.


Michael Baker                                          Kevin S. Milligan
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
University of Toronto                                  University of British Columbia
150 St. George Street                                  #997-1873 East Mall
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G7 CANADA                        Vancouver, B.C.
and NBER                                               CANADA V6T1Z1
baker@chass.utoronto.ca                                and NBER
                                                       kevin.milligan@ubc.ca
Jonathan Gruber
MIT Department of Economics
E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu
            Expenditures on income security programs for seniors in Canada are projected to

increase substantially over the next decades. For example, expenditures on the primary transfer

programs for seniors, which totaled over $23 billion in 1999/2000, are projected to rise from $25

billion in 2001 to $109 billion by 2030, or from 2.3 percent of GDP to 3.2 percent (Office of the

Superintendent of Financial Institutions 2002a). Benefit expenditures in the largest of the two

public pension plans, which totaled over $20 billion in 2000/01 are projected to rise to $74

billion in 2025 (Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions 2002b).

           While these expenditures are growing, Canada is in a better position than other developed

countries. The main earnings related pensions have moved in the direction of pre-funding and

current contribution rates are projected to be actuarially stable in the future.1 The pure pay-as-

you-go component of the system funded out of general tax revenue is relatively small. Finally,

population growth, while diminished relative to earlier decades, is still projected to be larger than

in Europe or Japan.2 Still, as the country’s population ages, stresses on the public finances may

extend to seniors’ pension benefits.

           There are a variety of solutions possible to this long-term problem. Some of them

involve reducing, in one way or another, the benefits available to retirees in Canada. For

example, the government could cut the OAS amount, change the translation of past earnings into

CPP/QPP benefits, or raise program entitlement ages. As discussed in Baker, Gruber and

Milligan (2003, 2004), these changes could have significant impacts on both retirement behavior

and program finances. For example, we find that raising the age of eligibility for retirement


1
    See Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (2002b).
2
    United Nations (2005).

                                                            1
programs in Canada would lower program expenditures by over 22%.

         While improving program finances, such a change might also have pernicious effects on

the well-being of the elderly in Canada. The income from retirement programs made up 45.5%

of the average elderly family’s gross income in Canada in 2000. If benefits from these programs

are reduced, it could lead to significant reductions in the standard of living of elderly families.

         But would it? This depends on the reaction of other sources of support to the elderly.

For example, a large literature has investigated the question of whether social security benefits

simply serve to crowd out savings by the elderly. Other sources of income support for the

elderly include their own labor supply or transfers from other family members. If these other

sources of support are increased as Social Security benefits are reduced, then there may be little

implications of benefits reductions for elderly well-being.

         In this paper, we investigate directly the “other side” of Income Security reform: the

implications for elderly well-being. We do so by using the large variation across birth cohorts in

income security entitlements in Canada that arise from reforms to the program over the past 35

years.    This variation allows us to explore the effects of benefits on elderly well-being while

controlling for other factors that affect well-being over time and by age.

         The paper proceeds as follows. In Section I, we provide a brief background on the

institutional features of the income security programs for Canadian elders. In section II, we

describe our data sources. Section III discusses our empirical strategy for using variation in

benefits across birth cohorts to identify the effect of benefits on well-being. Section IV presents

time series evidence on the role of Income Security, and Section V presents regression evidence.

Section VI concludes with the implications of our findings for Income Security policy.

                                                  2
Section I: Background on the Canadian Income Security
System
         Public pension plans for seniors in Canada fall into two groups: 1) the Old Age Security

program, and 2) the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans. The Old Age Security program, which

encompasses the Old Age Security (OAS) pension, the Guaranteed Income Supplement (GIS),

and the Allowance, are transfer programs financed out of general tax revenues. The Canada and

Quebec Pension Plans (CPP/QPP) are contributory programs that pay a benefit which is

proportional to an individual’s earnings over his/her working life.


The Current Parameters

         OAS is the older of the two programs, dating back to 1952. Its current rules, which have

been relatively stable since the 1970s, provide for a pension payable to all individuals aged 65 or

older who satisfy a residency requirement.3 In December 2005 the monthly benefit paid to

individuals who fully satisfied the residency requirement was $479.83. This benefit is clawed

back from higher income pensioners at a 15 percent rate, starting at incomes of $60,806 (2005).

Benefits are full indexed to the CPI and fully taxable under the Income Tax Act.

         Available since 1967, the GIS component of OAS is an income tested supplement that is

also payable to those aged 65 or older. The income test is applied annually based on taxable


3
 Individuals must have been a Canadian citizen or legal resident of Canada at some point before application, and
have resided in Canada for at least 10 years (if currently in Canada) or 20 years (if currently outside Canada). The
benefit is prorated for pensioners with less than 40 years of Canadian residence, unless they are “grandfathered”
under rules that apply to the persons who were over age 25 and had established attachment to Canada prior to July
1977.

                                                          3
income (as defined by the Income Tax Act, excluding any OAS pension) at the family level.

Benefits are taxed back at a 50 percent rate, expect in families where only one partner is 65 or

older, in which case the tax rate is 25 percent. There are separate monthly benefits for married

and single individuals, fully indexed to the CPI, which amounted to $371.46 and $570.27,

respectively, in December 2005. These benefits are not subject to income taxes.

           Finally, the Allowance (formerly the Spouse’s Allowance) is an income tested benefit

payable to 60-64 year old partners of individuals who are aged 65 or older. It is also available to

widow/widowers who are aged 60-64. This part of OAS was introduced in 1975. For the

partners of 65+ year olds the benefit equals the sum of an OAS pension plus a GIS at the married

rate. Benefits are reduced by 75 cents for each dollar of income to the OAS part of the benefit is

eliminated. At this point the benefit (as well as the partner’s GIS) is reduced according to

standard GIS rules. Widow/widowers receive a slightly higher benefit the benefit, but the

income test is applied equivalently. Again benefits are fully indexed and not subject to income

taxes.4

           CPP and QPP pensions, available since 1966, are financed by employer and employee

contributions. In 2005, these are (each) payable at a rate of 4.95 percent on earnings between

$3,500 and $ 41,100.00 (the Year’s Maximum Pensionable Earnings, YMPE). Pensions are

available to individuals aged 60 or older who have made contributions in at least one calendar

year in the (“contributory”) period stretching from age 18 to the year of application (or age 70).5

Benefits are actuarially adjusted for applications at different ages in the interval 60 through 70.


4
    More details on the Allowance are available in Baker (2002).
5
    For individuals who were 18 prior to 1966, the contributory period starts on January 1, 1966.

                                                            4
The adjustment is a reduction (premium) of 0.5 percent for each month the application precedes

(follows) the 65th birthday. Also, applications prior to age 65 are subject to a retirement test,

which is that the individual’s annual rate of earnings cannot exceed the maximum retirement

pension payable at age 65, for the year in which the pension is claimed.6

         The amount of benefits received is based on the individual’s “average” earnings over the

contributory period. Any months (a) receiving a disability pension, (b) spent rearing small

children,7 (c) between age 65 and the commencement of the pension8, and (d) 15 percent of the

remaining months, are excluded from the calculation.9 In each of the remaining months,

earnings are expressed as a fraction of 1/12 of the current YMPE, to a maximum of one.10 The

average of these fractions is then multiplied by the average value of the YMPE over the previous

five years (including the year of application), and then by 0.25, to arrive at the benefit level.

Benefits are fully indexed and subject to income taxes.

         Both the CPP and QPP pay survivor pensions when a contributor dies and has made

contributions for the lesser of 10 years or one third of the number of years in the contributory

period.11 For survivors under age 65, benefits are equal to a flat rate benefit plus 37.5 percent of

the earnings-related pension of the deceased spouse. Benefits are reduced if the claimant is

younger than age 45 and is not disabled and has no dependents. For survivors aged 65 and


6
   There are no restrictions on returning to work after the benefit is being paid.
7
  This is defined as months where there was a child less than 7 years of age and the worker had zero or below
average annual earnings.
8
  Periods after age 65 to age 70 can be substituted for periods prior to age 65 if this will increase their future
retirement pension.
9
  The last three of these exclusions cannot be used, however, to reduce the contributory period below 120 months
after taking into account the offset for months of disability pension receipt.
10
   Excess earnings in one month above 1/12 of the YMPE may be applied to months in the same calendar year in
which earnings are below 1/12 of the YMPE.

                                                          5
above, the pension is equal to the greater of a) 37.5 percent of the deceased’s retirement pension

plus 100 percent of the survivor’s own retirement pension, or b) 60 percent of the retirement

pension of the deceased plus 60 percent of the survivor’s own retirement pension. There is an

upper cap on total payments equal to the maximum retirement pension payable in that year.12

There are also orphan benefits payable to the children of the deceased.13

        The CPP and QPP also pay disability pensions. The benefit is equal to a flat-rate portion

plus an earnings-related portion equal to 75 percent of the applicable CPP/QPP retirement

pension, calculated with the contributory period ending at the date of disability. More

information can be found in Gruber (2000).


Program Changes over Time

        Changes to the OAS and CPP/QPP programs over time are the basis of identifying any

impact of income security benefits on well being. These changes have altered both the level of

benefits available to claimants, as well as the eligibility criteria.

        The age of eligibility for OAS pensions was changed over the period 1965 to 1970.

Initially these pensions were available starting at age 70 but starting in 1965 the age was lowered

annually in one year increments until it reached 65 in 1970. Full indexation of benefits did not

start until 1973.      Previously, adjustments to benefits were ad hoc.                Finally, the residency

requirements for benefits were changed in 1977. Originally individuals who did not fully satisfy

the requirement received no benefit, but starting in 1977 pro-rated benefits were granted for



11
  There is also a lump sum death benefit, which is generally equal to one-half of the annual CPP/QPP pension
amount up to a maximum $2,500.

                                                        6
partial fulfillment.

         The GIS was introduced in 1967. Benefits were indexed starting in 1973. There were

also one time real increases in benefits of 69 percent in 1971, 20 in 1972, 44 percent in 1979/80

and 16 percent in 1984. The introduction of the program, as well as these benefit changes, should

have heterogeneous impacts across birth cohorts. For example, older cohorts who missed out on

CPP/QPP pensions (introduced in 1966) are more reliant on GIS than younger cohorts whose

GIS is partially taxed back because of these pensions. Also, the introduction of the Allowance

in 1975 led to a dramatic temporal change in the public support available to 60-64 year olds.

This support was extended to widows aged 60-64 in 1985.

         The introduction of the CPP/QPP in 1966 had a differential impact across birth cohorts.

The parameters of the system were phased in over a ten year “transition” period. First, pensions

were initially (as of January 1967) payable starting at age 68. The minimum age was lowered in

subsequent years until it settled at age 65 in 1970. Second, pensions were prorated. The benefit

was calculated as the standard pension entitlement multiplied by the faction of the transition

period that the individual had made contributions to the plans. For example, if the benefit

application was made in January 1972 after 6 years of contributions, the standard pension

entitlement would be multiplied by 0.6, which is just the number of months of contributions (72)

divided by 120 months, the length of the transition period. This means that those born before

1900 got no pensions, those born between 1901 and 1910 got partial benefits, and those born

in/after 1911 were 65 in 1976 and so they got full benefits. The details of the phase-in were

12
   If the surviving spouse is receiving his or her own CPP disability pension, the sum of the earnings-related portion
of the two pensions cannot exceed the maximum retirement pension available in the year.
13
   More details on survivor pensions are available in Baker et al. (2004).

                                                          7
announced in 1965, so the 1901 cohort got a windfall, while later cohorts could have anticipated

the benefits they would receive.

       Starting in 1970, CPP/QPP benefits were available starting at age 65. This changed in

1984 for the QPP and 1987 for the CPP when more flexible rules were introduced. As described

above, these rules allowed application anytime between ages 60 and 70 subject to an actuarial

adjustment.

       The real value of pensions payable by the CPP/QPP changed quite dramatically over the

period 1975 and 1986. The YMPE, which is a prime determinant of benefits, was initially set to

equal average earnings. However, it was not indexed, so by the mid 1970s the value of the

YMPE had fallen to around 70% of average earnings. To rectify this situation, both the CPP and

QPP started to increase the YMPE by 12.5% per year, stopping in 1986 when the YMPE again

reached average earnings. This accounts for the large increases in the CPP/QPP benefits over the

decade from the mid 1970s to the mid 1980s.

       Finally, both the CPP and QPP initially had earnings tests on the pensions of

beneficiaries aged 65 to 69. Benefits were recovered at a rate of 50 cents for every dollar of

earnings in excess of 18 percent of the YMPE on an annual basis. An additional 50 cents was

recovered for earnings in excess of 30 percent of the YMPE. Therefore, at higher levels the tax

back was 100%. The earnings test was eliminated from the CPP in 1975. The second tier of the

test was eliminated from the QPP in 1973, while the remaining tier was dropped in 1977.

       In Figure 1 we graph the real value of the different pensions and benefits starting in 1961.

Many of the reforms and changes reviewed can be clearly seen in this picture. In particular, the

real increases in the GIS in 1971/72, 1978/79 and 1984, the indexing of the OAS pension, the

                                                8
effects of the CPP transition period and the recovery of the YMPE to the level of average wages

from 1975 to 1986.




Section II: Data Sources
       Our analysis encompasses three aspects of elderly wellbeing: incomes, consumption, and

happiness. In all cases, we use survey microdata provided by Statistics Canada. Below, we

describe the details for each of our data sources in detail. In addition, we explain exactly how we

form the wellbeing variables we use in the analysis from the raw data sources. Table 1 provides

descriptions of our data sources and the variables we form.

       There are several issues common to all of the data sets that we use. First, we use 2002

Euros for all of the analysis. We update dollar values to 2002 using the Canadian Consumer

Price Index, then translate to Euros using the average 2002 Euro-Canadian dollar exchange rate

(1.4832). Second, we scale all income and consumption data by an equivalence scale to account

for the size of the household / family. The first adult is counted as one, each subsequent adult

counts as 0.7, and each child under age 18 counts as 0.5. A third issue is the definition and

weighting of elderly households. We define an elderly household as one in which there is at

least one member age 60 or over. All other households are therefore classified as non-elderly.

Furthermore, we weight the results for the elderly households by how many members are ages 60

or over, effectively placing our results on an individual basis for the elderly.




                                                  9
Income data


         We draw our income data from two different sources. From 1971 to 1997, we have data

from the Survey of Consumer Finances. This survey reports information on the education, age,

family structure, labour market activity, and incomes of respondents. In particular for income,

the data is disaggregated to a degree that serves our purposes well. In particular, we use the

variables for after-tax income, Canada / Quebec Pension Plan income, and OAS/GIS/SPA

income to measure the actual public pension benefits received by elderly Canadians.

         The Survey of Consumer Finances is conducted using the sampling frame of the monthly

Labour Force Survey, which is a stratified random sample of Canadians with some oversampling

of smaller provinces to ensure sufficient sample size. With the survey weights, nationally

representative results can be obtained.14 The survey is available in odd years from 1971 to 1981,

then 1982, and finally on an annual basis from 1984 to 1997. The survey is available for

different family definitions and for individuals. We use the census family sample, which ranges

in size from 25,927 up to 47,840.15 Unfortunately, the household version of the survey does not

contain disaggregated government pension income, so we must use the family version.

         The Survey of Consumer Finances was replaced in the late 1990s by the Survey of

Labour and Income Dynamics. The new survey is available for 1993 to 2002 and for our

purposes is similar to the previous survey. One interesting difference is the source for income


14
   The sampling frame excluded residents of the three northern territories, those living in institutions, and inhabitants
of native reserves. These groups typically account for less than three percent of the population.
15
   A census family is comprised of parent(s) with their children, childless couples, or grandparents living with their
grandchildren. Individuals on their own who are not in a census family are classified as “non-family individuals”,
but are included in the census family sample.


                                                           10
data. For the Survey of Consumer Finances, income data was asked on a recall basis. For the

Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics, however, respondents may check a box indicating

consent to attach data directly from tax records. A high percentage of respondents take this

option (over 80 percent in 2000). We append the 1998 to 2002 data from the Survey of Labour

and Income Dynamics to the Survey of Consumer finance data for 1971 to 1997 to complete our

income data.

       We form several income variables for our analysis. The first is total income from public

pensions, which is the sum of reported CPP/QPP and OAS-GIS-SPA income. Second, we take

the reported total after-tax income for the family.      We use the mean, along with several

percentiles of this variable. We also use the mean calculated just for those who are beneath the

poverty line. Third, we form a measure of relative income poverty. For each year, we find the

median family income for non-elderly families. We set a poverty line at 40 percent of this

median, then form a dummy variable for each elderly family indicating whether it is over or

under the poverty line. Fourth, we measure absolute poverty by repeating the same exercise but

using the poverty line for 1971 in all years. Combined, these four measures will richly describe

the income patterns of elderly Canadian families over the three decades we study.


Consumption data
       The consumption data we use come from two different surveys, each conducted over a

number of years. The first survey is the Family Expenditure Survey. It was first conducted in

1969, followed irregularly by surveys in 1974, 1978, 1982, 1984, 1986, 1990, 1992, and 1996.

The sampling frame in several of the years included only residents of large cities, so we restrict

our sample in all years to residents of large cities to maintain comparability. This survey is also

                                                11
based on the Labour Force Survey sampling frame, so survey weights can potentially produce

nationally representative results. The sample size varies considerably, with between 4,569 and

15,140 observations.

       The unit of observation changed for the Family Expenditure survey in 1990. Prior to

1990, the concept used was the spending unit, defined as “a group of people living in the same

dwelling who depend on a common or pooled income for major expenses or one financially

independent individual living alone.” This is similar to a definition of an economic family, one

or more of which can live in any one dwelling. From 1990 on, the unit of observation was the

household, defined simply as those in the same dwelling unit.

       The second set of consumption data is the annual Survey of Household Spending,

available for the years 1997 through 2002. This survey has larger sample sizes than the Family

Expenditure Surveys did, with around 14 and 18 thousand households per year. We discard the

2002 survey because single years of age are not reported in the public-use version of the data.

       The key variable we extract from these surveys is the current consumption of the

household. Included in this measure is spending on goods and services throughout the year. It is

equivalent to the total expenditure of the household less personal taxes, gifts and donations, and

life insurance. We use the mean, as well as several percentiles of this variable. In addition to the

current consumption variable, we construct two other measures of elderly wellbeing similar to

those we made for income. There is a relative consumption poverty measure constructed as

being under 40 percent of the median non-elderly household’s consumption level in each year,

and an absolute measure based on the median non-elderly household in 1969.



                                                12
Happiness data


       To undertake our analysis of the happiness of elderly Canadian households, we put

together several waves of the General Social Survey. The sample is formed using a random digit

dialing methodology, with supplemental samples drawn from the Labour Force Survey sampling

frame in some years.      Sample sizes are around ten thousand observations per year.        The

happiness question that we require is asked in the years 1985, 1986, 1989-1991, 1996, and 1998.

Unfortunately, age is only reported in 5-year ranges, so we cannot identify the exact year of age

of the respondents. As the happiness question is individually based, we use the individual as the

unit of observation for the happiness data.

       The exact wording of the question is “presently, would you describe yourself as . . .”

Possible responses are very happy, somewhat happy, somewhat unhappy, and very unhappy.

We form two variables to use for our analysis. First is an indicator for having responded “very

happy.” The second is an indicator for having responded either somewhat or very unhappy.




Section III: Empirical Strategy

       For the regression analysis that forms the core of this paper, we want to regress well-

being outcomes on retirement income. Because observed retirement income may be determined

by the same factors that determine the outcomes we wish to study, we create simulated benefits

that are exogenous to the outcomes. We do this by attempting to capture legislative variation in

the system over time. In general, benefits are formed from two components: laws and the

                                               13
characteristics of recipients. The laws come in two forms: the euro amount of the benefits and

the age at which benefits are available. The idea of the simulated benefit approach is to abstract

from all differences in characteristics of recipients and focus solely on variation in benefits that

arises from law changes. Ideally, we would take exactly the same person, put him in every birth

cohort, and then compute his benefits. In this way, we would hold characteristics constant, and

any benefits variation that we saw over time or across birth cohorts would be due to law changes.

           Of course, this is impossible in reality. Two types of factors may differ across birth

cohorts that can affect benefit determination. The first type includes factors which are unlikely

to be endogenous to Income Security rules (at least to a first approximation), but which are

potentially important omitted determinants of well-being: differences in earnings histories;

differences in capital income (which can matter for GIS eligibility and benefits); and differences

in spousal labor supply. The second type is factors which are likely endogenous to Income

Security rules, such as differences in actual observed retirement ages. One possible simulated

benefits approach would hold the first type constant, and compute benefits for each birth cohort

based on that constant comparison. A more difficult question is whether one wants to hold the

second set of factors constant, as this may be part of the effect that we want to capture in our

results.

           Thus, we consider three approaches. First, we show results using actual benefits received,

as measured by reported IS income at each age. Second, we employ a “partial simulation”

approach, in which the first set of factors (earnings, capital income, family status) is held

constant, but the second set of factors (retirement ages) is allowed to vary. In particular, we base

the benefit amount on a fixed earnings history across all birth cohorts, not the actual earnings

                                                  14
history by cohort. The motivation for this partial simulation approach is to take account of

changes in retirement behaviour that may be responses to changes in program structure. At the

same time, by using the fixed earnings history the mixed approach allows for the fact that there

could be correlated changes over time in tastes for leisure (as manifested in early retirement) and

measures of well-being that could bias the results if each cohort’s actual earnings were used.

Finally, we also consider a “full simulation” approach, whereby both the first and second sets of

factors are held constant. For that approach, we use the base cohort earnings history and the

base cohort retirement patterns. So, in the full simulation, the variation comes only from

legislative variation since earnings and retirement variation are held constant for the entire

sample.

       Our empirical approach exploits the available policy variation. We concentrate on age-

year cells.   By calculating the expected benefits for a typical person in each age-year

combination, we can exploit changes that occur through time (like the GIS and CPP changes)

that affect people of different age groups differently. For example, the GIS expansions affected

those ages 65 and older, but not those who were younger. The focus on age-year cells, therefore,

provides both a clear and an effective source of identification.


Methodology

       In order to impute benefits to a retired family we must know their earnings history, their

capital and private pension income, at what age they retired, their marital status, and the rules

that were in place that determined their benefits. Combined, this information allows us to

calculate ‘typical’ benefits for families in our data. Our empirical strategy involves holding


                                                 15
several factors constant across all of the cohorts in our sample. We do this by focusing on the

1920 birth cohort, which reaches age 65 in the middle year of our sample (1985). By pushing

this cohort through the benefit calculation for all years in the sample, we will be able to extract

only the variation derived from changes in policy rules, since the cohort characteristics will be

identical by construction.

       For the age-year analysis, we form the earnings profile by taking deciles of earnings in

each year and age in the Survey of Consumer Finance data over all individuals, separately for

men and women. We perform this calculation only for the 1920 birth cohort, which we will use

to simulate benefits for all cohorts. We then average these deciles to form an earnings value for

each age and year. The motivation for this decile-based approach is to capture non-work in the

best way possible. Median earnings of women in earlier years were zero, for example, so using

the decile approach allows us to capture the fact that at least some of the women in those years

had earnings. Since the oldest income microdata available to us is 1971, we impute earnings to

each year previous to 1971 by deflating the 1971 age-earnings profile by the growth in the

industrial composite wage. For calculating CPP/QPP benefits, we need to extend back to 1966.

       For capital income, we use data from the Survey of Consumer Finances. We define

capital income as the sum of income from investments and income from retirement pensions,

which includes both withdrawals from Registered Retirement Savings Plans and Registered

Retirement Income Funds. For the age-year analysis, we form deciles of capital income for each

age and year by sex. The decile approach allows us to capture nonlinear effects of the income

security system that would be missed if we simply used the median or mean for assigning capital

income. Again, we use only the 1920 cohort’s capital income profile, adjusted up and down for

                                                16
other cohorts using the CPI. We assign the capital income deciles to the earnings deciles by

assuming that the lowest earning decile has the lowest capital income, the 2nd lowest earners with

the 2nd lowest capital income, and so on. At the end of the calculation, we average over the

deciles to arrive at the simulated benefit.

       We do not observe the age of retirement for elderly Canadians in our data. Because

CPP/QPP benefits depend on the date of retirement through the actuarial adjustment of early

retirement benefits, we must account for the possibility of different retirement dates. We do so

by calculating the retirement benefits that would be received at each potential age of retirement

between the ages 55 and 70. We then average these benefits using the observed retirement

probabilities at each age for the cohort as weights. We form the cohort retirement probabilities

with the Survey of Consumer Finances data. We assume that none are retired at age 55 and that

all are retired by age 70. The retirement rate is the change in the proportion of respondents who

are employed in one year over the previous year. Using these observed rates, we form a cohort-

and sex-specific set of probabilities for retirement that sum to one. With these probabilities, we

then determine a retirement age-weighted average of the benefits the family is currently

receiving.

       Finally, we must consider different family types. Someone we observe at an older age

may have previously been married but is now widowed. For such a person, we must assign

spousal benefits in order to get a correct measure of total Income Security benefits. We take

observed family types by age and sex in the 1990 General Social Survey and develop a set of




                                               17
probabilities.16 For each family in our simulation, we average the benefits over each of the seven

family types using the 1990 probabilities as weights.

           Our goal is to have simulated benefits for each someone in each age-year cell. To form

the full and the partially simulated benefits we use for the analysis, we use the described

methodology in slightly different ways. For both simulations, we use the 1920 cohort earnings

profile, the 1990 cross-sectional family types, and the 1920 cohort capital income profile. For

the partially simulated benefit, we use each cohort’s observed retirement pattern to find the

simulated benefits. In contrast, the fully simulated benefit applies the 1920 cohort’s retirement

pattern to all cohorts in our data. So, the key difference between the partially and fully simulated

benefits is whether cohort-specific or fixed retirement rates were used in the construction of the

benefits.


Description of Variation

           The result of this simulation exercise is a benefits measure that varies across birth cohorts

only for the age-year cells. In the regression analysis below, we will control for both age and

year effects, allowing us to identify the impact of income security programs on well-being solely

from variation across birth cohorts. In this section, we show that such variation is sizeable, and

explain its legislative origins.

           Figure 2 opens our discussion by showing the evolution of IS income over time. The first

line in this figure shows the average benefits paid to elders under IS programs, in 2002 Euros per

person. The line is derived from aggregate spending on the programs divided by the number of


16
     The seven family types we consider are married, male single never married, male widowed, male

                                                         18
Canadians age 60 and over.17 The rise has been substantial, from around 2,000 Euros in the early

60s up to 3,000 in the 1970s and then 6,000 by the 1990s. The increase from year 2000 over

1965 is 263 percent. The second line shows the ratio of those average benefits to average worker

income, with the scale on the right-hand side axis. Over the same 1965 to 2000 period, this ratio

increased by 179 percent, indicating that benefit growth has far-outpaced earnings growth over

the last generation. This gives an indication of the very large extent to which Canada’s programs

have been expanded.

        Figure 3 then shows our partially and fully simulated benefits measures, graphed over

time. These also grow steadily over time, in parallel fashion to actual benefits income, and move

very closely together. While they follow the same trends, our simulated benefits appear slightly

lower than actual benefits for the time period under consideration.

        Figure 4 shows the evolution of these benefits measures over birth cohorts more clearly.

We graph the simulated benefits levels for each cohort in the year they reach age 65. The first

upward increment in the late 1960s corresponds to the extension of OAS benefits down to age

65. The great rise in the 1970s is caused by the phasing in of the CPP/QPP over 1970 to 1976,

the introduction and expansion of the GIS in 1967, 1971, 1979, and 1980, and finally the SPA in

1976. Through the 1980s and 1990s, benefits grow much more slowly, increasing only with

higher earnings through the YMPE. The partially simulated benefits line is more volatile than

the fully simulated line, reflecting the additional variation introduced by the cohort-specific

retirement rates.



separated/divorced, female single never married, female widowed, female separated/divorced.
17
   The source is Human Resources Development (1999).

                                                       19
     The final picture of the variation in Canada’s recent history is in Figure 5. Here, we

expand on the age 65 variation from the previous figure to show benefits at several ages.

Benefits at age 60 are zero until the 1980s when early retirement is introduced in Quebec (in

1984) and the rest of Canada (in 1987). Benefits at ages 70, 80, and 90 are similar until the mid

70s, when those who are 70 begin to show CPP/QPP income. These same cohorts a decade later

as 80 year olds begin showing CPP/QPP income in the 1980s, so they pull higher than the 90

year olds who do not receive any CPP/QPP.


Regression Framework


       Having created these various measures of benefits (actual, partially simulated, fully

simulated), we can then use them in regression analysis to assess how income security generosity

affects our various measures of well-being. We make use both of the partial and the fully

simulated benefits. All regressions use age-year cells as the unit of observation. We weight by

the cell size from the micro-data in order to produce results that correspond to the full survey

outcomes.

       We begin by looking at ‘first-stage’ analysis of the effects of our simulated benefits on

the actual benefits. In the specification, we include the simulated benefit, age dummies, year

dummies, and a vector of cohort characteristics Xay. The characteristics are measured for the

cohort at age 50, and include their average earnings, education, and proportion married.



       ActualBenefitsay = β 0 + β1SimulatedBenefitsay + β 2 AGEa + β3YEARy + β 4 X ay + eay ,



                                               20
For some of the results we use the mean of the simulated benefit as the policy variable on the

right-hand side. However, for some of the poverty measures, using a more targeted percentile of

the within-cell distribution is more appropriate. We make clear what measure of simulated

benefits is used when we discuss each regression result below.

       We follow the ‘first-stage’ regressions with results that examine the ‘reduced form’ effect

of the simulated benefits on the well-being outcomes. The specification is similar to the first-

stage specification above.

            Outcomesay = β 0 + β1SimulatedBenefitsay + β 2 AGEa + β 3YEARy + β 4 X ay + eay ,


The simulated benefits are either the partial or the fully simulated benefits. Again, we also use

different measures of the benefits within-cell for the different outcome measures.

       Our third and final specification uses a full instrumental variables approach. We use the

simulated benefits to predict actual benefits, then use the predicted actual benefits as a regressor

for the outcome variables. So, the simulated benefits act as an instrument for the observed actual

benefits.

             Outcomesay = β 0 + β1 ActualBenefitsay + β 2 AGEa + β3YEARy + β 4 X ay + eay ,




       Section IV: Evidence

Time Series Evidence

      We begin our presentation of the effects of IS programs on well-being by examining the

evolution of our various well-being indicators over time. We use the equivalence-scale adjusted


                                                  21
measures, so the data represent the amount per effective person in 2002 Euros. In each case, we

show two lines on each graph. One line shows the evolution of the outcome in question for the

elderly in our sample, while the other provides the same measure for the working-age families in

order to provide a basis for comparison. We normalize each of these lines to 100 in the first year

the outcome is available, in order to emphasize the percentage change through time.

      Figure 6 shows the graph for actual benefits received, as reported in our microdata sources.

Similar to the aggregate and simulated benefits shows in earlier figures, there is a strong increase

from 1971 through 2000, with a slight flattening out over the last few years. There is no non-

elderly line in this graph since non-elderly do not receive retirement benefits.

      Figure 7 shows the results for average after-tax family income. Average incomes rise by

about 40 percent from 1970 through 1980, and very slowly thereafter, for both the elderly and

the non-elderly. Both lines jump for the 1998 to 2002 period. Two factors underlie this break in

trend. First, it reflects the change from the Survey of Consumer Finances over to the Survey of

Labour and Income Dynamics. The difference is in the average reported size of census families

across the two data sources – families in the new survey are smaller on average than in the older

survey, leaving the income to be spread less thinly. However, there is also a sharp increase in

incomes noticeable in 1998 when one compares data across the available years of the Survey of

Labour and Income Dynamics. So, some of this increase does reflect growing incomes.

      Figures 8 and 9 show the evolution of poverty over this time period, with the relative and

absolute income poverty measures respectively. By both measures, there is a steep reduction in

elderly poverty relative to the non-elderly over the 1970s and 1980s, which is consistent with IS

program growth. For relative poverty, however, this reduction does not begin until the late

                                                 22
1970s, after the major CPP/QPP expansion has completely phased in and the GIS expansions of

the late 1970s have been implemented. We can see clearly the drastic drop in elderly poverty,

from 100 in 1971 down to under 40 by the early 1980s, for a drop of 60 percent. For absolute

poverty, the reduction is very steep from 1971 onwards for the elderly, but it is also steep for the

non-elderly as well. Once again, the major improvement for the elderly relative to the non-

elderly is in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The timing of these movements corresponds well

with the GIS and CPP expansions.

      Figure 10 graphs the evolution of family after-tax income by percentiles. We show the

10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles for the elderly, along with the 50th percentile for the non-elderly.

One line is sharply different than the others – the 10th percentile of elderly income. It rises to

around 230 by the 1990s, for an increase of 130% relative to 1971. In contrast, the other

measures increase to only 140-160. Again, this reflects the phasing in of the CPP/QPP along

with the expansions of the GIS.

      We next turn to our consumption-based measures of well-being. Here the time series are

less complete due to more infrequent surveys. The volatility reflects in part the differences in

survey coverage and sample size across different waves of the consumption surveys.

Nonetheless, it is clear from Figure 11 that the time series for the elderly and non-elderly

consumption largely move together, suggesting relatively little effect of IS programs.

      Figures 12 and 13 examine relative and absolute consumption poverty measures. In both

cases, the elderly and non-elderly move closely together until the late 1980s and early 1990s, at

which point there is a larger fall in elderly consumption poverty than non-elderly consumption

poverty. Once again, given the more or less steady rise in IS benefits over this period, it is hard

                                                 23
to attribute this to IS effects.

      Figure 14 graphs the percentiles of consumption, as we saw in Figure 10 for income.

There appears to be little difference in the increase for the 10th, 50th, or 90th percentile of

consumption for the elderly, as they are all very close to 130 by 2001. The consumption of the

non-elderly is slightly higher. This is in sharp contrast to the income graph in Figure 10 that

showed a huge increase in income at the 10th percentile.

      Finally, Figures 15 and 16 show the results for our happiness measures. There is clearly

variation across different samples, reflecting either true differences in happiness across time or

some kind of differences in the sampling methodology. The measures for the elderly and non-

elderly move very closely, suggesting little effect of the IS expansions on elderly happiness.


Regression Results


      We next move from time series graphical analysis to regression analysis, which allows us

to exploit the variation in benefits across birth cohorts documented in Figure 5. As is clear from

that figure, a major source of variation is the evolution of benefits at age 60 over time, relative to

other ages. This allows us to include both age and year dummies in our model, controlling for

general differences in well-being by age and over time. Figure 17 shows our measure of

simulated benefits graphed against income, by age/year cell. It is clear that the set of points to

the left, for 60-64 year olds, is described by a different process than is the set of points to the

right, for 65 and over. The age 55-59 group is even more concentrated along the axis, as they

receive no benefits under the simulation. Given the differences between the 60-64 and the 65+

groups, we conclude that including age dummies is the proper specification rather than trying to

                                                 24
fit a linear age term across both clouds of data.

      The results of our analysis are presented in Table 2 and Table 3. In Table 2 for each

outcome variable we show the mean and the number of observations. Across the next 6 columns

are the results for the first-stage, reduced-form and instrumental variables analysis. Table 2

presents the results for eleven measures of income.

      The first set of results focuses on the first stage analysis. Actual income is regressed on

simulated benefits. The first result uses the means of simulated benefits to predict the mean IS

income. The coefficient of 0.759 indicates that a one euro increase in partially simulated

benefits leads to a 75.9 cent increase in after-tax income. For the fully simulated benefits, the

coefficient is slightly higher, at 0.830. Both of these are highly statistically significant.

      The next row in Table 2 shows the results for the mean income of those under the poverty

line. The simulated benefits used in these regressions are the 10th percentile of benefits. The

results are negative and only marginally statistically significant, suggesting some evidence that

higher benefits leads to a decrease in income. A contributing factor to the odd results is the fact

that elderly poverty is very small after the CPP/QPP became fully phased in and the GIS was

expanded, as was made clear in Figure 8. It is likely that most of those in poverty would be

those who were not eligible for the GIS or the CPP/QPP, such as newer immigrants. Since we

can’t control for these factors in the regression, it might be these excluded characteristics that

drive the result.

      The next three rows show the results for estimates at different points of the income

distribution. We have three dependent variables, formed as the mean of IS income between the

5th and 15th percentile, the 45th and 55th percentile, and the 85th to 95th percentile. The simulated

                                                    25
benefits we use in the three cases are the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles. The results indicate that

the simulated benefits are strong predictors of income at the 10th and 50th percentiles, but do

worse for the 90th percentile. Because higher income seniors likely have a larger proportion of

their incomes coming from non-governmental sources, the lower predictive power of the

simulated benefits at the 90th percentile should not be surprising.

      The bottom half of Table 2 presents the reduced form and instrumental variables estimates

for the well-being outcomes. The first outcome is mean income. Using the fully simulated

benefits, the reduced form specification indicates that a one dollar increase in benefits leads to a

89 cent increase in mean income. When we use the simulated benefit as an instrument, the

predicted impact of a dollar increase in benefits is 1.073. This suggests that benefits do not

crowd out other sources of income. In contrast, the partially simulated benefit gives a result of

0.546, which does suggest some evidence of crowd-out.

      The next two rows show the results for poverty. We use the simulated benefits of the 10th

percentile of lifetime earnings for this estimation, since it is more relevant for the estimation of

poverty rates. The results for partially and fully simulated benefits are quite similar. For relative

income poverty, an increase in benefits of €1,000 is predicted to decrease poverty by 2.6

percentage points for the fully simulated IV specification. The absolute poverty measure shows

no statistically significant effect.

      To gauge the magnitude of the relative poverty coefficient, we can compare the trend in

poverty over our sample period to the changes in benefits to see what proportion of the change

can be explained by the benefit changes. In the age-year cell data, the 1st decile of benefits

averaged €1,137 for those 60 and over in 1971, rising to €3,847 in 2002 for an increase of

                                                 26
€2,710. Our estimate of -0.026 implies that poverty should drop by about 7.10 percentage

points. In the data, actual poverty dropped by 7.38 percentage points over this period, meaning

that the increase in benefits can explain 96.3% of the trend. In other words, the decrease in

poverty over the 1971-2002 period can almost entirely be explained by the increase in the

generosity of benefits for low-income seniors.



      The final three rows show the results at different percentiles of the income distribution. At

the 10th percentile, both the partially and fully simulated benefits reveal little evidence of income

crowd out, with IV coefficients close to one. At the 50th percentile, the partially simulated

benefit coefficient is 0.330 and the fully simulated benefit is 0.728. For the 90th percentile, the

partially simulated result is not significant, and the fully simulated result comes in at 2.502. At

the higher income levels, benefits represent a lower proportion of income which may make the

results more sensitive.

      In Table 3, we repeat the reduced form and instrumental variable analysis with our

consumption and happiness measures. The first row shows the results for mean consumption.

The IV results are 0.660 for partially simulated and 0.797 for fully simulated benefits. This

suggests some crowd out of consumption. The next two rows look at consumption poverty. For

none of the specifications – either for relative or absolute poverty – do we find a significant

coefficient.

      Taking these results along with the income poverty results together, an obvious question is

how income poverty can be relieved by the IS system but consumption poverty shows no effect.

To resolve this puzzle, we turn back to some graphical analysis in Figure 19. We plot income

                                                 27
and consumption poverty rates in 2000 by age. The income poverty line shows a very sharp run-

up at ages 61 to 64. The average retirement age in Canada is around age 61, but the GIS and

OAS benefits do not begin until age 65. The graph suggests that the lack of benefits in the 61-64

age range is leading to substantial income poverty – reaching over one fifth of the population.

However, the consumption poverty line shows almost no impact over the very same age range.

This may indicate that the seniors are using savings or other channels of adjustment in order to

smooth their consumption while awaiting the onset of their income security benefits at age 65.

      The next three rows display the results at different percentiles of the consumption

distribution. The partially simulated benefits are not significant in the IV regressions for any of

the 10th, 50th, or 90th percentiles. For the fully simulated benefits, both the 10th and 50th

percentile results are significant at the 10 percent level, showing an effect of benefits of 0.383

and 0.275 respectively. The 90t percentile result is not statistically significant.

      The final two rows of Table 3 examine the effect of benefits on measures of happiness.

For the very happy question, we see no sign of a statistically significant relationship between

benefits and being very happy. On the other hand, there is some evidence of a decrease in

reports of being unhappy or very unhappy with higher benefits in the reduced form results, but

not in the IV results. These weak results may be due to the lack of variation in the data we have

for happiness – the data is much more limited than the consumption and income data.


Conclusion

      We find strong evidence that Canada’s income security programs have improved the

welfare of the cohorts in our data. Our estimates suggest that these cohorts have more income

                                                  28
and consumption than they would in the absence of income security. For poverty, we find large

decreases in relative income poverty, suggesting that the expansions of income security

programs in the 1970s had a substantial impact on poverty. However, we do not find evidence

that consumption poverty changed, suggesting that in the absence of benefits, poor families may

have found some way to consume at adequate levels. Finally, we find inconclusive evidence on

measures of happiness.

     As a caveat, extrapolating these results beyond the observed cohorts must be done with

care. Policy changes may affect savings and consumption behaviour of generations that had

more time to alter their plans than for cohorts who were surprised by policy changes in their

near-retirement years.




                                              29
References


Baker, Michael, “The Retirement Behaviour of Married Couples: Evidence From the Spouse's
       Allowance”, Journal of Human Resources, 37, Winter 2002, 1-34.

Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan (2003), “Simulating the Response to Reform
       of Canada’s Income Security System,” NBER Working Paper No. 9455.

Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber, and Kevin Milligan (2004), “Income Security Programs and
       Retirement in Canada,” in Jonathan Gruber and David Wise (eds.) Social Security
       Programs and Retirement Around the World: Micro Estimation. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press.

Human Resources Development (1999) HRDC Redbook. Statistics on income security.

Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (2002a), Actuarial Report on the Old Age
                      Security Program as at December 31, 2000. Ottawa.

Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (2002b), Canada Pension Plan: 19th
       Actuarial Report as at December 31, 2000, Supplement. Ottawa.

United Nations (2005), “World Population Prospects: The 2004 Revision,” United Nations
       Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. New York.




                                               30
                                               Figure 1: Real Maximum CPP, OAS and GIS Benefits 1961-2002
           900



           800



           700



           600
2002 CAD




           500                                                                                                                                                               O AS
                                                                                                                                                                             G IS
                                                                                                                                                                             CPP
           400                                                                                                                                                               CPP Ph



           300



           200



           100



             0
                 1961

                          1963

                                 1965

                                        1967

                                                 1969

                                                        1971

                                                               1973

                                                                      1975

                                                                             1977

                                                                                    1979

                                                                                           1981

                                                                                                       1983

                                                                                                              1985

                                                                                                                     1987

                                                                                                                            1989

                                                                                                                                   1991

                                                                                                                                          1993

                                                                                                                                                 1995

                                                                                                                                                        1997

                                                                                                                                                               1999

                                                                                                                                                                      2001
                                                                                           Year

                        Notes: GIS benefits are for a single individual. The CPP phase-in calculation is for December of
                        the indicated year.




                                                                                                  31
                                      Figure 2: Average Income Security Benefits

              7,000                                                                                               0.3


              6,000
                                                                                                                  0.25


              5,000
                                                                                                                  0.2
2002 Euros




              4,000
                                                                                                                  0.15
              3,000

                                                                                                                  0.1
              2,000


                                                                                                                  0.05
              1,000                                                    Average benefits

                                                                       Average benefits / average worker income
                   -                                                                                              0
                         64

                         66

                         68

                         70

                         72

                         74

                         76

                         78

                         80

                         82

                         84

                         86

                         88

                         90

                         92

                         94

                         96

                         98

                         00
                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       19

                       20
                                                               Years


                                        Figure 3: Average Simulated Benefits
                     5000
                        4000
             2002 Euros
              3000   2000
                     1000




                               1960          1970              1980                       1990               2000
                                                                 year
                                         Fully simulated benefit                  Partially simulated benefit



                                                               32
                                    Figure 4: Benefits at age 65 in different years


         6000
            4000
   2002 Euros
2000     0




                    1960                    1970              1980              1990             2000
                                                        year reached age 65
                                        Fully simulated benefit           Partially simulated benefit



                                   Figure 5: Benefits at different ages through time
               8000  6000
          2002 Euros
     2000    4000
               0




                            1960            1970             1980              1990            2000
                                                               year
                                                   Benefits at 60             Benefits at 65
                                                   Benefits at 70             Benefits at 80
                                                   Benefits at 90



                                                              33
                                             Figure 6: Benefits



               300
                      Index value 100 is equal to
                            2,083 for elderly
               250         (2002 constant )
    1971=100
               200
               150
               100




                     1970                  1980                      1990           2000
                                                      refyr − 1996



                                       Figure 7: After-tax income
           180




                     Index value 100 is equal to
                        10,520 for young and
                          10,420 for elderly
                          (2002 constant )
           160
1971=100
           140
           120
           100




                 1970                      1980                      1990           2000
                                                          Year
                                                    elderly                 young



                                                       34
                             Figure 8: Relative income poverty


           120
                                                              Index value 100 is equal to
                                                                 0.100 for young and
                                                                   0.122 for elderly.
           100
           80
1971=100
           60
           40
           20




                 1970              1980                1990                      2000
                                                Year
                                          elderly             young



                             Figure 9: Absolute income poverty
                100




                                                          Index value 100 is equal to
                                                             0.100 for young and
                                                               0.122 for elderly.
                80
     1971=100
                60
                40
                20




                      1970         1980                1990                    2000
                                                Year
                                          elderly         young



                                             35
                                    Figure 10: Percentiles of Income


           250
                      Index value 100 is equal to
                         9,376 for 50th young,
                         3,287 for 10th elderly,
                       8,564 for 50th elderly and
                        19,302 for 90th elderly.
           200
1971=100
           150
           100




                 1970                       1980                     1990                  2000
                                                            Year
                                    elderly 10th percentile             elderly 50th percentile
                                    elderly 90th percentile             young 50th percentile



                                      Figure 11: Total Consumption
                150




                       Index value 100 is equal to
                          11,637 for young and
                            11,749 for elderly
                            (2002 constant )
                140
                130
     1969=100
                120
                110
                100




                       1970                    1980                   1990                  2000
                                                              year
                                                      elderly           young




                                                         36
                          Figure 12: Relative consumption poverty


           250
                                                          Index value 100 is equal to
                                                             0.023 for young and
                                                               0.023 for elderly.
           200
1969=100
           150
           100
           50




                   1970              1980                1990                   2000
                                                  year
                                            elderly        young



                          Figure 13: Absolute consumption poverty
             100




                                                          Index value 100 is equal to
                                                             0.023 for young and
                                                               0.023 for elderly.
             80
             60
  1969=100
             40
             20
             0




                   1970              1980                1990                  2000
                                                  year
                                            elderly       young



                                               37
                            Figure 14: Percentiles of Consumption


            150
                   Index value 100 is equal to
                     10,237 for 50th young,
                      5,543 for 10th elderly,
                    9,867 for 50th elderly and
            140

                     19,847 for 90th elderly.
            130
 1969=100
            120
            110
            100




                    1970                  1980                   1990                   2000
                                                          year
                                elderly 10th percentile           elderly 50th percentile
                                elderly 90th percentile           young 50th percentile



                                      Figure 15: Very Happy
           160
           140
1985=100




                                                                  Index value 100 is equal to
           120




                                                                     0.5097 for young and
                                                                       0.4729 for elderly.
           100
           80




                  1985                    1990                   1995                       2000
                                                          year
                                                 elderly           young



                                                    38
                              Figure 16: Very Unhappy or Unhappy

                    Index value 100 is equal to
           140         0.0351 for young and
                         0.0624 for elderly.
           120
1985=100
           100
           80
           60




                   1985                    1990                     1995           2000
                                                        year
                                                  elderly                young



                            Figure 17: Benefits vs. Income Scatterplot


                                            Benefits vs. income
           25000
  15000 20000
2002 euros
           10000
           5000




                    0               2000               4000                 6000   8000
                                              Fully simulated benefits
                                    Income, age 55−59          Income, age 60−64
                                    Income, age 65 plus



                                                     39
                         Figure 18: Residuals vs. Benefits

                                   Residual vs. benefits
         4000
         2000
   2002 euros
       0 −2000
         −4000




                  0         2000              4000               6000            8000
                                     Fully simulated benefits



Figure 19: Relative Income and Consumption Poverty by age in 2000
      .2
      .15
Poverty rate
   .1 .05
      0




                 20                40                       60                     80
                                               Age
                      Income poverty in 2000             Consumption poverty in 2000



                                            40
41
                                        Table 1: Data Description

                                           Years     Ages Elderly
Measure                   Data Source      Available Availab Sample    Variable Description
Mean IS Income            SCF/SLID         1971-2002 25-79     301,538 Mean family IS income

Mean IS income            SCF/SLID         1971-2002 25-79     301,538 Mean IS income among
below poverty line                                                     families below poverty line

IS income of 5th-15th     SCF/SLID         1971-2002 25-79     301,538 Mean IS income for families
percentile earners                                                     between 5th and 15th percentile

IS income of 45th-55th    SCF/SLID         1971-2002 25-79     301,538 Mean IS income for families
percentile earners                                                     between 45th and 55th percentile

IS income of 85th-95th    SCF/SLID         1971-2002 25-79     301,538 Mean IS income for families
percentile earners                                                     between 85th and 95th percentile

Mean after-tax income     SCF/SLID         1971-2002 25-79     301,538 Mean total family income
                                                                       after tax
Relative income poverty   SCF/SLID         1971-2002 25-79     301,538 Equals one if under 40% of
                                                                       working family median income
Absolute income poverty   SCF/SLID         1971-2002 25-79     301,538 Equals one if under 40% of 1971
                                                                       working family median income
10th percentile income    SCF/SLID         1971-2002 25-79     301,538 10th percentile of total after-tax
                                                                       family income
50th percentile income    SCF/SLID         1971-2002 25-79     301,538 50th percentile of total after-tax
                                                                       family income
90th percentile income    SCF/SLID         1971-2002 25-79     301,538 90th percentile of total after-tax
                                                                       family income
Mean consumption          FAMEX/SHS        1969-2001 25-79      22,840 Mean of total family expenditure

Relative consumption      FAMEX/SHS        1969-2001 25-79      22,840 Equals one if under 40% of
poverty                                                                working family median consumption
Absolute consumption      FAMEX/SHS        1969-2001 25-79      22,840 Equals one if under 40% of 1969
poverty                                                                working family median consumption
10th percentile           FAMEX/SHS        1969-2001 25-79      22,840 10th percentile of total family
consumption                                                            consumption
50th percentile           FAMEX/SHS        1969-2001 25-79      22,840 50th percentile of total family
consumption                                                            consumption
90th percentile           FAMEX/SHS        1969-2001 25-79      22,840 90th percentile of total family
consumption                                                            consumption
Very happy                GSS              1985-1998 25-74      39,247 Equals one if responded very
                                                                       happy
Unhappy or very unhappy   GSS              1985-1998 25-74      39,247 Equals one if responded unhappy
                                                                       or very unhappy
Notes: SCF is Survey of Consumer Finances. SLID is Survey of Labour and Income Dynamics. FAMEX is
Survey of Family Expenditures. SHS is survey of Household Spending. GSS is General Social Survey.




                                                   42
                             Table 2: Income regression results

                                               First Stage      Reduced Form               IV
                          Mean     Obs.     Partial Full        Partial Full        Partial Full
Mean IS income            5135     500       0.759 0.830
                                            (0.048) (0.041)

Mean IS income,           1926      500      -0.213 -0.305
below poverty line                          (0.162) (0.182)

IS income of 5th-15th     2817      500      0.721 0.995
percentile earners                          (0.140) (0.164)

IS income of 45th-55th    5028      500      1.085 1.254
percentile earners                          (0.118) (0.115)

IS income of 85th-95th    7627      500      0.401 0.264
percentile earners                          (0.041) (0.043)

Mean income               14313     500                          0.415 0.890        0.546 1.073
                                                                (0.141) (0.159)    (0.183) (0.198)

Relative income           0.054     500                         -0.020 -0.026      -0.027 -0.026
poverty                                                         (0.004) (0.004)    (0.006) (0.005)

Absolute income           0.028     500                         -0.004 -0.005      -0.006 -0.005
poverty                                                         (0.004) (0.004)    (0.006) (0.005)

10th percentile           6903      500                          0.682 0.934        0.945 0.938
income                                                          (0.134) (0.164)    (0.106) (0.083)

50th percentile           12070     500                          0.404 0.946        0.330 0.728
income                                                          (0.138) (0.151)    (0.110) (0.133)

90th percentile           24130      500                             0.352 0.660         0.878 2.502
income                                                             (0.233) (0.230) (0.608) (1.048)
Notes: Coefficients reported are for the variables listed on the left. Details on the specifications
 are in the text.



                                              43
                  Table 3: Consumption and Happiness Results




                                                   Reduced Form             IV
                                Mean Obs.         Partial Full       Partial Full
Mean consumption                13799 226          0.406 0.502        0.660 0.797
                                                  (0.188) (0.191)    (0.333) (0.329)

Relative consumption poverty     0.029   226      -0.004 -0.005      -0.008 -0.009
                                                  (0.003) (0.003)    (0.008) (0.007)

Absolute consumption poverty 0.007        226      0.000 -0.001       0.000 -0.001
                                                  (0.002) (0.002)    (0.005) (0.004)

10th percentile consumption      6963     226      0.180 0.218        0.385 0.383
                                                  (0.090) (0.099)    (0.246) (0.217)

50th percentile consumption     11852     226      0.170 0.311        0.150 0.275
                                                  (0.172) (0.180)    (0.155) (0.162)

90th percentile consumption     23030     226      0.542 0.689        1.177 2.484
                                                  (0.595) (0.596)    (1.343) (2.379)

Very happy                       0.610    28       0.023 0.008        0.122 0.026
                                                  (0.037) (0.049)    (0.206) (0.161)

Unhappy or very unhappy          0.057    28        -0.017 -0.022        -0.088 -0.073
                                                    (0.008) (0.011) (0.064) (0.054)
Notes: Coefficients reported are for the variables listed on the left. Details on
the specifications are in the text.




                                         44
