                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          R&D INVESTMENT, EXPORTING, AND PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS

                                            Bee Yan Aw
                                           Mark J. Roberts
                                            Daniel Yi Xu

                                        Working Paper 14670
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14670


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2009




We thank Jan De Loecker, Ulrich Doraszelski, Marc Melitz, Ariel Pakes, Nina Pavnick, and Jim Tybout
for helpful discussions and comments. We are grateful to Yi Lee for helping us to acquire and understand
the data. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Bee Yan Aw, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Yi Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
R&D Investment, Exporting, and Productivity Dynamics
Bee Yan Aw, Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Yi Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 14670
January 2009, Revised October 2010
JEL No. F14,O31,O33

                                             ABSTRACT

A positive correlation between productivity and export market participation has been well documented
in producer micro data. Recent empirical studies and theoretical analyses have emphasized that this
may reflect the producer's other investment activities, particularly investments in R&D or new technology,
that both raise productivity and increase the payoff to exporting. In this paper we develop a dynamic
structural model of a producer's decision to invest in R&D and participate in the export market. The
investment decisions depend on the expected future profitability and the fixed and sunk costs incurred
with each activity. We estimate the model using plant-level data from the Taiwanese electronics industry
and find a complex set of interactions between R&D, exporting, and productivity. The self- selection
of high productivity plants is the dominant channel driving participation in the export market and R&D
investment. Both R&D and exporting have a positive direct effect on the plant's future productivity
which reinforces the selection effect. When modeled as discrete decisions, the productivity effect of
R&D is larger, but, because of its higher cost, is undertaken by fewer plants than exporting. The impact
of each activity on the net returns to the other are quantitatively unimportant. In model simulations,
the endogenous choice of R&D and exporting generates average productivity that is 22.0 percent higher
after 10 years than an environment where productivity evolution is not affected by plant investments.


Bee Yan Aw                                          Daniel Yi Xu
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
The Pennsylvania State University                   New York University
University Park, PA 16802                           19 West Fourth Street, Sixth Floor
byr@psu.edu                                         New York, NY 10012
                                                    and NBER
Mark J. Roberts                                     daniel.xu@nyu.edu
Department of Economics
513 Kern Graduate Building
Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
mroberts@psu.edu
  R&D Investment, Exporting, and Productivity Dynamics

                    By B EE YAN AW, M ARK J. ROBERTS , AND DANIEL Y I X U


            This paper estimates a dynamic structural model of a producer's decision
           to invest in R&D and export, allowing both choices to endogenously affect the
           future path of productivity. Using plant-level data for the Taiwanese electronics
           industry, both activities are found to have a positive effect on the plant's future
           productivity. This in turn drives more plants to self-select into both activities,
           contributing to further productivity gains. Simulations of an expansion of the
           export market are shown to increase both exporting and R&D investment and
           generate a gradual within-plant productivity improvement.
           JEL: F14, O31, O33
           Keywords: Export, R&D investment, Productivity Growth, Taiwan Electronics
           Industry


   A large empirical literature using rm and plant-level data documents that, on average, export-
ing producers are more productive than nonexporters. A general nding is that this re ects the
self-selection of more productive rms into the export market but, in some cases, may also re ect
a direct effect of exporting on future productivity gains.1 A further possibility is that there is a
spurious component to the correlation re ecting the fact that some rms undertake investments
that lead to both higher productivity and a higher propensity to export.
   Recently, several authors have begun to measure the potential role of the rms' own invest-
ments in R&D or technology adoption as a potentially important component of the productivity-
export link. Andrew B. Bernard and J. Bradford Jensen (1997), Mary Hallward-Driemeier,
Giuseppe Iarossi, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff (2002), John R. Baldwin and Wulong Gu (2004), Bee
Yan Aw, Mark J. Roberts, and Tor Winston (2007), Paula Bustos (forthcoming), Alla Lileeva
and Daniel Tre er (forthcoming), Leonardo Iacovone and Beata S. Javorcik (2007), Bee Yan Aw,
Mark J. Roberts, and Daniel Yi Xu (2008) and Jo e P. Damijan, Crt Kostevc, and Sašo Polanec
(2008) nd evidence from micro data sets that exporting is also correlated with rm investment
in R&D or adoption of new technology that can also affect productivity. Complementing this
evidence, Chiara Criscuolo, Jonathan Haskel, and Matthew Slaughter (2005) analyze survey data
collected for E.U. countries and nd that rms that operate globally devote more resources to as-
similating knowledge from abroad and generate more innovations and productivity improvement.
A key implication of these studies is that the technology and export decisions are interdependent
and both channels may endogenously affect the rm's future productivity.
   The effects of a trade liberalization that lowers trade costs or expands export markets will de-
pend crucially on the micro-level relationship between productivity, exporting, and R&D or tech-
nology investment. Two recent theoretical papers, Andrew Atkeson and Ariel Burstein (forth-
coming) and James A. Constantini and Marc J. Melitz (2008), have formalized how trade liberal-
izations can increase the rate of return to a rm's R&D or investment in new technology and thus

      Aw: The Pennsylvania State University, Department of Economics, 501 Kern Building, University Park, PA 16870,
(e-mail: byr@psu.edu). Roberts: The Pennsylvania State University, Department of Economics, 513 Kern Building,
University Park, PA 16870 and National Bureau of Econmic Research, (e-mail: mroberts@psu.edu). Xu: New York
University, Department of Economics, 19 West Fourth Street, Sixth Floor, New York, NY 10012 and National Bureau
of Economic Research, (e-mail: daniel.xu@nyu.edu). We thank Jan De Loecker, Ulrich Doraszelski, Jonathan Eaton,
José Carlos Fariñas, Oleg Itskhoki, Marc Melitz, Ariel Pakes, Nina Pavnick, Jim Tybout and two anonymous referees for
helpful discussions and comments. We are grateful to Yi Lee for helping us to acquire and understand the data. All
remaining errors are ours.
    1 See Greenaway and Kneller (2007) for a recent survey of the micro econometric evidence on this topic.

                                                         1
2                          THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                MONTH YEAR


lead to future endogenous productivity gains. Both papers share several common features. First,
productivity is the underlying state variable that distinguishes heterogeneous producers. Second,
productivity evolution is endogenous, affected by the rm's innovation decisions, and contains a
stochastic component. Third, while they differ in the speci c structure of costs and information,
they each identify pathways through which export market size affects the rm's choice to export
or invest in new technology. Quantifying these pathways is key to understanding the long-run
impacts of trade liberalization.
   In this paper we develop and estimate a dynamic, structural model of exporting and R&D
investment using data for Taiwanese manufacturing plants in the electronics products industry for
the period 2000-2004. We use the model to quantify the linkages between the export decision,
R&D investment, and endogenous productivity growth and then simulate the long-run impacts
of an export demand expansion on these variables. This provides a methodology for studying
the effects of trade liberalization on productivity growth without data from a natural experiment.
As part of our model we estimate the dynamic decision rules for the plant's optimal choice of
R&D and exporting where these rules depend on the expected future pro ts and the current xed
or sunk costs of each activity. We quantify three pathways linking exporting, R&D investment,
and productivity. First, the return to each investment increases with the producer's underlying
productivity which leads high-productivity producers to self-select into both investment activities.
Second, each investment directly affects future productivity which acts to reinforce the selection
effect. Third, as emphasized in the recent theoretical models, policy changes that alter the future
return to one activity, such as a reduction in trade costs or an R&D subsidy, affect the probability
of both activities.
   Our empirical results reveal a rich set of productivity determinants. Productivity evolution
is endogenous, being impacted positively by both R&D investment and exporting and, when
modeled as discrete activities, the impact of R&D is larger. There are signi cant entry costs
for both activities, which introduces a second source of intertemporal linkages in the decisions,
and the costs of undertaking R&D activities are larger than the costs of exporting. The self-
selection of high productivity plants is the dominant channel driving export market participation
and R&D investment and this is reinforced by the effect of each investment on future productivity.
Holding expected export market demand constant, whether or not a rm invested in R&D in
the past has very little direct impact on the net returns to exporting or the probability the rm
exports. Similarly, past export experience has very little direct impact on the return to R&D or
the probability of undertaking R&D.
   Using the model we conduct counterfactual exercises to quantify the effect of a permanent
reduction in trade costs that increases export demand on plant exporting, R&D, and productivity
change. Bustos (forthcoming) and Lileeva and Tre er (forthcoming) have studied periods of
trade liberalization in Argentina and Canada and found evidence that reductions in tariffs faced
by exporting rms lead to increases in exporting, innovative activities by the rm, or productivity.
We nd that an expansion in export market size would increase the export and R&D participation
rates by 10.2 and 4.7 percentage points, respectively, after 15 years. This would lead to an
increase in mean plant productivity of 5.3 percent. This re ects the cumulative effect of increased
exporting and R&D on productivity and the effect of these productivity gains on the self-selection
of plants into these activities. We isolate the individual roles of R&D and exporting by comparing
our counterfactual results with those generated by more restrictive productivity processes and nd
that, in the environment with endogenous plant productivity, the expansion of the export market
leads to an increase in mean productivity that is twice as large as the increase that would occur
under more restrictive environments. The combination of larger export markets and the plant's
ability to invest and endogenously affect its future productivity contributes to larger productivity
gains.
   The next section of this paper develops the theoretical model of the rm's dynamic decision to
invest in R&D and exporting. The third section develops a two-stage estimation method for the
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                         R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                                      3


model. The rst stage estimates the underlying process for producer productivity and the second
stage uses this to estimate the dynamic decision rules for R&D and export market participation.
The fourth section provides a brief discussion of the data source. The fth section summarizes
the parameter estimates, measures the costs and marginal returns to R&D investment and export
market participation, and conducts the counterfactual exercise to quantify the productivity effects
of an expansion of export demand.

                            I.   A Structural Model of Exporting and R&D

   The theoretical model developed in this section is similar in several ways to the models of
exporting developed by Mark J. Roberts and James R. Tybout (1997), Sofronis K. Clerides, Saul
Lach, and James R. Tybout (1998), Marc J. Melitz (2003), and Sanghamitra Das, Mark J. Roberts,
and James R. Tybout (2007) and the models of exporting and investment by Atkeson and Burstein
(forthcoming) and Constantini and Melitz (2008). We abstract from the decision to enter or exit
production and instead focus on the investment decisions and process of productivity evolution.
Firms are recognized to be heterogeneous in their productivity and the export demand curve they
face. Together these determine each rm's incentive to invest in R&D and to export. In turn,
these investments have feedback effects that can alter the path of future productivity for the rm.
We divide the rm's decision making into a static component, where the rm's productivity de-
termines its short-run pro ts from exporting, and a dynamic component where they make optimal
R&D and export-market participation decisions.

                                               A.     Static Decisions

  We begin with a model of the rm's revenue in the domestic and export markets. Firm i's
short-run marginal cost function is written as:

(1)                  lncit D lnc.kit ; wt /         !it D     0   C   k   ln kit C    w   ln wt       !it

where kit is rm capital stock, wt is a vector of variable input prices common to all rms, and !it
is rm productivity.2 Several features of the speci cation are important. The rm is assumed
to produce a single output which can be sold in both domestic and export markets and marginal
cost is identical across the two markets for a rm. There are two sources of short-run cost het-
erogeneity, capital stocks that are observable in the data and rm productivity that is observable
to the rm but not observable in our data. Marginal cost does not vary with the rm's output
level which implies that demand shocks in one market do not affect the static output decision in
the other market and allows us to model revenue and pro ts in each market independently of the
output level in the other market.3
   Both the domestic and export markets are assumed to be monopolistically competitive and
segmented from each other. This rules out strategic interaction among rms in each market but
does allow rms to charge markups that differ across markets. The demand curves faced by rm
i in the domestic and export markets are assumed to have the Dixit-Stiglitz form. In the domestic
market it is:

                                                              ItD pitD
(2)                       qitD D Q tD . pitD =PtD /   D   D      .     /     D   D 8tD . pitD /   D
                                                              PtD PtD

    2 Other rm-level cost shifters can be included in the empirical speci cation. In this version we will focus on the
heterogeneity that arises from differences in size, as measured by capital stocks, and productivity.
    3 The domestic market will play an important role in modeling the dynamic decision to invest in R&D developed later.
4                                THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                                          MONTH YEAR


where Q tD and PtD are the industry aggregate output and price index, ItD is total market size, and
  D is the constant elasticity of demand. The rm's demand depends on the industry aggregates,
represented by 8tD ; its price pitD , and the constant demand elasticity.

    A similar structure is assumed in the export market except that each rm's demand also de-
pends on a rm-speci c demand shifter z it . The demand curve rm i faces in the export market
is:

                                     ItX pitX
(3)                         qitX D      .     /       X    exp.z it / D 8tX . pitX /     X   exp.z it /
                                     PtX PtX

 where 8tX represents the aggregate export market size and price, pitX is the rm's export price,
  X is a common demand elasticity and z it is a rm-speci c demand shock. By including this
last term we incorporate an exogenous source of rm-level variation which will allow a rm's
relative demands in the domestic and export markets to vary across rms and over time. The
  rm is assumed to observe z it when making its export decision, but it is not observable in our
data.

    Given its demand and marginal cost curves, rm i chooses the price in each market to maximize
the sum of domestic and export pro ts. The rst-order condition for the domestic market price
pitD implies that the log of domestic market revenue ritD is:

                                         D
(4)    ln ritD D .    D   C 1/ ln.                / C ln 8tD C .        D   C 1/.    0   C    k   ln kit C     w   ln wt      !it /
                                     D   C1

Speci cally, the rm's revenue depends on the aggregate market conditions and the rm-speci c
productivity and capital stock. Similarly, if the rm chooses to export, export market revenue is:

                                     X
(5) ln ritX D .   X   C 1/ ln.            / C ln 8tX C .            X   C 1/.    0   C   k   ln kit C     w   ln wt        !it / C z it
                                 X   C1

depending on the aggregate export market conditions, rm productivity, capital stock, and the
export market demand shock. In the context of this model, these two equations show that the
  rm's domestic revenue will provide information on its marginal cost, in particular the produc-
tivity level !it . The export market revenue will also provide information on the export demand
shocks, but only for rms that are observed to export. In the empirical model developed below we
will estimate the revenue functions and can interpret the two sources of unobserved heterogeneity
!it and z it more generally. The rst term !it will capture any source of rm-level heterogeneity
that affects the rm's revenue in both markets. While we will refer to this as productivity, it
could include characteristics of the product, such as its quality, that would affect the demand for
the rm's product, as well as its cost, in both markets. The z it term will capture all sources of
revenue heterogeneity, arising from either the cost or demand side, that are unique to the export
market. We will refer to z it as the rm's export market shock.

  Given these functional form assumptions for demand and marginal cost, there is a simple link
between rm revenue and pro t in each market. The rm's pro t in the domestic market is:

                                             D              1
(6)                                          it   D    .         /ritD .8tD ; kit ; !it /
                                                             D

where revenue is given above. Similarly, if the rm chooses to export, the pro ts they will earn
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                               R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                                          5


are linked to export market revenue as:

                                            X                 1
(7)                                         it   D        .       /ritX .8tX ; kit ; !it ; z it /
                                                              X

These equations allow us to measure rm pro ts from observable data on revenue in each market.
These short-run pro ts will be important determinants of the rm's decision to export and to
invest in R&D in the dynamic model developed in the next two sections.

                                     B.          Transition of the State Variables

   In order to model the rm's dynamic optimization problem for exporting and R&D we begin
with a description of the evolution of the process for rm productivity !it and the other state
variables ln8tD , ln8tX , z it , and kit . We assume that productivity evolves over time as a Markov
process that depends on the rm's investments in R&D, its participation in the export market, and
a random shock:

(8)        !it    D     g.!it     1 ; dit 1 ; eit 1 / C it
                                                          2                             3
                  D       0 C     1 !it 1 C 2 .!it 1 /                  C     3 .!it 1 /    C       4 dit 1   C   5 eit 1   C
                          6 dit   1 eit 1   C        it

dit 1 and eit 1 are, respectively, the rm's R&D and export market participation in the previous
period. The inclusion of dit 1 recognizes that the rm may affect the evolution of its productivity
by investing in R&D. The inclusion of eit 1 allows for the possibility of learning-by-exporting,
that participation in the export market is a source of knowledge or expertise that can improve fu-
ture productivity. The stochastic nature of productivity improvement is captured by it which is
treated as an iid shock with zero mean and variance 2 .4 This stochastic component represents
the role that randomness plays in the evolution of a rm's productivity. It is the innovation in the
productivity process between t 1 and t that is not anticipated by the rm and by construction is
not correlated with !it 1 ; dit 1 ; and eit 1 . This speci cation also recognizes that the stochastic
shocks to productivity in any year t will carry forward into productivity in future years. The sec-
ond line of the equation gives the assumed functional form for this relationship: a cubic function
of lagged productivity and a full set of interactions between lagged exporting and R&D.
   We model the past R&D and export choice, dit 1 ; and eit 1 , as discrete 0/1 variables which
implies that any rm that undertakes R&D or exporting has the same expected increment to its
productivity, as described by the parameters 4 ; 5 ;and 6 (the realizations will differ because
of the stochastic component it ). This is consistent with the evidence reported by Aw, Roberts,
and Winston (2007) who estimate a reduced-form model consistent with the structural model
we develop here. They nd that productivity evolution for Taiwanese electronics producers is
affected by the discrete export and R&D variables. They also nd that rm productivity is a
signi cant determinant of the discrete decision to undertake each of these activities, but nd little
evidence that productivity is correlated with the level of export market sales for rms that choose
these investments.

    4 This is a generalization of the productivity process used by G. Steven Olley and Ariel Pakes (1996) in their work
on productivity evolution in the U.S. telecommunications industry. They modeled productivity as an exogenous Markov
process !it D g.!it 1 / C it : Ulrich Doraszelski and Jordi Jaumandreu (2007) have endogenized productivity by
allowing it to depend on the rm's choice of R&D. They model productivity as !it D g.!it 1 ; dit 1 / C it where
dit 1 is the rm's past R&D expenditure. They also show how their speci cation generalizes the "knowledge capital"
model of productivity developed by Zvi Griliches (1979, 1998).
6                               THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                           MONTH YEAR


    The rm's export demand shock will be modeled as a rst-order Markov process:
                                                                                2
(9)                                 z it D   z z it 1   C   it ;   it   N .0;       /:

If a source of rm-level heterogeneity like z was not included in this model, there would be a
perfect cross-section correlation between domestic and export revenue. In our application it is
important to allow persistence in the evolution of z because it is going to capture factors like the
nature of the rm's product, the set of countries they export to, and any long-term contractual or
reputation effects that lead to persistence in the demand for its exports over time.5
   In modeling the dynamic decisions to export and invest in R&D, the rm's capital stock, ki ;
will be treated as xed over time. We recognize the differences in capital stocks across rms but
do not attempt to model the rm's investment in capital. Given the relatively short time series
in our data, virtually all the variation in capital stocks is across rms and there is nothing to be
gained in our empirical application by the additional complication of modeling the rm's capital
stock as an endogenous state variable. Finally, the aggregate state variables ln8tD and ln8tX are
treated as exogenous rst-order Markov processes that will be controlled for using time dummies
in the empirical model.

                              C.    Dynamic Decisions - R&D and Exporting

   In this section we develop the rm's dynamic decision to export and invest in R&D. A rm
entering the export market will incur a nonrecoverable sunk cost and this implies that the rm's
past export status is a state variable in the rm's export decision. This is the basis for the dynamic
models of export participation developed by Roberts and Tybout (1997) and Das, Roberts, and
Tybout (2007). We will also incorporate a sunk startup cost for the rm when it begins investing
in R&D and this will make the rm's past R&D status a state variable in the investment choices.
This is similar to Daniel Yi Xu (2008) who estimates a dynamic model of rm R&D choice where
R&D expenditures affect the future productivity of the rm. Finally, in our model there is one
additional intertemporal linkage: productivity is endogenous meaning the rm's export and R&D
choices can affect its future productivity as shown in equation 8.
   While the static pro ts, equations 6 and 7, earned by the rm are one important component of
its decisions, these will also depend on the combination of markets it participates in and the xed
and sunk costs it must incur. It is necessary to make explicit assumptions about the timing of the
  rm's decision to export and undertake R&D. We assume that the rm rst observes values of the
  xed and sunk costs of exporting, itF and itS ; and makes its discrete decision to export in year
t. Following this, it observes a xed and sunk cost of investment, itI and itD ; and makes the
discrete decision to undertake R&D.6 These costs are the expenditures that the rm must make
to realize the productivity gains that are given by equation 8. These expenditures will differ
across rms because of differences in technological opportunities and expertise and we assume
the rm observes its required expenditure before it makes its discrete decision to undertake R&D

    5 This formulation does not imply that the rm's R&D cannot affect its pro tability in the export market. We just
assume that whatever role R&D plays it works through ! and affects the rm's revenue and pro ts in both the domestic
and export market. In our data, the R&D variable measures the rm's investments to develop and introduce new products
and to improve its production processes. This variable is best incorporated in our model by allowing it to affect both
markets. If separate data were available on R&D expenditures to develop new products and expenditures to improve
production processes then some other speci cations could be developed. For example, it would be possible to allow the
process R&D variable to affect both markets through ! while the new product expenditures acted to shift export demand
through z.
    6 An alternative assumption is that the rm simultaneously chooses d and e. This will lead to a multinomial model
of the four possible combinations of exporting and R&D investment. In the empirical application, it is more dif cult to
calculate the probability of each outcome in this environment.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                                R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                                      7


or export. Since we do not know the underlying technological opportunities for each rm we
model these four expenditures as iid draws from a known joint distribution G : One goal of the
empirical model is to estimate parameters that characterize the cost distribution.
  The state vector for rm i in year t is sit D .!it ; z it ; ki ; 8t ; eit 1; dit 1 / and the rm's value
function in year t; before it observes its xed and sunk costs, can be written as:
                  Z
(10) Vit .sit / D . itD C max f. itX eit 1 itF .1 eit 1 / itS / C VitE .sit /; VitD .sit /g/dG
                                      eit

where eit 1 is a discrete 0/1 variable identifying the rm's export status in t 1. If the rm
exported in t 1 it pays the xed cost itF when exporting in period t, otherwise it pays the sunk
entry cost itS to participate. V E is the value of an exporting rm after it makes its optimal R&D
decision and, similarly, VitD is the value of a non-exporting rm after it makes its optimal R&D
decision. This equation shows that the rm chooses to export in year t when the current plus
expected gain in future export pro t exceeds the relevant xed or sunk cost. In this equation the
value of investing in R&D is subsumed in VitD and VitE . Speci cally,

                         Z
(11)   VitE .sit /   D        max f E t VitC1 .sitC1 jeit D 1; dit D 1/               dit     I
                                                                                            1 it    .1     dit       D
                                                                                                                 1 / it ;
                               dit
                             E t VitC1 .sitC1 jeit D 1; dit D 0/gdG

The rst term shows that if the rm chooses to undertake R&D .dit D 1/ then it pays a current
cost that depends on its prior R&D choice. If it invested in R&D in t 1 then it pays the
  xed investment cost itI otherwise it pays the sunk startup cost itD : It has an expected future
return which depends on how R&D affects future productivity. If they do not choose to invest
.dit D 0/ they have a different future productivity path. The larger the impact of R&D on future
productivity, the larger the difference between the expected returns of doing R&D versus not
doing R&D and thus the more likely the rm is to invest in R&D. Similarly, the value of R&D to
a non-exporting rm is:

                         Z
(12)   VitD .sit /   D        max f E t VitC1 .sitC1 jeit D 0; dit D 1/               dit     I
                                                                                            1 it    .1     dit       D
                                                                                                                 1 / it ;
                                dit
                             E t VitC1 .sitC1 jeit D 0; dit D 0/gdG

where the rm faces the same tradeoff, but now the future productivity paths will be those for a
non-exporter. Finally, to be speci c, the expected future value conditional on different choices
for eit and dit is:

                                             Z Z Z
(13)       E t VitC1 .sitC1 jeit ; dit / D                 VitC1 .s 0 /d F.!0 j!it ; eit ; dit /d F.z 0 jz it /dG.80 j8t /
                                              0    0   0
                                             8 z !

In this equation the evolution of productivity d F.!0 j!it ; eit ; dit / is conditional on both eit and
dit because of the assumption in equation 8.
   In this framework, the net bene ts of both exporting and R&D investment are increasing in
current productivity. This leads to the usual selection effect where high productivity rms are
more likely to export and invest in R&D. By making future productivity endogenous, this model
recognizes that current choices lead to improvements in future productivity and thus more rms
8                                THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                                MONTH YEAR


will self-select into, or remain in, exporting and R&D investment in the future.
   When we have two choice variables for the rm, there are new forces in addition to the selec-
tion effect which make the decisions interdependent. First, whether or not the rm chooses to
export in year t affects the return to investing in R&D. For any state vector, we can de ne the
marginal bene t of doing R&D from equations 11 and 12 as the difference in the expected future
returns between choosing and not choosing R&D:


(14)         M B Rit .sit jeit / D E t VitC1 .sitC1 jeit ; dit D 1/           E t VitC1 .sitC1 jeit ; dit D 0/:

This will depend on the impact of R&D on future productivity but also on the rm's export choice
eit because of the effect of the sunk cost of exporting and the direct effect of exporting on future
productivity through equation 8. In the special case where the sunk cost of exporting itS D 0 and
exporting does not affect the evolution of productivity ( 5 D 6 D 0 in equation 8), exporting
becomes a static decision and M B Rit will not be a function of eit implying that an exporter and
a non-exporter will have the same valuation of R&D investment.7
   In general, M B Rit will differ for exporters and nonexporters and the sign and magnitude of
the difference will depend on the combined effect of the sunk cost of exporting and the sign of the
interaction effect between R&D and exporting on productivity, which is given by the coef cient
  6 in equation 8. De ne the difference in the future bene t of R&D between exporters and
nonexporters as 1M B Rit .sit / D M B Rit .sit jeit D 1/ M B Rit .sit jeit D 0/: If 6 > 0 then
R&D will be more valuable to exporters and 1M B R > 0: As 6 falls, 1M B R also declines
and can become negative if 6 is negative and the sunk cost of exporting is suf ciently small.
In this case nonexporters will be more likely to undertake R&D projects. One way to interpret
this is to recognize that d and e are both tools that the rm can employ to acquire knowledge
and expertise in order to improve its future productivity. If the two activities are essentially
substitutes in the type of knowledge or expertise they bring to the rm, there will be diminishing
returns to additional activities and 6 < 0: Conversely, if the knowledge and expertise acquired
through the two activities are complementary, for example, a rm that conducts its own R&D
program is better able to assimilate knowledge gained from its export contacts, then there are
increasing returns to activities, 6 > 0 and productivity will rise more when the rm adds the
second activity.8
   The expected payoff to exporting will, in general, depend on the rm's past choice of R&D.
From equation 10 exporting provides current export pro ts itX and a future bene t that depends
on the difference between being in the export market VitE and remaining only in the domestic
market VitD : For any state vector we can de ne the marginal bene t of exporting as:

                                                   X
(15)                 M B E it .sit jdit   1/   D   it .sit / C   VitE .sit jdit   1/   VitD .sit jdit   1/

If there is a sunk cost to initiating an R&D program, this difference will depend on the rm's
previous R&D choice dit 1: In the special case where there is no sunk cost of R&D then VitE and
VitD ; and thus M B E it ; do not depend on dit 1: The incremental impact of R&D on the return to
exporting can be measured by 1M B E it .sit / D M B E it .sit jdit 1 D 1/ M B E it .sit jdit 1 D 0/.

    7 This does not imply that the ability to export has no effect on the rm's choice of R&D. Atkeson and Burstein's
(forthcoming) model treats exporting as a static decision but the expectation of lower future xed costs in the export
market increases the rm's incentive to invest in current R&D. They study the implications of this market size effect on
the evolution of industry structure and productivity.
    8 This is the basis for the model of Wesley M. Cohen and Daniel A. Levinthal (1989). In their model R&D acts to
increase the rm's own innovation rate but also to increase its ability to learn or assimilate new information from others.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                             R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                                         9


   To summarize the model, rms's differ in their past export market experience, capital stocks,
productivity, and export demand and these determine their short-run pro ts in the domestic and
export market. The rm can affect its future productivity and thus pro ts by investing in R&D
or participating in the export market. These processes, combined with the required xed or sunk
expenditure to export or conduct R&D, determine the rm's optimal decisions on export market
participation and whether or not to undertake R&D. In the next section we detail how we estimate
the structural parameters of the pro t functions, productivity process, and costs of exporting and
conducting R&D.

                                   II.        Empirical Model and Estimation

   The model of the last section can be estimated using rm or plant-level panel data on export
market participation, export market revenue, domestic market revenue, capital stocks, and the
discrete R&D decision. In this section we develop an empirical model which can be estimated in
two stages. In the rst stage, parameters of the domestic revenue function and the productivity
evolution process will be jointly estimated and used to construct the measure of rm productivity.
In the second stage, a dynamic discrete choice model of the export and R&D decision will be
developed and used to estimate the xed and sunk cost of exporting and R&D and the export
revenue parameters. The second-stage estimator is based on the model of exporting developed by
Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007) augmented with the R&D decision and endogenous productivity
evolution. The full set of model parameters includes the market demand elasticities X and D ,
the aggregate demand shifters, 8tX and 8tD , the marginal cost parameters 0 , k , and w , the
function describing productivity evolution g.!it 1 ; dit 1 ; eit 1 /, the variance of the productivity
shocks 2 , the distribution of the xed and sunk costs of exporting and R&D investment G and
the Markov process parameters for the export market shocks, z and 2 .

                                         A.    Demand and Cost Parameters

  We begin by estimating the domestic demand, marginal cost, and productivity evolution para-
meters. The domestic revenue function in equation 4 is appended with an iid error term u it that
re ects measurement in revenue or optimization errors in price choice:

                                       D
(16) ln ritD D .    D   C 1/ ln.              / C ln 8tD C .   D   C 1/.   0   C   k   ln kit C   w   ln wt   !it / C u it
                                   D   C1

where the composite error term, . D C 1/. !it / C u it contains rm productivity. We utilize
the insights of Olley and Pakes (1996) to rewrite the unobserved productivity in terms of some
observable variables that are correlated with it. In general, the rm's choice of the variable
input levels for materials, m it , and electricity, n it , will depend on the level of productivity and
the export market shock (which are both observable to the rm). Under our assumption that
marginal cost is constant in output, the relative expenditures on all the variable inputs will not
be a function of total output and thus not depend on the export market shock z it : In addition, if
technology differences are not Hick's neutral then differences in productivity will lead to variation
across rms and time in the mix of variable inputs used. The material and energy expenditures
by the rm will contain information on the productivity level.9 Using these insights we can write
the level of productivity, conditional on the capital stock, as a function of the variable input levels

    9 A large empirical literature has developed models of technical change that are not Hicks neutral. Dale Jorgenson,
Frank Gollop, and Barbera Fraumeni (1987) estimate biased technical change using sectoral data. Hans Binswanger
(1974) and Rodney Stevenson (1980) are early applications using state and plant-level data, respectively. The empirical
studies tend to nd that technological change is not Hick's neutral.
10                                  THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                                                  MONTH YEAR


!it .kit ; m it ; n it /: This allows us to use the materials and electricity expenditures by the rm to
control for the productivity in equation 16. By combining the demand elasticity terms into an
intercept 0 , and the time-varying aggregate demand shock and market-level factor prices into a
set of time dummies Dt , equation 16 can be written as:


                                                  T
                                                  X
(17)                 ln ritD   D          0   C         t Dt   C.        D   C 1/.         k   ln kit     !it / C u it
                                                  tD1
                                                  T
                                                  X
                               D          0C            t Dt   C h.kit ; m it ; n it / C vit
                                                  tD1

where the function h. / captures the combined effect of capital and productivity on domestic
revenue. We specify h. / as a cubic function of its arguments and estimate equation 17 with
ordinary least squares. The tted value of the h. / function, which we denote O it , is an estimate
of . D C 1/. k ln kit !it /.10 Next, as in Olley and Pakes (1996) and Doraszelski and Jau-
mandreu (2007), we construct a productivity series for each rm. This is done by estimating the
parameters of the productivity process, equation 8. Substituting !it D . 1C1 / O it C k ln kit
                                                                           D
into equation 8 for productivity evolution gives an estimating equation:


                                                                                                                                   2
(18)     O it   D       k  ln kit      0   C     1 . O it 1          k   ln kit   1/             2 . it 1
                                                                                                    O             k   ln kit     1/    C
                                                         3
                        3 . it 1           k ln kit 1 /            4 dit 1          5 eit 1               6 dit 1 eit 1
                            O                                                                                                     it

where the star represents that the and k coef cients are multiplied by . D C 1/.11 This
equation can be estimated with nonlinear least squares and the underlying and k parameters
                                                                                                          ^           ^
can be retrieved given an estimate of D . Finally, given estimates                                         k   and        D;   we construct an
estimate of productivity for each observation as:


                                      ^                    ^                           ^
(19)                                  !it D         .1=.       D   C 1// O it C            k   ln kit :

   The nal estimating equation in the static demand and cost model exploits the data on total
variable cost .tvc/. Since each rm's marginal cost is constant with respect to output and equal
for both domestic and export output, tvc is the sum of the product of output and marginal cost
in each market. Using the rst-order condition for pro t maximization, marginal cost is equal
to marginal revenue in each market and thus tvc is an elasticity-weighted combination of total
revenue in each market:


                                                                              1                           1
(20)                  tvcit D qitD cit C qitX cit D ritD .1 C                     / C ritX .1 C                / C "it
                                                                              D                            X


   10 In this stage of the estimation we recognize that the rm's capital stock changes over time and incorporate that into
the variation in O it . In the estimation of the dynamic export and R&D decisions in section 4.2 we simplify the process
and keep the rm's capital stock xed at its mean value over time.
   11 The only exceptions are that                      1 and                     2
                                      2 D 2 .1 C D /           3 D 3 .1 C D /
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                          R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                                       11


where the error term " is included to re ect measurement error in total cost. This equation
provides estimates of the two demand elasticity parameters.
   Three key aspects of this static empirical model are worth noting. First, we utilize data on the
  rm's domestic revenue to estimate rm productivity, an important source of rm heterogeneity
that is relevant in both the domestic and export markets. In effect, we use domestic revenue data
to estimate and control for one source of the underlying pro t heterogeneity in the export market.
Second, like Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007) we utilize data on the rm's total variable cost to
estimate demand elasticities and markups in both markets. Third, the method we use to estimate
the parameters of the productivity process, equation 8, can be extended to include other endoge-
nous variables that impact productivity. Estimation of the process for productivity evolution is
important for estimating the rm's dynamic investment equations because the parameters from
equation 8 are used directly to construct the value functions that underlie the rm's R&D and
export choice, equations 11, 12, and 13.

                                             B.    Dynamic Parameters

   The remaining parameters of the model, the xed and sunk costs of exporting and investment
and the process for the export revenue shocks, can be estimated using the discrete decisions
for export market participation, R&D, and export revenue for the rm's that choose to export.
Intuitively, entry and exit from the export market provide information on the distribution of the
sunk entry costs itS and xed cost itF , respectively. The level of export revenue provides
information on the distribution of the demand shocks z it conditional on exporting, which can be
used to infer the unconditional distribution for the export shocks. The distribution of the xed
and sunk cost of R&D investment, itI and itD ; are estimated from the discrete R&D choice.
   The dynamic estimation is based on the likelihood function for the observed patterns of rm
i exporting ei      .ei0 ; :::ei T /, export revenue riX         X ; :::r X /, and the discrete patterns of
                                                              .ri0       iT
  rm R&D investment di            .di0 ; :::di T /. Once we recover the rst-stage parameter estimates
and construct the rm-level productivity series !i             .!i0 ; :::!i T /, we can write the ith rm's
contribution to the likelihood function as:

(21)                      P.ei ; di ; riX j!i ; ki ; 8/ D P.ei ; di j!i ; ki ; 8; z iC /h.z iC /

This equation expresses the joint probability of the data as the product of the joint probability
of the discrete e and d decisions, conditional on the export market shocks z, and the marginal
distribution of z.12 The variable z iC denotes the time series of export market shocks in the years
.0; 1; :::T / when rm i exports. Das, Roberts and Tybout (2007) show how to construct the
density h.z iC / given our assumptions on the process for the export market shocks in equation 9.
Given knowledge of h.z iC / the export market shocks can be simulated and used in the evaluation
of the likelihood function.13
   A key part of the likelihood function is the joint probability of .ei ; di /: By assuming that
the sunk and xed costs for each rm and year are iid draws from a known distribution, the
joint probability of .ei ; di / can be written as the product of the choice probabilities for eit and
dit in each year. These choice probabilities in year t are conditioned on the state variables in
that year: !it ; z it ; ki ; 8t ; eit 1; and dit 1 . The lagged export and R&D choice are part of the

   12 In this equation we treat the intercepts of the domestic and export revenue equations as a constant, 8: We have
estimated the model with time-varying intercepts but they were not statistically different from each other in our short
panel and we have simpli ed the estimation by treating them as constant.
   13 Given the assumptions in equation 9, the distribution h.z C / is normal with a zero mean and a covariance matrix that
                                                                i
depends on z and 2 : If the export market shocks were not serially correlated, equation 21 would take the form of a
tobit model. Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007, section 3) show how to extend the model to the case where z is serially
correlated and we use their methodology to allow the export market shocks to be serially correlated.
12                                THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                               MONTH YEAR


state vector because they determine whether the rm pays the sunk cost to enter or the xed cost
to remain in year t. The model developed above allows us to express the conditional choice
probabilities in terms of these costs and the value functions that summarize the payoffs to each
activity. Speci cally, equation 10 shows the rm's decision to export involves a comparison of
the expected pro t from exporting relative to remaining in the domestic market with the xed
cost, for previous period exporters, and the sunk cost for nonexporters. From this equation, the
probability of exporting can be written as:
                                                    F                       S         X
(22)               P.eit D 1jsit / D P.eit        1 it   C .1     eit   1 / it        it   C VitE   VitD /

  Similarly, equations 11 and 12 show that the rm compares the increase in expected future
value if it chooses to do R&D with the current period cost of R&D. The rm's conditional
probability of investing in R&D is equal to:

(23)     P.dit D 1jsit / D           P.dit 1 itI C .1 dit 1 / itD
                                      E t VitC1 .sitC1 jeit ; dit D 1/           E t VitC1 .sitC1 jeit ; dit D 0//

Notice that there is one slight difference in the state vector for the R&D decision. The current
period exports, rather than the lagged exports, are the relevant state variable because of the timing
assumption made in the theoretical model. There it was assumed that the rm makes its export
and R&D decisions sequentially, so that current period export status is known prior to choosing
R&D.14
   The probabilities of investing in R&D and exporting in equations 22 and 23 depend on the
value functions E t VitC1 ; VitE ; and VitD . For a given set of parameters, these can be constructed
by iterating on the equation system de ned by 10, 11, 12, and 13. We will evaluate the likelihood
function for each set of parameters and rather than attempt to maximize the likelihood function
we will utilize a Bayesian Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) estimator. This changes the ob-
jective of estimation to characterizing the posterior distribution of the dynamic parameters. The
details of the value-function solution algorithm and the MCMC implementation are contained in
the appendix to this paper published on the AER website. The nal detail needed for estimation
is a distributional assumption on the xed and sunk costs. We assume that each of the four costs
are drawn from separate independent exponential distributions. The xed and sunk cost parame-
ters that we estimate are the means of these distributions. With this method it is also simple to
allow the cost distributions to vary with some observable characteristic of the rm. For example,
we allow the xed and sunk cost distributions to be different for large and small rms (based on
their observed capital stock) and estimate separate exponential distributions for each group.

                                                      III.      Data

                                      A.    Taiwanese Electronics Industry

   The model developed in the last section will be used to analyze the sources of productivity
change of manufacturing plants in the Taiwanese electronics industry. The micro data used in
estimation was collected by the Ministry of Economic Affairs (MOEA) in Taiwan for the years

   14 The choice probabilities in equations 22 and 23 are accurate for time periods 1; 2:::T in the data. In the rst year of
the data, period 0, we do not observe the prior period choices for d and e and this leads to an initial conditions problem
in estimating the probabilities of exporting or investing in R&D. We deal with this using James J. Heckman's (1981)
suggestion and model the decision to export and conduct R&D in year 0 with separate probit equations. The explanatory
variables in year 0 are the state variables !i0 ; ki; and z i0 :
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                         R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                                      13


2000, and 2002-2004.15 There are four broad product classes included in the electronics industry:
consumer electronics, telecommunications equipment, computers and storage equipment, and
electronics parts and components. The electronics industry has been one of the most dynamic
industries in the Taiwanese manufacturing sector. Chia-Hung Sun (2005) reports that over the
two decades 1981-1999, the electronics industry averaged total factor productivity growth of 2.0
percent per year, while the total manufacturing sector averaged 0.2 percent. It is also a major
export industry. For example, in 2000, the electronics subsector accounted for approximately
40 percent of total manufacturing sector exports. Several authors have discussed the nature
of information diffusion from developed country buyers to export producers.16 In addition,
electronics has also been viewed as Taiwan's most promising and prominent high-tech industry.
As reported by National Science Council of Taiwan, R&D expenditure in the electronics industry
accounted for more than 72 percent of the manufacturing total in 2000. Overall, it is an excellent
industry in which to examine the linkages between exporting, R&D investment, and productivity.
   The data set that we use is a balanced panel of 1237 plants that were in operation in all four
sample years and that reported the necessary data on domestic and export sales, capital stocks,
and R&D expenditure. While the survey is conducted at the plant level, the distinction between
plant and rm is not important in this sample. Of the sample plants, 1126, 91 percent of the
total, are owned by rms that had only a single plant in the electronics industry. The remaining
111 plants are owned by rms that had at least one other plant in the industry in at least one year.
Only one plant was owned by a rm that had more than two plants under ownership. This closely
mirrors the ownership pattern in the industry as a whole, where, over the period 2000-2004, 92.8
percent of the manufacturing plants were owned by single-plant rms. In the discussion of the
empirical results that follows we will use the word plant to refer to the observations in our sample.
   Table 1 provides summary measures of the size of the plants, measured as sales revenue. The
top panel of the table provides the median plant size across the 1237 plants in our sample in each
year, while the bottom panel summarizes the average plant size. The rst column summarizes
the approximately 60 percent of the plants that do not export in a given year. The median plant's
domestic sales varies from 17.0 to 22.2 million new Taiwan dollars.17 Among the exporting
plants, the median plant's domestic market sales is approximately twice as large, 36.4 to 52.8
million NT dollars. The export sales of the median plant are approximately 32 million NT
dollars. It is not the case, however, that there is a perfect correlation between domestic market
size and export market size across plants. The simple correlation between domestic and export
market revenue is .48 across all plant-year observations and .49 for observations with positive
export sales. This suggests that it will be necessary to allow at least two factors to explain the
plant-level heterogeneity in revenues in the two markets. The empirical model developed above
does this with productivity !it and the export market shock z it :

                                                    Table 1 here
   The distribution of plant revenue is highly skewed, particularly for plants that participate in
the export market. The average domestic plant sales are larger than the medians by a factor of
approximately ten for the exporting plants and the average export sales are larger by a factor of
approximately 17. The skewness in the revenue distributions can also be seen from the fact that

   15 The survey was not conducted in 2001. In that year a manufacturing sector census was conducted by the Directorate
General of Budget, Accounting, and Statistics. This cannot be merged at the plant level with the MOEA survey data for
the other years. We use the dynamic model developed in the last section to characterize the plant's productivity, R&D and
export choice for the years 2002-2004 and utilize the information from 2000 to control for the initial conditions problem
in the estimation.
   16 The initial arguments for learning-by-exporting, made by Howard Pack (1992), Brian Levy (1994), Michael Hobday
(1995), and Larry E. Westphal (2002), were based on case-study evidence for East Asian countries including Taiwan.
   17 In the period 2002-2004, the exchange rate between Taiwan and U.S. dollars was approximately 34 NT$/US$. The
median plant size is approximately .5 million U.S. dollars
14                               THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                              MONTH YEAR


the 100 largest plants in our sample in each year account for approximately 75 percent of the total
domestic sales and 91 percent of the export sales in the sample. The skewness in revenues will
lead to large differences in pro ts across plants and a heavy tail in the pro t distribution. To t the
participation patterns of all the plants it is necessary to allow the possibility that a plant has large
  xed and/or sunk costs. We allow for this in our empirical model by, rst, assuming exponential
distributions for the xed and sunk costs and, second, allowing large and small plants to draw
their costs from exponential distributions with different means. Together these assumptions
allow for substantial heterogeneity in the costs across plants.
   The other important variable in the data set is the discrete indicator of R&D investment. In the
survey, R&D expenditure is reported as the sum of the salaries of R&D personnel (researchers and
scientists), material purchases for R&D, and R&D capital (equipment and buildings) expenses.
We convert this into a discrete 0/1 variable if the expenditure is positive.18 Overall, 18.2 percent
of the plant-year observations have positive R&D expenditures and, for this group, the median
expenditure is 11.2 million NT dollars and the mean expenditure is 60.9 million NT dollars.
When expressed as a share of total plant sales, the median plant value is .031 and the mean is
.064. The R&D expenditure corresponds to the realization of the xed cost of R&D in our
model and, as with the export costs, we allow for substantial cost heterogeneity by both assuming
exponential distributions for the xed costs and allowing them to differ for large and small plants.

                       B.    Empirical Transition Patterns for R&D and Exporting

   The empirical model developed in the last section explains a producer's investment decisions.
In this section we summarize the patterns of R&D and exporting behavior in the sample, with a
focus on the transition patterns that are important to estimating the xed and sunk costs of R&D
and exporting. Table 2 reports the proportion of plants that undertake each combination of the
activities and the transition rates between pairs of activities over time. The rst row reports
the cross-sectional distribution of exporting and R&D averaged over all years. It shows that in
each year, the proportion of plants undertaking neither of these activities is .563. The proportion
that conduct R&D but do not export is .036, export only is .255, and do both activities is .146.
Overall, 731 of the sample plants (60 percent) engage in at least one of the investments in at least
one year. One straightforward explanation for the difference in export and R&D participation is
that differences in productivity and the export demand shocks affect the return of each activity
and the plant's with favorable values of these underlying pro t determinants self-select into each
activity.

                                                     Table 2 here
   The transition patterns among R&D and exporting are important for the model estimation. The
last four rows of the table report the transition rate from each activity in year t to each activity in

   18 Another possible source of knowledge acquisition is the purchase of technology from abroad. The survey form
asks each plant if it made any purchases of technology. This is a much less common occurence than investing in R&D.
In our data, 18.2 percent of the plant-year observations report positive R&D expenditures but only 4.9 percent report
purchasing technology from abroad. More importantly for estimation of our model, only 31 observations (0.62 percent
of the sample) report purchasing technology but not conducting their own R&D. It is not going to be possible to estimate
separate effects of R&D and technology purchases on productivity with this sample. Given our discrete model of R&D
investment, there would be virtually no difference in the data if we de ned the discrete variable as investing in R&D
or purchasing technology. We have not used the technology purchase variable in our estimation. Lee Branstetter and
Jong-Rong Chen (2006) use this survey data for an earlier, longer time period, 1986-1995, and a more broadly de ned
industry, electrical machinery and electronics products, and include both technology purchases and R&D expenditures,
measured as continuous variables, in a production function model. They nd that both variables are signi cant in the
production function when estimated with random effects and the R&D elasticity is larger. Neither variable is signi cant
in xed effects estimates of the production function and they suspect that the reason is measurement error in the variables.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                    R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                             15


t C 1. Several patterns are clear. First, there is signi cant persistence in the status over time. Of
the plants that did neither activity in year t, .871 of them are in the same category in year t C 1.
Similarly, the probability of remaining in the same category over adjacent years is .336, .708, and
.767 for the other three categories. This can re ect a combination of high sunk costs of entering
a new activity and a high degree of persistence in the underlying sources of pro t heterogeneity,
which, in our model, are capital stocks k, productivity !; and the export market shocks z.
   Second, plants that undertake one of the activities in year t are more likely to start the other
activity than a plant that does neither. If the plant does neither activity in year t, it has a probability
of .115 that it will enter the export market. This is lower than the .291 probability that a plant
conducting R&D only will then enter the export market. Similarly, a plant that does neither
activity has a .019 probability that it will start investing in R&D, but an exporting plant has a
.080 probability of adding R&D investment as a second activity. Third, plants that conduct both
activities in year t are less likely to abandon one of the activities than plants than only conduct
one of them. Plants that both export and conduct R&D have a .171 probability of abandoning
R&D and a .086 probability of leaving the export market. Plants that only do R&D have a .430
probability of stopping while plants that only export have a .223 probability of stopping.
   The transition patterns reported in Table 1 illustrate the need to model the R&D and exporting
decision jointly. In our model, there are three mechanisms linking these activities. One is that
plants that do one of the activities may have more favorable values of k; !; or z that lead them
to self-select into the other. A second pathway is that an investment in either activity can affect
the future path of productivity as shown in equation 8 and thus the return to both R&D and
exporting. A third pathway is possible for exporting. Even if exporting does not directly enter
the productivity evolution process, the return to R&D can be higher or lower for exporting versus
nonexporting plants, which makes the probability that the plant will conduct R&D dependent on
the plant's export status.

                                       IV.   Empirical Results

                           A.   Demand, Cost, and Productivity Evolution

   The parameter estimates from the rst-stage estimation of equations 18 and 20 are reported
in Table 3. The coef cients on the !; d; and e variables are the coef cients in equation 8.
We report estimates in column 1 using the discrete measure of R&D, which we also use in the
dynamic model.

                                              Table 3 here
   Focusing on the rst column, the demand elasticity parameters are virtually identical in the
domestic and export markets. The implied value of D is -6.38 and the value of X is -6.10.
These elasticity estimates imply markups of price over marginal cost of 18.6 percent for domestic
market sales and 19.6 percent for foreign sales. The coef cient on lnkit 1 is an estimate of the
elasticity of capital in the marginal cost function k : It equals -0.063 (s.e.=.0052), implying, as
expected, total variable costs are lower for plants with higher capital stock. More interesting are
the coef cients for productivity evolution. The coef cients 1 , 2 , and 3 measure the effect of
the three powers of !it 1 on !it . They imply a clear signi cant non-linear relationship between
current and lagged productivity. The coef cient 4 measures the effect of the lagged discrete
R&D investment on current productivity and it is positive and signi cant. Plants that are engaged
in R&D investment have 4.79 percent higher productivity. The direct effect of past exporting on
current productivity is given by 5 and is also positive and signi cant. This is a measure of the
productivity impact of learning-by-exporting and implies the past exporters have productivity that
is 1.96 percent higher. The magnitude of the export coef cient is less than half of the magnitude
of the R&D coef cient implying a larger direct productivity impact from R&D than exporting.
16                                THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                               MONTH YEAR


The last coef cient 6 measures an interaction effect from the combination of past exporting and
R&D on productivity evolution. Plants that do both R&D and exporting have productivity that is
5.56 percent higher than plants that do neither activity.19 Plants that do both activities have the
highest intercept in the productivity process, but the negative sign on the interaction term implies
that the marginal contribution to future productivity of adding the second activity is less than the
marginal contribution of adding that same activity when the plant makes no investment.20
   The coef cients 4 ; 5 ; and 6 imply that the mean long-run productivity level for a plant will
depend on the combinations of e and d. Relative to a plant that never exports or invests in R&D
.e D 0, d D 0/; a plant that does both in each year .e D d D 1/ will have mean productivity that
is 123 percent higher.21 A plant that only conducts R&D .d D 1; e D 0/ in every year will be
twice as productive. The smallest improvement is for the rms that only export .e D 1; d D 0/.
They will be 34 percent more productive than the base group While this provides a summary
of the technology linkages between exporting, R&D, and productivity, it does not recognize the
impact of this process on the plant's choice to enter exporting or conduct R&D. This behavioral
response is the focus of the second stage estimation. Given the estimates in Table 3 we construct
an estimate of plant productivity from equation 19. The mean of the productivity estimates is .446
and the (.05, .95) percentiles of the distribution are (.092, .831). This variation in productivity
will be one important dimension of heterogeneity in the returns to R&D and exporting and be
important in explaining which plants self-select into these activities.22

                                                      Table 4 here
   We can assess how well the productivity measure correlates with the plant's R&D and export
choices. In the top panel of Table 4 we report estimates of a bivariate probit regression of
exporting and R&D on the rm's productivity, log capital stock, lagged export dummy, lagged
R&D dummy, and a set of time dummies. This regression is similar to the reduced form policy
functions that come from our dynamic model. The only difference is the fact that the export
demand shocks z are not included explictly but rather captured in the error terms. The bivariate
probit model allows the error terms of the two probits to be correlated, as they would be if z was
a common omitted factor. In both probit models, all the variables, particularly the productivity

   19 Aw, Roberts, and Winston (2007) also studied this industry using data from a 10-year time period, 1986-1996,
analyzed at 5-year intervals, and found a similar pattern (Table 6, p. 100). Compared with rms that did neither activity,
  rms that only exported had productivity that was 4.2 percent higher, rms that only did R&D had productivity that was
4.7 percent higher, and rms that did both had 7.8 percent higher productivity.
   20 Column 2 of Table 2 repeats the estimation using the log of R&D expenditure rather than the discrete variable. This
change has no effect on any of the model coef cients except the two coef cients on R&D, 4 and 6 : The statistical
signi ance of 4 and the insigni cance of 6 is not affected. Among the plants that conducted R&D the mean value
of the log of R&D expenditure is 9.14. At this mean expenditure, plants that conducted R&D have productivity that is
6.1 percent higher (.0610=.00667*9.14) than plants that make no investment and this is similar to the magnitude of the
R&D effect reported in column 1. In either speci cation the conclusion about the important role of R&D is the same.
We will utilize the discrete speci cation in the dynamic model. Although we have a short panel, we experimented with
including a second lag of R&D and exporting in equation 8. The coef cients on the two-period lags were very small
and not statistically signi cant (.0093 (t=1.2) for R&D and .0097 (t=1.6) for exporting) and so we limit our analysis to a
model with one year lags of R&D and exporting in the productivity evolution equation.
   21 Because the interaction term
                                      6 is not statistically signi cant in Table 3, we examined the sensitivity of the results
if we set the parameter equal to zero. In this case productivity for a plant that always does both activities .d D e D 1/
will increase more rapidly. The long-run productivity for this plant will be 162 percent higher than for a plant that does
neither activity.
   22 These estimates are based on a balanced panel of plants. They are robust if we extend the sample to include all plants
that enter or exit during the period. Following the framework in Olley and Pakes (1996) we estimate a probit model for
plant exit and include a predicted probability of exit in equation 18. In the probit regression, capital, and the productivity
proxies (material and energy use), explain very little of the exit variation. Adding this correction term to equation 18 has
virtually no effect on the estimated coef cients reported in Table 3. Finally, there is virtually no difference in the export
and R&D propensities between exiting and surviving plants in the sample. Overall, selection into the domestic market is
not an important feature of our data set.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                          R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                                        17


variable, are highly signi cant. The correlation in the errors is also positive and statistically
signi cant implying that the decisions are driven by some other common factors, such as the
export demand shocks z. In the second and third panels of Table 4 we report regressions of
export revenue, equation 5, for plants that are in the export market. The explanatory variables
are productivity, the capital stock, and time dummies. (The lagged export and R&D dummies do
not affect the volume decision once the rm is in the export market). The middle panel reports
OLS estimates of the revenue function and the bottom panel treats the export demand shocks
as time-invariant plant effects. In both cases the productivity variable is positive and highly
signi cant.23 It is important to recognize that this productivity measure has been estimated
from the domestic market revenue data. From the xed effect regression the variation in the
plant-speci c export demand shocks account for 72 percent of the error variance, suggesting
that, even after controlling for productivity, export demand heterogeneity will be an important
source of size and pro t differences in the export market. Overall, it is clear from these reduced
form regressions that the productivity variable we have constructed is measuring an important
plant characteristic that is correlated with the discrete export and R&D decisions and the plant's
export revenue once they choose to participate in the market.24 In the next section we report the
estimates of the dynamic investment equations.

                                              B.    Dynamic Estimates

   The remaining cost and export demand parameters are estimated in the second stage of our
empirical model using the likelihood function that is the product over the plant-speci c joint
probability of the data given in equation 21. Each of the four values I , D ; F and S is the
parameter of an exponential distribution for, respectively, the R&D xed cost, R&D sunk cost,
  xed cost of exporting, and the sunk cost of exporting. The coef cients reported in Table 5 are
the means and standard deviations of the posterior distribution of the parameters. The rst set of
estimates, labeled Model 1, assumes that all plants face the same distributions for the four costs.
While we will delay precise statements about the magnitudes of realized sunk and xed costs
until later, two broad patterns are immediately clear from the parameter estimates. First, for each
activity, the estimated xed cost parameter is less than the sunk cost parameter, indicating that
the startup costs of each activity are more substantial than the per-period costs of maintaining
the activity. Second, the xed and sunk costs parameters for R&D are larger than for exporting,
indicating that it will be more costly to begin or maintain an R&D investment program than an
export program.25

                                                      Table 5 here
   In the right side of table 5, labeled Model 2, we divide the plants into two groups based on
the size of the capital stock and allow the cost distributions to differ for small (size 1) and large
(size 2) plants. The two patterns observed in Model 1 are still present and, in addition, there are
differences in the cost distributions faced by large and small plants. The parameter values differ

   23 The coef cients on productivity will be subject to a selection bias if the export demand shocks z are correlated with
  rm productivity x: Our estimation of the full structural model recognizes the endogeneity of the decision to export and
the fact that the observed realizations of z are drawn from a truncated distribution.
   24 Similar results are reported in Aw, Roberts, and Winston (2007). They estimate a bivariate probit investment model
and nd that productivity is signi cant in both investments. They also nd that the lagged exporting status is also an
important determinant of current investment, which is consistent with the presence of sunk costs of exporting.
   25 To check if our estimates are sensitive to the assumption that plants choose their export status before their R&D
status, we reestimated the model with the alternative pattern for plant decisions. The results in Table 5 change very little
as a result and none of our conclusions are affected by this change. It is not surprising that this change has little effect
since it only changes the order of integration in equations (10)-(12) but has no effect on equation (13) which is the key
component of the future value.
18                                THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                              MONTH YEAR


the most for the two xed cost categories. The smaller parameter value for size 1 plants implies
that the scale of operations, either exporting or investing in R&D, will tend to be smaller for the
plants with smaller capital stocks. The nal group of parameters describe the stochastic process
driving the export market shocks z. This is characterized by a rst-order autoregressive process
with serial correlation parameter equal to 0:763 and a standard deviation for the transitory shocks
equal to exp(-0.289)=0:75. This positive serial correlation parameter implies persistence in the
plant's export status and export revenue if they choose to be in the market. The parameters
estimates for the z process are very similar for Models 1 and 2.

                                       C.    In-Sample Model Performance

   To assess the overall t of the model, we use the estimated parameters from Model 2 to simulate
patterns of R&D and exporting choice, transition patterns between the choices, and productivity
trajectories for the plants in the sample and compare the simulated patterns with the actual data.
Since each plant's productivity !it evolves endogenously according to equation 8, we need to
simulate each plant's trajectory of productivity jointly with its dynamic decisions.26 In Table 6
we report the actual and predicted percentage of R&D performers, export market participation
rate, and industry mean productivity. Overall, the simulations do a good job of replicating these
average data pattern for all three variables.

                                                      Table 6 here
   Second, we summarize the transition patterns of each plant's export and R&D status in table
7. The simulated panel performs reasonably well on the transition patterns for all four groups of
plants. In particular for the two groups that account of 81.8 percent of the sample observations,
those who engage in neither activity and those who only export, the predicted transition patterns
match the data very closely. The most dif cult transition patterns to t closely are the ones related
to starting or stopping R&D. Among the group of plants that only conduct R&D in year t, the
model tends to overpredict the proportion of plants that will stop R&D and underestimate the
proportion that will continue in year t C 1. This group of plants accounts for only 3.6 percent
of the total observations, however. The model simulations also capture the inter-dependence of
the two activities. Plants that undertake one of the activities in year t are more likely to start the
other than a plant that does neither. If a plant does neither activity in year t, it has a probability of
.110 of entering the export market, lower than the .193 probability that a plant conducting R&D
only will also enter the export market. Similarly, a plant that does neither activity has a .019
probability of starting R&D only, but an exporting plant has a .077 probability of adding R&D
investment. These four transition rates are all similar to what is observed in the data.

                                                      Table 7 here

          D.     The Determinants of R&D and Exporting: Productivity, Costs, and History

   In our model the determinants of a plant's export and R&D choice are its current productiv-
ity, prior export and R&D status, export market shock, capital stock, and cost draws. In this
section we will isolate the role of current productivity, the plant's export and R&D history, and
the cost shocks on current R&D and export choices. Isolating the role of current productivity

   26 To do this we take the initial year status .! ; z ; e ; k / of all plants in our data as given and simulate their next
                                                   i0 i0 i0 i
three sample year's export demand shocks z it , R&D costs itI , itD , and export costs itF , it  S . We then use equations
10, 11, 12, and 13 to solve each plant's optimal R&D and export decisions year-by-year. Note that these simulations do
not use any data information on a plant's characteristics after their rst year. We calculate each plant's domestic and
export revenues using equations 4 and 5. For each plant, we repeat the simulation 100 times and report averages over the
simulations.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                          R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                                      19


allows us to understand the importance of market selection effects while isolating the role of
the plant's history allows us to understand the importance of sunk costs in the decision process.
We do this by calculating the marginal bene t to each activity. Table 8 reports the marginal
bene ts of exporting for a plant with different combinations of productivity (rows) and previ-
ous R&D (columns). The second and third columns report values of VtE .!t ; dt 1 /;the future
payoff to being an exporter, while columns four and ve report VtD .!t ; dt 1 /; the future payoff
to remaining in the domestic market.27 All the values are increasing in the productivity level,
re ecting the increase in pro ts in both markets with higher productivity. For each value of
.!t ; dt 1 /; VtE .!t ; dt 1 / > VtD .!t ; dt 1 / re ecting both the fact that current exporters do not
have to pay the sunk cost of entering the export market in the next period and the impact of
learning-by-exporting on future productivity.

                                                     Table 8 here

   The sixth column reports the marginal bene t of exporting for a plant that conducted R&D in
t 1; de ned in equation 15 as M B E.!t jdt 1 D 1/. It is positive, re ecting the fact that a plant
that does both activities has a higher future productivity trajectory, and is increasing in current
productivity implying that a high productivity producer is more likely to self select into the export
market. The bene t of exporting for a plant that did not invest in R&D, M B E.!t jdt 1 D
0/; is reported in the last column and it also is positive and increasing in the level of current
productivity. Comparing the last two columns we see that 1M B E.!t / D M B E.!t jdt 1 D
1/ M B E.!t jdt 1 D 0/ is negative and the magnitudes are very small, implying that the prior
R&D experience has very little impact on the return to exporting.28 Heterogeneity in current
productivity will be a major factor distinguishing which plants participate in the export market
and its effect will swamp differences due to past R&D experience.
   The marginal bene ts of exporting can be translated into probabilities of exporting by compar-
ing them with the relevant cost faced by the plant: the sunk cost if the plant was not an exporter
in the prior year .et 1 D 0/ and the xed cost if it was .et 1 D 1/: The coef cients F and
  S in Table 5 are each the mean of an exponential random variable. The higher estimate for S
indicates that the sunk cost distribution will have much more of the mass concentrated in high
cost values, so, for the same marginal bene t, a plant will be more likely to remain in the export
market than to enter the export market. The probabilities of exporting are reported in Table 9 for
different combinations of productivity (the rows) and dt 1 for both nonexporters and exporters
(columns 2-5). First, the export probabilities are always increasing in current productivity. The
difference between a low and high productivity plant is substantial and this shows the importance
of selection based on current productivity. Second, the probabilities are largest for past exporters
.et 1 D 1/: For example, a plant with productivity level 0.49 and prior R&D investment, will
have a .710 probability of remaining in the export market but only a .309 probability of entering.
This is the effect of the sunk cost of entry and it can also be substantial for the intermediate range
of plant productivity.
   A comparison of Tables 8 and 9 provides insight on the xed and sunk costs that the plants
will incur to be exporters. As discussed in section I.C, the costs are the expenditures that a plant
must make to participate in the export market and these differ across plants. Plants that have a

   27 These are averages across values of the capital stock and export demand shock and use the dynamic parameter
estimates from Model 2 in Table 5
   28 The negative sign for 1M B E.! / is due to the negative value for the
                                        t                                          6 coef cient in Table 3, which implies
that the marginal contribution of exporting is larger for plants that did not have prior R&D experience. If we set this
coef cient equal to zero, 1M B E.!t / will take positive values, so that plants that conducted R&D in the past will have a
higher return to exporting. The magnitude of the effect, however, remains quite small. At the mean productivity level,
1M B E.!t D 0:49/ =4.3 rather than the -1.6 seen from Table 8. Our conclusion that prior R&D experience has little
impact on the return to exporting is not affected by this change.
20                              THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                           MONTH YEAR


  xed or sunk cost less than the value of M B E.!t jdt 1 / will choose to export. Columns 2-5 of
Table 9 show the proportion of plants that will have costs less than this threshold. For example,
M B E.!t D 0:49jdt 1 D 1/ is 31.3 million NT dollars and 71.0 percent of the prior period
exporting plants will have a xed cost less than this value and 30.9 percent of the prior period
nonexporters will have a sunk cost less than this value and thus choose to export in the current
year. For each combination of the state variables .!t ; dt 1 ; et 1 / the mean xed/sunk cost of
the plants that choose to export is the truncated mean of an exponential distribution with location
parameter given in Table 5 and truncation point given by M B E. These means are reported in the
2nd and 3rd columns of Table 10 for different values of !.29 For example, for the productivity
level !t D 0:49, the plants that choose to continue in the export market will have a mean xed
cost of 6.21 million NT dollars while the plants that choose to enter the export market will have
a mean sunk cost of 12.32 million NT dollars. The sunk cost of entry is always larger than
the xed cost of maintaining an export market presence. The mean xed and sunk cost of the
exporters rises with the plant's productivity level since the return to exporting, M B E, rises with
productivity. High productivity plants will nd it pro table to make larger xed or sunk cost
outlays in order to export than their low productivity competitors.

                                                   Table 9 here

                                                   Table 10 here
   Tables 11 and 12 conduct a similar analysis of the marginal bene t and probability of conduct-
ing R&D. Columns 2-5 of Table 11 report the values of E t VtC1 .!t jeit ; dit / de ned in equation
13. First, the future plant value is increasing in the level of productivity and the magnitudes vary
substantially between low and high productivity plants. Second, for any value of !, E VtC1 is
greatest for plants that do both activities, followed by R&D plants, exporting plants, and plants
that do neither activity. This re ects the difference in the parameters of the productivity process
reported in Table 3 as well as the impact of sunk costs. The last two columns report the mar-
ginal bene t of R&D, M B R.!t jet / de ned in equation 14. This increases substantially with
the level of productivity implying that high productivity plants will be more likely to self select
into R&D investment. Comparing the last two columns reveals the impact of exporting on the
return to R&D. 1M B R.!t / D M B R.!t jet D 1/ M B R.!t jet D 0/ is negative implying a
higher return to R&D for nonexporting plants. This sign of this interaction effect follows from
the negative coef cient on 6 but the magnitudes are quite small.30
   Table 12 reports the probability of undertaking R&D for different combinations of !t , et ; and
dt 1 : The probabilities increase with productivity for all combinations of et and dt 1 : Com-
paring columns 2 and 3 we observe that, for any level of productivity, the probability of R&D is
always higher when dt 1 D 1: This re ect the fact that the sunk cost of starting the operation is
more substantial than the xed cost of maintaining it. The same pattern holds in columns 4 and
5.

                                                   Table 11 here


                                                   Table 12 here

   29 We report the values for plants that conducted R&D in the prior year, d
                                                                              t 1 D 1: The cost values for plants that
did not conduct R&D are approximately .1 to .4 million NT dollars higher, re ecting the slightly higher value of MBE in
Table 8 for these plants.
   30 If we set
                 6 D 0, 1M B R.!t D 0:49/ =11.3 rather than -3.6 from Table 11. As seen above with 1M B E; the
interaction effect of exporting on the return to R&D is small.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                         R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                                     21


   The value of M B R.!t jet / in Table 11 provides the marginal bene t of conducting R&D which
is also the threshold expenditure necessary for a plant to undertake R&D. Plants with sunk or
  xed costs less than this threshold will choose to invest in R&D. The mean value of the xed and
sunk cost of R&D, for the set of plants that choose to invest, are reported in the last two columns
of Table 10.31 For example, for plants with productivity level !t D 0:49 and et D 1; the value of
conducting R&D is 34.3 million NT dollars, 32.9 percent of the plants that previously conducted
R&D will have xed costs less than this value, and the average realized R&D expenditure among
this group is 12.8 million NT dollars. In addition, 7.5 percent of the plants that did not previously
invest in R&D will choose to enter and the average sunk startup expenditure among this group
is 15.64 million NT dollars. As we observed with exporting, the mean sunk startup costs for
R&D are greater than the mean xed cost of continuing an R&D program. Comparing the two
activities, the mean costs of R&D are greater than the mean costs of exporting at each productivity
level, which contributes to the fact that R&D investment rates are lower than export rates. For
plants with productivity above 0.32, this is reinforced by the fact that the marginal return to R&D
is less than the marginal return to exporting, M B R < M B E, so that high productivity plants are
more likely to export than invest in R&D. This is particularly true for high productivity plants
that are entering the activity.
   Overall, the results in Tables 8-12 allow us to draw four conclusions about the determinants
of the plant's decision regarding exporting and R&D investment. First, current productivity has
a large positive impact on the return to both activities, particularly exporting. Self-selection
based on the plant's productivity is a major reason a plant chooses to export or invest in R&D.
It is further reinforced by the dynamic impact this choice has on the plant's future productivity.
Second, the costs of exporting are less than the comparable costs of conducting R&D and this
contributes to the fact that plants are more likely to export than invest in R&D. Third, a history
of prior investment in the activity, so that xed costs rather than sunk costs are the relevant
cost comparison, leads to substantially higher participation rates. Fourth, the indirect effect
of each activity on the net returns to the other is small and has little impact on the probability
the plant exports or conducts R&D. It is important to emphasize that each of these effects is
derived holding the export market size xed and only summarizes how variation in the state
variables, productivity and prior exporting or R&D experience, affect the payoffs and probability
of undertaking each investment activity. In the next section we use the estimated model to
simulate how an exogenous increase in the size of the export market will impact long-run patterns
of exporting, R&D investment, and productivity.

                   E.    Export Market Size and Endogenous Productivity Evolution

   Trade liberalization results in an expansion of export market size or a reduction of variable
trade costs which increases plant pro ts in the export market. In turn, this can affect the rm's
incentives to invest in new technology or innovation activities, as modeled by Constantini and
Melitz (2008) and Atkeson and Burstein (forthcoming). In this section we conduct a counter-
factual exercise quantifying the impact of an exogenous increase in export market pro ts on the
plant's decision to export and conduct R&D and the impact this has on the productivity trajectory
of the plant. In our structural model, an increase in export market size or a decrease in vari-
able costs would act on the intercept of the export pro t/revenue function , ln 8 X in equation
5. By changing this coef cient we can simulate the long-run impact on the plant's decisions and
productivity. In addition we can compare how this market expansion will alter plant decisions
when productivity is endogenous versus when productivity is exogenous to the plant. This al-
lows us to isolate the mechanisms that work to alter plant investments in R&D or new technology

  31 We report the mean cost values for the plants that choose to export. The mean realized costs for plants that do not
export will be slightly higher because of the higher value of MBR for these plants seen in Table 11. The differences in
magnitude, however, are small and the patterns are identical to the ones we discuss in the text.
22                               THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                             MONTH YEAR


in the face of trade liberalization, as measured by Bustos (forthcoming) and Lileeva and Tre er
(forthcoming).
   In this exercise we increase export market pro ts by increasing the value of ln 8 X by .37. This
is equivalent to a reduction in the average tariff faced by Taiwanese exporters from approximately
10 to 5 percent. To analyze the effect on plant decisions and productivity change we solve for
the optimal R&D and exporting choices for each plant using the new intercept for the export
revenue function and simulate the plant's productivity trajectory for 15 years into the future.32
We repeat this simulation thirty times and then summarize the results by averaging the proportion
of exporting plants, proportion of R&D performers, and productivity across plants in each year.
Table 13 reports the percentage change in each of these variables resulting from the increase
in market size, for years 2, 5, 10, and 15. The top panel of Table 13 provides results for an
environment where productivity is endogenously affected by both the plant's discrete R&D and
export choice as modeled in equation 8. The remainder of the table examines the plant choices
and productivity path under more restrictive conditions on the productivity process: exporting
has no direct effect . 5 D 6 D 0/, R&D has no direct effect . 4 D 6 D 0/, and productivity
is exogenous to the plant . 4 D 5 D 6 D 0/ By comparing the results under these different
scenarios for the productivity process we can quantify the importance of the plant's endogenous
choice of R&D and exporting on future productivity when export markets expand.

                                                    Table 13 here
   The top panel of Table 13 shows that market expansion raises the proportion of exporters
and plants conducting R&D immediately as a result of the increase in export market pro ts.
The proportions continue to rise over time as the additional impact of the endogenous increase
in productivity plays a role. After 15 years the proportion of exporting plants will be higher
by 10.2 points and the proportion of R&D performers by 4.7 points. Approximately half of
each increase is observed in the rst year and the remainder is due to further continual increases
over time. Mean productivity shows a small increase in year 2 after the market expansion, 0.5
percent, but this increases steadily to 5.3 percent after 15 years. Overall, in an environment where
productivity endogenously responds to the plant's export and R&D decisions, the larger export
market results in increases in participation in both activities and a resulting gain in productivity.
   The expansion in the proportion of plants exporting and investing in R&D is consistent with
the reduced form evidence presented by Bustos (forthcoming). She reports that the average
reduction in Brazil's tariffs of 24 percentage points increases the export proportion of Argentine
  rms by 10-14 points, depending on regression speci cation. She also reports that this average
tariff reduction leads to a 7 point increase in her index of innovation (the proportion of times rms
report "yes" to questions about their innovation activity or use of new technology). Lileeva and
Tre er (forthcoming) focus on a group of Canadian rms induced to export to the U.S. market
by a reduction in U.S. tariffs. Using a before-and-after comparison of labor productivity for this
group, they nd that productivity increases, but only for the rms with initially low-productivity.
Although the mechanism is different, we also nd a hetergenous response of R&D investment to
expansion of the market across plants with different productivity. The rise in the probability of
conducting R&D is determined by both the shift in the M B R and the shape of the distribution of
sunk or xed costs of R&D. In our case, the market expansion generates a larger increase in the
probability of R&D for lower and medium productivity plants, regardless of the plant's export
status. Because of the endogeneity of productivity this R&D investment will lead to higher future
productivity for these plants.
   In the remainder of Table 13 we simulate the effect of the market expansion when the plants
face a more restrictive productivity process. A purely exogenous productivity process is sum-

  32 The initial distribution of the state variables, productivity, prior exporting, prior R&D investment, and capital, is
chosen to match the distribution observed in the data.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                  R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                         23


marized in the bottom panel of the table. In this case, the market expansion increases M B E and
increases the proportion of plants that export, but there is no incentive to invest in R&D and no
effect on within-plant future productivity. The proportion of exporting plants rises by 5.5 points
over the 15 year horizon, with the majority of the increase coming immediately and the remain-
der due to the effect of sunk entry costs creating hysteresis in the participation decision This
is the effect modeled in Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007). In contrast, in the environment with
endogenous productivity, there is a larger expansion in the export proportion and an additional
increase in the R&D proportion after the second year. This results from the feedback effect of
increased productivity on the incentive to export and conduct R&D.
   The second panel in Table 13 simulates the plant's decisions in an environment where there
is no direct effect of export status on productivity (no learning-by-exporting). In this case the
plant invests in R&D because of its impact on future productivity and exports in response to
the increase in export pro ts. Comparing this environment with the top panel, we observe a
smaller increase in export proportion because the bene t of exporting comes only in the form of
current and future pro t, but not from increases in future productivity. There is also a smaller
increase in the proportion of plants that conduct R&D because the improvement in productivity
is not as substantial as in the top panel. The difference in the top two panels shows the additional
contribution of learning-by-exporting to the productivity improvement when the market expands.
   The third panel in Table 13 eliminates any role for R&D. In this case there is no incentive
to invest in R&D but exporting will be valuable because it both increases pro ts and improves
future productivity. In this case we observe an increase of mean productivity of 1.8 percent over
15 years, less than we observe in the environment where only R&D matters. The productivity
also increases slower because, as shown in our estimates of the productivity process in Table 3,
exporting has a smaller direct effect on future productivity than R&D.
   Overall, the comparison of the top panel with the more restrictive environments in the rest of
the table shows the important role of endogenous productivity. The export market expansion
initially leads to only a small increase in productivity, but it induces both more export market
participation and more R&D investment. The cumulative effect of these additional activities
by the plants leads to a substantial increase in productivity over longer time periods. Mapping
the productivity trajectory of these plants over time and comparing the paths under alternative
productivity processes can only be done with a dynamic model that recognizes the endogeneity
of the export and R&D decision.

                                         V.   Conclusions

   This paper estimates a dynamic structural model that captures both the behavioral and techno-
logical linkages between R&D, exporting, and productivity. It characterizes a producer's joint
dynamic decision process for exporting and R&D investment as depending on their productivity,
export demand, plant size, prior export and R&D experience, and xed and sunk costs of both
activities. It also describes how a plant's R&D and exporting endogenously affect their future
productivity trajectories. We estimate the model using plant-level data for the Taiwan electronics
industry from the period 2000-2004.
   There are six broad conclusions we draw about the sources of productivity evolution among
Taiwan's electronics producers. First, plant productivity evolves endogenously in response to
the plant's choice to export or invest in R&D. Relative to a plant that does neither activity, export
market participation raises future productivity by 1.96 percent, R&D investment raises it by 4.79
percent and undertaking both activities raises it by 5.56 percent. Second, the marginal bene ts of
both exporting and R&D increase with the plant's productivity and high productivity plants have
particularly large bene ts from exporting. This leads to the self selection of high productivity
plants into both activities. When combined with the fact that exporting and R&D investment
then lead to endogenous productivity improvements, this further reinforces the importance of
self selection based on current productivity as the major factor driving the decision to export
24                          THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                 MONTH YEAR


and invest in R&D. Third, the sunk cost of beginning either activity is greater than the xed
cost of maintaining the activity. For a given productivity level, an existing exporter is much
more likely to continue exporting than a nonexporter is to enter the market and the differences
in the probability of exporting are often quite substantial between the two groups. The same is
true of R&D investment. Fourth, the sunk and xed costs of investing in R&D are greater than
the sunk and xed costs of exporting which results in a larger proportion of plants choosing to
export than to conduct R&D. This occurs even though R&D has a larger direct effect on future
productivity. Fifth, the results indicate that the interdependence of the two activities is not a very
important factor in the plant's decisions. Investment in R&D has relatively little impact on the
return to exporting and there is very little difference in the return to R&D between exporters and
nonexporters. As a result, the fact that a plant exports, for example, has virtually no effect on
its probability of investing in R&D. Finally, our counterfactual exercises show that a reduction
in trade costs will have a signi cant effect on the probabilities that a plant exports and invests in
R&D. These in turn lead to an increase in mean productivity that is twice as large as the increase
that would occur under more restrictive environments. The combination of larger export markets
and the plants ability to invest and endogenously affect its future productivity contributes to larger
productivity gains.




   Overall, the empirical ndings emphasize the important role of underlying heterogeneity in
productivity as the driving force determining which Taiwanese electronics plants choose to export
and/or invest in R&D. This is further reinforced by the fact that these activities result in future
productivity improvements. The framework used here can be extended in several ways. If more
detailed data were available on the uses of R&D, particularly the distinction between R&D used to
improve the ef ciency of the production process versus develop new products or improve product
quality, it would be possible to distinguish the return to each type of investment. In particular,
whether one of the investment tools had a more substantial impact on the return in the export
market. In addition, while we have focused attention on heterogeneity in productivity in this
paper, we also nd, like Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2007) nd using Colombian manufacturing
data, that plant-speci c export market shocks also play an important role in the export decision.
If more detailed data were available on the characteristics of the products it could be possible
to augment this framework with a richer demand structure that would allow us to treat export
market heterogeneity as resulting from the plant's R&D or product quality choices, rather than as
an exogenous process.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE               R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                     25


                                      REFERENCES

 Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein. Forthcoming. "Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and Interna-
 tional Trade." Journal of Political Economy.
 Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts and Tor Winston. 2007. "Export Market Participation, Invest-
 ments in R&D and Worker Training, and the Evolution of Firm Productivity." The World Econ-
 omy, 14(1): 83-104.
 Aw, Bee Yan, Mark J. Roberts and Daniel Yi Xu. 2008. "R&D Investments, Exporting, and the
 Evolution of Firm Productivity." American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 98(2):
 451-456.
 Baldwin, John R and Wulong Gu. 2004. "Export Market Participation and Productivity Perfor-
 mance in Canadian Manufacturing." Canadian Journal of Economics, 36: 634-657.
 Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. 1997. "Exporters, Skill Upgrading, and the Wage
 Gap." Journal of International Economics, 42(1):3-31.
 Binswanger, Hans. 1974. "The Measurement of Technical Change Biases with Many Factors of
 Production." American Economic Review, 64(6): 964-976.
 Branstetter, Lee and Jong-Rong Chen. 2006. "The Impact of Technology Transfer and R&D
 on Productivity Growth in Taiwanese Industry: Microeconometric Analysis Using Plant and
 Firm-Level Data." Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 20: 177-192.
 Bustos, Paula. Forthcoming. "Multilateral Trade Liberalization, Exports and Technology Up-
 grading: Evidence on the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinean Firms." American Economic
 Review.
 Clerides, Sofronis K., Saul Lach, and James R. Tybout.1998. "Is Learning By Exporting Impor-
 tant? Micro-Dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco." Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 113(3): 903-947.
 Cohen, Wesley M. and Daniel A. Levinthal. 1989. "Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces of
 R&D." Economic Journal, 99: 569-596.
 Constantini, James A., and Marc J. Melitz. 2008. "The Dynamics of Firm-Level Adjustment to
 Trade Liberalization." in The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, ed. E. Helpman, D.
 Marin, and T. Verdier. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
 Criscuolo, Chiara, Jonathan Haskel, and Mathew Slaughter. 2005. "Global Engagement and the
 Innovation Activities of Firms." NBER Working Paper 11479.
 Damijan, Jo e P., Crt Kostevc, and Sašo Polanec. 2008. "From Innovation to Exporting or Vice
 Versa?" LICOS Discussion Paper 204.
 Das, Sanghamitra, Mark J. Roberts and James R. Tybout. 2007. "Market Entry Costs, Producer
 Heterogeneity, and Export Dynamics." Econometrica, 75(3): 837-873.
 Doraszelski, Ulrich and Jordi Jaumandreu. 2007. "R&D and Productivity: Estimating Produc-
 tion Functions When Productivity is Endogenous." Working Paper, Department of Economics,
 Harvard University.
 Greenaway, David and Richard Kneller. 2007. "Firm Heterogeneity, Exporting and Foreign Di-
 rect Investment." Economic Journal, 117: F134-F161.
 Griliches, Zvi. 1979. "Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to
 Productivity Growth." The Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1): 92-116.
 Griliches, Zvi. 1998. R&D and Productivity: The Econometric Evidence. Chicago: The Univer-
 sity of Chicago Press.
 Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, Giuseppe Iarossi, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2002. "Exports and
 Manufacturing Productivity in East Asia: A Comparative Analysis with Firm-Level Data."
 NBER Working Paper 8894.
26                       THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                            MONTH YEAR


 Heckman, James J. 1981. "The Incidental Parameters Problem and the Problem of Initial Con-
 ditions in Estimating a Discrete Time-Discrete Data Stochastic Process and Some Monte Carlo
 Evidence." in Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications, ed. Charles
 Manski and Daniel McFadden, 179-195. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 Hobday, Michael. 1995. Innovation in East Asia: The Challenge to Japan, Brook eld, VT:
 Edward Elgar Publisher.
 Iacovone, Leonardo and Beata S. Javorcik. 2007. "Getting Ready: Preparation for Exporting."
 Working Paper.
 Jorgenson, Dale, Frank Gollop, and Barbara Fraumeni. 1987. Productivity and U.S. Economic
 Growth. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
 Levy, Brian. 1994. "Technical and Marketing Support Systems for Successful Small and
 Medium Sized Enterprises in Four Countries." Policy Research Working Paper, No. 1400,
 World Bank.
 Lileeva, Alla and Daniel Tre er. Forthcoming. "Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises
 Plant-Level Productivity. . . for Some Plants." Quarterly Journal of Economics.
 Melitz, Marc J. 2003. "The Impact of Trade on Aggregate Industry Productivity and Intra-
 Industry Reallocations." Econometrica, 71(6): 1695-1725.
 Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes. 1996. "The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunica-
 tions Equipment Industry." Econometrica, 64(6): 1263-1297.
 Pack, Howard. 1992. "New Perspectives on Industrial Growth in Taiwan." in Taiwan from De-
 veloping to Mature Economy, ed. G. Ranis. Boulder. CO: Westview Press.
 Roberts, Mark J. and James R. Tybout. 1997. "The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Em-
 pirical Model of Entry with Sunk Costs." American Economic Review, 87(4): 545-564.
 Rust, John. 1997. "Using Randomization to Break the Curse of Dimensionality." Econometrica,
 65(3): 487-516.
 Stevenson, Rodney. 1980. "Measuring Technological Bias." American Economic Review, 70(1):
 162-173.
 Sun, Chia-Hung. 2005. The Growth Process in East Asian Manufacturing Industries. Edward
 Elger Publisher.
 Westpahl, Larry E. 2002. "Technology Strategies for Economic Development in a Fast Changing
 Global Economy." Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 11: 275-320.
 Xu, Daniel Yi. 2008. "A Structural Model of R&D, Firm Heterogeneity, and Industry Evolu-
 tion." Working Paper, Department of Economics, New York University.
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                 R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                  27




                     Table 1 - Domestic and Export Sales (millions of NT$)

                  Nonexporters                               Exporters
             Median Domestic Sales          Median Domestic Sales Median Export Sales
     2000             22.2                           52.8                  33.6
     2002             17.0                           36.4                  32.5
     2003             17.3                           42.7                  30.9
     2004             17.8                           38.6                  30.7
             Average Domestic Sales         Average Domestic Sales Average Export Sales
     2000             69.5                          390.0                 586.0
     2002             55.8                          363.1                 490.5
     2003             57.2                          385.9                 576.3
     2004             83.3                          354.3                 522.8




                     Table 2 - Annual Transition Rates for Continuing Plants

                 Status year t                    Status Year t+1
                                  Neither     only R&D only Export      Both
                  All Firms        0.563        0.036          0.255    0.146
                   Neither         0.871        0.014         .0.110    0.005
                  only R&D         0.372        0.336          0.058    0.233
                 only Export       0.213        0.010          0.708    0.070
                    Both           0.024        0.062          0.147    0.767
28                         THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                            MONTH YEAR



                       Table 3 - Demand, Cost and Productivity Evolution
                              Parameter Estimates (standard errors)

                     Parameter       Discrete R&D         Continuous R&D
                     1 C 1= D       0.8432 (0.0195)       0.8432 (0.0195)
                     1 C 1= X       0.8361 (0.0164)       0.8361 (0.0164)
                          k        -0.0633 (0.0052)       -0.0636 (0.0051)
                          0         0.0879 (0.0198)       0.0866 (0.0194)
                          1         0.5925 (0.0519)       0.5982 (0.0511)
                          2         0.3791 (0.0915)       0.3777 (0.0912)
                          3        -0.1439 (0.0585)       -0.1592 (0.0588)
                          4         0.0479 (0.0099)       0.0067 (0.0012)
                          5         0.0196 (0.0046)       0.0197 (0.0045)
                          6        -0.0118 (0.0115)       -0.0022 (0.0014)
                       S E. it /         0.1100                0.1098
                     sample size          3703                  3703




                     Table 4 - Reduced Form Participation and Export Revenue Equations

 Dependent Variable      Coeff on !it     Coeff on kit    Coeff on eit 1 Coeff on dit 1         Other
                                    Bivariate Probit on Exporting and R&D
     Exporting eit       1.63 (t=10.3) 0.064 (t=3.38) 1.80 (t=32.1)         0.186(t=2.26)
       R&D dit           1.65 (t=7.12) 0.205 (t=7.52) 0.344 (t=4.38)        1.86(t=23.3)        D 0:168
                                                Export Revenue
         lnritX          6.45 (t=36.1) 0.409 (t=20.3)
                                    Export Revenue with Fixed Effect .z i /
         lnritX          5.55 (t=18.0) 0.430 (t=4.16)                                       V ar .z/ D 0:72
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE               R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                      29




                           Table 5 - Dynamic Parameter Estimates

                 Means and Standard Deviations of the Posterior Distribution
                        Model 1                                      Model 2
             Parameter            Mean      St. Dev. Parameter          Mean     St. Dev.
             I (R&D FC)           67.606     3.930       I (size 1)     46.265    7.038
                                                         1
                                                         I
                                                         2 (size 2)     66.596    3.423
             D (R&D SC)          354.277 31.377          D  (size 1)   381.908   66.521
                                                         1
                                                         D
                                                         2 (size 2)    388.715   41.959
            F (Export FC)         11.074     0.389       F (size 1)      5.733    0.295
                                                         1
                                                         F (size 2)     15.962    0.704
                                                         2
            S (Export SC)         50.753     3.483       S
                                                         1 (size 1)     51.852    6.046
                                                         S (size 2)     67.401    6.676
                                                         2
     8 X (Export Rev Intercept)    3.813     0.063          8X           3.873    0.063
      Z (Export Rev AR process)   0.773      0.014            Z          0.763    0.015
    log    (Export Rev Std Dev)   -0.287     0.018        log           -0.289    0.021




               Table 6 - R&D Investment Rates, Export Rates, and Productivity

                               Year 2002      Year 2003        Year 2004
                              Export Market Participation Rate
               Actual Data       0.395           0.392           0.390
                Predicted        0.370           0.371           0.371
                                  R&D Investment Rate
               Actual Data       0.177           0.170           0.169
                Predicted        0.172           0.168           0.167
                                   Average Productivity
               Actual Data       0.436           0.444           0.436
                Predicted        0.449           0.441           0.432
30                           THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                            MONTH YEAR



              Table 7 - Predicted Transition Rates for Continuing Plants - Model 2

             Status year t                             Status Year t+1
                                         Neither   only R&D only Export        Both
               Neither       Predicted    0.866      0.019          0.110      0.008
                              Actual      0.871      0.014          0.110      0.005
             only R&D        Predicted    0.476      0.214          0.116      0.193
                              Actual      0.372      0.336          0.058      0.233
             only Export     Predicted    0.292      0.010          0.622      0.077
                              Actual      0.213      0.010          0.708      0.070
                Both         Predicted    0.049      0.028          0.138      0.784
                              Actual      0.024      0.062          0.147      0.767




                 Table 8 - Marginal Bene t of Exporting (millions of NT dollars)

                        VtE                      VtD           MBE D      X
                                                                          t   C VtE VtD
      !t        dt 1 D 1 dt 1 D 0        dt 1 D 1 dt 1 D 0     dt 1 D 1        dt 1 D 0
     -0.19        132.5      132.4         130.9     130.7       2.08             2.11
     -0.02        138.9      138.5         136.3     135.9       3.69             3.76
     0.15         151.8      150.9         147.3      146.3       7.06            7.21
     0.32         179.4      176.3         170.9      167.4       14.7            15.2
     0.49         245.3      235.6         228.9      217.7       31.3            32.9
     0.67         392.6      365.3         362.9      331.9       65.3            69.1
     0.84         714.0      655.9         667.0      599.1      132.3           142.1
     1.01        1206.3     1117.4        1143.7     1041.5      266.8           280.1
     1.18        1911.3     1790.0        1834.0     1695.3      565.7           583.2
     1.35        2689.1     2568.8        2610.8     2471.7     1246.9          1265.7
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE                  R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                 31



                     Table 9 - Export Policy Functions: Pr .et D 1jet   1 ; dt 1 /

                      !t     et 1 D 1   et 1 D 0    et 1 D 1       et 1 D 0
                             dt 1 D 1   dt 1 D 1    dt 1 D 0       dt 1 D 0
                     -0.19     0.156      0.032       0.157          0.032
                     -0.02     0.246      0.055       0.248          0.056
                      0.15     0.365      0.098       0.369          0.099
                      0.32     0.518      0.178       0.523          0.181
                      0.49     0.710      0.309       0.718          0.317
                      0.67     0.895      0.485       0.907          0.503
                      0.84     0.969      0.653       0.980          0.693
                      1.01     0.988      0.749       0.994          0.785
                      1.18     0.997      0.835       0.999          0.873
                      1.35     0.997      0.874       0.999          0.901




               Table 10 - Costs of Exporting and R&D (millions of NT dollars)

             Mean Export Costs among Exportersa         Mean R&D Costs among Investorsb
       !t        Fixed Cost        Sunk Cost             Fixed Cost      Sunk Cost
     -0.19           0.97            1.036                   1.32          1.34
     -0.02           1.61             1.80                   2.06          2.12
      0.15           2.64             3.33                   3.41           3.59
      0.32           4.18             6.50                   6.55           7.28
      0.49           6.21            12.32                  12.83          15.64
      0.67           8.50            21.06                  24.01          33.74
      0.84           9.86            30.72                  36.28          60.78
      1.01          10.35            37.17                  43.49          86.61
      1.18          10.67            43.54                  49.35         113.93
      1.35          10.70            47.02                  48.26         114.87
     a. For plants with dt 1 D 1
     b. For plants with et D 1
32                   THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW                                  MONTH YEAR



     Table 11 - Marginal Bene t of R&D Investment (millions of NT dollars)

             E VtC1 .dt   D 1; et /   E VtC1 .dt   D 0; et /            MBR
       !t    et D 1       et D 0      et D 1       et D 0      et D 1     et D 0
     -0.19    142.2        140.7       139.3        137.6        2.8         3.2
     -0.02    150.2        147.9       145.8        142.9        4.5         5.0
      0.15    166.2        162.1       158.6        153.7        7.6         8.4
      0.32    200.3        192.1       184.6        175.1       15.7        17.0
      0.49    278.6        262.5       244.3        224.6       34.3        37.9
      0.67    447.3        417.5       371.2        333.0       76.1        84.5
      0.84    797.2        749.5       654.2        583.3      143.0       166.3
      1.01   1320.2       1255.6      1105.7       1004.1      214.5       251.5
      1.18   2065.7       1985.2      1773.5       1637.5      292.2       347.7
      1.35   2883.8       2802.5      2575.2       2425.5      308.6       377.0




             Table 12 - R&D Policy Functions: Pr .dt D 1jet ; dt          1/

              !t       et D 1          et D 1       et D 0        et D 0
                      dt 1 D 1        dt 1 D 0     dt 1 D 1      dt 1 D 0
             -0.19      0.041           0.007        0.046         0.008
             -0.02      0.063           0.011        0.070         0.012
              0.15      0.101           0.018        0.109         0.020
              0.32      0.182           0.036        0.192         0.039
              0.49      0.329           0.075        0.347         0.082
              0.67      0.566           0.155        0.590         0.169
              0.84      0.777           0.265        0.812         0.296
              1.01      0.872           0.360        0.899         0.399
              1.18      0.940           0.455        0.959         0.504
              1.35      0.928           0.451        0.951         0.505
VOL. VOL NO. ISSUE               R&D, EXPORTING, PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS                              33




           Table 13 - Plant Response to Exogenous Increase in Export Market Size

                     Year                        2                5                  10      15
                 Endogenous productivity: !it D g.!it   1 ; dit       1 ; eit    1 / C  it

       Change in Proportion of Exporters          5.2      9.0                       10.0    10.2
    Change in Proportion of R&D Performers        2.5      3.5                        4.1     4.7
    Percentage Change in Mean Productivity        0.5      1.5                       3.7     5.3
                   Endogenous productivity: !it   D g.!it 1 ; dit         1 / C it

       Change in Proportion of Exporters        2.0      3.9                         4.0     4.4
    Change in Proportion of R&D Performers      1.8      2.6                         3.5     4.0
    Percentage Change in Mean Productivity      0.0      0.8                         1.9     2.9
                   Endogenous productivity: !it D g.!it 1 ; eit           1 / C it

       Change in Proportion of Exporters       3.4       5.9                         7.2     7.6
    Percentage Change in Mean Productivity     0.0       0.0                         1.2     1.8
                       Exogenous productivity !it D g.!it 1 / C                 it

       Change in Proportion of Exporters          4.6        5.7                     5.8     5.5
