                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        "MOMMA'S GOT THE PILL":
HOW ANTHONY COMSTOCK AND GRISWOLD V. CONNECTICUT SHAPED U.S. CHILDBEARING

                                              Martha J. Bailey

                                           Working Paper 14675
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w14675


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        January 2009




   Research on this project was generously supported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the
   University of Michigan Population Studies Center. I am grateful for insightful comments from Jeremy
   Atack, Dale Ballou, Charlie Brown, Tom Buchmueller, Kasey Buckles, Bill Collins, John DiNardo,
   Daniel Eisenberg, David Frisvold, David Lam, Bob Margo, Heather Royer, Jeff Smith, Gary Solon,
   Tara Watson, Charlie Westoff, and Bob Willis. This paper has also benefited from the comments and
   suggestions the participants at the University of Minnesota Population Center, the Robert Wood Johnson
   Foundation Annual Meetings in Health Policy Research, and seminar participants at the University
   of Indiana, Stanford University, University of Toronto Law School, the University of Michigan Labor
   Seminar and Population Studies Center, and the National Bureau of Economic Research. Allie Davido
   provided exceptional legal research and coauthored the online legal appendix. We gratefully acknowledge
   input from Joanna Lahey and Elizabeth Oltmans Ananat in the construction of this paper's legal appendix.
   I am also grateful to Lindley Barbee, Emily Gray, and Kate VandenBroek for research assistance.
   Isaac W. Eberstein made me aware of Loretta Lynn's controversial 1972 hit, “Pill,” referenced in the
   paper’s title. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
   views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
   reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
   NBER publications.

   © 2009 by Martha J. Bailey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
   may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
   the source.
"Momma's Got the Pill": How Anthony Comstock and Griswold v. Connecticut Shaped U.S.
Childbearing
Martha J. Bailey
NBER Working Paper No. 14675
January 20095HYLVHG-XQH
JEL No. I18,J01,J1,J12,J13

                                                 ABSTRACT

The 1960s ushered in a new era in U.S. demographic history characterized by significantly lower fertility
rates and smaller family sizes. What catalyzed these changes remains a matter of considerable debate.
This paper exploits idiosyncratic variation in the language of “Comstock” statutes, enacted in the late
1800s, to quantify the role of the birth control pill in this transition. Almost fifty years after the contraceptive
pill appeared on the U.S. market, this analysis provides new evidence that it accelerated the post-1960
decline in marital fertility.


Martha J. Bailey
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
611 Tappan Street
207 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
baileymj@umich.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w14675
     During the 1960s, significant changes in women's decisions regarding marriage, childbearing, and

work ushered in a new era of U.S. demographic history. Over the next 20 years, U.S. fertility rates fell by

50 percent (figure I), and the proportion of ever-married women having fewer than three children

increased from 42 to 66 percent (figure II).1 Almost half a century later, the American family and labor

force remain fundamentally altered.

     Although hundreds of articles in academic and popular journals document these trends and speculate

about their origins, the underlying causes of this transition remain a subject of scholarly debate. The

demographic literature has emphasized the role of technology in regulating the supply of births and, in

particular, the role of oral contraception, better known as “the Pill.” Based upon national survey

evidence, many population scientists heralded the 1960s as a period of “contraceptive revolution”

characterized by substantial declines in unplanned marital childbearing (Ryder and Westoff 1971,

Westoff 1975) and a significant rise in the frequency of marital intercourse (Westoff 1974). In his

Presidential Address to the Population Association in 1975, Westoff asserted that “the entire decline in

births within marriage across the decade of the ‘sixties’ can be attributed to the improvement in the

control of fertility” (579).2

     Economists have been critical of this view and have, instead, emphasized changes in the demand for

children.3 Because sharp reductions in the U.S. fertility rate in the 1960s followed the U.S. baby boom,

some would argue that this period represents a reversion to the longer-term U.S. trend and not a

revolution at all. One need only point to sharp declines in the U.S. fertility during the 1920s to highlight

how rapidly behavior might have changed in the absence of the Pill. For these reasons, Gary Becker




1
  This comparison is made for cohorts entering their childbearing years in different decades. Women born in 1930 (1950) entered
their childbearing years during the 1950s (1970s).
2
  Not all demographers were in agreement about the relative importance of unwanted fertility. See, for example, Judith Blake’s
1969 article challenging this view.
3
  The longer-term decline in fertility is often attributed to the gradual evolution in the demand for children. This explanation
highlights the rising opportunity cost of childbearing associated with increases in women's education, the growth of the clerical
sector, and falling discrimination in the workplace. The baby boom interrupted this longer-term decline from around 1940 to
1957.

                                            Momma’s Got the Pill - 1
concludes in his Treatise on the Family (1991: 143) that “the ‘contraceptive revolution’ … ushered in by

the Pill has probably not been a major cause of the sharp drop in fertility in recent decades.”

      The relevance of this debate bears upon theoretical formulations of economic and population growth,

many of which implicitly ignore significant changes in the costs of regulating births. It also has

substantial implications for economic models of the age distribution, family size and structure, and the

composition of the labor force. Finally, it shapes our evaluations of domestic and international family

planning policies, which have been the subject of heated scholarly discourse (Pritchett 1994a, 1994b;

Bongaarts 1994, Knowles, Akin, and Guilkey 1994).

      Yet 50 years after the advent of the Pill, it is unclear whether the 1960s were a “contraceptive

revolution” or a revolution of the times. This uncertainty is largely due to the difficulty of disentangling

the contribution of modern contraception from a variety of concurrent demographic, social and economic

changes. This is especially true in the United States where the 1957 release of Enovid, later approved as

the first oral contraceptive, coincided with the peak of the baby boom and rapidly changing awareness,

attitudes, and norms about women’s rights and roles.4 Recent empirical work on the Pill provides limited

answers, because the legal variation used for identification is concentrated in the early 1970s and only

affected access to the Pill among unmarried, childless women under age 21 (Goldin and Katz 2002,

Bailey 2006, Guldi 2008). It is also likely that women who were married, had made their human capital

investments, and had begun their families responded differently to the introduction of oral contraception.

The “power of the Pill” for the population of married women—a group accounting for over 80 percent of

the decline in the total fertility rate over the 1960s (Gibson 1976)—remains an open question.




4
 In 1963, President John F. Kennedy's Commission on the Status of Women released a report documenting
pervasive discrimination against women. Betty Friedan published the best-seller, The Feminine Mystique, in 1963,
which documented the emotional and intellectual oppression of the middle-class housewife. In 1964, Title VII of
the Civil Rights Act codified a prohibition on employer discrimination against women. In 1966, the National
Organization for Women was organized by the NAACP. By the end of the decade, the women’s movement had
become instrumental in generating awareness of gender inequities and creating opportunities for many women. This
simultaneity of events renders standard inter-temporal comparisons difficult to interpret.

                                             Momma’s Got the Pill - 2
      This paper quantifies the importance of the birth control pill on marital fertility using a newly

compiled history of U.S. anti-obscenity statutes better known as “Comstock laws.” Although 47 of the 48

coterminous states enacted anti-obscenity laws (most before 1900), idiosyncratic differences in language

had an important impact on their relevance for contraceptive access decades later. For instance, only 31

states explicitly enumerated “contraception” among the regulated obscenities, and language in only 24

states additionally banned the “sales” of contraceptive supplies. These sales bans remained on the books

and induced substantial cross-state variation in the price of obtaining and using the birth control pill in the

early 1960s. The U.S. Supreme Court’s 1965 Griswold v. Connecticut decision5, which struck down

Connecticut’s ban on the use of contraceptives, altered enforcement and compliance across the U.S. In

the aftermath of this ruling, state legislatures actively revised their laws to permit sales of contraceptives

to married women.

      This paper’s empirical strategy exploits these legal differences, the timing of the introduction of the

birth control pill, and the timing of the Griswold decision to explore the importance of oral contraception

for married women during the 1960s. The first component of the empirical analysis establishes both the

relevance and the validity of using statutory bans on contraceptive sales to identify the impact of the Pill.

Using data from the 1955 Growth of American Families Study (GAF) and 1965 and 1970 National

Fertility Studies (NFS), differences-in-differences, regression-adjusted estimates provide the first

quantitative evidence that Comstock sales bans slowed the diffusion of oral contraception before the

Griswold decision in 1965.6 Women in states with sales bans were 25 to 30 percent less likely to have

ever used oral contraception before the Griswold decision relative to women in the same census regions

without these laws—even after adjusting for a host of observable characteristics. The absence of similar




5
  Grisworld v. Connecticut. 381, US 479 (1965).
6
  Previous research has been limited by the availability of data with which to test the effectiveness of laws restricting access to
the birth control pill (Goldin and Katz 2002, Bailey 2006, Guldi 2008). This is because very little information exists on the
attitudes or contraceptive choices of unmarried women during the 1960s and early 1970s. Goldin and Katz (2002) use one cross-
section that contains both information on contraceptive choices and state identifiers to verify the relevance of early consent laws
for unmarried women’s contraceptive decisions.

                                            Momma’s Got the Pill - 3
patterns for other types of contraceptives from 1955 to 1965 and strong, post-1965 convergence in the use

of oral contraception in states with sales bans is consistent with statutory bans driving these differences.

      The paper’s main analysis focuses on quantifying the importance of the birth control pill for marital

childbearing in the 1960s. The central results suggest that oral contraception accelerated the reduction in

period birth rates and facilitated the eventual transition to the two-child family. The implications of these

results reach beyond the 1960s, as lower fertility rates have had a lasting impact on the American family

and economy.


       I. The Theoretical Relationship of the Cost of Contraception and Number of Children

      The pioneering work of Michael and Willis (1976) laid the conceptual foundation for understanding

the role of both the demand and the supply of children in a unified theoretical framework. This

framework supplements the now standard, neoclassical approach to modeling the demand for children

(Becker 1960, 1965; Willis 1973; Becker and Lewis 1973) with the “supply-side” that is stressed in the

demographic literature (Sheps 1964, Sheps and Perrin 1966). This approach relaxes two assumptions that

limited the potential role of improvements in contraceptive technology or changes in its price.7 First,

Michael and Willis allow pregnancy to occur probabilistically rather than deterministically. The number

of children is treated as a random variable, and couples choose a contraceptive strategy to reduce the

monthly probability of conception. This is equivalent, under the assumptions in their model, to choosing

an ex ante distribution of the number of children born that is summarized by its first moment,  (the

focus of this paper’s discussion), and the second moment (omitted from this discussion for simplicity).

Second, they relax the assumption that fertility regulation is costless. In their framework, a contraceptive

strategy j—the adoption of a behavior or use of contraceptive supplies over a period of time—is


7
  In the Willis (1973) and Becker and Lewis (1973) frameworks, better and lower-cost contraception may only affect the demand
for children by reducing the relative price of child quality and, thus, may have induced substitution toward fewer children.
Becker and Lewis (1973), for instance, assume that household utility, U(C,Z), is increasing in “children”, C=NQ, and a
composite commodity, Z. C is increasing in both the quantity of children, N, and child “quality”, Q. Consumption is limited by
lifetime income, I, the “price of child services,” πc, and the per-unit cost of the composite commodity, πz. Households choose the
optimal number of children deterministically, N*=h(πc, πz, I), such that, V(N*) ≥ V(N')  N' N*, where V(N)=maxQ,Z
{U(N,Q,Z) s.t. πcNQ πzZI}. As noted in Becker and Lewis (1973: S283), the price of birth control may impact childbearing
outcomes in this framework by affecting the relative price of child quality.

                                            Momma’s Got the Pill - 4
associated with a price, πj, and couples maximize utility by weighing the marginal costs of averting each

birth against the marginal benefit of attaining each ex ante distribution of childbearing outcomes.

Therefore, couples optimize by choosing a distribution of possible childbearing outcomes, *, to

maximize expected utility net of the costs of fertility regulation.

     Reference to the marginal costs of adopting a contraceptive strategy is particularly apt in describing

changes in contraceptive technology during the 1960s. Consider, as Michael and Willis do, a simple

division of costs of attaining a fertility distribution, , using contraceptive strategy j, where strategy j

entails a fixed, j, and a marginal cost, j. The total cost of using strategy j to attain an ex ante birth

distribution, , is given by πj = j + j (N -), where N is the mean of the expected distribution of

children born in the absence of any contraceptive method. N - is, therefore, the expected number of

births averted. In this context, the marginal cost of averting a birth might be characterized in terms of a

behavioral cost (as with abstinence or withdrawal), the inconvenience or discomfort of birth control use at

the time of intercourse (as with barrier methods), or the necessity of purchasing refills of supplies (as with

condoms or the birth control pill). Fixed costs might include costs such as the price of searching for a

supplier and learning about a particular method.

      For the sake of illustration, panel A of figure III plots an example of total costs by contraceptive

strategy and births averted. It is easy to see that different contraceptive strategies may be optimal

depending upon the number of births a couple wishes to avoid. For instance, if a couple wishes to avoid

one birth, then a strategy that entails a negligible fixed cost but higher marginal cost (like withdrawal,

represented by line π1) may be optimal. A couple wishing to avoid two births may choose the strategy

associated with π2; the high fixed but low marginal cost of strategy π3 would make it the lowest cost

option for preventing five or more conceptions. In this sense, the total cost function for achieving any

birth distribution, , is given by the bolded, lower envelope, or C()=minj{j +j (N -)}.

     The introduction of the birth control pill may have altered the total cost function in a manner

suggested by strategy π4 illustrated in panel A of figure III, because the fixed cost of using the Pill would


                                      Momma’s Got the Pill - 5
have been at least as high as any other method available in the 1960s. However, the marginal cost of

preventing births with the Pill was much lower, as it required no interruption, effort or discomfort at the

time of intimacy. As a result, the availability of oral contraception may flatten a portion of the total cost

curve (illustrated in the line segment above 2 births averted associated with strategy π4).

      In summary, the Michael and Willis framework yields several important predictions about the

diffusion and adoption of the birth control pill. First, the Pill reduced the marginal costs of preventing

births above some threshold. Holding the demand for births constant, reducing the marginal costs of

preventing births for some women should lead to a reduction in the number of children born per woman.

Second, the birth control pill reduced the uncertainty surrounding childbearing outcomes, because it was

much more effective than other methods for a given amount of effort. The impact of a reduction in

uncertainty, however, is more complicated to assess. On the one hand, greater reliability minimizes the

chance of having more children than intended. However, a more reliable contraceptive technology may

increase the number of children borne by eliminating the risk of overshooting. For these reasons, the

impact of oral contraception on the number of children born over the lifecycle is theoretically

ambiguous.8

      Another implication of the Michael and Willis framework is that the adoption of the birth control pill

is strongly related to the desired number of births to be averted. This has an important relationship to

expected duration of use and, thus, to age. Because younger women may desire to avert more births over

their remaining lifetimes than older women after the Pill is introduced, younger women would be more

likely to adopt the birth control pill. In addition, because the desired number of children reflects the

demand for children (market prices, household income, and preferences) and also determines a woman’s




8
 See Michael and Willis (1976) for a succinct treatment.9 This bears on the relevance of Pritchett’s assertion that “the challenge
of reducing people’s fertility is the challenge of reducing people’s fertility desires” (1994, 3). In the Michael and Willis model,
desires for children determine the choice of contraception in the same way the marginal costs of averting births determine the
desired number of children. See also Richard Easterlin, Robert A. Pollak and Michael L. Wachter (1980).

                                             Momma’s Got the Pill - 6
likelihood of adopting the Pill, comparisons of childbearing outcomes among women using and not using

the birth control pill reveal little about the importance of demand or supply factors.9

      To identify the impact of changes in birth control technology, an ideal experiment would compare

the childbearing outcomes of women with identical preferences and household incomes, who face

identical market prices except for the cost of regulating births. This paper argues that variation in the

restrictiveness of Comstock legislation provides natural randomization in the cost of adopting the birth

control pill. The next sections provide historical and quantitative support for these assumptions.


                    II. A Brief History of Comstock Laws and Griswold v. Connecticut

      In 1873, the U.S. Congress codified the “Comstock Act” outlawing the interstate mailing, shipping

or importation of articles, drugs, medicines, and printed materials of “obscenities,” which applied to

anything used “for the prevention of conception” (18 U.S.C. §1461-1462).10 The Act also succeeded in

its secondary purpose, which was to “incite every State Legislature to enact similar laws” (Dienes 1972:

43, quoting Representative Merrimam, New York Times, Mar. 15, 1873, p. 3, col. 3). By 1900, at least 42

states had enacted or amended anti-obscenity statutes, which directly regulated trade in “obscene” or

“immoral” information within states. By 1920, at least 45 states had these laws.11

      State statutes varied considerably in their language and, consequently, their ultimate implications for

access to contraception in the 1960s. Table I documents the date of enactment and groups these laws into

four broad categories; see legal appendix for more information on the exact language and history in each

state and in the following sources: Dennett 1926; Dienes 1972; Department of Health, Education and

Welfare 1974; and Smith 1964).


9
  This bears on the relevance of Pritchett’s assertion that “the challenge of reducing people’s fertility is the challenge of reducing
people’s fertility desires” (1994, 3). In the Michael and Willis model, desires for children determine the choice of contraception
in the same way the marginal costs of averting births determine the desired number of children. See also Richard Easterlin,
Robert A. Pollak and Michael L. Wachter (1980).
See Michael and Willis (1976) for a succinct treatment.
10
   This Act was comprehensive. It banned any “book, pamphlet, paper, writing, advertisement, circular, print, picture, drawing, or
other representation, figure, or image on or of other material, or any cast, instrument, or other article of an immoral nature, or any
drug or medicine, or any article whatever for the prevention of conception” (Andrea Tone 1996, 488). This Act is often referred
to as the Comstock Act after its zealous congressional advocate, Anthony Comstock of New York.
11
   The remaining states may have passed their legislation earlier. The dates reported in Table I are based only on what could be
verified in statute books. Scans of these original statutes are posted at the author’s website.

                                             Momma’s Got the Pill - 7
1. General obscenity statutes banned the dissemination of obscene information, the sale of obscene
   information, and the sale of indecent or immoral “articles or instruments.” They did not explicitly
   categorize the prevention of conception as obscene and so are grouped with control states in the
   analysis.
2. Advertising or information bans in 30 states explicitly outlawed the distribution of information or
   advertising about articles, instruments, and medicines for the prevention of conception. Although
   these laws often banned the sale of information about the prevention of conception, they did not ban
   the sale of contraceptives themselves. If a state only had this type of law, physicians or pharmacists
   could fill prescriptions initiated by the requests of their patients without violating state law.

3. Sales bans in 24 states explicitly prohibited the sale of any article, instrument, medicine or secret
   nostrum for the prevention of conception. These laws banned both physicians and pharmacists from
   fitting diaphragms, selling condoms, and prescribing or filling prescriptions for the birth control pill.
   (Each of these states also had an advertising or information ban).

4. Physician or pharmacist exceptions in 7 states provided blanket exceptions for physicians and
   sometimes pharmacists from advertising and sales bans, and most of these statutes contained this
   language from the date of enactment. Several states have more ambiguous exceptions for “legitimate
   business.” Because it is unclear whether prescribing or selling contraceptives falls under these
   exceptions, the analysis treats these states as having restrictive sales bans. The online appendix
   provides results for coding that treats “legitimate business” exceptions as physician exceptions in the
   analysis.

      Figure IV presents the geographic distribution of these legal restrictions (type 2 to 4) as of 1960. All

shaded states had some sort of statute that specifically cited the “prevention of conception” as part of an

anti-obscenity statute. The light gray states had advertising and informational bans only (table I, column

2). The dark gray states banned advertising and information as well as sales; these states, however, made

exceptions for physicians (table I, column 4). The black states had advertising and informational bans as

well as sales bans and provided no exceptions for physicians (table 1, column 3 without “X”s in column

4).

      The distribution of these statutes, and specifically sales bans, do not appear to reflect particular

political delineations of the 1960s. Laws of different types are found in each census region of the

country, and their rosters contain states that were progressive in their family planning and social policies.

For instance, California and Washington, two of the three coterminous states to repeal abortion bans prior

to Roe v. Wade, actually restricted sales and the dissemination of information about contraception,




                                      Momma’s Got the Pill - 8
respectively, in 1960 (Levine, Staiger, Kane, and Zimmerman 1996).12 Surprisingly, New York, the

home state of Anthony Comstock and one of the states to repeal abortion bans before Roe, had exempted

physicians from its sales ban since 1873. This seemingly idiosyncratic distribution of sales bans in 1960

provides prima facie evidence that sales bans were not markers of conservative or more slowly changing

attitudes about family planning—a claim tested later in the analysis.

      The implications of these laws in the 1960s for oral contraception varied considerably. Statutes

limiting advertising or the distribution of information, for instance, were probably not very effective.

These laws did limit direct advertising and informational brochures in physicians’ offices, but physicians

could prescribe contraceptives upon the request of a patient. Also limiting the effectiveness of advertising

bans was the murkiness of distinctions between scientific and obscene information. G.D. Searle, the

patent holder for Enovid, actively pursued “scientific” coverage about the clinical trials of the drug for use

as a contraceptive, including features in highly visible, national periodicals like Time, Business Week,

Consumer Reports, Fortune, Reader's Digest and the New York Times (Watkins 1998). Similarly, the

company cultivated awareness of Enovid’s contraceptive properties through mass mailings “warning”

physicians about Enovid's anovulant “side-effects.” Although Enovid was only approved for the

regulation of menses in 1957, the public and physicians were well aware of its contraceptive properties

before it was approved for this purpose by the FDA in 1960.

      In contrast, statutes banning sales without physician exceptions (henceforth referred to as “sales

bans”) may have had a direct impact on the availability of contraceptives, in general, and the birth control

pill in particular. First, the threat of penalties, fines and jail time could reduce the number of providers for

all types of contraceptives. The stakes for professional physicians and pharmacists—exclusive

distributors of the birth control pill—would have been especially high, because illegal prescriptions and

sales risked their licenses and livelihoods. Diaphragms and condoms, on the other hand, could be


12
   Another pattern is the absence of explicit contraceptive bans in the South. My reading of obscenity statute texts suggests that
the primary explanation for this is that Southern states had older and broader statutes prohibiting the “corruption of morals.”
Because these statutes predated the 1870s Comstock amendments and revisions, they did not have language outlawing the
“prevention of conception.” The implication is that statutes in most of the South could accommodate the evolution of social
norms about obscenity and contraception, whereas codified prohibitions on contraception provided much less flexibility.

                                             Momma’s Got the Pill - 9
purchased through the mail, and condoms could be obtained from gas station clerks or vending machines.

The distributors of these products stood to lose much less by selling contraceptive contraband, and these

informal supply channels may have functioned quite well (Tone 2000, 2001).13 Second, unlike other

contraceptives, production of the birth control pill required the synthesis of a chemical compound, which

probably limited black market production in the shorter run. One final reason that sales bans may have

had more bite for the birth control pill is that women could neither verify their safety (ingesting chemicals

of unknown quality poses health risks) nor their effectiveness. In contrast, the quality of other illegally

obtained methods (such as diaphragms or condoms) had an established reputation and was easier to verify

by visual inspection. Coupled with the more frequent need for refills and physician supervision, illegally

produced or procured birth control pills may have entailed higher fixed and marginal prices relative to

other methods.

     These arguments imply that—even without perfect enforcement or compliance—sales bans should

make the total cost curve steeper and increase the threshold (in terms of desired births averted), above

which women would adopt the Pill. These arguments can be integrated into the cost framework presented

in the previous section in the form of mark-ups, t, on both the fixed cost and marginal costs,

πjS=j(1+tj)+j(1+tj) (N -), where the superscript, S, references the total cost function in states with

sales bans, t0 is the increase in the fixed cost, and t0 is the mark-up in the marginal cost. Note that a

sales ban should have no effect on the price of methods requiring no supplies, such as abstinence, rhythm

or withdrawal (t=0, t=0). For methods requiring fairly low fixed costs but frequent purchase of supplies

(sponges, spermicidal jellies, or condoms), sales bans would tend to raise total costs by increasing t. For

methods like the diaphragm which require a fitting by physician but rare return visits, sales bans would

tend to raise total costs by increasing t. In both cases, a codified exception for physicians would tend to

mitigate the burden of the sales bans by reducing t and t. As illustrated in panel B of figure III, the



13
   There is ample evidence in published newspapers that customers obtained contraceptives through the mail under the auspices
of “feminine hygiene” or “womb support.” Similarly, male “sheaths” or “shields” and “uterine elevators” were also available for
the “prevention of disease.”

                                          Momma’s Got the Pill - 10
arguments above suggest that t and t would have been larger for the birth control pill than for other

methods.

       These state laws survived virtually unaltered until the 1960s, when legal challenges in several states

and the U.S. Supreme Court’s 1965 decision in Griswold v. Connecticut in others prompted legislative

revisions (table I, column 5). Although the Griswold decision enjoined a provision in Connecticut’s 1879

law, which uniquely prohibited the “use” of contraception, state legislatures across the U.S. responded by

repealing or amending their obscenity statutes in the aftermath of this ruling.14 By 1971, almost every

state had eliminated its bans on contraception sales to married individuals (Pilpel and Wechsler 1969;

Department of Health, Education and Welfare 1974).15


     III. Using Comstock Sales Bans to Assess the Impact of Oral Contraception on Birth Rates

       Three historical fertility studies facilitate direct tests of the identifying assumptions of the analysis.

The 1955 Growth of the American Families Study (GAF) and the 1965 and 1970 National Fertility

Studies (NFS) provide snapshots of contraceptive use among married women before the birth control pill

was introduced (1955), in the year of the Griswold decision (1965), and five years after Griswold (1970).

They also contain a rich set of highly comparable (and sometimes identical) questions about respondents’

and their husbands’ characteristics. State identifiers also allow linking with state-level Comstock laws in

table I.16 Only currently-married, white women ages 18 to 39 were sampled in all three of the surveys.

The restriction of the sampling frame to white women is unfortunate, but the limitation to married women

poses little problem for this paper, as married women were the main group benefitting from Griswold.17

       This section pools these surveys and provides timeseries and regression-adjusted, difference-in-

differences estimates to demonstrate both the relevance and validity of using Comstock sales bans to



14
    William O. Douglas, writing for the majority, explicitly contrasted Connecticut's law, which forbade the “use of
contraceptives”, with other states’ laws, which merely regulated “their manufacture or sale.”
15
   It is unclear whether compliance or enforcement responded to the Griswold decision or to the letter of the state law. There is
some evidence, for instance, that state programs encouraging and subsidizing family planning were enacted before state sales
bans were repealed. For this reason, the analysis will not make use of the date of repeal or amendment of these statutes.
17
   Griswold extended the rights of married couples only.
17
   Griswold extended the rights of married couples only.

                                            Momma’s Got the Pill - 11
identify the Pill’s impact on marital fertility. The evidence shows that the diffusion of oral contraception

was slower in states with sales bans but that this pattern reversed after the Griswold decision. These

surveys also reveal that differential use of contraception in states with sales bans was limited to the birth

control pill, which helps exclude alternative explanations such as differential shifts in the demand for

children in states with sales bans and misreporting in states where the birth control pill was illegal.

                               A. Did Sales Bans Slow the Diffusion of Oral Contraception?

      The historical and legal literatures provide mixed evidence on the importance of Comstock laws, so a

central issue in this analysis is whether sales bans reduced the use of oral contraception at all.18 Justice

Felix Frankfurter’s 1961 opinion for the majority in an earlier case challenging Connecticut’s anti-

obscenity statute, Poe v. Ullman,19 noted that, “neither counsel nor our own research have discovered any

other attempt to enforce the prohibition of distribution or use of contraceptive devices by criminal

process” (367 U.S. 497, 1961). A legal literature has grown from this opinion that treats Griswold as a

test case about a relatively unimportant and unenforced statute.

      There is, however, considerable anecdotal evidence that Connecticut’s statute did matter. Garrow's

account of this period notes that on the very day the U.S. Supreme Court was voting to dismiss Poe, the

Wallingford Post reported that Thomas Coccomo was arrested for possessing approximately $100 worth

of contraceptives (1994: 188). Most notably, the family planning clinic opened by Estelle Griswold and

C. Lee Buxton was raided by the police after operating for nine days in 1961. This public event was

evidence that Connecticut’s law was being enforced and, as a result, provided legal grounds to challenge

Connecticut statute—the case that resulted in the 1965 Griswold decision. In other less-researched states,

there is almost no evidence about the importance of sales bans or other anti-obscenity statutes. Without

further evidence, it is impossible to know the extent to which Connecticut’s and other states’ laws


18
   For instance, an article in Medical World News in 1960 noted that Connecticut physicians were aware of the state's ban on sales
and use of contraceptives, but regularly ignored it. One physician said, “Most of us doctors are usually very strict in following
the laws relating to medical practice, even when we don't fully agree with them. But this is one law we don't obey.” Citing this
article, the New York Herald Tribune reported that “birth control devices are just as widely used in Connecticut as in any other
state” (September 24, 1960: 12).
19
   Poe v. Ullman. 367, US 497 (1961).

                                           Momma’s Got the Pill - 12
affected most couples’ decisions about contraception. The purpose of this section is to provide the first

quantitative evaluation of these laws’ importance.

        As a point of departure, it is useful to consider the popularity of oral contraception among U.S.

women in the early 1960s. Among those sampled in the 1970 NFS, roughly 15 percent of nonwhites and

25 percent of whites reported having used the Pill by 1965 and these figures rose to 50 and 60 percent,

respectively, by 1970. Before 1965, figure V shows that the adoption of oral contraception was slower in

states with sales bans. Using the 1965 NFS only, panel A plots the differences in the proportion of

women ever using the birth control pill (as a fraction of all women residing in those states at the time of

the survey) between states with sales bans and other states in the same census region. The quarterly

fluctuations in the series are due to small sample sizes and problems of recall (observations are heaped in

certain months like January or July). The overall trend in each census region, however, is that use of oral

contraception was 3 to 8 percentage points, or 20 to 25 percent, lower in states with sales bans in 1965.

        Panel B repeats this exercise for a pooled sample of the 1965 and 1970 NFS, which allows

comparisons in the cumulative proportion of women using the birth control pill over the entire decade of

the 1960s.20 Notwithstanding potential recall bias or cross-state mobility of respondents after 1965 in the

1970 NFS, the results in pooled sample are similar to the 1965 NFS in the Midwestern and Western

census regions, where women in states with sales bans are slower to begin using the birth control pill

before 1965. Following Griswold, the proportion of women ever using the Pill in states with sales bans in

these regions rapidly converged on rates among women in other states. By 1967, the differences in use

appear to have disappeared completely.

        The levels in the Northeast are different in the pooled sample and the 1965 NFS. Although use of

birth control pill was lower in the Northeast in states with sales bans in panel A, there appears to be very




20
     Because there are so few observations in the Southern states with sales bans in the 1970 NFS, the South is omitted.

                                              Momma’s Got the Pill - 13
little difference in use before 1965 in the 1970 data.21 Even so, the change in trends in the aftermath of

Griswold is striking. After five years of proportional increases in both groups of states, the increase in

use of the Pill among new users in states with sales bans outstripped increases in states without these bans

by 4 percentage points by 1967 and another 2 percentage points by 1970. The post-Griswold increase is

consistent with the idea that women in Connecticut, Massachusetts and New Jersey (states banning the

sales of contraceptives in the Northeast) would have been using the birth control pill in greater numbers

had laws not been so restrictive.

     Panel C of figure V adjusts the comparisons for the number of women across states who were not

potential birth control pill users. Instead of counting all women observed in the state in the denominator,

panel C only includes women who had used the birth control pill at some point by the time of the 1970

NFS. The idea is to compare the timing of adoption among all women who eventually opted to use the

Pill. Although each of the series should approach zero as dates approach the 1970 survey date, it is

striking that the largest difference in the proportion of women ever using the Pill—approximately 6 to 10

percentage points—is observed on the eve of the Griswold decision. Just as striking is the rapid

disappearance of this difference only two years after Griswold was decided.

     The robustness of these trends to finer designations of legal regime and adjustments for changes in

observable characteristics is explored within the following differences-in-differences framework

 1                       1

where C is a binary variable equal to 1 if respondent i in state s observed in year t ever used the Pill; Sales

is a binary variable equal to one if state s had a sales ban (Sales=1 for all states checked in column 3 of

table I); Exception is a binary variable equal to one if a state had a codified physician exception

(Exception=1 for all states checked in column 4 of table I); and                   1, 1       1970      is vector where the

first element is a constant and the second element is an indicator variable equal to one if the individual is



21
   Slight differences in the sampling frame may have induced these differences: 1965 survey included Rhode Island whereas the
1970 survey included New Hampshire. On the other hand, measurement error induced by mobility between states may bias the
estimates from the 1970 NFS.

                                          Momma’s Got the Pill - 14
observed in 1970. The coefficients of interest are the elements of                        ,   ,   ,     :    ,   is the point

estimate on the interaction of Sales and the constant, and              ,     is point estimate on the interaction of

Sales and the indicator for observation in 1970. The implied marginal effect associated with the former

captures the average difference in Pill use in states with sales bans versus the comparison group

(subsequently discussed in detail) in 1965 and the latter how this difference changed from 1965 to 1970.

         The analysis examines the sensitivity of the estimates to various comparison groups. In practice,

these comparison groups are created by adding the remaining variables in equation I sequentially. The

baseline specification includes only Sales, Exception, and the interaction of census region dummy

variables (Northeast omitted) with the elements of               represented by        . These comparisons are similar

to those in figure V, and the average marginal effects of interest capture differences between states with

restrictive sales bans (and no physician exception) and those without bans in same census region in 1965

and changes in this difference from 1965 to 1970.22 Next I refine the baseline comparison by including

the interaction of Advertising (Advertising=1 for all states checked in column 2 of table I) and the

elements of      . In this specification, the implied marginal effects of interest capture the 1965, within-

census region difference in Pill use between states with sales bans and states with advertising bans only

and changes in this difference by 1970. Because advertising bans were quite similar in language but

should not have restricted physician behavior, this specification tests whether having a sales ban per se

drives the results. Finally, I refine the comparison group by adjusting the estimates for differences in

observable characteristics, X, potentially correlated with the demand for children under the Michael and

Willis model (age, Catholicism, woman's education, husband's income, and ideals about children).23

     Table II presents average marginal effects obtained from probit specifications, and robust standard

errors corrected for correlation within state are presented in brackets beneath each estimate (Arellano

1987; Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan 2004). Columns 1 to 4 alter the comparison groups as described


22
   Treating states with sales bans and physician exceptions as a separate group avoids implicitly assuming they are most
comparable to states with sales bans or the comparison group.
23
   Ideals about children are taken from a survey question about the “ideal number of children in the average American family.”
These variables are captured in X in equation I and are described in details in the notes of table II.

                                           Momma’s Got the Pill - 15
above (included variables are indicated in the last rows of the table and in the table notes). Across

specifications, women in states with sales bans were significantly less likely to have used oral

contraception before the 1965 Griswold decision. In columns 3 and 4, this estimate is negligibly affected

by adjustments for observable characteristics. Even as more of the variation in the dependent variable is

explained by other variables in the model (the pseudo R2 increases from 0.13 to 0.21 from column 1 to

column 4), the estimated difference in 1965 use increases from approximately 6 to 8 percentage points.

Despite the small sample sizes, the 1965 differences are statistically significant in each specification.

       One final specification (not reported in table II) additionally differentiates between early repeal states

(indicated in column 5 of table I) and those that repealed after Griswold. I allow use of the birth control

pill to evolve separately in these states by adding a dummy variable for early legalization and its

interaction with the elements of           . Because the resulting marginal effects are quite similar to those in

columns 1 to 4 (-0.073 for         ,   , s.e. 0.021; 0.054 for     ,     , s.e. 0.025), this specification provides no

evidence that early repeal states are driving the results. The estimates across specifications imply that the

number of women ever using the birth control pill was approximately 25 to 30 percent lower in states

with sales bans by 1965.24 The age-specific marginal effects also reveal that the effects are strongest

among women in their twenties and early thirties.25

       One interpretation of these results is that demand for the Pill among women in states with sales bans

was simply lower for reasons unrelated to statutory differences. If this were the case, then differences in

use of the birth control might fail to disappear even as states revised their statutes in the aftermath of

Griswold. Consistent with timeseries evidence (panel B of figure V), positive marginal effects associated

with     ,     indicate that lower use of the Pill in states with sales bans had all but disappeared by 1970.



24
   Specifications that omit census regions one at a time or include all women sampled in 1965 and 1970 yield similar results.
These are reported on the online appendix.
25
   I run a regression for the 1965 data only, which interacts each of the variables in equation I with a set of dummy variables for
five-year age groups (20-24, 25-29,.., 40-44; 15-19 omitted) in lieu of the interaction with the elements of . The average
marginal effect for women in the omitted category in states with sales bans is -0.168 (s.e. 0.073) (these women had to be
“currently married” to be sampled in 1965); the marginal effect for women ages 20 to 24 is 0.100 (s.e. 0.116); for women ages 25
to 29 it is 0.167 (s.e. 0.110); for women ages 30 to 34 it is 0.102 (s.e. 0.108); for women ages 35 to 39 the average marginal
effect is 0.163 (s.e. 0.104); and for women ages 40 to 44 the average marginal effect is 0.196 (s.e. 0.102).

                                            Momma’s Got the Pill - 16
Across specifications, hypothesis tests fail to reject that the sum of the marginal effects implied by                    ,


and       ,     is equal to zero at any conventional level of significance. In summary, omitted variables

threatening the interpretation of these estimates as the impact of statutory differences would need to

reduce Pill use prior to 1965 but not from 1965 to 1970. The next section explores the potential influence

of time-varying unobservables on these findings.

       B. Were Comstock Sales Bans Related to Changes in the Demand for Children from 1955 to 1965?

Two additional explanations are consistent with the results thus far. One is that differential changes in the

demand for children (not captured in X) in states with sales bans are responsible for the lower use of oral

contraception. The second is that respondents may have underreported use of the birth control pill in the

pre-1965 period, because they knew it was illegal. If either of these alternative explanations accounts for

the differences in Pill use, then the same patterns of use should appear for other types of contraceptives as

well.

        Table III examines this by modifying the dependent variable in equation I to be the use of

contraceptives other than the birth control pill. Because differences in the use of other types of

contraceptives were not zero in 1955, I expand the sample to include the 1955 GAF and modify equation

(I) by redefining              1, 1           1965 , 1       1970     and the associated vectors of point estimates.26 In

this revised specification, the coefficients of interest are              ,   , the point estimate on the interaction of Sales

and the constant, as well as              ,     and      ,   , the interaction of Sales and the indicator variables for

observation in the 1965 and 1970 surveys, respectively. The implied marginal effect associated with                           ,


represents the average, adjusted difference in Pill use in states with sales bans versus the comparison

group in 1955;          ,     and     ,        capture how this difference changed from 1955 to 1965 and 1955 to

1970.

        Panel A of table III presents the average marginal effects from probit specifications (corresponding

to the columns in table II) for a new dependent variable equal to one if the respondent reported ever using


26
     Unfortunately, the 1960 GAF does not contain state identifiers and so cannot be used in the analysis.

                                                Momma’s Got the Pill - 17
any method of contraception. Unlike the results in table II, women in states with sales bans appear no

different in their propensity to have used contraception in 1955. Moreover, this difference does not

change in an economically or statistically significant manner in states with sales bans from 1955 to 1965

or from 1955 to 1970. As more covariates are added in columns 2 to 4, the estimates grow even smaller

in magnitude.

     Because the evolution of “contraceptive use” may mask important changes in the type of

contraceptives used, panel B presents estimates using another dependent variable equal to one if a

respondent reported ever using either a diaphragm or a condom—two of the most popular and effective

methods before the introduction of the birth control pill. Across specifications, women in states with sales

bans appear slightly more likely (although not significantly so) to have used barrier methods in 1955. In

contrast to the absence of changes in panel A, the propensity to use barrier methods in states with sales

bans grew slightly from 1955 to 1965. This finding is consistent with women in states without sales bans

opting for the birth control pill in greater numbers, while women in states with sales bans started or

continued with use of barrier methods. Although these estimates are never statistically significant, use of

barrier methods reverted toward 1955 levels by 1970, which is consistent with women in states with sales

bans switching from barrier methods to the Pill in the aftermath of Griswold.

     In summary, this evidence corroborates the legal and historical literature that argues that sales bans

mattered very little for methods pre-dating the birth control pill (Tone 2000, 2002; Poe v. Ullman 1961).

However, this empirical evidence challenges the claim that sales bans were irrelevant in the 1960s. Sales

bans are associated with significantly lower use of the Pill prior to Griswold—an association that is robust

across specifications and comparison groups. In neither panel A or panel B of table III does the evidence

indicate that this association is due to differentially lower demand for children in 1965, more slowly

falling demand for children from 1955 to 1965, or differential underreporting of contraceptive use in

states with sales bans before 1965. This narrows the potential scope for omitted variables considerably:

confounding, unobservables would need to reduce Pill use prior to 1965 but not from 1965 to 1970;

moreover, they would need to have no impact on the propensity to use of other contraceptive methods.

                                    Momma’s Got the Pill - 18
Taken together, these findings support the validity of an empirical strategy that uses sales bans to isolate

the impact of the Pill on marital fertility in the early 1960s.


                  IV. The Impact of Oral Contraception on Marital Childbearing

      Under the Michael and Willis model, the birth control pill should affect aggregate birth outcomes

through two channels: by lowering the marginal cost of averting births (thus increasing the number of

women opting to do so) and reducing the monthly probability of conception. Because I have no way of

identifying the magnitude of the former, this section begins by generating back-of-the-envelope

calculations of the expected magnitude of the change in birth rates through the second channel only.

These serve as a benchmark for the subsequent estimates of the importance of sales bans for the U.S.

general fertility rate from 1951 to 1980.

                    A. The Expected Relationship between Sales Bans and Period Fertility Rates

      Denote the number of births to married women of childbearing ages (15 to 44) in year t as Bt. These

births consist of planned births, Pt, and contraceptive failures, Ft. Let Q denote the proportion of married

women who are fecund and trying to get pregnant, S the proportion of married women who are not

fecund, s the time-invariant average rate of success among women trying to get pregnant, and f the

average failure rate among married, fecund women using any contraceptive method. Using this notation,

the fertility rate in year t can be written as the sum of planned and unplanned births and reflects decisions

in the previous period about whether or not to get pregnant as well as the success and failure rates, or

(2)              Bt = Ft+ Pt = Qt-1 s + (1-Qt-1-S t-1) f.

All but one quantity is straightforward to estimate: Q and S are observed in the 1955 GAF and 1965 NFS.

Census information provides information on the population of women ages 15 to 44, and counts of births

are published each year by the Division of Vital Statistics. The average annual success rates of women

trying to get pregnant, s, is typically approximated at 0.85 (James Trussell 2004). Estimating the failure

rate, f, is difficult, because contraceptive methods cannot be randomly assigned. My approach is to choose

the value of f that would satisfy equation II based upon observations of Q and S in the 1955 GAF (0.056


                                       Momma’s Got the Pill - 19
and 0.294 respectively) and the U.S. marital fertility rate, B, in 1956 (163 per 1000 married women ages

15 to 44).27 Therefore, f = (0.163 – 0.056 ×0.85)/ (1 - 0.056- 0.294) = 0.177. That is, approximately 17.7

percent of married U.S. women, who were not trying to get pregnant in 1955, conceived in order for the

U.S. marital fertility rate to have reached 163 per 1000 women in 1956 (see online appendix for more

information on the computation of these numbers).28

      How much should birth rates in the population (not only among married women) have changed in

states with sales bans after 1957 relative to birth rates in other states? To answer this, redefine f as a

weighted average of the failure rates of oral contraception and other methods. Let qt-1 denote the

proportion of the fecund, married population using oral contraception, f o be the time-invariant failure rate

associated with the birth control pill, and f be the time-invariant failure rate associated with all other

methods (calculated above at 0.177). Using this notation, the marital fertility rate at time t can be written

as Bt = Qt-1s + (1-Qt-1 -S t-1) [ qt-1 f o +(1- qt-1) f ]. The partial impact of changes in failure rates on

difference in the marital fertility rate, Dt , between states with sales bans, BtS, versus those without these

laws, Bt0, in 1965 ceteris paribus can be written as the sum of differences in planned births and failures

due to pre-Pill methods and due to the Pill, or

(3)      ΔD ≡ D66 –D56 = (B65S – B650) – (B55S – B550)

                         = [(Q65S–Q65 0) – ( Q55S–Q550 )] s

                             + (1–Q65 –S 65) S [q65S f o + (1–q65 S) f ] – (1–Q65 –S 65)0 [q650 f o + (1– q65 0) f]

                             – [(1-Q55 -S55)S – (1–Q55 –S55)0 ] f .

Assuming that the gap in Q and S remained constant from 1955 to 1965 and that there were no behavioral

differences between states with sales bans and those without, (1-Q65 -S 65)S = (1-Q65 -S 65)0, ΔD depends

only on (1-Q65 -S 65)(q65S- q650)(f o - f). Using the fact that (1-Q65 -S 65) = 0.657 and (q65S- q650) ≈ 0.07



27
   Illegitimate births comprised 3.6 percent of all births in 1956, but the 1955 GAF provides no information on contraceptive
behavior among unmarried women.
28
   Note this estimate of f averages failures among women abstaining from sex ( 0) with those not using any methods
(considerably higher). Using nonexperimental comparisons, Trussell (2004) calculates that women using condoms and
diaphragms today experience failure rates of 16 and 32 percent respectively. My figure may be smaller than the average implied
by these numbers due to adjustments in the frequency of coitus and nonrandom selection into methods.

                                          Momma’s Got the Pill - 20
(table II), and f o ≈ 0, ΔD ≈ 0.008. This estimate provides the expected change in the gap in birth rates

between states with sales bans and those without from 1956 to 1966 among married women only.

Assuming that there was no change in failure rates among unmarried women, the change in this gap

among all women ages 15 to 44 in the U.S. is ΔDUS ≈ 0.70 × ΔDm ≈ 0.0057. This back-of-the-envelope

calculation suggests that the aggregate gap in the U.S should grow by almost six births per 1000 women

of childbearing age due to changes in failure rates alone.

                                 B. The Relationship between Sales Bans and Period Fertility

      To estimate changes in aggregate birth rates in states with sales bans, I encoded information from

the published Vital Statistics Natality volumes by state from 1950 to 1967 (U.S. Department of Health,

Education and Welfare, 1953-1969) and supplement it with similarly aggregated information from the

publicly-available Natality Detail files for 1968 to 1980. Each year-by-state birth count is divided by an

estimate of 1/1000 of the relevant population using the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS)

in the years of the decennial census and using linear interpolation in the intercensal years (Ruggles et al.

2008). The dependent variable is the general fertility rate, GFRst, for each state, s, and year, t (see the

data appendix for more detail). For fertility outcomes, I estimate the following linear, panel analog of

equation (1)

 4

where = 1950, 1951, …, 1980,                = [1, 1(t=1951), 1(t=1952), …, 1(t=1980)], and X includes a set of

time-varying covariates obtained by linearly interpolating variables between census years (proportion of

the state population of 15 to 44 year olds residing on a farm, currently married, nonwhite, foreign born,

and in poverty and mean total income and mean educational attainment).29 In some specifications, X also

includes a set of state fixed effects. The legal variables remain as previously defined. Because the

evolution of births in the U.S. from 1950 to 1980 is highly nonlinear (see figure I), state-specific trends


29
  This is because Vital Statistics volumes do not contain information on state or individual-level characteristics and because
there is no data source containing annual state characteristics for the 1950s or early 1960s. These estimates of state
characteristics are imperfect, so specifications with these variables should be viewed as a robustness check. In general, these
controls sharpen the results.

                                            Momma’s Got the Pill - 21
are not included in the analysis. However, all of the specifications include census-region-by-year fixed

effects,   , to parallel the analysis of contraceptive use presented in section III and to capture the

nonlinear evolution of birth rates common to all states within census regions. As before, the point

estimates of interest, denoted      = [1,1951, 1,1952…1,1980], capture changes in the gap in birth rates in states

with sales bans relative to those in the comparison groups for 1951 to 1980.

     Figure VI plots estimates of       along with 95 percent confidence intervals using heteroskedasticity-

robust standard errors that have been adjusted for serial correlation within states (Arellano 1987, Bertrand

et al. 2004). Recall, back-of-the-envelope calculations anticipate a change in the difference in birth rates

of at least six births per 1000 women from 1955 to 1965. By the same logic, one would expect the gap in

birth rates to narrow between 1965 and 1970 as use of oral contraception converged in the aftermath of

Griswold. Plots of the estimates of        in all panels of figure VI correspond closely to these expectations.

From 1951 to 1957, the gap in birth rates changed very little. After the introduction of Enovid in 1957

and before the 1965 Griswold decision, the average within-region difference between states with sales

bans and the comparison group grew by approximately seven to nine births per 1000 women, and the

estimates are individually and statistically distinguishable from zero from 1961 to 1965. Another striking

feature of these plots is that differences in the birth rates fell sharply by around 4 births per 1000 women

after 1965. After 1966, the point estimates are no longer (individually) statistically distinguishable from

zero, and a Wald test rejects the equivalence of the point estimates in 1967 and 1965 at the 5 percent level

in each specification in figure VI. The fact that laws banning contraceptive sales are associated with

growing differences in birth rates from 1958 to 1965 and falling differences from 1965 to 1970 is

consistent with the waxing of their relevance with the introduction of a refillable, prescription

contraceptive and the waning of their relevance in the aftermath of Griswold. One final feature of the

plots is that differences in the general fertility rate in states with sales bans evolve smoothly after 1968.

This implies that pre-existing sales bans were poor predictors of abortion legalization and other

determinants of the post-1965 fluctuations in the birth rate.



                                      Momma’s Got the Pill - 22
      As in the previous section, figure VI examines the robustness of estimates to the use of different

comparison groups. Panel A presents three specifications that are analogous to comparisons in tables II

and III for equation (1) (these specifications omit state fixed effects). The baseline estimates of                        are

obtained from a specification that includes Sales, Exception and census region-by-year dummy variables,

so they capture changes in the gap in the birth rate between states with sales bans and other states in the

same census region. A second specification refines this comparison by including a dummy variable for

advertising bans interacted with the elements of               , so      captures the differential evolution of birth

rates in states with sales bans relative to states with advertising bans only in the same census region. A

third specification additionally adjusts for compositional changes by including annual, state-level

covariates. The results indicate that sales bans affected the birth rate by affecting the availability of

supplies rather than the flow of information (second specification) and that the evolution of observable

(and perhaps unobservable) characteristics tended to offset the effects of sales bans (third specification) in

the aftermath of Griswold.

      Panel B adds state fixed effects and modifies the estimating equation to allow birth rates to evolve

differently in states that repealed their sales bans before Griswold.30 The results change negligibly: Least

squares estimates of the increase in the gap in birth rates are comparable to those in panel A.31 The post-

1965 decline in the gap, however, is slightly larger indicating that the difference in birth rates fell by

approximately 7 births per 1000 women within the five years after Griswold. These results are consistent

with the results on use of the birth control pill, and their robustness to excluding states that choose to

repeal their laws suggests that unobserved political, legal or social changes are not driving the results.

      The similarity of these patterns across specifications in panel A and B supports the credibility of this

paper’s empirical strategy. As in the analysis of contraceptive use in section III, the evolution of birth


30
   In practice, equation I is modified to include a dummy variable equal to one for this group of states as well as dummy variables
for the interaction of this variable with each year from 1951 to 1980 as well as state fixed effects. The results are qualitatively
similar when I allow the legal variables to “turn off” following a pre-Griswold revision (see online appendix for these estimates).
31
   It is worth noting that the robustness to the inclusion of state fixed effects is not terribly surprising. After all, the most
concerning threats to identification are not time-invariant, state-level factors, but time-varying, unobservables that (1) are
concentrated in states with sales bans, (2) correspond in timing to the introduction and diffusion of the Pill between 1957 and
1965, and (3) wane in their importance after the Griswold decision.

                                           Momma’s Got the Pill - 23
rates in states with sales bans from 1957 to 1965 is virtually identical when using different comparison

groups and strengthened with the adjustments for observable characteristics.

        Panel C demonstrates that sales bans tended to have similar effects across regions. Each line presents

estimates from separate regressions that correspond to the specification in panel B with advertising bans

and state-level covariates. If one census region were driving the results, omitting that region from the

analysis would alter the pattern of estimates. This does not appear to be the case, as the 1957 to 1965

divergence in birth rates and the post-1965 convergence is similar as each census region is omitted.

        Finally, panel D explores heterogeneity in the effect of the Pill by age group. I redefine the

dependent variable as the state birth rate in year t for each of six five-year age groups (15 to 19, 20 to 24,

…, 40 to 44) and estimate separate regressions that correspond to the specification in panel B with

advertising bans and state-level covariates.32 The divergence in birth rates is most pronounced among 20

to 24 year olds, where the difference increases by approximately 18 births per 1000 women from 1958 to

1965 and drops precipitously after 1965. The pattern is less pronounced but also present among 15 to 19,

25 to 29, and 30 to 34 year olds. Consistent with the paucity of women ages 35 to 44 who adopted oral

contraception, or perhaps the importance of the law for this group, the pattern for this age group deviates

little from zero.


                                        V. The Demographic Legacy of the Pill

            Fifty years after Enovid appeared on the U.S. market, this analysis provides new evidence that the

contraceptive pill accelerated the post-1960 decline in marital fertility. The paper’s results rely upon a

novel empirical strategy, which exploits the idiosyncratic language of Comstock statutes, the timing of the

introduction of the birth control pill, and the timing of the 1965 Griswold decision. Despite imperfect

enforcement and compliance of Comstock laws, women in states with sales bans were less likely to have

used the birth control pill before Griswold. These legally-induced differences in Pill use had an

appreciable impact on marital childbearing. Period fertility rates fell more slowly in states with sales bans


32
     State covariates are redefined to be specific to the particular age group under consideration.

                                               Momma’s Got the Pill - 24
in the period following the introduction of Enovid and before Griswold. By 1965 the difference in the

general fertility rate had grown by approximately 8 births per 1000 women of childbearing age. This

figure suggests that approximately 124,600 U.S. births in 1965 occurred in excess of what would have

been predicted based upon the pre-existing, state-level differences.33 Without bans on the sales of

contraception, the marital fertility rate could have been 8 percent lower in states with sales bans and 4

percent lower in the U.S. as a whole.

          Had the Pill been unavailable during the 1960s, it is likely that the U.S. fertility rate would have

fallen more slowly. But how slowly? How much of the total decline in the marital fertility rate from 163

births per 1000 married women in 1956 to 131 in 1966 can be attributed to the Pill? To speculate on the

answer to this question, I generate a simple counterfactual using equation II and information on behavior

and fecundity from the 1965 NFS. Assuming that the failure rate remained unchanged at 0.177 after

1955, I simulate the 1966 marital fertility rate based upon the observed number of women trying to get

pregnant, Q, and who were fecund, S, to be                               1                     =(.029)(.85)+(.665) (.177) =

0.144. Because this simulation holds constant failure rates at the level imputed from the 1955 GAF, it

attributes approximately 60 percent of the total change in the martial fertility rate from 1956 to 1966

(            =163-144=19) to changes in marital behavior. The remaining component,                                    =144-

131=13, can be attributed to changes in the failure rate, f.34 If all of the changes in the failure rate were

due to the introduction of oral contraception, approximately 40 percent (13/32) of the total change in the

U.S. marital fertility rate from 1955 to 1965 could be attributed to the Pill.

          This is a large number, but it might be even larger. Economic models maintain that changes in

marital behavior—couples’ decisions to prevent or delay births, for instance—may also respond to

changes in contraceptive technology. If the Pill also altered the number of women trying to get pregnant,

the proportion of the total decline in U.S. fertility attributed to the Pill could well exceed 40 percent.


33
   This estimate is obtained by multiplying the growth in the difference between 1957 and 1965 in the number of births per 1000
women ages 15 to 44 in states with sales bans (0.008) by the population of women in that age range in 1965 (15,574,871).
34
   The Pill may have affected women’s probability of getting pregnant even after ceasing use. Changes in the failure rate over this
period may also have reflected changes in selection into marriage.

                                           Momma’s Got the Pill - 25
        It is important to emphasize that these results do not discount the role of other forces in the 1960s.

On the contrary, increases in the demand for women’s work, falling discrimination, and shifting norms

and preferences independent of changes in contraceptive technology provided powerful incentives for

U.S. women to use the Pill once it became available. Therefore, caution should be exercised in

extrapolating these results to other places and periods.

        In summary, this paper provides new evidence that the contraceptive revolution was an important

force behind the sharp drop in U.S. fertility during the 1960s. The evidence suggests a role for

contraceptive technology that far exceeds its treatment, implicitly or explicitly, in the economics

literature. Simple extensions of economic models to incorporate changes in contraceptive technology

may help resolve larger demographic puzzles and illuminate this technology’s implications for household

labor supply, potential earnings, and the longer-term well-being of parents and children.




                                    Momma’s Got the Pill - 26
                                        VI. REFERENCES

Arellano, Manuel. 1987. “Computing Robust Standard Errors for Within-Group Estimators,” Oxford
         Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 49 (4): 431-434.
Bailey, Martha J. 2006. “More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraceptive Freedom on Women's
         Lifecycle Labor Supply,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (1): 289-320.
Becker, Gary. 1960. “An Economic Analysis of Fertility,” in Demographic and Economic Change in
         Developed Countries, Conference of the Universities-National Bureau Committee for Economic
         Research, a Report of the National Bureau of Economic Research Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
         University Press: 209-40.
-----. 1965. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” Economic Journal, 75 (299): 493-517.
-----. 1991. A Treatise on the Family, enlarged edition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
----- and H. Gregg Lewis. 1973. “On the Interaction between Quantity and Quality of Children,” Journal
         of Political Economy, 81(2): S279-88.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. “How Much Should We Trust
         Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (1): 249-75.
Blake, Judith. 1969. “Population Policy for Americans: Is the Government Being Misled?” Science, 164:
         522-9.
Bongaarts, John. 1994. “The Impact of Population Policies: Comment,” Population and Development
         Review, 20 (3): 616-620.
Dennett, Mary Ware. 1926. Birth Control Laws: Shall We Keep Them, Change Them or Abolish Them.
         New York: F. H. Hitchcock.
Department of Health and Economic Welfare Center for Family Planning Program Development (Planned
         Parenthood-World Population). 1974. “Family Planning, Contraception, and Voluntary
         Sterilization: An Analysis of Laws and Policies in the United States, each State and Jurisdiction
         (as of September 1971): A Report of the National Center for Family Planning Services, Health
         Services and Mental Health Administration.” DHEW Publication 74-16001.
Dienes, C. Thomas. 1972. Law, Politics and Birth Control. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Easterlin, Richard A., Robert A. Pollak, and Michael L. Wachter. 1980. “Towards a More General Model
         of Fertility Determination: Endogenous Preferences and Natural Fertility,” in Population and
         Economic Change in Less Developed Countries, ed. Richard A. Easterlin, 81-150. Chicago, IL:
         University of Chicago Press.
Freedman, Ronald, Pascal Kidder Whelpton, and Arthur A. Campbell. 1955. “Growth of American
         Familes.” Machine-readable data file. University of Wisconsin Center for Demography and
         Ecology.
Garrow, David J. 1994. Liberty and Sexuality: The Right to Privacy and the Making of Roe v. Wade.
         Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Gibson, Campbell. 1976. “The U.S. Fertility Decline, 1961-1975: The Contribution of Changes in Marital
         Status and Marital Fertility.” Family Planning Perspectives, 8 (5): 249-52.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz. 2002. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s
         Career and Marriage Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy, 110 (4): 730-70.
Guldi, Melanie. 2008. “Fertility Effects of Abortion and Pill Access for Minors,” Demography, 45:817-
         27.
Knowles, James C., John S. Akin, David K. Guilkey. 1994. “The Impact of Population Policies:
         Comment,” Population and Development Review, 20 (3): 611-15.
Levine, Phillip B., Douglas Staiger, Thomas J. Kane, David J. Zimmerman. 1996. “Roe v. Wade and


                                   Momma’s Got the Pill - 27
         American Fertility,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 5615.
Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak. 2007. “The American Family and Family Economics,” Journal of
         Economic Perspectives, 21 (2): 3-26.
Michael, Robert T., and Robert J. Willis. 1976. “Contraception and Fertility: Household Production under
         Uncertainty,” in Demographic Behavior of the Household, 25-98. Cambridge, MA: National
         Bureau of Economic Research.
National Fertility Study, 1965 [machine readable data file]. Survey conducted by Norman B. Ryder and
         Charles F. Westoff; data file edition was prepared by D. Capaldi, M. Knoll, and M. Pasaba under
         the direction of Larry Bumpass, Center for Demography and Ecology, University of Wisconsin,
         Madison (Princeton, NJ: Office of Population Research [producer], 1965; Madison, WI:
         University of Wisconsin Data and Program Library Service [distributor], 1971).
National Fertility Study, 1970 [machine readable data file]. Survey conducted by Norman B. Ryder and
         Charles F. Westoff for the Office of Population Research; data file edition was prepared under the
         direction of Larry Bumpass, Center for Demography and Ecology, University of Wisconsin,
         Madison (Princeton, NJ: Office of Population Research [producer], 1970; Madison, WI:
         University of Wisconsin Data and Program Library Service [distributor], 1976).
New York Herald Tribune, September 24, 1960: 12.
Pilpel, Harriet and Nancy F. Wechsler. 1969. “Birth Control, Teenagers and the Law,” Family Planning
         Perspectives, 1 (1): 29-36.
Pritchett, Lant H. 1994a. “Desired Fertility and the Impact of Population Policies,” Population and
         Development Review, 20 (1): 1-55.
-----. 1994b. “Impact of Population Policies: Reply,” Population and Development Review, 20 (3): 621-
         630.
Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly
         Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2008. “Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version
         3.0.” Machine-readable database. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center.
Ryder, Norman B. and Charles F. Westoff. 1965. “National Fertility Study.” Machine-readable data file.
         University of Wisconsin Center for Demography and Ecology.
----. 1970. “National Fertility Study.” Machine-readable data file. University of Wisconsin Center for
         Demography and Ecology.
----. 1971. The Contraceptive Revolution. Princeton, NJ, Princeton University Press.
Sheps, Mindel C. 1964. “On the Time Required for Conception,” Population Studies, 18 (1): 85-97.
---- and Edward B. Perrin. 1966. “Further Results from a Human Fertility Model with a Variety of
         Pregnancy Outcomes,” Human Biology, 38 (3): 189-93.
Smith, Peter. 1964. “Comment: The History and Future of the Legal Battle over Birth Control,” Cornell
         Law Quarterly, 49: 275-303.
Tone, Andrea. 1996. “Contraceptive Consumers: Gender and the Political Economy of Birth Control in
         the 1930s,” Journal of Social History, 29 (3): 485-506.
----. 2000. “Black Market Birth Control: Contraceptive Entrepreneurship and Criminality in the Guilded
         Age,” Journal of American History, 82 (2): 435-59.
----. 2001. Devices and Desires: A History of Contraceptives in America. New York: Hill and Wang.
Trussell, James. 2004. “Contraceptive Efficacy,” In Contraceptive Technology, 18th ed. Robert A.
         Hatcher, James Trussell, Anita Nelson, Willard Cates, Jr., Felicia Stewart, and Deborah Kowal,
         747-826. New York NY: Ardent Media.
U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare. 1953. “Table 22B: Live Births by Age of Mother,
         Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White Mother: Each State, 1950.” In Vitals Statistics of the

                                   Momma’s Got the Pill - 28
         United States, 1950. Vol. II. Marriage, Divorce, Natality, Fetal Mortality, and Infant Mortality,
         238-73. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1954. “Table 26B: Live Births by Age of Mother, Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White Mothers:
         Each State, 1951.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1951. Vol. I. Analysis and Summary
         Tables, Tables for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands, Marriage, Divorce, Natality,
         Fetal Mortality and Infant Mortality Data, 232-67. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1955. “Table 24B: Live Births by Age of Mother, Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White Mothers:
         Each State, 1952.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1952. Vol. I. Introduction and
         Summary Tables, Tables for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands, Marriage, Divorce,
         Natality, Fetal Mortality and Infant Mortality Data, 204-39. Washington, DC: Government
         Printing Office.
-----. 1955. “Table 24B: Live Births by Age of Mother, Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White Mothers:
         Each State, 1953.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1953. Vol I. Introduction and Summary
         Tables, Tables for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands, Marriage, Divorce, Natality,
         Fetal Mortality and Infant Mortality Data, 218-53. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1956. “Table 24B: Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1954.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1954. Vol. I. Introduction
         and Summary Tables, Tables for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands, Marriage,
         Divorce, Natality, Fetal Mortality and Infant Mortality Data, 218-58. Washington, DC:
         Government Printing Office.
-----. 1957. “Table 26B: Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1955.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1955. Vol. I. Introduction
         and Summary Tables, Tables for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands, Marriage,
         Divorce, Natality, Fetal Mortality and Infant Mortality Data, 223-63. Washington, DC:
         Government Printing Office.
-----. 1958. “Table 25B: Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1956.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1956. Vol. I. Introduction
         and Text Tables, Tables for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands, Marriage, Divorce,
         Natality, Fetal Mortality and Infant Mortality Data, 218-58. Washington, DC: Government
         Printing Office.
-----. 1959. “Table 30B: Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1957.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1957. Vol. I. Introduction
         and Text Tables, Tables for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands, Marriage, Divorce,
         Natality, Fetal Mortality and Infant Mortality Data, 234-74. Washington, DC: Government
         Printing Office.
-----. 1960. “Table 40B: Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1958.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1958. Vol. I. Introduction
         and Text Tables, Tables for Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands, Marriage, Divorce,
         Natality, Fetal Mortality and Infant Mortality Data, 277-31. Washington, DC: Government
         Printing Office.
-----. 1961. “Table 39B: Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1959.” In Vital Statistics for the United States, 1959. Vol. I. Introductory
         Text and Related Tables, General Tables for Hawaii, Puerto Rico and Virgin Islands (Marriage,
         Divorce, Natality, Fetal Mortality and Infant Mortality), General Tables for United States and
         Each State (Marriage, Divorce, Natality, Fetal Mortality and Infant Mortality), 252-93.
         Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1962. “Table 2-14: Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Color and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1960.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1960: Vol. I. Natality, 2-24–

                                   Momma’s Got the Pill - 29
         2-25. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1963. “Table 2-11. Section 2- Natality. “Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Color
         and Nativity of White Mothers: Each State, 1961.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1961.
         Vol. I. Natality, 2-20–2-51. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1964. “Table I-42. Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Color and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1962.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1962. Vol. I. Natality, 1-47–
         1-78. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1964. “Table 1-47. Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Color and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1963.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1963. Vol. I. Natality, 1-57–
         1-88. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1966. “Table 1-49. Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1964.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1964: Vol. I. Natality, 1-64–
         1-86. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1967. “Table 1-49. Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1965.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1965: Vol. I. Natality, 1-59–
         1-81. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1968. “Table 1-50. Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1966.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1966: Vol. I. Natality, 1-57–
         1-79. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
-----. 1969. “Table 1-50. Live Births by Age of Mother, Live-Birth Order, Race and Nativity of White
         Mothers: Each State, 1967.” In Vital Statistics of the United States, 1967: Vol. I. Natality, 1-53–
         1-75. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2002. “Natality Detail Files, 1968-1971.”Computer file.
         Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research.
Watkins, Elizabeth Siegel. 1998. On the Pill: A Social History of Oral Contraceptives, 1950 - 1970.
         Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Westoff, Charles F. 1974. “Coital Frequency and Contraception,” Family Planning Perspectives, 6: 136-
         41.
-----. 1975. “The Yield of the Imperfect: The 1970 National Fertility Study,” Demography, 12 (4): 573-
         80.
Willis, Robert J. 1973. “A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility Behavior,” Journal of
         Political Economy, 81 (2): S14-64.




                                    Momma’s Got the Pill - 30
                                                       Figure I
                        U.S. Fertility and Children Ever Born from 1895 to 1985


170                                                                                                     4.5

                                                                                       1965: Griswold v.
                                      1957: Enovid approved by
                                                                                       Connecticut strikes down
150                                   FDA for the regulation of
                                                                                       Connecticut’s obscenity law
                                      menses
                                                                                                        4

130



110                                                                                                     3.5



90

                                                                                                        3

70



50                                                                                                      2.5
      1895   1905         1915      1925        1935        1945        1955        1965         1975

                 Fertility rate    White fertility rate      Children ever born to 41-70 year olds


The outcome variables are the period fertility rate (and separately for white women) and the mean self-reported
number of children by birth cohort. Mean children ever born excludes women who had no children. Birth cohorts
 are indexed to year of birth and increased by 25 years. (For instance, the birth cohort of 1870 corresponds to the
                           year 1895.) Computations using the IPUMS census weights.
                     Source: Annual fertility rates are calculated using Historical Statistics,
     http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/statab/t001x01.pdf. The mean number of children ever born per woman is
    calculated using a sample of ever-married women ages 41 to 70 in the 1950, 1960, 1970, and 1980 IPUMS
                                               (Ruggles et al. 2007).




                                           Momma’s Got the Pill - 31
                                                      Figure II
                          Distribution of Children Ever Born by Year-of-Birth Cohort

     0.4


    0.35
                                   1949

     0.3


    0.251910
                                          1940

     0.2

               1920
    0.15                                         1930

     0.1


    0.05


       0
           0          1      2      3      4      5        6      7        8       9       10      11      12

The outcome variable is the proportion of women born in a specific year who report a given number of children.
 This variable is created using the question of self-reported children ever-born excluding stillbirths, adopted, and
step children. In 1960 this question was only asked of ever-married women, so I exclude never-married women in
 later census years for consistency. I also top-code children ever born at 12 in 1960 for consistency with the later
  census years. Year of birth is obtained by subtracting age at the time of the census from the year of observation.

                 Sample: Ever-married women ages 41 to 50 residing the coterminous United States.
                                Source: 1960-1990 IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2007).




                                           Momma’s Got the Pill - 32
                                     Figure III
                Total and Marginal Cost of Averting Births

   A. How the Birth Control Pill Affected the Total Cost of Averting Births

Cost
                      Π1                 Π2
                                                      Π3




                                                           Π4: Total cost for using the
                                                           birth control pill




           1     2     3    4    5      6     7   8    9      10        Births averted

           11    10    9    8    7      6     5   4    3      2      1 Children born



        B. How Sales Bans Affected the Total Cost of Averting Births
Cost
                      Π1                Π2
                                                      Π3


                                                                   Π5: Total cost for using the birth
                                                                   control pill with sales ban

                                                           Π4: Total cost for using the birth
                                                           control pill without ban




           1     2     3    4    5      6     7   8    9      10        Births averted

           11    10    9    8    7      6     5   4    3      2      1 Children born




                           Momma’s Got the Pill - 33
                                                     Figure IV
                     Geographic Distribution of Comstock Sales Laws by Type circa 1960




                        No shading: States with no laws mentioning the “prevention of conception”
          Light gray: States banning only advertising or the distribution of information (Table I, columns 2 and 3)
Dark gray: States banning advertising and the sale of contraceptives but with physician exceptions (Table I, columns 3 and 4)
      Black: States with sales bans and advertising bans with no exceptions for physicians (Table I, columns 3 and 4)




                                            Momma’s Got the Pill - 34
                                                  Figure V
              Differences in the Cumulative Proportion of Women Ever Using the Pill

        A. Differences in Ever Used the Pill (States with Sales Bans-States without Bans) (1965 NFS)
 0.02



    0
     1960       1961     1962      1963       1964    1965       1966     1967     1968       1969   1970

-0.02



-0.04



-0.06



-0.08



 -0.1
                                Northeast         Midwest        South          West


  B. Differences in Ever Used the Pill (Sales with Bans –States without Bans) (1965 and 1970 NFS)
0.12

 0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

    0
     1960       1961     1962      1963       1964    1965       1966     1967         1968   1969   1970
-0.02

-0.04

-0.06

-0.08
                                      Northeast        Midwest           West


                                          Momma’s Got the Pill - 35
     C. Differences in Ever used the Pill Conditional upon using Pill by 1970(States with Bans –States
                                     without Bans) (1965 and 1970 NFS)

           0.06

           0.04

           0.02

              0
                1960          1962           1964           1966             1968         1970
           ‐0.02

           ‐0.04

           ‐0.06

           ‐0.08

            ‐0.1

           ‐0.12

           ‐0.14                      Northeast        Midwest        West

Each point plots the differences in cumulative number of women who report having used oral
contraception in states with restrictive sales bans (i.e. no physician exceptions) and women in states
without these laws by quarter of first use and region of residence at the time of the survey. Panels A and B
take the number of women residing in the region at the time of the survey as the denominator. Panel C
takes the number of women who used the birth control pill by 1970 as the denominator. The estimates are
noisy due to small sample sizes and the focus should be on trends rather than the quarterly fluctuations.
The South is omitted from the post-1965 comparisons, because there are only 22 observations in the sales
ban states in the 1970 NFS. Underlying counts are presented in the online appendix. Source: 1965 and
1970 NFS.




                                        Momma’s Got the Pill - 36
                                             Figure VI
        Differential Evolution of Birth Rates in States with Sales Bans, 1951 to 1980
A. Changes in the Difference between States with Sales Bans and the Comparison Group without State Fixed
                          Effects (95 Percent Confidence Intervals in Dashed Lines)
 15                                                   1965: Griswold decision
        1957: Enovid
        approved by FDA


 10




  5




  0
   1950            1955            1960             1965               1970               1975              1980


 -5
                                       Relative to states in same census region
                                       Relative to states in same census region with advertising bans
                                       Relative to states in same census region with advertising bans + covariates
-10

 B. Changes in the Difference between States with Sales Bans Until 1965 and the Comparison Group with
                   State Fixed Effects (95 Percent Confidence Intervals in Dashed Lines)

 15       1957: Enovid                                     1965: Griswold decision
          approved by FDA



 10




  5




  0
   1950            1955            1960             1965               1970               1975              1980



 -5
                                     Relative to states in same census region
                                     Relative to states in same census region with advertising bans
                                     Relative to states in same census region with advertising bans + covariates
-10

                                   Momma’s Got the Pill - 37
       C. Changes in the Difference between States with Sales Bans Until 1965 and the Comparison Group with
                                    State Fixed Effects Omitting Each Census Region
       15


                   1957: Enovid                                        1965: Griswold decision
       10        approved by FDA




        5




        0
         1950               1955               1960               1965              1970               1975               1980


       -5

                               Omit Northeast              Omit Midwest              Omit South              Omit West

      -10
       D. Changes in the Difference between States with Sales Bans Until 1965 and the Comparison Group with
                                           State Fixed Effects by Age Group
       20
                                                                1965: Griswold decision
                1957: Enovid
              approved by FDA
       15



       10



        5



        0
         1950               1955               1960               1965              1970               1975               1980

       -5

                                                      Ages 15 to 19             Ages 20 to 24              Ages 25 to 29
                                                      Ages 30 to 34             Ages 35 to 39              Ages 40 to 44
      -10
Panels A through D present point estimates for 1, the coefficients on Sales interacted with year dummies, from three alternative
    specifications of equation (2). See text for details on the alternative specifications. Panel B performs the same analysis but
   adds a separate term for states that repealed their laws before Griswold and its interaction with year dummies and state fixed
   effects. Panel C omits one census region at a time and reruns the specification from panel B labeled “relative to states in the
     same census region with advertising bans + covariates”. Panel D disaggregates the dependent variable into five-year age
       groups and for each five-year age groups separately. Each line in panels C and D plots the estimates from a separate
  regression model. Panels C and D omit confidence intervals, but these estimates are included in an online appendix. Source:
              1950 to 1967 Vital Statistics Volumes (see Appendix B) and 1968 to 1980 Natality Files (ICPSR 2002).

                                                Momma’s Got the Pill - 38
                                       Table I
   Comstock Laws Related to Contraception in the Continental United States circa 1960

                      (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)
                 Earliest Date                                            Date Sales Ban
                  Obscenity      Advertising   Sales Bans    Physician     Repealed or
                 Law Enacted       Bans                      Exceptions   Struck Down1
Alabama              1884
Arizona              1870            X             X                          19623
Arkansas            19432            X             X         X (1943)
California           1873            X             X
Colorado             1885            X             X                           1961
Connecticut          1879            X             X                           1965
Delaware            19352            X             X
Florida              1868
Georgia              1878
Idaho                1887            X             X         X (1937)
Illinois             1845            X             X                           1961
Indiana              1896            X             X                           1963
Iowa                 1897            X             X
Kansas              19202            X             X                           1963
Kentucky             1894
Louisiana            1884            X
Maine                1857            X
Maryland             1888
Massachusetts        1847            X             X
Michigan             1897            X
Minnesota            1894            X             X             X
Mississippi          1892            X             X
Missouri             1879            X             X
Montana             19352            X             X          X(1935)
Nebraska             1885            X             X
Nevada               1877            X             X                           1963
New Hampshire        1891
New Jersey           1898            X             X                           1963
New Mexico           1884
New York             1868            X             X          X(1873)
North Carolina       1885
North Dakota         1895
Ohio                 1885            X             X
Oklahoma             1891
Oregon               1864         X(1935)       X(1935)       X(1935)
Pennsylvania         1870            X
Rhode Island         1896
South Carolina       1894
South Dakota       <19102            X
Tennessee            1884
Texas                1897
Utah                 1898

                                 Momma’s Got the Pill - 39
    Vermont                   <1880
    Virginia                   1874
    Washington                19092               X
    West Virginia             <1899
    Wisconsin                  1849            X(1933)          X(1933)            X(1933)
    Wyoming                   1890                X                X
    TOTAL                       48               31               24                   7             7 before 1965

Source: State statute books, Dennett (1925), Smith (1964), Dienes (1972, Appendix B, pp. 317-319), and DHEW
(1974). In the cases of discrepancies between sources, we refer to original statute text and trace the evolution of
wording until 1965. Dates in column (1) indicate the earliest date that we could verify an anti-obscenity statute in
statute books. The less-than sign, “<”, indicates that the law was enacted by the date indicated when we could not
identify the date the statute was first enacted. Dates in parentheses indicate the date the original law was revised to
include the particular provision if it was not part of the original statute.. Ad bans refer to statutes banning advertising
or the distribution of information about contraception. Sales bans refer to statutes banning the sales of drugs,
instruments or articles relating to contraception. Physician exceptions refer to sales bans exempting physicians or
pharmacists from their provisions. 1 These dates are only for statutes repealed or overturned before Griswold as used
in the sensitivity analysis Because it is unclear whether repeal dates after Griswold reflect actual changes in practice
or a codification of current practice, the analysis does not make use of actual changes in statutes if they occurred
after Griswold. See online legal appendix for more information on the repeal dates. 2 Earlier statutes may have been
enacted. Dates are the earliest date we could verify an anti-obscenity statute using primary sources. Copies of these
statutes are posted at the author’s webpage. 3 Judicial decision overturned the statute. Detailed notes on coding
decisions can be found in an online legal appendix.




                                             Momma’s Got the Pill - 40
                                               Table II
               Changes in Birth Control Pill Use in States with Sales Bans, 1965 to 1970

                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)
                                                       DV: 1=Ever used the birth control pill
                  Sales ban                         -0.057      -0.072      -0.073       -0.077
                                                    [0.020]    [0.022]     [0.023]      [0.022]
                  Sales ban x 1(1970)                0.043       0.040      0.058       0.0061
                                                    [0.029]    [0.030]     [0.024]      [0.023]

                  Observations                        6950         6950       6754         6712
                  Log likelihood                    -4203.19     -4201.65   -3700.85     -3676.13

                  Additional covariatesa                R          R         RACEI      RACEIK
                  Legal variablesb                     PX        PX,AD       PX,AD       PX,AD

Each column presents the average marginal effects from probit specifications corresponding to equation I. Robust
standard errors clustered at the state level are presented in brackets. a Covariates include fixed effects for census
region denoted R in each column. Columns 3 and 4 include dummy variables for age categories, A (18 to 19, 20-24,
25-29, 30-34,35-39); Catholic, C (equal to one if the respondent indicated her religious preference was Roman
Catholic); educational categories, E (8, 9-11, 12, 13-15, 16 or more); and husband's annual income, I (0-
4500,4501-6500, 6501-8500,10500-21000 in 1969 dollars). The omitted category includes 18- to 19-year-old, non-
Catholic white women in the Northeast with less than 9 years of education whose husbands report no earnings.
Column 4 adds a set of dummy variables for the “ideal number of children in the average American household”, K,
to proxy for differences in norms about childbearing. The omitted category changes to be all of the categories listed
above and women reporting no children as ideal. b Legal variables include interactions of states with sales bans and
physician exceptions (PX), and states with advertising bans only (AD) with a set of dummies for the years 1965 and
1970. Changes in the number of observations reflects missing values or, in column 4, the lack of variation in the
dependent variable for certain categories of the K variable. Sample: Married women between the ages of 18 to 39 at
the time of the survey. Sources: 1965 and 1970 NFS.




                                           Momma’s Got the Pill - 41
                                              Table III
                  Changes in Contraceptive Use in States with Sales Bans, 1955 to 1970

                                           (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)
           Panel A                              DV: 1=Ever used any method of contraception
           Sales ban                      0.016           0.012           0.011             0.007
                                         [0.016]        [0.017]          [0.016]           [0.015]
           Sales ban x 1(1965)           -0.028          -0.003           -0.007            -0.005
                                         [0.040]        [0.052]          [0.043]           [0.043]
           Sales ban x 1(1970)           -0.020          -0.015           -0.011            -0.009
                                         [0.031]        [0.030]          [0.030]           [0.029]

           Observations                   9557              9557              9256               9188
           Log likelihood               -4120.13          -4117.36          -3660.22           -3602.01

           Panel B                        DV: 1=Ever used a barrier method (diaphragm or condom)
           Sales ban                      0.035           0.023            0.011            0.007
                                         [0.033]         [0.032]          [0.030]          [0.029]
           Sales ban x 1(1965)           -0.040           0.016            0.036            0.040
                                         [0.040]         [0.056]          [0.044]          [0.045]
           Sales ban x 1(1970)           -0.038           0.010            0.013            0.019
                                         [0.045]         [0.045]          [0.043]          [0.039]

           Observations                   9557              9557              9256               9188
           Log likelihood               -6252.97          -6242.76          -5341.91           -5272.19

           Additional covariatesa           R                R               RACEI             RACEIK
           Legal variablesb                PX              PX,AD             PX,AD              PX,AD

Notes: Panels A and B present the average marginal effects from probit specifications corresponding to equation I
for three years of cross-sectional data (1955, 1965, and 1970). Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are
presented in brackets. a Covariates include fixed effects for census region denoted R. Columns 3 and 4 include
dummy variables for age categories, A (18-19, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34,35-39); Catholic, C (equal to one if the
respondent indicated her religious preference was Roman Catholic); educational categories, E (8, 9-11, 12, 13-15,
16 or more); and husband's annual income, I (0-4500,4501-6500, 6501-8500,10500-21000 in 1969 dollars). The
omitted category includes 18- to 19-year-old, non-Catholic white women in the Northeast with less than 9 years of
education whose husbands report no earnings. Column 4 adds a set of dummy variables for the “ideal number of
children in the average American household”, K, to proxy for differences in norms about childbearing. The omitted
category changes to be all of the categories listed above and women desiring no children. b Legal covariates include
interactions of states with sales bans and physician exceptions (PX), and states with advertising bans only (AD) with
a set of dummies for the years 1955, 1965 and 1970. Sample: Married women between the ages of 18 to 39 at the
time of the survey. Sources: 1955 GAF, 1965 and 1970 NFS.




                                            Momma’s Got the Pill - 42
  DATA APPENDIX

                                 1955 Growth of American Families Study

This study sampled 18 to 39 year-old white women, who were currently married. For information on

whether respondent ever used contraception in the 1955 GAF, information was taken from two questions.

The first asked “have you or your husband ever done anything to limit the number of your children or to

keep from having them at certain times?” –the respondent could reply “yes” or “no”). For those

respondents who indicated “yes”, the survey then asked, “Doctors and public health workers are

interested in knowing what methods people are using over the country as a whole. What methods have

you used? (You can tell me by the numbers on the card, if you wish.)” The options on the card included

“Safe period – rhythm”, “douche”, “withdrawal”, “abstinence”, “rubber condom”, “diaphragm”, “jelly”,

“vaginal suppository”, “foam tablets”, “tampon, vaginal cap, or stem pessary”, and “lactation.” From this

information, I create two different measures of contraceptive use: a binary variable equal to one if the

respondent or her husband had ever used any method of contraception and a binary variable equal to one

if the couple had ever used a condom or the diaphragm (barrier methods).

                                       1965 National Fertility Study

This study sampled currently married women ages 18 to 54 in the autumn of 1965. For information on

whether respondent ever used contraception in 1965 NFS, information was taken from the question that

asked the following: “Here is a card with the names of methods couples use to delay or prevent having a

baby. (SHOW CARD 1). During this time, which method or methods, if any, did you or your husband

use? You may just tell me by number if you like.” This question is asked for each pregnancy interval,

where these intervals are defined as the period after marriage and before the first pregnancy, the periods

between pregnancies, or between the time of marriage/last pregnancy and the date of interview. The

options on the card included “rhythm”, “douche”, “withdrawal”, “abstinence”, “condom”, “diaphragm”,

“jelly”, “suppository”, “foam tablets”, “sponge”, “jelly”, “contraceptive pill”, and “IUD.”




                            Momma’s Got the Pill – Data Appendix 1
In the 1965 data, the construction of the four measures of contraceptive use is more difficult. For instance,

3072 women are coded as having used some form of contraception in the first pregnancy interval (2045 as

using none), but the choices of 469 of the women who are coded as first interval users did not indicate

having used any of the methods listed. The documentation does not provide any clues about why this is

the case. As a result, these women are coded as missing and not included in the analysis of the outcomes

“ever users of contraception” or “ever used barrier methods.” The survey separately asked women

whether they had ever used the birth control pill and asked them to circle the months it was used on the

survey. These questions are used to create the measure of “ever used oral contraception” before the

Griswold decision.

                                        1970 National Fertility Study

This study sampled ever-married women ages 18 to 44. For information on whether respondent ever used

contraception in 1970 NFS, information was taken from an almost identical question to the 1965 survey

question about contraceptive use in each pregnancy “interval” (where “interval” is defined as in the 1965

survey). The survey codes only allow me to group answers into the following categories, “rhythm”,

“abstinence (no intercourse) for at least one month”, “condom, rubber, safe”, “withdrawal, pulling out”,

“diaphragm, pessary (with or without cream or jelly)”, “birth control pill, oral contraceptive pill”, “jelly

or cream (alone)”, “suppositories”, “foam tablets, foam spray”, “sponge, tampon”, “IUD, coil, loop, ring,

bow”, and “douche.” Again, the survey explicitly asked women whether they had ever used the birth

control pill and asked them to circle the months it was used on the survey from January of 1960 to the

date of survey in 1970. These questions are used to create the measure of “ever used oral contraception”

across the 1970s.

                                            Pooled Data Sample

For comparability across studies, I limit the samples to currently-married white women ages 18 to 44 for

comparability across studies. I develop three variables of contraceptive use for the analysis:




                             Momma’s Got the Pill – Data Appendix 2
    (i) Ever used any contraceptive method: This is a straightforward adaptation of the survey question
        in 1955. I generate a comparable variable from the 1965 and 1970 NFS that codes a “yes” if a
        respondent reported using any contraception in any pregnancy interval.

    (ii) Ever used barrier method: I define “barrier method” as a condom or diaphragm (the closest
         potential substitutes for the birth control pill). This is straightforward using the survey question
         in 1955. I generate a comparable variable from the 1965 and 1970 NFS that codes a “yes” if a
         respondent reported using condoms or diaphragms in any pregnancy interval.

    (iii) Ever used oral contraception: There is no information about use of oral contraception before
          1965. Because Enovid was first approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the
          regulation of menses in 1957, I code this variable as zero in 1955. In the 1965 and 1970 NFS, I
          use similar questions about whether the respondent had ever used the birth control pill.

Summary statistics for these variables and other covariates are summarized in the data appendix table 1.

                                        Natality Data for 1950 to 1967

The data for 1950 to 1967 was taken from published volumes of the Vital Statistics Division of National

Center for Health Statistics (NCHS, formerly the National Office of Vital Statistics, US Department of

Health, Education and Welfare 1953-1969). The tables were entered that contained information on the

number of live births by birth order, state, age of mother, and race. These volumes were compiled using

microfilm copies, transcripts or state data files of all original birth certificates sent from states to the

NCHS. All births are based on place of residence. However, births to Americans outside of the United

States are not recorded in these data, although births to foreigners in the United States are recorded and

assigned to state of occurrence.

        The 1950 and 1955 data correspond to a direct count of live births in the United States. Data for

the years 1951 to1954 and 1956 to 1966 are based on a 50 percent sample consisting of only the even-

numbered live birth records. The data for 1967 are based on a 20 to 50 percent sample (depending upon

the state) and similar calculations were used to generate aggregate statistics. The NCHS generated the

live birth counts by multiplying the samples by two in the case of a 50 percent sample and 5 in the case of

a 20 percent sample. Although the data provide a representative sample of all registered births, birth

registration was not 100 percent in the United States from 1950 to 1967. In 1950, the NCHS estimated



                              Momma’s Got the Pill – Data Appendix 3
that 98.1 percent of all births in the nation were registered: 98.8 percent for whites and 94.1 percent for

the nonwhite (p. XXI, 1950).

        There are several more data limitations that should be noted. For Massachusetts, the 1964 figures

exclude approximately 1800 live births, and prior to 1964 Massachusetts’ live-birth records were

overstated by approximately 4 percent due to duplicate documentation. Also, due to a coding error in

1967, approximately 20,000 to 24,000 births were miscoded. It is believed that most of the misclassified

births were first births. Although this error potentially affected many states, the NCHS documentation

notes that it is particularly severe for Massachusetts, Wisconsin, New Jersey, and Utah. The robustness of

the results does not appear to be related to decisions about whether to exclude or include these states.

Finally, in entering the published data into spreadsheets, we noted several inconsistencies. Specifically,

the sum of births of a given parity across age categories within race did not equal the published total. In

this instance, the age category numbers were assumed to be correct and the total for the state was

corrected accordingly.

                                      Natality Data from 1968 to 1970

The data for 1968 to 1970 are taken from natality micro-data detail files available from ICPSR. The

microdata were aggregated by state of residence to correspond to the age of mother and birth order

categories available in the published volumes for earlier years. Birth counts are adjusted for 1968 to 1971

to reflect the 50 percent sampling scheme for all states. From 1972 to 1978, birth counts are adjusted to

reflect the 50 percent sampling in a subset of states.




                             Momma’s Got the Pill – Data Appendix 4
                                        Appendix Table 1.
         Summary Statistics for Growth of American Families and National Fertility Studies

                                                                            1955       1965        1970
          Ever Used Contraception
                       Any method*                                         0.814       0.836       0.862
                       Barrier method                                      0.467       0.479       0.314
                       Birth control pill                                  0.000       0.278       0.682
                       Sterilization (respondent or husband)               0.086       0.127       0.134
          Respondent characteristics
                       White                                               1.000       1.000      1.000
                       Currently married                                   1.000       1.000      1.000
                       Catholic                                            0.293       0.291      0.256
                       Year of birth                                      1924.7      1935.4     1941.1
                Residence in
                        Northeast                                          0.249       0.229       0.199
                        Midwest                                            0.316       0.305       0.317
                        South                                              0.270       0.294       0.293
                        West                                               0.165       0.171       0.191
                Education
                        Less than 9 years                                  0.136       0.093       0.052
                        9 to 11 years                                      0.250       0.221       0.163
                        12 years                                           0.461       0.486       0.505
                        13 to 15 years                                     0.107       0.126       0.161
                        16 years                                           0.046       0.075       0.119
               Ideal number of children**
                        Fewer than two                                     0.003       0.005       0.015
                        Two                                                0.207       0.258       0.516
                        Three                                              0.344       0.354       0.236
                        Four                                               0.379       0.328       0.194
                        Five or more                                       0.067       0.056       0.038
                        Missing                                               28          27          22
               Husband's income
                      0 to 4500                                            0.224       0.128       0.113
                      4501 to 6500                                         0.464       0.108       0.182
                      6501 to 7699                                         0.152       0.320       0.100
                      7700 to 11999                                        0.105       0.257       0.201
                      12000 and up                                         0.055       0.187       0.404
                      Missing                                                105          82         118
          Total respondents                                                 2607         2864       4086
*Any contraceptive method includes “douche”. **This variable is constructed from the answer to the question
regarding “ideal number of children for the average American family”. Statistics for the 1965 and 1970 surveys use
the weights recommended in the study documentation. Sample: White, currently married women ages 18 to 39.
Sources: 1955 GAF, 1965 and 1970 NFS.




                                  Momma’s Got the Pill – Data Appendix 5
