                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE IMPACT OF CHILDREN'S PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE EXPANSIONS
                       ON EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES

                                        Phillip B. Levine
                                  Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach

                                       Working Paper 14671
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14671


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2009




We are grateful for helpful comments from Amy Finkelstein, Dana Goldman, Larry Hedges, Helen
Levy and an anonymous referee along with participants at a seminar at the University of Illinois at
Chicago and the Frontiers in Health Policy Research Conference. We also are grateful to Jennifer
Humensky, Lindsey Leininger and Elizabeth Munnich for helpful research assistance. We also gratefully
acknowledge funding from the U.S. Department of Education under grant #R902B050006. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Phillip B. Levine and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Children’s Public Health Insurance Expansions on Educational Outcomes
Phillip B. Levine and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
NBER Working Paper No. 14671
January 2009
JEL No. I18,I21

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impact of public health insurance expansions through both Medicaid and
SCHIP on children’s educational outcomes, measured by 4th and 8th grade reading and math test scores,
available from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). We use a triple difference
estimation strategy, taking advantage of the cross-state variation over time and across ages in children’s
health insurance eligibility. Using this approach, we find that test scores in reading, but not math,
increased for those children affected at birth by increased health insurance eligibility. A 50 percentage
point increase in eligibility is found to increase reading test scores by 0.09 standard deviations. We
also examine whether the improvements in educational outcomes can be at least partially attributed
to improvements in health status itself. First, we provide further evidence that increases in eligibility
are linked to improvements in health status at birth. Second, we show that better health status at birth
(measured by rates of low birth-weight and infant mortality), is linked to improved educational outcomes.
Although the methods used to support this last finding do not completely eliminate potentially confounding
factors, we believe it is strongly suggestive that improving children’s health will improve their classroom
performance.


Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu

Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Harris School
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street Suite 143
Chicago, IL 60637
schanzenbach@uchicago.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

        The main goal of expanding access to health insurance is to improve the health of the

population. The most recent policy interventions designed to address that goal were expansions

to the Medicaid system and the introduction of the State Children’s Health Insurance Program

(SCHIP). These policies made available public health insurance coverage to children from

families with incomes that previously would have been too high to qualify. Despite evidence of

some crowd-out of private health insurance coverage, they have been shown to improve

children’s health status, as reviewed below.

        Yet the benefits associated with increased public health insurance coverage may extend

beyond improvements in health status. In particular, one could imagine that these interventions

may improve educational outcomes. Two potential mechanisms could generate such a result.

First, children in poor health may be poorly equipped to learn; alleviating their health problems

could remove barriers that would enable them to succeed in the classroom.1 Second, educational

outcomes may improve even if crowd-out dampens the health impact. Families that switch from

private to public health insurance would have additional resources that may be devoted towards

human capital development.

        The goal of this paper is to address this issue, examining the impact of public health

insurance expansions (through both Medicaid and SCHIP) on children’s educational outcomes.

In our analysis, we examine the health-related determinants of educational performance,


1
  The policy community has been clear in its recognition of the problem. For instance, the U.S. Department of
Education has provided a review of the factors that hinder student achievement with the goal towards finding ways
to promote academic success (Rossi and Montgomery, 2004). The review states that “poor health and untreated
physical conditions may slow a child's academic progress. Recurrent illness, for example, may interfere with
attentiveness and attendance, and vision or hearing problems may make class participation difficult.” The National
Governors Association is also promoting interventions to improve children’s health as a mechanism to improve
academic performance (National Governors Association, 2000).

                                                        1
measured by test scores in reading in math at ages 9 and 13, available from the National

Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). We begin our analysis relying on the cross-state

variation over time and across ages in children’s health insurance eligibility brought about by the

Medicaid expansions and the introduction of SCHIP. The availability of test scores at different

ages in the same year provides the opportunity to implement a triple-difference estimation

strategy. Using this approach, we find evidence that test scores in reading, but not math,

increased for those children affected at birth by the increase in health insurance eligibility.

       We go on to examine the potential mechanism for this effect. Specifically, we seek to

determine whether the improvements in educational outcomes can be attributed to improvements

in health status itself. First, we provide further evidence that increases in eligibility are linked to

improvements in health status at birth. In states/years in which public health insurance was more

broadly available, the rate of births with low birth-weight declines. This effect is larger for less-

educated mothers, as one would expect based on eligibility rules. Second, we go on to show that

better health status at birth, as measured by rates of low birth-weight and infant mortality, is

linked to improved educational outcomes. Although this last finding is based on a methodology

that does not completely eliminate potentially confounding factors, we believe it is strongly

suggestive that improving children’s health will improve their performance in the classroom.



II. LITERATURE REVIEW

       There is an extensive clinical literature relating poor child health to worse cognitive and

behavioral outcomes. Children with chronic conditions, like asthma, have been found to be more

likely to repeat a grade and are more poorly behaved (Gortmaker, et al. 1990). Children with

chronic conditions that are not well treated are especially at risk. For example, Diette, et al.



                                                  2
(2000) find that children with asthma that is not well-controlled are more likely to miss school.

Fowler et al. (1992) find that asthma is associated with more grade retention; this relationship is

stronger among children from low-income families than high-income families. Gozal (1998)

finds that children who are treated for sleep apnea improve their school performance after

treatment. Children with ADHD are more likely to be retained or drop out, have lower grades

and exhibit worse behavior (Barkley 2002).2 This literature, however, is plagued by the inability

to distinguish causal mechanisms from mere associations.

         An alternative strand of the literature focuses on the relationship between health care and

well-being using strategies better-suited for identifying causal effects. In their review of the

evidence on the causal impact of health insurance coverage, Levy and Meltzer (2008, p. 406)

conclude that “the evidence available to date conclusively demonstrates that health insurance

improves the health of vulnerable subpopulations” such as infants and children.

         Past research has also focused on the impact of the expansion of the Medicaid system, as

we do, finding that it led to improved health outcomes for children. Currie and Gruber (1996b)

find that it improved mothers’ prenatal care, substantially reducing infant mortality and the

incidence of low birth weight. Currie and Gruber (1996a) find that Medicaid expansions reduced

child mortality by over 5 percent.3 Dafny and Gruber (2005) find that increased Medicaid

eligibility reduced the incidence of avoidable hospitalizations, which have apparently been

prevented by more appropriate care through an early contact with a primary care physician.


2
 Currie & Stabile (2006) provide evidence that ADHD symptoms decrease school achievement and attainment
within the context of a sibling difference model, which is more indicative of a causal effect.

3
  This reduction in child mortality may actually lead to a reduction in test scores if the marginal children who are
born are lower than average performers on standardized tests. Any improvement in test scores that we are able to
attribute to increased health insurance coverage is actually net of this effect. The practical implications of this issue
may be rather limited, however, because infant mortality rates are so low (in the vicinity of 1 percent over the
sample period) that a five percent reduction in infant mortality means that these marginal children will only increase
the size of the birth cohort by an additional .05 percent of children born.

                                                           3
Some evidence also shows that the more recently introduced SCHIP program has led to

improved health outcomes for children. LoSasso and Buchmueller (2004) show that SCHIP is

associated with an increase in health insurance coverage among the eligible, uninsured

population. Joyce and Racine (2003) find that SCHIP increases the probability that a child

receives a newly approved vaccine. We also provide additional evidence later in this paper that

eligibility expansions improved children’s health.

       Although public insurance expansions were primarily designed to cover the uninsured,

one possible response is for individuals to give up their private insurance coverage and replace it

with less expensive public coverage. This is a phenomenon known in the literature as “crowd-

out,” and a considerable body of research has documented its existence (Cutler and Gruber 1996,

1997; Dubay and Kenney 1996, 1997; Blumberg, Dubay and Norton 2000; Yazici and Kaestner

2000; Shore-Sheppard 2005; Ham and Shore-Sheppard 2005; and Gruber and Simon, 2008).

There is no evidence to suggest, however, that crowd-out is complete, so the expansions in health

insurance access did increase actual insurance coverage for at least some children. Past research

has also focused on the impact of crowd-out on household spending under the theory that crowd-

out will free up some resources previously spent on insurance coverage for children. Gruber and

Yelowitz (1999) find that households targeted by the Medicaid expansions of the late 1980s and

early 1990s significantly increased their spending in other areas. In the end, the literature on the

impact of recent public health insurance expansions indicates that children’s health did improve,

but crowd-out occurred as well. As we described earlier, both effects may have been at work

improving educational performance; examining this relationship is the focus of this paper.

       Past research also provides evidence on the role of family resources on children’s

educational outcomes. Much of this literature, reviewed by Haveman and Wolfe (1995) and



                                                 4
Mayer (1997), relies on correlational analysis and fails to isolate the causal effect of family

resources on child outcomes. Two recent additions, however, effectively isolate the causal

effects.     Morris, Duncan and Rodrigues (2004) combine evidence from several randomly

assigned welfare reform demonstrations and are able to separate the effect of increases in income

from the other aspects of treatment. They find that a $1,000 increase in family income improves

child test scores by 6 percent of a standard deviation. Dahl and Lochner (2005) use expansions

in the Earned Income Tax Credit to isolate the effect of changes in income on child test scores.

They find that a $1,000 increase in family income improves child reading scores by 3.6 percent

of a standard deviation, and math scores by 2.1 percent.

           Currie (2008) provides a comprehensive review of the role that children’s health status

plays in determining subsequent socioeconomic outcomes, including education.            Her main

conclusion is that “in developed countries, there has been relatively little examination of the

question of whether poor health in childhood is linked to lower future socioeconomic status

(p. 26).” Much of the literature that exists is plagued by difficulties in identifying causality,

relying on correlations instead. Case, Fertig and Paxson (2005) use unusually rich panel data

from Great Britain and find that, after controlling for family background characteristics,

unhealthy children attain less schooling.      Although this is an important finding, issues of

unobservable heterogeneity remain. Bleakley (2007) finds that the health improvements induced

by the eradication of hookworm – which infected a large proportion of Southern school-aged

children around 1910 – led to increased school attendance and literacy. This study has the

advantage of a strong identification strategy, but its relevance to modern-day changes in health

status is questionable.




                                                  5
       One area in which credible methodologies have been applied to related questions is the

relationship between low birth weight and later educational outcomes. Several studies have

measured differences in educational outcomes between siblings/twins associated with differences

in their birth weight (cf. Conley and Bennett, 2000; Behrman and Rosenzweig, 2001; Boardman

et al., 2002; and Black, Devereux and Salvanes, 2007). All find that low birth weight leads to

poorer academic performance, usually measured as total years of education attained.



III. MEDICAID EXPANSIONS AND SCHIP

       Part of our research design focuses on the variation in public health insurance eligibility

that is associated with the expansions of the Medicaid system in the late 1980s and early 1990s

and the introduction of the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) in the late 1990s.

In this section, we review the institutional arrangements that generate this policy variability.

       The Medicaid system is the main government program that provides health insurance to

the poor. Prior to 1984, eligibility for Medicaid among those who were not elderly or disabled

was strongly tied to eligibility for Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC). Between

1984 and 1992, eligibility was decoupled from AFDC and was widely expanded – first to

pregnant women through 1987, and then after that to poor families with income levels that had

previously been too high to qualify for the program, up to 185 percent of the poverty line. These

policy changes led to a dramatic increase in the fraction of children who were eligible for

Medicaid; the percentage of children 0 to 15 eligible more than doubled, from about 14 percent

to about 31 percent between 1983 and 1996 (Gruber, 2003). The SCHIP program, introduced in

1997, allowed states to expand eligibility to older children and to further raise income eligibility

thresholds.



                                                  6
       Table 1 details the differences in children’s health insurance eligibility as a result of the

Medicaid expansions and the introduction of SCHIP between 1988 and 2004 and between states

for the five most populous states. Over time, each state (generally) increased the income

threshold under which children could qualify for Medicaid. These thresholds tended to begin at

the poverty line in the late 1980s and more recently have crept up to two or three times that. In

the late 1980s, only infants in these low-income households were eligible, but the maximum age

that would enable one to qualify for benefits has also risen over time so that children meeting the

(now higher) income thresholds are eligible for benefits through the end of their teen years. Both

of these types of changes occurred at different rates in different states.

       Because of the differences in timing and generosity, otherwise similar children residing

in different states may have been treated differently by the Medicaid system measured at a point

in time or cumulatively over their entire lives. Table 2 presents an example of this, documenting

these differences for children who continuously reside in the five largest states, who were born in

1986, 1988, and 1990, and whose family income was at 120 percent of the poverty level in each

year since birth.    The results of this simulation exercise show the wide variety of health

insurance exposure that these children face. Lifetime exposure varies between 1 and 7 years by

age 9 and between 2 and 11 years by age 13. Some children are covered at birth. Children born

in different states at the same time and children born within a state at different times all had

differential exposure to public health insurance.



IV. METHODOLOGY

       In our analysis, we begin by focusing on the reduced form impact of access to public

health insurance on educational outcomes. We then recognize that this impact may be generated



                                                    7
either by improvements in health status or through the additional income generated if the

availability of public health insurance crowds out privately purchased health insurance. We

subsequently attempt to determine whether we can identify a direct impact of the health

improvements itself.

       All of this can be characterized by the following structural model of educational

outcomes:

                                Eist = δ 0 + δ1 H ist + δ 2 I ist + δ 3 X ist + ε ist           (1)

                                   H ist = γ 0 + γ 1 PHI st + γ 2 X ist + uist                  (2)

                                    I ist = λ0 + λ1 PHI st + λ2 X ist + vist                    (3)

where Eist represents some measure of educational performance for individual i in state s at time

t, Hist represents the child’s health status, Iist represents the child’s family income, Xist is a

composite variable that represents other individual-specific factors that are related to school

outcomes, PHIst represents provisions of the state’s public health insurance policies for lower

income children, which depends upon the particular year and the child’s state of residence, and

εist, uist, and νist represent random error terms. The reduced for specification of this structural

model would take the form:

                                   Eist = β 0 + β1 PHI st + β 2 X ist + υist                    (4)

In this model the coefficient, β1, represents the impact on educational performance associated

with a child’s exposure to public health insurance eligibility.

       We begin our analysis by estimating equation (4) to determine whether we are able to

find any reduced form effect. In practice, we augment this model (and all subsequent models)

with state fixed effects (to control for longstanding differences across states in things like

willingness to fund social programs and other underlying cultural differences) and year fixed

                                                         8
effects (to control for arbitrary movements in educational outcomes over time that occur in all

states simultaneously). This approach represents a differences-in-differences estimator of the

impact of public health insurance on educational outcomes. Difference-in-difference models

suffer from the imperfection that time varying factors within states – such as state-level

accountability policies or abrupt changes in school funding levels – cannot be captured by state

or year fixed effects. If these time-varying, state-specific factors are correlated to both health

insurance eligibility and educational outcomes, then they may introduce bias.4 To circumvent

this problem, we use the fact that tests are given to children in different grades within state and

year, but the children in different grades were subject to different health insurance eligibility

rules. This provides a third difference, allowing us to sweep out the effects of state-by-time

specific effects.

         One limitation of this analysis is that it is impossible to determine whether any estimated

impact of public health insurance access on education performance in equation (4) can be

specifically attributable to the health or the income channel. This can easily be seen based on

equations (1) through (3). If another variable were available that we could relate to health status

or income, we could identify the specific mechanism, but we are unable to identify any such

variable.

         As it stands, we focus on trying to determine whether health status plays a role in the

reduced form relationship. To do this, we first estimate a model similar in form to equation (2),

attempting to provide further evidence on the relationship between public health insurance and

improvements in children’s health. Past research has extensively addressed this issue and found



4
  Researchers also worry about “policy endogeneity,” where state policies respond to the outcome being examined.
In the present context, however, it seems unlikely that states would enact legislation enacting health care in response
to the latest state test score results.

                                                          9
such a link, as described earlier. Our contribution is to use a longer panel, combining the

Medicaid expansions and the introduction of SCHIP, providing more power to the analysis.

        Second, we estimate a model similar in spirit to that in equation (1), but focusing on the

relationship between educational outcomes and measures of children’s health status at birth.5 An

important caveat in this analysis is that it is difficult to attribute causality in the relationship

between children’s health status and educational outcomes as estimated in models like this. It

could be the case that other underlying social conditions, either at the time the test scores were

measured, or at the time of the children’s birth, were changing within the state that would

generate a spurious relationship between test scores and health. One should note that these

problems may be attenuated because we also compare differences in test scores between 4th and

8th graders as a function of differences in health status at birth since both groups would be

exposed to many of the same contemporaneous factors.                      Taking these differences would

eliminate the bias introduced by the presence of such factors.                     Nevertheless changes in

underlying social conditions in the state that differentially affected the different birth cohorts

could still introduce bias.



V. DATA DESCRIPTION

        The two main variables represented in our empirical specification are the measures of

educational performance and the measures of public health insurance eligibility. In this section

of the paper we will detail our sources, properties, and creation of these variables along with the

remaining data used in our analysis.



5
  In theory, we could also include “income” as in equation 1, but measured income would not capture the additional
resources available to the family through public provision of child health insurance. Expenditures would better
capture that concept, but no such data are available.

                                                       10
        The measures of educational performance that we use are test scores in reading and math

from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), which is sometimes referred to

as the “nation’s report card.” Exams are administered periodically to students in 4th and 8th

grades to a nationally representative sample of students. Beginning in 1990, states began to

augment the national samples to create samples of students that were representative of their own

populations.6     Not all states participated in the early years, so our resulting data panel is

unbalanced. Tests in reading and math are the ones most commonly conducted and we will

restrict our attention to them.7 We use state-level average scaled scores (separately by grade),

which range between 0 and 500.

        NAEP also collects information on a student’s demographic characteristics, including

race/ethnicity, parental education level, and free lunch status, allowing us to calculate average

scores for various subgroups. The use of free lunch status would be of particular value in

providing a potential third difference since those receiving free or reduced price lunches should

be more likely to be subject to the expanded eligibility standards. Unfortunately, free lunch data

are only available beginning in 2000, restricting our sample size to such an extent that we were

unable to obtain precise parameter estimates in such models. Results across other subgroups

were not significantly different, so we do not report those results below but they are available

upon request.

        To measure the generosity of public health insurance, we follow Currie and Gruber

(1996a) and employ a “simulated instrument” approach. In this approach, we begin with a

nationwide sample of children from the Current Population Survey and determine whether or not

6
  The number of test takers within each state is roughly comparable across states. This means that regression models
that rely on cross-state variation over time do not need to be weighted by state population.
7
  Math scores are available for 4th grade in 1992, 1996, 2000, 2003, and 2005 and for 8th grade in 1990, 1992, 1996,
2003, and 2005. Reading scores are available for 4th grade in 1992, 1994, 1998, 2002, 2003, and 2005 and for 8th
grade in 1998, 2002, 2003, and 2005.

                                                        11
they would be eligible for coverage under the rules in each state/year based on the child’s age

and family income.8 Since the sample is national in scope, and not state-specific, this approach

provides a measure of the generosity of a state’s plan, but abstracts from differences in

populations across states.        We can apply this approach directly to determine measures of

contemporaneous eligibility rates in each state and in each year. We can also make an additional

assumption that the family’s income remained roughly constant and that the child lived in the

same state since the child’s birth to construct a measure of lifetime public health insurance

eligibility, much like we did in Table 2.9 If we run our national sample of children through each

state’s eligibility rules since the child was born, we can construct measures of exposure to public

health insurance for each state and birth cohort. Finally, we can use a similar approach to

determine eligibility rates in the year the child was born.

        To create these simulated instruments, we use data from the March Current Population

Surveys (CPS). The March CPS provides data on family income in the preceding calendar year

for a national sample of roughly 100,000 individuals each year. We can select children from

these data, attach their families’ income to them, and then run them through a program that

would identify their simulated health insurance eligibility at birth, in the years since birth, and at

present depending upon when they were born.

        Figure 1A displays trends in measures of children’s health insurance eligibility over the

last couple of decades. Prior to the expansion of the Medicaid system in the mid 1980s, roughly

16 percent of newborns and 10 percent of 9 and 13 year olds were covered, typically because



8
  These rules were obtained from Yelowitz (1995), Shore-Sheppard (2002), and CMMS (2004).
9
  A preliminary analysis of data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth shows that about 85 percent of
children live in the same state at age 14 as their state of birth. Similarly, the correlation between their family’s
income by age 3 with their income between ages 10 and 14 was 44 percent. This estimate is almost certainly an
understatement, attributable to measurement error in reported family income (cf. Zimmerman, 1992; and Solon,
1992).

                                                        12
their family was receiving AFDC benefits. Eligibility among very young children (newborns in

this figure) started to rise in the late 1980s and then for somewhat older children (9 year olds in

this figure) in the early 1990s, and finally for older children (13 year olds in this figure) starting

in the mid 1990s. By 2003, we find that over 50 percent of all newborns and over 40 percent of

9 and 13 year olds are eligible for public health insurance.

         The change in eligibility associated solely with the income-based Medicaid expansions is

depicted in Figure 1B. This is an important figure because the key explanatory variables in our

regression models reflect Medicaid eligibility solely attributable to the income-based

expansions.10 In this figure, eligibility is set at zero prior to 1987 because eligibility was still tied

to the income thresholds associated with welfare. It was beginning in that year and initially for

infants that income thresholds for eligibility began to rise. Within a couple of years, about one-

third of all newborns were eligible for Medicaid. For nine year olds, the improved access to

coverage began in earnest in 1992; by 1992 about one-quarter of children at this age were

eligible. The process was a bit more gradual for 13 year olds, as eligibility rose from a negligible

level to about one-quarter of 13 year old children by 1996. For children of all ages the expansion

of eligibility brought about by SCHIP continued the escalation of eligibility through the end of

our sample period.

         Figures 2 and 3 depict the nature of the variation in public health insurance eligibility that

we are able to exploit in our econometric analysis. In each figure, the y-axis measures the

standard deviation in eligibility rates across states and the x-axis measures the year in which the

test is taken; 4th graders and 8th graders are compared separately. The figures are distinguished

by eligibility at birth (Figure 2) and contemporaneous eligibility (Figure 3). Figure 2 shows that


10
  The reason for this is because of the difficulty of projecting backwards an individual’s family structure based on
contemporaneous data, which is all the information that we have available.

                                                         13
the variation across states in rates of eligibility at birth began in 1996 among 4th graders (age 9)

and in 2000 for 8th graders (age 13), which is consistent with the initial introduction of these state

options in 1987.11 The extent of that variation increased considerably once this process began to

spread across the states. An important lesson from this figure is that there is considerable

variability in the time series patterns between 4th and 8th graders. For those currently eligible, we

see that the variation across states was greatest in the period just prior to SCHIP in 1997,

particularly for the 13 year olds.           When SCHIP went into effect, it reduced disparities in

eligibility among older children. Those disparities were greatest in the years preceding it as

states were allowed to offer eligibility to older children, but weren’t required to. This is the

nature of the variability that we exploit in our subsequent empirical analysis.

        In addition to our two main data sources, we also use additional data from the Vital

Statistics system as well as other CPS data.                 In specifications where we consider specific

children’s health outcomes, we take advantage of Vital Statistics data on infant mortality and low

birth weight. We use additional data from the CPS to construct measures of the demographic

features of a state’s population over time (used as explanatory variables in our regressions) to

help control for some of the time-varying covariates within a state. Each month, one quarter of

the CPS sample exits the survey; data for members of these “outgoing rotation groups” over the

course of a full year are available and the use of these data provides a sample size three times the

size of any single survey. We use these data to measure demographic characteristics, including

age, race, marital status, and educational attainment. Our final source of data is state level data

on the unemployment rate, which is available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

11
  The variation across states in eligibility at birth increased again in 2001 among 4th graders and 2005 among 8th
graders. The reason for this is that most states standardized their eligibility cutoffs for young children, including
newborns, at 133 percent of the poverty line in 1991, but then states began getting more generous after that, with
some states expanding coverage to young children up to 300% of the poverty line.


                                                        14
VI. RESULTS

         To begin our empirical analysis, we first report the results of estimating models of the

form of equation (4), which reflects the reduced form relationship between test scores in

different subjects/grades as a function of public health insurance eligibility at birth, since birth,

and contemporaneously. We also report results from a “triple differences” estimating strategy,

comparing results between 4th and 8th graders as a function of differential exposure to our three

measures of public health insurance eligibility.

         Results from these reduced form specifications are reported in Table 3.                                 These

specifications include three different measures of exposure to public health insurance: the

percentage eligible in a student’s year of birth, the percentage of life eligible since birth, and the

percentage currently eligible. In this specification, the variability in the percentage of life

eligible since birth is identified based on variability in eligibility in the years following birth and

prior to the current year. For instance, at age 9 this variable is identified based on variability in

eligibility in years 1 through 8 of the student’s life.12

         The results in Table 3 indicate that we are unable to detect an impact of any of our health

insurance measures on reading test scores separately in 4th or 8th grades. When we introduce the

third difference and compare results for 4th and 8th graders (in effect sweeping out state-by-time

fixed effects) and relate that difference to differences in public health insurance exposure,

however, we find a positive and statistically significant relationship between eligibility at birth



12
   Each of these measures of eligibility can have different effects on current test scores because there is no reason to
expect that the impact of health insurance eligibility should be linear over a child’s life. In fact, since health
problems at birth are so much more common than health problems subsequent to birth, one might anticipate that
reducing the health problems at birth would have a larger effect on subsequent life outcomes. Currie, Decker, and
Lin (2008) find a result consistent with this fact. In their work, they find that Medicaid eligibility at very young ages
has a positive impact on future health status despite the fact that current Medicaid eligibility is not found to have an
impact.


                                                          15
and reading scores (Column 3).13 This pattern of results suggests that contemporaneous factors

affecting both 4th and 8th graders are introducing a bias that the triple difference strategy can

resolve. We are unable to detect any impact on math test scores in 4th grade, 8th grade, or in the

difference between grades in response to any of the measures of public health insurance

eligibility.

         The results for reading test scores support the notion that expanding access to public

health insurance may improve educational performance. The estimated magnitude of this effect

is relatively small. A 50 percentage point increase in public health insurance eligibility at birth is

estimated to increase reading test scores by 3 scaled points (or 0.091 standard deviation) on a

base of about 239 (the mean of the 4th and 8th grade mean scaled scores).                                  Of course,

improvements in reading scores are only one of the potential benefits of health insurance

expansions.14

         Although these results are informative, the reduced form nature of this analysis prevents

us from identifying the mechanisms at work in generating test score gains.                              As we have

previously described, this finding could be attributable to improvements in health outcomes or

the increased family resources available to the extent that crowd out occurs (or some

combination of the two). In the remainder of this discussion, we attempt to determine whether

we can identify specifically the role that health improvements may play. We focus our attention

on health status at birth since insurance access at births appears to be driving the improvement in

reading test scores. We use rates of low birth weight and infant mortality as our measures of

13
  Results for eligibility at birth are quite similar if we omit controls for contemporaneous and lifetime eligibility.
14
  We attempted one extension of this analysis directed at identifying whether the estimated impact of the expansions
differed by time period. This could occur if, for instance, the impact differed at different levels of the income
distribution since the system’s expansion over time affected different portions of the income distribution.
Unfortunately, the limitations of the NAEP data made such an exercise too weak to be useful. Because the data
exist for sporadic years and are not consistent between tests at different grades, the sample size is significantly
limited when we try to separate out early and later years for the analysis, particularly in the triple difference models.


                                                          16
children’s health. This is not to say that these are the only channels through which public health

insurance can improve children’s health, but these are two measures for which data are available

on the scale necessary to conduct this exercise. We see them as markers of children’s health

status that may capture part, but by no means all, of the improvement in health associated with

access to health insurance.

         Our first approach is to provide additional evidence that increased public health insurance

access at birth has an impact on children’s health status. Methodologically, we estimate models

that take the general form of equation (2), augmenting this statistical model with state and year

fixed effects along with state-specific linear trends.15 These regressions are comparable to those

used in past work, like Currie and Gruber (1996a and 1996b) and Joyce and Racine (2003). The

contribution here is that we expand the time period covered to encompass both the earlier period

of Medicaid expansions along with the more recent introduction and implementation of SCHIP

to get a broader picture of the role that public health insurance has played in affecting children’s

health status.

         In these regressions, we estimate models aggregated to births to all mothers and

separately for mothers who differ by their level of educational attainment. Since public health

insurance expansions should be more likely to affect less educated mothers, we should observe

estimated effects that are greater for those groups. When we conduct our analysis using infant

mortality rates by mothers’ level of education, our sample is restricted because linked natality

and infant death records are only currently available for 1984-1991 and 1995-2001. These

linked records are necessary to attach the mother’s level of education to the child’s death. We

use data from 1984-2003 in the remainder of the analysis. In these specifications, all regressions

15
  We are able to use state-specific linear trends in this part of our analysis because of the longer time series of data
available within each state. In our analysis using the NAEP data, there are too few observations within states to
yield robust results when we include state-specific trends.

                                                          17
are weighted by the number of births in the state/year to help resolve issues of heteroskedasticity

that arise from the different sample sizes in each state. Here (and elsewhere) standard errors are

clustered at the state level to correct for arbitrary covariance structures over time within states.

        The results of this analysis are reported in Table 4. The top panel provides results from

models in which the dependent variable is the rate of low birth weight. For children as a whole,

7.3 percent of children are born weighing less than 2500 kg (the cut-off for a determination of

low birth weight). This rate varies with mother’s level of education, ranging from 9.2 percent for

children of mothers who are high school dropouts to 5.6 percent for children of mothers who

graduated from college. The results indicate that greater health insurance eligibility reduces the

rate of low birth weight children for women as a whole.16 They also indicate that the estimated

impact of greater public health insurance eligibility declines as a mother’s education increases, as

one would predict since more highly educated women are less likely to qualify for public health

insurance.

        To gauge the magnitude of the estimated impact, note that the percentage of children

eligible for public health insurance at birth solely attributable to the income-based Medicaid

expansions rose by about 40 percentage points between the mid 1980s and mid 1990s (i.e. just

prior to the introduction of SCHIP). Based on our estimates for all women (coefficient of about -

0.3), this implies a 0.12 percentage point reduction in the rate of low birth weight in response to

the expansions to public health insurance eligibility among children. With a base rate of 7.3

percent, this reflects a modest 1.6 percent reduction.




16
  Although earlier Medicaid expansions clearly included prenatal care, the coverage of prenatal care in the SCHIP
expansions is less clear. We estimated our low birth weight regressions separately for the two periods (1996 and
earlier compared to post-1996) and find that the results reported here are largely driven by those from the Medicaid
expansion period.

                                                        18
       We also find some evidence of a small effect when we examine the impact on infant

mortality. When we focus our analysis on births to women with a high school degree, a group

likely to be affected by the policy change, we see a marginally statistically significant reduction

in infant mortality associated with an increase in public health insurance eligibility. Again, the

magnitude of these estimates is modest. The mean infant mortality rate is 0.867 per 1000 births

to women with a high school degree. If there is a 40 percentage point increase in public health

insurance eligibility among children at birth, this rate would decline by 0.058 per 1000 births, or

6.7 percent among women with a high school degree who gave birth. The impact on infant

mortality more broadly would be smaller than that.

       We can conclude from this analysis that the expansion of public health insurance does

appear to have improved the health status of children. The magnitudes of the impact on low

birth weight and infant mortality are not large, but these individual measures of children’s health

may not completely capture the true impact on the well-being of children in ways that would

affect their educational attainment. Unfortunately, data limitations prevent us from testing other

measures of health status. The fact that we are able to detect impacts on children’s health using

these broad measures suggest that other aspects of health may have been improved as well in

ways that could affect educational outcomes.

       We move on to consider the direct relationship between child health and test score

outcomes, as represented by equation (1) augmented by state and year fixed effects. As before,

our measures of educational outcomes are test scores in reading and math in 4th and 8th grades,

and children’s health status is proxied by the infant mortality rate and the rate of low birth weight

in the year the children were born. As noted above, it is difficult to attribute causality in a model

like this, because if other underlying social conditions were changing – either at the time the test



                                                 19
scores were measured, or at the time of the children’s birth – within the state, that would

generate a spurious relationship between test scores and health. Although the triple-difference

approach alleviates this problem somewhat if both the 4th and 8th graders were exposed to many

of the same contemporaneous factors, nonetheless changes in underlying social conditions in the

state that differentially affected the different birth cohorts could still introduce bias.

         The results of this analysis are reported in Table 5.17 Among both 4th and 8th grade

students we are unable to see a consistent pattern in the relationship between health status at birth

and test scores. Higher infant mortality rates in the student’s year of birth are estimated to

significantly reduce math scores in 4th grade and reading scores in both grades, but rates of low

birth weight are not found to be significantly associated with test scores in either grade.

Columns 3 and 6 repeat this analysis, but focusing on the difference in test scores between

cohorts in relation to the difference in health status in birth.                     Here we see a consistent

relationship that cohorts born in worse health, measured by infant mortality and low birth weight,

appear to perform worse on reading tests. With a mean infant mortality rate in our sample of

0.9 (per 1000 births) and a mean rate of low birth weight of 8 (per 100 births), these estimates

are not very large. A 4 percentage point increase in the rate of low birth weight – that is, a

50 percent increase in the rate – would decrease reading test scores by about 4 points (or

0.12 standard deviation) on a base value of 238.7 pooled across the 4th and 8th grade mean scores.


17
  The analysis reported in Tables 4 and 5 can be thought of like a first stage and a structural equation in a two-stage
least squares model for which instrumental variables may be considered a viable estimation strategy. We have
chosen not to go down that path for two reasons. First, the “first stage” regressions in Table 4 take advantage of the
maximum amount of Vital Statistics data available. The test score models in Table 5 are estimated using a restricted
set of state/year cells based on NAEP data availability. If we estimate the first stage regressions on this limited
number of cells, we lose sufficient power that nothing is statistically significant, so estimating a formal IV model
would provide a very weak test. Second, this IV model would suggest that the only avenue that Medicaid
expansions would alter educational outcomes would be through low birth weight or infant mortality. Those two
health outcomes are used in this analysis as markers of health conditions that may be affected by Medicaid
expansions, but are not meant to be the exclusive mechanisms.


                                                         20
Put into a different context, the nationwide rate of low birth weight births increased by 0.8 points

(from 6.8 to 7.6 per 100) from 1980 to 2000. An increase of this magnitude would imply a mean

reading test score decline of 0.025 standard deviations.         Similarly, a health improvement

associated with a 0.5 increase in the infant mortality rate would reduce reading test scores by

2.4 points (or 0.07 standard deviation).



VII. CONCLUSIONS

       The results of our analysis suggest that children’s greater access to public health

insurance at birth improved their performance on standardized tests of reading ability. We then

focused our analysis at determining whether we could find evidence that this effect was

generated by actual improvements in children’s health associated with the expanded access as

opposed to (or at least in addition to) greater resources available to families through crowd out of

private insurance. We found additional evidence supporting the relationship between insurance

eligibility and infant health outcomes. Our findings in this regard augment past research that has

also obtained this result. In addition, we were also able to directly link infant health outcomes, in

the form of low birth weight and infant mortality, to reading test scores. This evidence expands

upon previous research that has found low birth weight to be negatively related to educational

outcomes. Although our findings in this part of the analysis are subject to methodological

limitations, combined with the past literature we believe that they provide meaningful evidence

of a link between infant health and test scores. Taken as a whole, we find that the improvement

in reading test scores associated with children’s public health insurance expansions is at least

partially attributable to direct improvements in children’s health.




                                                 21
       One interesting aspect of our findings is that we are only to identify a relationship

between children’s health at birth and reading test scores, but not math test scores. Why would

one set of scores be affected, but not the other? Jacob (2005) proposes a potential explanation

imbedded in a statement he made regarding the results of an accountability study he conducted:

“This is consistent with a number of education evaluations that show larger effects in math than

reading, presumably because reading achievement is determined by a host of family and other

non-school factors while math achievement is determined largely by school (p. 771).” If this

viewpoint is correct, then it is likely that health improvements would fall into the category of

family and non-school factors that are more likely to affect reading scores.




                                                22
REFERENCES
Barkley, Russell A. 2002. “Major Life Activity and Health Outcomes Associated with
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorer.” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 63[suppl 12]10-15.

Behrman, Jere and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2001. “The Returns to Increasing Body Weight.”
Penn Institute for Economic Research Working Paper 01-052.

Black, Sandra, Paul Devereux and Kjell Salvanes. 2007. “From the Cradle to the Labor Market?
The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122:1.

Bleakley, Hoyt. 2007. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in
the American South.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122:1.

Blumberg, Linda J., Lisa Dubay, and Stephen A.Norton. 2000. “Did the Medicaid expansions for
children displace private insurance? An analysis using the SIPP.” Journal of Health Economics
(January) 19(1):33-60.

Boardman, Jason D., Robert A. Hummer, Yolanda Padilla, and Daniel Powers. 2002. “Low
Birth Weight, Social Factors, and Developmental Outcomes among Children in the United
States.” Demography. 39: 353-68.

Case, Anne, Angela Fertig and Christina Paxson. 2005. “The Lasting Impact of Childhood
Health and Circumstance.” Journal of Health Economics, volume 24, pp. 365-389.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMMS). 2004. “State 1998 SCHIP Evaluations
and State SCHIP Summaries.” http://www.cms.hhs.gov/schip/researchers/default.asp.

Conley, Dalton and Neil G. Bennett. 2000. “Is Biology Destiny? Birth Weight and Life
Chances.” American Sociological Review. 65(3): 458-467.

Currie, Janet. 2008. “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in
Childhood, and Human Capital Development” NBER Working Paper #13987.

Currie, Janet, Sandra Decker, and Wanchuan Lin. “Has Public Health Insurance for Older
Children Reduced Disparities in Access to Care and Health Outcomes?” Journal of Health
Economics. 27(6): 1567–1581.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
Care, and Child Health.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 111: 431-66.

Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber. 1996b. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
Expansions of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women.” Journal of Political Economy. 104:
1263-96.


                                              23
Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. 2006. “Child Mental Health and Human Capital Accumulation:
The Case of ADHD”. Journal of Health Economics. 25(6):1094-1118.

Cutler, David M. and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private
Insurance?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 391-430.

Cutler, David M. and Jonathan Gruber. 1997. “Medicaid and Private Insurance: Evidence and
Implications,” Health Affairs 16(1):194-200.

Dafny, Leemore and Jonathan Gruber. 2005. “Public Insurance and Child Hospitalizations:
Access and Efficiency Effects,” Journal of Public Economics 89(1): 109-129.

Dahl, Gordon and Lance Lochner. 2005.            “The Impact of Family Income on Child
Achievement,” NBER Working Paper #11279.

Diette, Gregory B.; Leona Markson; Elizabeth A. Skinner; Theresa T. H. Nguyen; Pamela
Algatt-Bergstrom; and Albert W. Wu. 2000. “Nocturnal Asthma in Children Affects School
Attendance, School Performance, and Parents’ Work Attendance.” Archives of Pediatric and
Adolescent Medicine 154: 923-928.

Dubay, Lisa and Genevieve Kenney. 1996. “The Effects of Medicaid Expansions on Insurance
Coverage of Children,” The Future of Children 6(1):152 – 161.

Dubay, Lisa and Genevieve Kenney. 1997. “Did Medicaid Expansions For Pregnant Women
Crowd Out Private Coverage?” Health Affairs 16(1): 185 – 193.

Fowler, Mary Glenn, Marsha G. Davenport and Rekha Garg. 1992. “School Functioning of US
Children with Asthma.” Pediatrics. 90(6):939-944.

Gortmaker, Steven L., Deborah K. Walker, Michael Weitzman and Arthur M. Sobol. 1990.
“Chronic Conditions, Socioeconomic Risks, and Behavioral Problems in Children and
Adolescents.” Pediatrics 85:267-276.

Gozal, David. 1998. “Sleep-Disordered Breathing and School Performance in Children.”
Pediatrics 102(3): 616-620.

Gruber, Jonathan. 2003. “Medicaid.” in Robert A. Moffitt (ed.), Means-Tested Transfer
Programs in the United States.

Gruber, Jonathan and Kosali Simon. 2008. “Crowd-Out Ten Years Later: Have Recent Public
Insurance Expansions Crowded Out Private Health Insurance?” Journal of Health Economics
March 27(2): 201-217.

Gruber, Jonathan and Aaron Yelowitz. 1999. “Public Health Insurance and Private Savings,”
Journal of Political Economy 107(6): 1249-1274.



                                            24
Ham, John, and Lara Shore Sheppard. 2005 “Did Expanding Medicaid Affect Welfare
Participation?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 58, no. 3, April, pp. 452-470.

Haveman, Robert and Bobbi Wolfe. 1995. “The Determinants of Children’s Attainments: A
Review of Methods and Findings.” Journal of Economic Literature 33(4): 1829-1878.

Jacob, Brian A. 2005. “Accountability, Incentives and Behavior.”         Journal of Public
Economics. 89(5-6): 761-796.

Joyce, Ted and Andrew Racine. 2003. “Chip Shots: Association Between the State Children’s
Health Insurance Programs and Immunization Coverage and Delivery.” NBER Working Paper
#9831.

Levy, Helen and David Meltzer. 2008. “The Impact of Health Insurance on Health” Annual
Review of Public Health 29:399-409.

Lloyd, B.W., K. Wheldall, D. Perks. 1988. “Controlled Study of Intelligence and School
Performance of Very Low Birth Weight Children from a Defined Geographical Area.”
Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology. 30:36-42.

LoSasso, Anthony and Thomas Buchmueller. 2004. “The Effect of the State Children’s Health
Insurance Program on Health Insurance Coverage.” Journal of Health Economics. 23:1059-82.

Mayer, Susan. 1997. What Money Can’t Buy: Family Income and Children’s Life Chances.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Morris, Pamela, Greg Duncan and Christopher Rodrigues. 2004. “Does Money Really Matter?
Estimating Impacts of Family Income on Children’s Achievement with Data from Random
Assignment Experiments,” Northwestern University, mimeo.

National Governors Association, Education Policy Studies Division. 2000. Improving Academic
Performance by Meeting Student Health Needs. Washington, DC: National Governors
Association.

Rossi, Robert and Alesia Montgomery. 2004. Educational Reforms and Students at Risk: A
Review of the Current State of the Art. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Office
of Educational Research and Improvement, Office of Research.

Shore-Sheppard, Lara. 2003. “Expanding Public Health Insurance for Children,” in Changing
Welfare, Rachel Gordon and Herbert Walberg, eds. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Publishers.

Shore-Sheppard, Lara D. 2005. “Stemming the Tide: The Effect of Expanding Medicaid
Eligibility on Health Insurance.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11091.




                                            25
Solon, Gary. 1992. “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States,” American
Economic Review. 82(3): 393-408.

Yazici, Esel Y. and Robert Kaestner. 2000. “Medicaid Expansions And The Crowding Out of
Private Health Insurance Among Children,” Inquiry 37(1):23-32.

Yelowitz, Aaron. 1995. “The Medicaid Notch, Labor Supply and Welfare Participation:
Evidence from Eligibility Expansions.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 110(4): 909-39.

Zimmerman, David J. 1992. “Regression Toward Mediocrity in Economic Stature,” American
Economic Review. 82(3): 409-429.




                                          26
                  Table 1: Public Health Insurance Eligibility for Minors by State and Year -- Age and Maximum Income

                  1988    1989     1990    1991     1992     1993    1994     1995     1996     1997     1998     1999     2000     2001     2002     2003     2004
California          0       0      1/185   5/133    5/133   5/133     5/133   5/133    0/200    0/200     0/200   0/250    19/250   19/250   19/250   0/300    0/300
                                   4/100            8/100   9/100    10/100   11/100   5/133    5/133     6/133   19/200                              19/250   19/250
                                                                                       12/100   13/100   14/100
                                                                                                          19/82

Texas               0     0/130    0/130   5/133    5/133   0/185     0/185   0/185    0/185    0/185     0/185   0/185    0/185    19/200   19/200   19/200   19/200
                          1/100    3/100            8/100   5/133     5/133   5/133    5/133    5/133     6/133   6/133    6/133
                                                            9/100    10/100   11/100   12/100   13/100   14/100   19/100   19/100
                                                                                                          19/17

New York            0       0      0/185   0/185   12/185   12/185    0/185   0/185    0/185    0/185     0/185   19/192   19/192   19/192   19/250   19/250   19/250
                                           5/133                     12/160   12/160   5/133    5/133     6/133
                                                                                       12/100   13/100   14/100
                                                                                                          19/87

Florida           1/100   4/100    0/150   5/133    5/133   5/133     5/133   5/133    0/185    0/185     0/185   19/200   19/200   19/200   19/200   19/200   19/200
                                   5/100   6/100    8/100   9/100    10/100   11/100   5/133    5/133     6/133
                                                                                       18/100   18/100   14/100
                                                                                                          19/28

Illinois            0     0/100    0/100   5/133    5/133   5/133     5/133   5/133    5/133    5/133     6/133   0/200    0/200     0/200   0/200    0/200    19/200
                                                    8/100   9/100    10/100   11/100   12/100   13/100   14/100   19/185   19/185   19/185   19/185   19/185
                                                                                                          19/46
Notes: Entries in table show maximum age of eligibility, then maximum income as a percentage of the poverty line. For simplicity, eligibility is as of January of
calendar year.
Sources: Yelowitz (1995), Shore-Sheppard (2002), and CMMS (2004).
                    Table 2: Public Health Insurance Eligibility for Children
         with Family Income at 120 Percent of the Poverty Line by Selected State and Age
State and                       covered at age:                        years covered by age:
Birth Year              0              9               13                9              13
California
    1986               no             no               yes               1               2
    1988               no             no               yes               3               6
    1990               yes            yes              yes               7              11
Texas
    1986               no             no               yes               1               2
    1988               no             no               yes               3               6
    1990               yes            no               yes               6               9
New York
    1986               no             yes              yes               5               6
    1988               no             no               yes               5               8
    1990              Yes             yes              yes               7              11
Florida
    1986               no             no               yes               1               2
    1988               no             no               yes               3               6
    1990               yes            yes              yes               7              11
Illinois
    1986               no             no               yes               1               2
    1988               no             no               yes               3               6
    1990               no             yes              yes               6              10
Note: This table reflects eligibility for a child born in January of the given year.
                               Table 3: Impact of Medicaid/SCHIP Expansions on NAEP Test Scores
                                         4th Grade    8th Grade
                                         Reading      Reading      Difference in         4th Grade Math   8th Grade Math   Difference in
                                          Scores       Scores     Reading Scores              Scores           Scores      Math Scores
                                             (1)          (2)           (3)                    (4)              (5)             (6)
Percentage eligible in                     2.138        1.049          5.815                  0.844           2.384           -1.629
in student’s year of birth                (3.641)      (4.854)        (2.365)                (4.102)         (4.446)          (2.265)

Mean Percentage of Life                   -7.833       -18.453        -5.177                -12.723           -3.298          -0.709
Eligible since birth                      (8.104)      (12.168)      (13.979)               (8.159)          (9.708)         (10.476)

Percentage Currently                       3.318        4.926          9.583                  3.838            2.1             2.186
Eligible                                  (4.272)      (5.826)       (28.148)                (3.384)         (2.778)          (3.093)

Sample Size                                262           169           169                    227              261             223
Notes: Regressions are based on aggregated state/year NAEP test score data and simulated Medicaid eligibility measures by state in
students’ state/year of residence. In models where the outcome is the difference in scores between the two grades, the eligibility
measures are calculated as the difference in rates between the two birth cohorts. Additional explanatory variables in “undifferenced”
models include the unemployment rate, the percentage of the population that is married, the percentage white, the percentage who
have dropped out of high school, are high school graduates, and have attended some college, and the percentage of the state’s
population that is 0-4, 5-17, 18-24, 25-44, 45-64, and 65+. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Regressions are
unweighted.
                                       Table 4: Impact of Medicaid/SCHIP Expansions on Infant Health

                             All Mothers        All Mothers        Mothers with Less     Mothers with HS   Mothers with Some    Mothers with
                            (Full Sample)    (Restricted Sample)    than HS Degree           Degree            College         College Degree
                                  (1)                 (2)                 (3)                  (4)                (5)                (6)

                                                                                Low Birth Weight

 Percentage of Cohort          -0.298                ---                 -0.985                -0.784            -0.693            -0.311
 Eligible at Birth (x100)      (0.138)               ---                (0.390)               (0.420)           (0.384)           (0.233)

 Mean Rate (x100)              7.267                 ---                9.173                  7.580             6.527             5.598
 Sample Size                   1,020                 ---                1,020                  1,020             1,020             1,020

                                                                             Infant Mortality Rate

 Percentage of Cohort          -0.036              -0.017                -0.137                -0.146            -0.071            -0.030
 Eligible at Birth (x100)      (0.029)             (0.054)              (0.113)               (0.088)           (0.080)           (0.053)

 Mean Rate (x100)              0.847               0.845                1.118                  0.867             0.681             0.509
 Sample Size                   1,020                765                  765                    765               765               765
Notes: Infant mortality regressions include a “full sample,” obtained from published reports on aggregate state/year infant mortality
rates and a “restricted sample,” where aggregate rates were calculated from linked birth/infant death Vital Statistics microdata. All
birth weight data was calculated from Vital Statistics Natality microdata. All models include state and year fixed effects along with
state-specific linear trends. Additional explanatory variables include the unemployment rate, the percentage of the population that is
married, the percentage white, the percentage who have dropped out of high school, are high school graduates, and have attended
some college, and the percentage of the state’s population that is 0-4, 5-17, 18-24, 25-44, 45-64, and 65+. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. Regressions are weighted by the number of births in the state/year.
                                     Table 5: Impact of Health Status at Birth on NAEP Test Scores

                                4th Grade        8th Grade       Difference in                4th Grade Math   8th Grade Math   Difference in
                              Reading Scores   Reading Scores   Reading Scores                     Scores           Scores      Math Scores
                                    (1)              (2)              (3)                           (4)              (5)             (6)

 Mean of Dependent
 Variable                         215.9            261.5            -45.1                            227.5         271.3           -45.2
 Sample Size                       262              169              169                              227           261             223

                                                                             Infant Mortality Rate

 Rate per 1,000 births           -10.857          -9.583            -4.868                            -7.853       -4.814          -1.166
 in student’s year of birth      (3.478)          (4.654)          (2.240)                           (3.030)      (3.185)         (1.195)

                                                                        Rate of Low Birth Weight

 Rate per 100 births             -0.266            0.687           -1.058                             0.928        0.839           0.277
 in student’s year of birth      (0.656)          (0.564)          (0.325)                           (1.040)      (0.767)         (0.419)
Notes: Regressions are based on aggregated state/year NAEP test score data and Vital Statistics data on rates of infant mortality rate
and low birth weight by state in students’ state/year of birth. In models where the outcome is the difference in scores between the two
grades, the infant mortality rate and the rate of low birth weight are measured as the difference in rates between the two birth cohorts.
Additional explanatory variables in “undifferenced” models include the unemployment rate, the percentage of the population that is
married, the percentage white, the percentage who have dropped out of high school, are high school graduates, and have attended
some college, and the percentage of the state’s population that is 0-4, 5-17, 18-24, 25-44, 45-64, and 65+. All models include state
and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. Regressions are unweighted.
                                             Figure 1A: Trends in Children's Eligibility for Public Health Insurance
                   60



                   50



                   40
Percent Eligible




                   30



                   20



                   10



                    0
                        1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
                                                                              Year

                                             Eligible at Birth       Eligible at Age 9        Eligible at Age 13
                                Figure 1B: Trends in Children's Eligibility for Public Health Insurance through Income-Based Waivers
                   60



                   50



                   40
Percent Eligible




                   30



                   20



                   10



                    0
                        1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
                                                                                Year

                                               Eligible at Birth       Eligible at Age 9        Eligible at Age 13
                                                       Figure 2: Variation across States in Percentage Medicaid Eligible at Birth
                                          14



                                          12
Standard Deviation in Eligibility Rates




                                          10



                                           8



                                           6



                                           4



                                           2



                                           0
                                               1994   1995    1996     1997    1998      1999      2000    2001    2002    2003     2004   2005
                                                                                          Year of Test
                                                                                 4th Graders        8th Graders
                                                        Figure 3: Variation across States in Percentage Currently Medicaid Eligible
                                          18


                                          16


                                          14
Standard Deviation in Eligibility Rates




                                          12


                                          10


                                           8


                                           6


                                           4


                                           2


                                           0
                                               1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997 1998 1999     2000    2001   2002   2003   2004   2005
                                                                                            Year of Test
                                                                                    4th Graders       8th Graders
