                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            IS MONETARY POLICY EFFECTIVE DURING FINANCIAL CRISES?

                                         Frederic S. Mishkin

                                        Working Paper 14678
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14678


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2009




The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily those of Columbia University or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. I thank Raghuram Rajan for his helpful comments.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Is Monetary Policy Effective During Financial Crises?
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 14678
January 2009
JEL No. E52,G1

                                            ABSTRACT

This short paper argues that the view that monetary policy is ineffective during financial crises is not
only wrong, but may promote policy inaction in the face of a severe contractionary shock. To the
contrary, monetary policy is more potent during financial crises because aggressive monetary policy
easing can make adverse feedback loops less likely. The fact that monetary policy is more potent than
during normal times provides a rationale for a risk-management approach to counter the contractionary
effects from financial crises, in which monetary policy is far less inertial than would otherwise be
typical – not only by moving decisively through conventional or nonconventional means to reduce
downside risks from the financial disruption, but also in being prepared to quickly take back some
of that insurance in response to a recovery in financial markets or an upward shift in inflation risks.


Frederic S. Mishkin
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 817
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu
       Since August 2007, the Federal Reserve has eased monetary policy aggressively in the

face of the worst financial crisis that the United States has experienced since the Great

Depression, lowering the federal funds rate target from 51/4% in September 2007 to 0 to 1/4%

in December 2008. Despite the substantial decline in the federal funds rate and interest rates on

Treasury securities, the cost of credit to both households and businesses has generally risen.

Since September 2007, interest rates on riskier debt instruments have risen sharply. Baa

corporate bond rates have risen by over 200 basis points (2 percentage points) since September

2007, while interest rates on junk bonds have risen by over 1000 basis points. Banks and other

financial intermediaries have also sharply tightened credit standards for both household and

businesses.

       The tightening of credit standards and the failure of the cost of credit to households and

businesses to fall despite the sharp easing of monetary policy has led to a common view that

monetary policy has not been effective during the recent financial crisis. The most recent Nobel

laureate, Paul Krugman, has expressed this view in his New York Times column, stating,



       “We are already, however, well into the realm of what I call depression economics. By

       that I mean a state of affairs like that of the 1930s in which the usual tools of monetary

       policy – above all the Federal Reserve’s ability to pump up the economy by cutting

       interest rates – have lost all traction.” (Krugman, 2008).



More importantly, this view has been expressed by some participants in the FOMC as the

minutes from the October 28-29, 2008, meeting indicate:


                                                -1-
       “Some members were concerned that the effectiveness of cuts in the target federal funds

       rate may have been diminished by the financial dislocations, suggesting that further

       policy action might have limited efficacy in promoting a recovery in economic growth.”

       (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 2008).



The views expressed in the above quotes harks back to early Keynesian discussions of the

ineffectiveness of monetary policy during the Great Depression period. Because of the shocks to

credit markets from the financial crisis, the argument is that monetary policy is unable to lower

the cost of credit and is thus pushing on a string. Monetary policy is therefore ineffective.

       I will argue in this paper that this view is just plain wrong. Not only that, the view that

monetary policy is ineffective during a financial crisis is highly dangerous because it leads to the

following two conclusions. First, if monetary policy is ineffective, then there is no reason to use

it to cope with the crisis. Second, easing monetary policy during a crisis is counterproductive

because it can weaken the credibility of the monetary authorities to keep inflation under control

and thus be inflationary. In this short paper, I argue that both of these conclusions are incorrect.

If the goal of the monetary authority is to offset the contractionary effects of a financial crisis

like the current one, then it may need to pursue more aggressive monetary policy easing than

normal."




I. Financial Instability and Macroeconomic Risk




                                                  -2-
       The financial system performs the function of efficiently channeling funds to individuals

or corporations with worthy investment opportunities by collecting and processing information.

Although financial markets and institutions deal with large volumes of information,

some of this information is by nature asymmetric; that is, one party to a financial contract

(typically the lender) has less accurate information about the likely distribution of outcomes

than does the other party (typically the borrower). Historically, banks and other financial

intermediaries have played a major role in reducing the asymmetry of information, partly

because these firms tend to have long-term relationships with their clients

       The continuity of this information flow is crucial to the process of price discovery--that

is, the ability of market participants to assess the fundamental worth of each financial asset.

During periods of financial distress, however, information flows are disrupted and price

discovery is impaired. The high risk spreads and reluctance to purchase assets that are

characteristic of such episodes are natural responses to the increased uncertainty resulting from

the disruption of information

       Two types of risks are particularly important for understanding financial instability. The

first is what I will refer to as valuation risk: The market, realizing the complexity of a security

or the opaqueness of its underlying creditworthiness, finds it has trouble assessing the value of

the security. For example, this sort of risk has been central to the repricing of many structured-

credit products during the turmoil of the past year, when investors have struggled to understand

how potential losses in subprime mortgages might filter through the layers of complexity that

such products entail.

       The second type of risk that I consider central to the understanding of financial stability

                                                 -3-
is what I refer to as macroeconomic risk--that is, an increase in the probability that a financial

disruption will cause significant deterioration in the real economy. In particular, strains in

financial markets can spill over to the broader economy and have adverse consequences on

output and employment. Furthermore, an economic downturn tends to generate even greater

uncertainty about asset values, which could initiate an adverse feedback loop in which the

financial disruption restrains economic activity; such a situation could lead to greater uncertainty

and increased financial disruption, causing a further deterioration in macroeconomic activity,

and so on. This phenomenon is generally referred to as the financial accelerator (Ben Bernanke

and Mark Gertler, 1989; Ben Bernanke, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist, 1996, 1999).

       The quality of balance sheets of households and firms comprise a key element of the

financial accelerator mechanism, because some of the assets of each borrower may serve as

collateral for its liabilities. The use of collateral helps mitigate the problem of asymmetric

information, because the borrower’s incentive not to engage in excessive risk-taking is

strengthened by the threat of losing the collateral: If a default does occur, the lender can

take title to the borrower’s collateral and thereby recover some or all of the value of the loan.

However, a macroeconomic downturn tends to diminish the value of many forms of collateral,

thereby exacerbating the impact of frictions in credit markets and reinforcing the propagation

of the adverse feedback loop.




II. The Current Financial Crisis




                                                 -4-
       The current financial crisis has many features in common with past financial crises that

have occurred throughout history. As in many previous crises, the current crisis has had three

precipitating factors: 1) mismanagement of financial innovation, 2) an asset price bubble that

burst, and 3) deterioration of financial institution balance sheets.1

       Financial innovation has the potential for making the financial system more efficient, but

in the recent episode, the financial innovations of subprime mortgages and structured credit

products ended up being destructive. They did not deal with the serious agency problems of the

originate-to-distribute model, in which there were only weak incentives to do proper credit risk

analysis, and they also increased the complexity of financial products so that they were

increasingly difficult to value (Gary Gorton, 2008). The weakening of underwriting standards in

the subprime mortgage market was exacerbated by the housing price bubble which encouraged

risky lending, because as long as housing prices were rising, defaults on subprime mortgages

were low. When the housing price bubble burst in 2007, the rot in the financial system began to

be revealed. The decline in housing prices led to many subprime borrowers finding that their

mortgages were “underwater”, that is, the value of the house fell below the amount of the

mortgage, and defaults on mortgages began to rise. Rising defaults on subprime mortgages then

revealed the problems in structured credit products. When the value of mortgage-backed

securities and structured credit products such as CDOs and SIVs collapsed, there were large

write-downs at banks and.other financial institutions. The deterioration of financial institutions’

balance sheets then led to the deleveraging process in which lending fell, consumer spending and



       1
        I provide a more detailed discussion of why the current financial crisis occurred in
Frederic Mishkin (forthcoming).

                                                 -5-
business investment declined, resulting in a contraction in economic activity. The weaker

economy and the resulting decline in the demand for housing then led to an even more rapid rate

of decline in housing and related asset prices, which caused a further deterioration in financial

institutions’ balance sheets and a further decline in lending. The result has been a very nonlinear

adverse feedback loop that has substantially raised macroeconomic risk.

       The combination of an increase in valuation risk once the agency problems in the

subprime mortgage and structured-credit products markets were revealed, along with the

increase in macroeconomic risk, led to a huge increase in credit spreads worldwide. The

financial crisis began a second, more virulent phase, after the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy and

near failure of AIG in September 2008. A bad situation was made worse after the House of

Representatives, fearing the wrath of constituents who were angry about bailing out Wall Street,

voted down a $700 billion dollar bailout package on Monday, September 29, 2008. Although

the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act was finally passed on Friday, October 3, the stock

market crash accelerated, with the week beginning with October 6 showing the worst weekly

decline in U.S. history. Credit spreads went through the roof over the next three weeks, with the

Treasury Bill-to-Eurodollar rate (TED) spread, a good measure of liquidity in the interbank

market, going from around 40 basis points (0.40 percentage points) before the crisis to over 450

basis points, the highest value in its history The subprime financial crisis had spun out of

control.

       The result of these higher credit spreads was that despite aggressive cuts in the federal

funds rate, interest rates relevant to household and business spending decisions rose, along with

a sharp tightening of credit standards. The economy went into a tailspin and we are now in the

                                                -6-
midst of a serious recession.




III. Is Monetary Policy Ineffective?




       Does the fact that the cost of credit has risen for households and businesses despite

aggressive monetary easing mean that monetary policy has been ineffective in the current

financial crisis episode? The answer is no. To see this, consider the following counterfactual:

What if the Fed had not aggressively cut rates during the current crisis?

       Valuation risk would certainly have stayed as high because tighter monetary policy

would certainly not have made it easier to value securities by either reducing the opaqueness of

securities that were hard to value or making it easier to assess credit risk.

       On the other hand, tighter monetary policy would surely have led to higher

macroeconomic risk. Tighter monetary policy , through its usual channels by restraining

consumer spending and business investment, would have made it more likely that the economic

downturn would even more severe, which would result in even greater uncertainty about asset

values. Tighter monetary policy would then have made an adverse feedback loop more likely in

which the greater uncertainty about asset values would raise credit spreads, causing economic

activity to contract further: The contraction in economic activity then would create more

uncertainty, making the financial crisis worse, causing the economic activity to contract further

and so on.

       If the Fed had not aggressively cut rates, the result would have been both higher interest

                                                 -7-
rates on default-free bonds like Treasury securities and a substantial increase in macroeconomic

risk with much higher credit spreads. Interest rates relevant to household and business spending

decisions would then have been much higher than what we see currently.          Aggregate spending

would therefore have been lower and the current recession would be far more severe. Tighter

monetary policy would have been very costly indeed.

       The logic above indicates that not only has monetary policy been effective during the

current financial crisis, but that it has been even more potent than during normal times because it

not only lowered interest rates on default-free securities, but also helped lower credit spreads.

The argument here does not, however, say that monetary policy can offset the contractionary

effect of a massive financial disruption in the credit markets of the type we have been

experiencing. The financial crisis has led to such a widening of credit spreads and tightening of

credit standards, that aggressive monetary policy easing has not been enough to contain the

crisis. This is why central banks have provided liquidity support to particular sectors of the

financial system in order to contain liquidity squeezes.

       The Federal Reserve, in particular, has implemented large liquidity injections into the

credit markets to try to get them lending again. Starting in mid-August 2007, the Fed lowered the

discount rate to just 50 basis points above the federal funds rate target from the normal 100 basis

points (later to 25 basis points). Over the course of the crisis, the Fed broadened its provision of

liquidity to the financial system well outside of its traditional lending to depository institutions,

leading Paul Volcker, a former Chairman of the Federal Reserve, to describe the Fed’s actions as

going to the “very edge of its lawful and implied powers.” The number of new Fed lending

programs over the course of the crisis spawned a whole new set of acronyms, the TAF, TSLF,

                                                  -8-
PDCF , AMLF, CPFF, and MMIFF and TALF, making the Fed sound like the Pentagon with

code-named initiatives and weapons. Like the Pentagon, the Fed has been fighting a war againts

a potentially destructive enemy, although its weapons were financial rather than guns, tanks, or

aircraft.

        Even though I believe that the Fed’s liquidity injections, which have expanded the Fed

balance sheet by well over a trillion dollars, have been extremely useful in limiting the negative

impacts of the financial crisis, they will not be enough. To get the financial system working

again, financial institutions will need to be recapitalized sufficiently to bring them back to

health, so that they have the proper incentives to go out and make loans to households and

businesses with productive investment opportunities. In addition economists (and politicians)

have come around to the view that large fiscal stimulus packages may be necessary to keep

economies throughout the world from entering into deep recessions or even depressions. Of

course, the $500 billion plus question is whether these fiscal packages can be done right so they

have the maximum impact in the short-run, but do not lead to future tax burdens that are

unsustainable.




IV. The Rationale for Aggressive Monetary Policy During Financial Crises




        The logic of the argument above which indicates that monetary policy may be even more

effective during financial crises also argues that more aggressive easing of monetary policy may

be necessary to counter the contractionary effects of financial crises.


                                                 -9-
        As argued above financial disruptions can have particularly nonlinear effects on the

economy because they can lead to an adverse feedback loop. As I outlined in Mishkin (2008),

the resulting nonlinearity argues against the result from a linear-quadratic (LQ) framework that

optimal monetary policy should display considerable inertia.2 An alternative approach is for

monetary policy to engage in risk management by using monetary policy to take out insurance

against tail risks.

        As I mentioned above, periods of financial instability are characterized by valuation risk

and macroeconomic risk. Monetary policy cannot aim at minimizing valuation risk, but can

reduce macroeconomic risk. By easing monetary policy aggressively to offset the negative

effects of financial turmoil on aggregate economic activity – this includes cutting interest rates

preemptively, as well as using nonconventional monetary policy tools if interest rates fall to

close to the zero lower bound – monetary policy can reduce the likelihood that a financial

disruption might set off an adverse feedback loop. The resulting reduction in uncertainty can

then make it easier for the markets to collect the information that facilitates price discovery, thus

hastening the return of normal market functioning.

        One danger from aggressive easing monetary policy easing is that it might unanchor

inflation expectations. This unanchoring of inflation expectations could then lead to significant




        2
        The now-classic textbook on this topic is Michael Woodford (2003). Also see Marvin
Goodfriend and Robert King (1997); Julio Rotemberg and Michael Woodford (1997); Richard
Clarida, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1999); Robert King and Alexander Wolman (1999);
Christopher Erceg, Dale Henderson, and Andrew Levin (2000); PierpaloBenigno and Michael
Woodford (2003); Marc Giannoni and Michael Woodford (2005); Andrew Levin, Alexei
Onatski, John Williams and Noah Williams (2005); and StephanieSchmitt-Grohé and Martin
Uribe (2005)

                                                -10-
inflation in the future because the behavior of inflation is significantly influenced by the public’s

expectations about where inflation is likely to head in the long run (Mishkin, 2007). Therefore,

aggressive preemptive easing of monetary policy would be counterproductive if these actions

caused an increase in inflation expectations and the underlying rate of inflation; in other words,

the flexibility to act preemptively against a financial disruption presumes that inflation

expectations are well anchored and unlikely to rise during a period of temporary monetary

easing.

          How can a central bank keep inflation expectations solidly anchored so it can respond

preemptively to financial disruptions? The central bank has to have earned credibility with

financial markets and the public through a record of previous actions to maintain low and stable

inflation. Furthermore, by clearly communicating the rationale for its policy actions, the central

can make it clear that it will not let inflation spin out of control. In addition, inflation

expectations are more likely to remain anchored if the central banks communicate that it will be

flexible in the opposite direction by raising interest rates quickly if there is a rapid recovery in

financial markets or if there is an upward shift in projections for future inflation. In this way the

central bank can show that it is prepared to take back some of the insurance it has provided by its

earlier monetary policy easing.




V. Conclusion




          The fallacy that monetary policy is ineffective during financial crises may promote policy


                                                 -11-
inaction in the face of a severe contractionary shock. I have argued that, if anything, monetary

policy is more potent during financial crises because aggressive monetary policy easing can

make adverse feedback loops less likely. The fact that monetary policy is more potent than

during normal times provides a rationale for a risk-management approach to counter the

contractionary effects from financial crises, in which monetary policy is far less inertial than

would otherwise be typical – not only by moving decisively through conventional or

nonconventional means to reduce downside risks from the financial disruption, but also in being

prepared to quickly take back some of that insurance in response to a recovery in financial

markets or an upward shift in inflation risks.




                                                 -12-
                                        References




Benigno, Pierpaolo, and Michael Woodford. 2003. “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy:

      A Linear-Quadratic Approach,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER

      Macroeconomics Annual 2003. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press: 271-332.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler. 1989. “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business

      Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 79: 14-31.

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1996. “The Financial Accelerator

      and the Flight to Quality,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78: 1-15.

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. “The Financial Accelerator in a

      Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford,

      eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 1, part 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland: 1341-

      93.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2008. Minutes of the Federal Open

      Market Committee, October 28-29.

      http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/fomcminutes20081029.pdf

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler. 1999. “The Science of Monetary Policy: A

      New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37: 1661-707.




                                             -13-
Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin. 2000. “Optimal Monetary

       Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.

       46 (October): 281-313.

Giannoni, Marc P. , and Michael Woodford. 2005. “Optimal Inflation-Targeting Rules,” in

       Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford, eds., Inflation Targeting. Chicago: University

       of Chicago Press: 93-172.

Goodfriend, Marvin, and Robert King . 1997. “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role

       of Monetary Policy,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER

       Macroeconomics Annual 1997. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press:. 231-83.

Gorton, Gary. 2008. “The Panic of 2007,” NBER Working Paper No. 14358, September.

King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman. 1999. “What Should the Monetary Authority Do

       When Prices Are Sticky?” in John Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago:

       University of Chicago Press: 349-98.

Krugman, Paul. 2008. “Depression Economics Returns,” New York Times, November 14, 2008.

Levin, Andrew, Alexei Onatski, John C. Williams, and Noah Williams. 2005. “Monetary

       Policy under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models,” in Mark Gertler

       and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005. Cambridge, Mass.:

       MIT Press:. 229-88.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 2007. “Inflation Dynamics,” International Finance 10(3): 317-334.




                                              -14-
Mishkin, Frederic S. 2008. “Monetary Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial

       Disruption,” speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, January 11,

       2008, http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/mishkin20080111a.htm.

Mishkin, Frederic S. forthcoming. “Chapter 9: Financial Crises and the Subprime Meltdown,”

       in The Economics of Money, Banking, and Financial Markets, 9th edition, Boston:

       Pearson-Addison Wesley.

Rotemberg, Julio, and Michael Woodford. 1997.. “An Optimization-Based Econometric

       Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J.

       Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press:.

       297-346.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe. 2005. “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in

       a Medium-Scale Macroeconomic Model,” in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,

       NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press: 383-425.

Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.

       Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                                -15-
