                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HARVESTS AND BUSINESS CYCLES IN NINETEENTH-CENTURY AMERICA

                                           Joseph H. Davis
                                          Christopher Hanes
                                            Paul W. Rhode

                                        Working Paper 14686
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14686


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2009




We have benefited from the suggestions and comments of participants at presentations at the NBER-DAE,
Society for Economic Dynamics, All-UC Group in Economic History, and UC Davis. Thanks to Charles
Calomiris, John James, Jon Moen, Scott Redenius, Kenneth Snowden, Alan Taylor, Marc Weidenmier
and David Weiman for comments, suggestions and data. Rhode is supported by NSF grant 34-3428-00-0-79-405.
 The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Joseph H. Davis, Christopher Hanes, and Paul W. Rhode. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Harvests and Business Cycles in Nineteenth-Century America
Joseph H. Davis, Christopher Hanes, and Paul W. Rhode
NBER Working Paper No. 14686
January 2009
JEL No. E32,N11,N51,N61

                                              ABSTRACT

Most major American industrial business cycles from around 1880 to the First World War were caused
by fluctuations in the size of the cotton harvest due to economically exogenous factors such as weather.
Wheat and corn harvests did not affect industrial production; nor did the cotton harvest before the
late 1870s. The unique effect of the cotton harvest in this period can be explained as an essentially
monetary phenomenon, the result of interactions between harvests, international gold flows and high-powered
money demand under America’s gold-standard regime of 1879-1914.


Joseph H. Davis                                      Paul W. Rhode
The Vanguard Group                                   Economics Department
P.O. Box 2600, MS V37                                Eller College of Management
Valley Forge, PA 19482-2600                          University of Arizona
and NBER                                             Tucson, AZ 85721-0108
joseph_davis@vanguard.com                            and NBER
                                                     pwrhode@email.arizona.edu
Christopher Hanes
Dept. of Economics
SUNY Binghamton
P.O. Box 6000
Binghamton, NY 13902-6000
chanes@binghamton.edu
       Economists have long been intrigued by the notion that business cycles are caused

by a few types of identifiable, exogenous shocks. For the postwar U.S. economy one

possibility is oil prices, following Hamilton’s (1983) observation that (with one

exception) the “tendency...for oil price increases to be followed by recessions has in fact

characterized every recession in the United States since World War II” (p. 229). The

apparent relation between oil supply shocks and economic activity has been explained as

a result of oil prices' real effects on capital productivity and expenditure patterns

(Hamilton 2000, p. 35), or alternatively as the outcome of monetary shocks resulting

from policymakers' reactions to oil prices (Bernanke, Gertler, and Watson 1997).

       Up to the mid-twentieth century, the prime suspect was crop harvest fluctuations

caused by weather and other natural events. William Stanley Jevons (1884) speculated

that sunspots affected British industrial activity through crop yields in tropical countries.

Many economists asserted that an effect of harvests on industry was evident in the United

States (Moore 1914; Robertson 1915; Pigou 1927; H. Stanley Jevons 1933). At the turn

of the twentieth century, A. Piatt Andrew claimed that “one cannot review the past forty

years without observing that the beginnings of every movement toward business

prosperity and the turning-points toward every business decline… were closely connected

with the out-turn of crops” (1906, p. 351).

       Subsequent research into business cycles did not support such strong claims. In

their Monetary History of the United States, Friedman and Schwartz (1963, pp. 97-98,

107, 140-141) argued that the wheat crop, specifically, contributed to a few pre-1914

cycles, through the effects of wheat export revenues on the U.S. money supply under the

gold standard. But NBER scholars such as Wesley Mitchell (1951, p. 58), Arthur Burns

(1951, pp. 7-8), and Robert A. Gordon (1952, p. 386) concluded that farm-sector output

was uniquely unrelated to output in other sectors. Edwin Frickey (1942, p. 229) found no

correlations between indices of farm output and his annual index of industrial production

for 1865-1914.
       Pre-1914 business cycles remain a topic of current research. They are generally

found to resemble postwar cycles in the behavior of real variables such as consumption,

investment and employment (Backus and Kehoe 1992; Romer 1994; Calomiris and

Hanes 1995; Basu and Taylor 1999). But there has been little recent inquiry into the role

of agricultural shocks in pre-1914 business cycles. Solomou and Wu (1999) argue that

weather-related harvest fluctuations affected real GDP in Europe in the late nineteenth

century, but only because of their direct effects on the agricultural portion of GDP. Odell

and Weidenmier (2004) argue that the American depression of 1907-08 was the result of

another type of real shock, the San Francisco earthquake, through the response of central

banks to international gold flows associated with insurance payments. For the interwar

(1920s-1930s) period, an extensive modern literature has explored interactions between

the farm sector and industrial business cycles in the U.S. and elsewhere (e.g. Temin 1976;

Madsen 2001).

       In this paper, we re-examine the relation between American business cycles and

harvests of the country’s staple crops – cotton, wheat, and corn – from the early

nineteenth century to the First World War. We focus specifically on the relation between

harvests and fluctuations in nonagricultural output indicated by indices of industrial

production (IP). Our results should alter views of historical business cycles and attract

the attention of macroeconomic theorists.

       From about 1880 to 1914, year-to-year fluctuations in the American cotton

harvest caused business-cycle variations in American IP. Indeed, the cotton harvest

accounts for most major American business cycles of this era, including the depressions

of 1884, 1893, 1895 and 1910. The relation between cotton harvests and business cycles

was causal: it holds for harvest fluctuations due to weather in southern cotton-growing

regions – a factor exogenous to economic activity and unlikely to affect IP through other

channels. It was also unique to the cotton crop and to the postbellum era: IP was not

affected by wheat or corn harvests, or by cotton in the antebellum era. After


                                             2
demonstrating these patterns we propose an essentially monetary explanation. We argue

that the unique IP effect of the cotton harvest in the postbellum era can be accounted for

by a standard open-economy sticky-price model, as the outcome of two more proximate

effects of harvests: on potential high-powered money supply through export revenues,

and on money demand. In the last section of the paper, we test implications of our

explanation for monetary quantities, exchange rates, interest rates and inflation.

I. Pre-1914 data on production in agriculture and industry

        For pre-1914 America, indices of industrial production (IP) are the only reliable

cyclical-frequency indicators of real activity outside agriculture. For most of the

nineteenth century the shortest available frequency is annual.1 The index constructed by

Joseph Davis (2004) is the most comprehensive and the only one that covers years

preceding the War Between the States. The Davis index indicates production over

calendar years from 1790 through 1915. Its year-to-year fluctuations are consistent with

other cyclical indicators and with the traditional NBER business cycle chronology

(though several NBER downturns appear in the Davis series as growth slowdowns rather

than contractions [Davis 2006, pp. 108-109]). Important components enter during 1827,

so our samples begin with 1828. To avoid possible effects of the First World War's

outbreak (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, p. 196) we present results from samples that end

with 1913. Samples ending with 1914 gave very similar results.

        Two components of the Davis index are directly related to farm output in a way

that is undesirable for our purposes: U.S. consumption of raw cotton, and shipments of

wheat flour. As a check, we examine a specially-constructed index excluding these two

components. For postbellum years, we also use the Frickey (1947) annual index of

manufacturing production.




1
  Annual-frequency estimates of aggregate employment and NIPA variables such as GNP are actually
interpolations on IP series or on nominal variables such as price indexes, suspended between reliable
estimates for census years only (Rhode 2002; Davis 2004). The monthly IP index constructed by Miron and
Romer (1990) begins with January 1884.
                                                  3
        In American agriculture, the most important products were animals for slaughter

and three "staple" crops: cotton, wheat, and corn (maize). There are no reliable annual

estimates of livestock production before about 1910, or of wheat and corn production in

the antebellum era.2 But beginning with 1866, the U.S. Department of Agriculture

(USDA) produced reliable annual estimates of production of all three staple crops, based

mainly on information provided by local crop reporters. For cotton alone, the USDA

published annual production estimates for antebellum and war years, based on

contemporary commercial estimates (Carter et. al. 2006, series Da 696, Da718, Da756).

Thus, we can examine harvest fluctuations of cotton, wheat and corn in the postbellum

era, and of cotton alone in the antebellum era. In the years just following the War

Between the States, cotton production was subject to many special factors (described by

Ransom and Sutch 1977) beyond the scope of this paper. Thus, we begin postbellum

samples with 1869. Starting samples a few years earlier or later gave similar results.

        We measure business-cycle industrial fluctuations as deviation from trend in log

IP series - the “IP gap.” We define business-cycle industrial fluctuations as deviations

from estimated trends in the log of IP series, with trends estimated separately over 1828-

1860 and 1869-1913. To span most definitions of cyclical fluctuations versus trends, we

estimate trends two ways: quadratic in time; and using the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter

with the smoothing parameter set at the value (100) used by most other studies of annual

historical data (such as Backus and Kehoe 1992). As is well known, the HP filter

incorporates some relatively high-frequency movements into the trend; the quadratic does




2
  For years from 1867 on, the USDA assembled annual estimates of the number of head of livestock on
farms reproduced in Carter et. al. 2006, series Da968-973), rather than output of slaughtered meat. From
these USDA "inventory" numbers, Strauss and Bean (1940, pp. 105-123) created estimates of slaughtered
meat output by assuming that a fixed fraction of the livestock headcount in each animal category (cattle,
hogs, sheep) was slaughtered every year, and applying estimates of livestock weights derived from
incomplete records of commercial slaughterhouses. Though they are given on an annual basis, we believe
the Strauss and Bean estimates indicate long-term trends in livestock production rather than annual
fluctuations, which would be affected by variations in the slaughtered fraction of the headcount, animal
mortality from diseases versus slaughter, and so on.
                                                    4
not.3

        We define crop harvest fluctuations parallel to IP gaps, as deviations of log output

from the two trends. Figure I plots output of each crop and quadratic trends, which appear

to be good descriptions of long-term growth. Table I presents statistics on volatility,

persistence and cross-correlations for harvest fluctuations and IP gaps. IP gaps are

persistent (high serial correlation) and slightly more volatile in the postbellum era.

Harvest fluctuations are not at all persistent; volatility is similar across crops and eras.

None of the cross-correlations is strong.

II. Staple crops in the American economy

        Crop production was fundamentally seasonal and regional. Cotton, wheat and

corn were all harvested within the months from July through November, planted in the

previous spring or earlier. Cotton was grown in the southern "cotton belt" from North

Carolina to Texas. The bulk of industrial production took place elsewhere, in the

Northeast and Midwest. Wheat and corn were concentrated in the "grain belt" of the

Midwest and West, closer to industrial centers but far from the cotton belt.4

        Almost all harvested cotton was sold off the farm for factory textile production.

Most was exported, primarily to Britain, which had the world’s largest cotton textile

industry. Most harvested wheat was sold off the farm to be milled into flour for human

consumption (some was retained for seed and animal feed). Unlike cotton and wheat,

most corn was fed to draft and meat animals, often on the same farm where it was grown



3
  Ravn and Uhlig (2002) show that a smoothing-parameter value of 6.25 for annual-frequency data would
be more consistent with the value of 1600 conventionally applied to quarterly- data. Compared with a
value of 100, a value of 6.25 would create trends that are even more sensitive to short-term fluctuations.
4
  Cotton was planted from March through May, harvested beginning in August (Covert 1912, p. 93). By the
end of October over sixty percent of the cotton harvest was completed, at least in the 1900s (U.S. Bureau of
the Census 1909, p. 13). Corn was planted in the spring, harvested from early September through
November (Covert 1912, p. 17). "Winter wheat" was planted from September through October; "spring
wheat" was planted from March through May; both wheat plantings were harvested mostly in July and
August (Covert 1912, pp. 30, 41; Monthly Crop Reporter Sept. 1920, p. 100). In the postbellum era about
70 percent of U.S. wheat came from Ohio, Michigan, Indiana, Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Indiana,
Missouri, the Dakotas, Kansas and Nebraska (U.S. Department of Agriculture 1955). Over 1910-1914,
about sixty percent of corn came from Iowa, Illinois, Missouri, Indiana, Nebraska, Ohio and Kansas (U.S.
Department of Agriculture 1954). In the late nineteenth century the cotton belt states developed a large
                                                     5
(USDA 1922, pp. 79, 151-155, 164-165, 199-201, 391-399). The U.S. produced most of

the world’s marketed cotton, even as late as 1913; the U.S. share of world wheat was

much smaller (USDA 1921, pp. 547-548).

         Table II indicates crops’ roles in U.S. exports and national income. (Underlying

figures on crop values and sales incorporate estimates of output retained on the farm [for

wheat and corn] and local prices available to farmers [as distinct from central commodity

market prices] appear reliable for these long-run averages, though not from year to year.)

The value of raw cotton as a share of U.S. export revenue or relative to GNP fell from the

antebellum to the postbellum era. In the postbellum era, the cotton and wheat harvests

had similar value relative to GNP and generated similar crop sale income to farmers.

Cotton was a larger share of export revenue, and had a higher ratio of export revenue to

crop sales. Corn had the largest value relative to GNP but generated less sales because

most corn was retained on the farm. The lower section of the Table indicates the

importance of raw cotton as an input to U.S. and British industry. Raw cotton was always

more important to the British economy, in the sense that the value of cotton consumed

and U.S. cotton imports were larger relative to British national product.

         Relations between harvest fluctuations and U.S. export revenues can be observed

in annual data on exports by commodity, available starting in the early nineteenth century

for twelve-month spans corresponding to one harvest season’s exports. These data show

that cotton harvest fluctuations were not related to U.S. export revenue in the antebellum

era. In the postbellum era, both cotton and wheat harvest fluctuations were positively

related to export revenue with similar magnitudes. Corn harvest fluctuations were not

strongly related to export revenue. Table III presents results indicating these patterns. We

regressed the log of total revenue from crop-related exports - the sum of raw cotton,

wheat and wheat flour, corn and corn flour - on the corresponding season’s harvest

fluctuations (quadratic trends), time trend terms, and the log of the WPI over the twelve


cotton textile industry, but as late as 1895 northern mills accounted for two-thirds of U.S. raw cotton
consumption (Hammond 1897, p. 343).
                                                      6
months preceding the harvest season (ending June) to control for the general price level.

The antebellum era's cotton harvest coefficient (column 1) is not significantly different

from zero. The postbellum cotton harvest coefficient (column 2) is positive and

significant at the one percent level. When wheat and corn fluctuations are added to the

right-hand side (column 3), the wheat coefficient is positive, significant at one percent

and of similar magnitude to cotton's; the corn coefficient is smaller and not significantly

different from zero at the five percent level.

         Remaining columns show that these relations between harvests and export

revenues most likely reflect the behavior of export prices, as roughly indicated by

observable spot prices in central U.S. commodity markets (New York for cotton, Chicago

for wheat and corn).5 Columns (4) and (5) show results of regressing log cotton export

quantity (in pounds) on harvest fluctuations: coefficients are positive for both the

antebellum and postbellum eras. For (6) – (9), left-hand side variables were crops’ spot

prices averaged over the twelve months beginning with the fall harvest season (July

through the following June). The antebellum cotton harvest coefficient is close to

negative one, not significantly different from negative one at conventional levels (p-value

0.67). The postbellum cotton coefficient is negative but smaller in magnitude; the

hypothesis that it is negative one can be rejected at the one percent level. In (8), wheat

prices appear largely unrelated to U.S. harvests; in (9) corn prices show a strong negative

relation to harvests.

         Wright (1974, p. 630) observed the decrease in the relation between cotton

harvests and prices from the antebellum to the postbellum period, and argued that it was

perhaps a consequence of declining U.S. share in world cotton production. We add that

the development of cotton futures markets, which occurred over the 1860s, may have

5
  Actual export prices are unobservable. In the antebellum period, cotton was sold in many port cities and
cotton prices varied substantially across ports (Hammond 1897, pp. 278-291; Woodman 1968, pp. 19-42).
For many ports prices are unavailable, as is the fraction of exports sold at a given local price (cotton
shipped from a given port was not necessarily sold by the exporter at that port’s price). In the postbellum
period, there was tighter correlation of prices across local markets, but there were active futures markets
(Stevens 1887), so spot prices are not necessarily equal to export prices.
                                                     7
dampened the sensitivity of world cotton prices to short-run supply disturbances.6 The

weak relation between wheat prices and U.S. harvests is consistent with the small U.S.

share of world wheat supply. Because wheat prices were largely unrelated to U.S.

harvests, U.S. wheat harvests' effects on export revenues were similar to cotton's, even

though wheat was a smaller share of export revenue on average.

III. Causes of harvest fluctuations

        What caused harvest fluctuations? Were they driven by business cycles (through

demand for crops, for example), or by some third factor or factors that affected both

agriculture and industry? We begin to answer these questions by regressing autumn

harvest fluctuations on IP gaps for the same calendar year and the previous year. Given

the fundamental lag between planting and harvest, there is no reason to believe a

common third factor could affect crop output before IP. Thus, effects on harvests of

business cycles or common third factors should appear as positive coefficients on IP

gaps. For cotton and corn, these regressions give no evidence that harvest fluctuations

were caused by business cycles or common third factors. For the wheat crop only, there is

evidence of a relation between the harvest and IP in the same year.

        Table IV shows results. The last rows show p-values to test hypotheses that

coefficients on all right-hand side variables are zero, and that the two IP gap coefficients

are zero. For cotton and corn, one cannot reject the hypothesis that all variables’

coefficients are zero. For the wheat crop only, the coefficient on the current-year IP gap

is positive and significant at conventional levels.

        The apparently weak relations between autumn harvests and IP of the same

calendar year are consistent with observations of early NBER researchers, who found no

conformity between business cycles and indices of crop output or farm employment

(Burns 1951, pp. 7-8; Gordon 1952, pp. 385-387; Kuznets 1951, p. 159). Mitchell (1951

pp. 56, 57) concluded that "the basic industry of growing crops does not expand and

6
  Textile manufacturers and middlemen used futures to hedge the risk of a decrease in the value of their
stocks of cotton, which allowed them to hold larger stocks (Hammond 1897, pp. 300-314; Woodman 1968,
                                                   8
contract in unison with mining, manufacturing, trading, transportations and finance"

because "farmers cannot control the short-term fluctuations in their output...the factor that

dominates year-to-year changes in the harvests is that intricate complex called weather.

Plant diseases and insect pests also exert an appreciable influence."

         Weather, plant diseases and pests are indeed plausible causes of harvest

fluctuations, as we have defined them. Many fluctuations apparent in Figure I are

coincident with events of this type noted by contemporary observers (such as, for cotton,

cotton worm infestation in 1846 and the early 1870s, boll worms in 1881, the boll weevil

in 1909 and 1915; the Mississippi flood in 1892 [Thorp 1926]). Their effects are also

consistent with the absence of serial correlation in harvest fluctuations. Long-run effects

of most newly-introduced crop diseases and pests were mitigated by innovations in

agricultural technique (Olmstead and Rhode 2002). Year-to-year effects depended on

interactions with weather. For example, the boll weevil, which began to affect U.S. cotton

production in 1892, caused most damage in years of especially wet, warm weather

(Henry 1925, p. 523; Kincer 1928).

IV. Effects of harvests on industrial production

         To observe the effects of harvest fluctuations on business cycles, we begin by

running OLS regressions of IP gaps on lagged IP gaps and the previous fall’s harvest

fluctuations. Results indicate a positive relation of very high statistical significance

between a year’s IP gap and the previous fall’s cotton harvest, within the postbellum era

only. There is no such relation for the postbellum wheat or corn harvests, or for the cotton

harvest in the antebellum era.

         Next, we ask whether cotton harvests were related to IP throughout the

postbellum era, or only within a portion of the era. Given the small number of

observations in question, we cannot claim definitive evidence on this point. However, in

a variety of specifications the relation between cotton harvests and IP does not appear



289-294); larger stocks could dampen price effects of short-run supply fluctuations.
                                                     9
within the 1870s, though it holds in every other decade from the 1880s through 1913.

       Finally, to establish the direction of causality between cotton harvests and IP, we

observe the effect of harvest fluctuations specifically due to weather, using time-series

weather data in two-stage least squares. Recall we have found no reason to believe any

cotton harvest fluctuations reflect reverse causation from IP or common effects of third

factors. But the natural experiments created by weather events reveal causality in an

unusually definitive way. In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, if not the

twenty-first, weather was unaffected by industrial activity. There is no reason to believe

that weather relevant for cotton could affect IP through channels other than the cotton

harvest. Industrial production might be affected by northern weather – for example, an

especially cold winter could hinder shipping by freezing waterways. But cotton-growing

was affected by southern weather. Our IV results confirm that the post-1870s relation

between the cotton harvest and the following year’s IP was one of cause and effect. They

are also consistent with the absence of effects from wheat and corn.

       IV.A) OLS regressions

       Table V, panel A shows results of regressing IP gaps on two lags of IP gaps and

harvest fluctuations. IP indexes are the standard Davis series, the Davis series excluding

cotton textiles and flour, and sector-specific Davis series for two industries particularly

far removed from crop inputs: metals (mainly iron and steel), and machinery. The last

column shows results from the Frickey index of manufacturing production. In all cases,

whether or not the postbellum sample includes the 1870s, the postbellum era's coefficient

on the previous year's cotton harvest is positive and significantly different from zero at

the two percent level or better; wheat and corn coefficients are not significantly different

from zero (and are sometimes negative in sign). The antebellum era's cotton harvest

coefficient is not significantly different from zero. In most cases coefficients on the

second lags of crop harvests and IP gaps are not significantly different from zero,

individually or jointly (p-values in the last row of the Table). Excluding second lags from


                                             10
the right-hand side, in panel B, has little effect on coefficients on the previous fall's

harvests.

        Scatterplots of the first-difference of (log) IP gap against the previous fall’s

harvest fluctuations should give good representations of the results in Table V, because

estimated coefficients on the previous year's IP gap are close to one, and correlations

across different crops’ harvest fluctuations are low. Figure II A) is a scatterplot for the

cotton harvest (standard Davis series, quadratic time trends) in the postbellum period. For

comparison, Figures II) B) C) and D) show scatterplots for the antebellum cotton harvest

and the wheat and corn harvests. The unique postbellum relation between cotton harvests

and IP is apparent. The outlier is 1908 (harvests of fall 1907).

        V. B) The 1870s versus the rest of the postbellum era

        To observe whether cotton harvests were related to IP throughout the postbellum

era, we examine the year-by-year correspondence between IP gaps and “forecasts” of IP

gaps based cotton harvest fluctuations. We look at forecasts derived from two different

regressions: the IP gap regressed on the previous two years’ cotton harvest fluctuations;

and the IP gap regressed on the previous year's IP gap and cotton harvest. To produce the

forecast from the second regression, values for lagged IP gaps were lagged forecast

values (except for 1869 and 1870), so that both sets of forecast values are determined by

cotton harvests alone.

        Figure III plots actual and forecast IP gaps for quadratic and HP trends (each

trend type defines both IP gaps and cotton harvest fluctuations). From the beginning of

the 1880s on, most of the big swings in IP forecast by cotton harvests appear in the actual

IP gap. Cotton harvests account for the IP peak around 1881 and the downturn to a trough

in 1885; the depression of 1893, the brief 1894 upturn and the downturn in 1895; the

trough in 1904; and the depression of 1910-1911. Indeed, among the major depressions

after 1880, cotton harvests fail to account for only one: 1907-1908. We conclude that

cotton harvests were related to nonagricultural business cycles throughout the period


                                              11
from the beginning of the 1880s to the First World War.

        Within the 1870s, there is not clear evidence of a relation between cotton harvests

and the IP gap. The actual IP gap falls from a peak in 1873 to a trough in 1875 or around

1877 (depending on trend definition), then rises through the end of the decade to the 1881

peak. The IP swings forecast by cotton harvests are clearly different in the early 1870s - a

sharp downturn from 1871 and an upturn around 1873 - though they are arguably

consistent with the actual IP recovery in the later 1870s.

        Given the small number of observations at issue and the difficulties of dating

nineteenth-century business cycles, we do not claim to precisely date the inception of the

relation between cotton harvests and nonagricultural production, but we cautiously

conclude that it did not exist throughout the 1870s: it may have come into force at the end

of that decade or within its later years.

        Without attempting to distinguish between years within the 1870s, we apply tests

to observe whether there is a statistically significant difference between the 1870s as a

whole and the rest of the postbellum era in the cotton harvest-IP relation. Table VI shows

results of regressing IP gaps on the previous year's IP gap and cotton harvest, a dummy

variable for observations 1870-1879, and an interaction between the dummy and the

cotton harvest. If IP gaps were unrelated to the cotton harvest within the 1870s, the

interaction-term coefficient should be negative and the sum of the interaction coefficient

and the cotton harvest coefficient should be close to zero, meaning that the cotton harvest

coefficient specific to 1870-1879 is zero. Also, the cotton harvest coefficient should be

larger than that from the corresponding specifications in Table V B). These patterns hold

for all variants.

        To see whether the 1870s years were unique in the absence of a cotton harvest

effect on IP, for each trend definition we ran 35 separate OLS regressions, defining

dummy and interaction terms for each successive ten-year span: one regression with

dummy and interaction terms defined for 1871-1880; another with terms defined for


                                             12
1872-1881; and so on. Figure IV) plots the resulting coefficients on the cotton harvest,

and the sums of the cotton harvest coefficient and the interaction term, with the last year

of each ten-year span on the horizontal axis. (Thus, coefficients from Table VI are plotted

at 1879.) The 1870s are indeed unique: no span outside the 1870s gives a shift coefficient

that is negative and close in magnitude to the cotton-harvest coefficient; defining the shift

terms for the 1870s maximizes the cotton-harvest coefficient.

       V. C) IV results

       The civilian U.S. Weather Bureau, founded in 1891, took over and expanded data-

gathering operations that had been handled earlier by a variety of Federal agencies, and

began to publish state-level monthly average temperatures and precipitation. In a

pioneering statistical work, Moore (1917) showed that variations in a number of states'

cotton harvests over 1894-1914 could be predicted by just three Weather Bureau monthly

series (May rainfall, July and August temperatures), expressed as deviations from the

average value across the preceding three years (p. 119).

       To identify the causal nature of the cotton harvest-IP relation through two-stage

least squares, it is desirable to avoid overfitting the first-stage relation between cotton

harvests and weather variables. We take our first-stage specification directly from Moore.

Published Weather Bureau series do not extend back before the late 1880s. But for all of

the postbellum era - unfortunately, not for the antebellum era - we were able to construct

measures of these three weather variables for the cotton belt states as a whole, from

databases giving observations by thousands of individual weather stations. The data

appendix gives details. Following Moore, we converted the series into deviations from

the preceding three years' average value. To allow for possible changes in weather effects

due to the arrival of the boll weevil, and for differences in the nature of the weather data

associated with the establishment of the civilian Weather Bureau, we allow the first-stage

weather coefficients (and the constant) to differ before 1892.

       For comparison, we performed parallel exercises for wheat and corn. Guided by


                                              13
early twentieth-century studies of weather effects on these crops’ harvests (Moore 1920;

Hanney 1931; Henry et. al. 1925; Kincer and Mattice 1928; and Mattice 1931), we chose

four variables to predict wheat (January and May temperatures, June precipitation, and

precipitation in the October preceding the harvest, as some harvest-season wheat -

“winter” wheat – had been planted in the previous fall) and four for corn (July and

August precipitation, April and July temperature). We constructed these variables from

observations by grain belt states' weather stations (data appendix). Otherwise our first-

stage specifications for wheat and corn were the same as for cotton.

       Table VII A indicates the quality of these instruments with R2’s, and F-statistics

with associated p-values, from regressions of harvest fluctuations (quadratic trends) on

each crop’s set of weather variables. We have fairly strong instruments for all three crops

within the 1880-1913 period, though not for wheat over the longer 1870-1913 period.7

No crop’s weather variables are strongly related to harvests of other crops.

       Table VIII) panel A) shows results of 2SLS regressions for 1870-1913 and 1880-

1913; matching OLS regressions are in panel B). For the first three columns,

specifications follow Table V, panel B, with IP gaps regressed on the previous year’s IP

gap and harvest fluctuation (quadratic). For the last three columns, the first difference of

log IP was regressed on the previous year’s harvest fluctuation alone.

       In both specifications, coefficients on cotton harvests are positive and significant

at one percent. Coefficients on wheat and corn are not significantly different from zero,

and are close to zero in magnitude. Other IP series and HP trends gave similar results.

V. Explaining harvests’ effects on IP

       Why did cotton harvests affect U.S. IP in the postbellum era but not in the

antebellum era, when raw cotton was a larger share of U.S. national income? Why did

wheat and corn harvests fail to affect IP even though their shares of national income were

similar to cotton’s? In the remaining sections of the paper, we briefly consider and reject




                                             14
a “real” explanation of these patterns suggested by the literature on oil-price shocks. At

greater length, we propose and test a monetary explanation.

        V. A) A real explanation? Cotton harvests as shocks to raw material supply

        The modern real business cycle literature has not dealt with harvest shocks as

such.8 The persistent productivity shocks depicted in RBC models are essentially

different from harvest fluctuations as we have defined them. Crop output variations

caused by weather, for example, affect the outcome of factor inputs applied in the past,

not expected productivity of current or future inputs. There is no sense in which a large

cotton harvest could boost nonagricultural output by releasing labor from the agricultural

sector: it took more labor to bring in a larger crop (Parker 1991, pp. 61-63).

        However, models of oil shocks as disruptions to the supply of a sector-specific

raw material input (e.g. Hamilton 1988; Aguiar-Conraria and Wen 2007) could perhaps

be applied to cotton as an input to the textile industry. A test of this approach is to

observe the relation between U.S. cotton harvests and British IP. Recall that American

cotton was a more important input to the British industrial economy than to America’s.

The drastic reduction of cotton supply during the War Between the States had clear

effects on the British economy (Henderson 1934) which were not apparent in the

northern U.S. (Hammond 1897, p. 265). If the cotton harvest affected U.S. IP through

cotton’s role as a raw material input, there should be similar effects on British IP. To

check this, we examine the relation between U.S. cotton harvests and Hoffman’s (1955)

index of British IP, defining IP gaps as for the U.S. We observe no cotton harvest effect

on British IP in the postbellum era analogous to the U.S. effect. Therefore, we do not

view this real channel as promising.

        Table IX shows results of regressing each country’s IP gap on the other country’s

IP gap, its own lagged IP gap, and the lagged U.S. cotton harvest fluctuation. With the


7
  This is not surprising, because the geographic location of wheat production changed substantially from
the 1870s to the 1900s (Olmstead and Rhode 2002, p. 937) and the prior studies guiding our wheat weather
variable selection date from the twentieth century.
                                                  15
U.S. IP gap on the left-hand side, the cotton harvest coefficient is practically zero in the

antebellum era; but positive and significant at one percent in the postbellum samples.

With the British IP gap on the left-hand side, the cotton coefficient is very small in

magnitude and not significantly different from zero for either postbellum sample, though

it is positive and significant at around the ten percent level for the antebellum era.

        V. B) Monetary explanation

        In their Monetary History of the United States, Friedman and Schwartz (1963, pp.

97-99, 107, 140-41) argue that wheat harvest fluctuations contributed to business cycles

in the period from 1879 to the First World War, through a monetary channel created by

the U.S. monetary regime of the period. In January 1879, the U.S. Treasury began to

redeem legal-tender currency dollars (“greenbacks”) in gold, placing the U.S. within the

international gold standard that had developed over the 1870s (Meissner 2005) and which

remained in force until the beginning of the First World War, when most countries

suspended gold convertibility. Under the international gold standard, a country’s

monetary authorities exchanged domestic high-powered money for gold at a fixed rate.

Monetary gold flows balanced the difference between net exports and international

capital outflow. The U.S. had no central bank. High-powered money consisted of

monetized gold, and nongold currency that the Treasury promised to redeem in gold. The

high-powered money supply to banks and the public was proximately determined by

international gold flows reflecting the balance of payments; the rate of growth of nongold

currency; and the change in the stock of gold held in Treasury vaults, removed from

banks and the public (Friedman and Schwartz 1963, pp. 124-134). As a bumper crop

harvest boosted U.S. export revenues it could boost potential money growth, unless this

effect were counteracted by slower growth in nongold high-powered money or an


8
 Da-Rocha and Restuccia (2006) show that a large farm sector can amplify real effects of nonagricultural
productivity shocks in an RBC model, by increasing elasticity of labor supply to nonagricultural sectors.
                                                    16
increase in the Treasury gold stock. In fact there is no reason to believe Treasury policy

tended to counteract the potential effects of crop export revenues in this way.9 Table X

shows results of regressing growth in nongold high-powered money and the Treasury

gold stock on harvest fluctuations: no coefficient is significant at conventional levels.

Thus, Friedman and Schwartz argued that wheat harvest fluctuations affected high-

powered money-supply growth through net exports, and hence contributed to business

cycles through a general effect of money-supply shocks on real activity. Fels (1959, pp.

60, 87, 181, 220) makes a similar argument.

         Oddly, neither Fels nor Friedman and Schwartz mention cotton in this context.

But pre-1914 contemporaries mentioned cotton along with wheat harvests as affecting

financial conditions through international gold flows (e.g. Sprague 1903, p. 50; 1915, p.

500; Andrew 1906). Both crops’ fluctuations were positively related to export revenue in

the postbellum era, as was indicated by Table III. Within the post-1879 gold standard

period, volatility in both crops’ export revenues was large enough to affect high-powered

money supply growth. Table XI shows statistics on high-powered money growth, gold

inflow across the twelve months from the July preceding a harvest season to the

following July, and annual crop-related export revenues, all expressed as fractions of the

preceding July’s money stock. For both cotton and wheat revenues, standard deviations

and maximum-minimum spreads are large relative to volatility in gold flow or money

growth.

         A channel from cotton harvests to U.S. IP through international gold flows is

consistent with the absence of a cotton-harvest effect on British IP. Britain and major

European countries had central banks that could sterilize the effects of transitory gold



9
  Nongold money consisted of greenbacks, silver notes, national banknotes and silver coins. The quantity of
greenbacks was simply fixed; the rate at which the Treasury created new silver notes was governed by
longstanding political factors (Myers, 1931, pp. 396-398; 402); and the rate at which banks created national
bank notes was remarkably insensitive to variations in interest rates and business activity (Myers, 1931, p.
403; Cagan, 1965, p. 91). On occasion, Treasury officials deliberately managed Treasury vault cash to
                                                    17
flows on money supplies, but often responded to persistent gold outflows with actions

that tended to reduce the money supply and raise interest rates (Sayers 1976). Harvest-

related gold inflows to the U.S. must have been matched by outflows from the outside

gold-standard world. These may not have been large enough relative to the world gold

stock to provoke tightening by European central banks, but there is no reason they should

cause monetary loosening abroad.10 Table XII shows results of regressing the change in

British short-term interest rates (July-to-June averages) and the British high-powered

money supply (July-to-June averages or July-to-July) on U.S. harvest fluctuations: no

coefficient is significant at conventional levels.

         A channel through export revenues is also consistent with the absence of a cotton

harvest effect on U.S. IP in the antebellum era. In that era, the U.S. and most other

countries active in international trade and investment tied their currencies to gold, silver,

or both.11 Friedman (1990) and Flandreau (1996) argue that these various standards

amounted to a single specie standard essentially similar to the later gold standard. If so,

the U.S. money supply was linked to export revenues before 1860 as after 1879.

However, as we showed in section II, within the antebellum era export revenues were

unrelated to cotton harvest fluctuations, perhaps because cotton prices were more

sensitive to U.S. harvests than in the postbellum era.

         Finally, a gold-standard monetary channel is consistent with our tentative

conclusion that cotton harvests began to affect the IP gap at a point prior to the beginning

of the 1880s, but subsequent to the early 1870s. From 1862 through 1878, legal-tender

currency dollars traded at a floating rate against gold and specie-linked currencies; their

supply was unaffected by the trade balance (Friedman and Schwartz, 1960, 54-55).


affect money-market conditions (Myers, 1931, pp. 370-86), but no accounts suggest that they did so in a
way that would pre-empt the effects of harvest fluctuations.
10
   Friedman and Schwartz (1963, p. 89 footnote) guessed that the U.S. held less than twenty percent of the
world monetary gold stock in the late nineteenth century. A theoretical attempt to quantify the possible
effect of U.S. money-demand variations on world interest rates would be interesting but dubious.
11
   The American dollar was officially bimetallic but effectively silver until 1834, gold after that (Friedman,
1990).
                                                     18
Legislation passed in 1875 promised that gold redemption at the antebellum rate would

resume in January 1879; this event took place as scheduled. Thus, the straightforward

gold-standard link between net exports and the high-powered money supply came into

effect at the end of the 1870s. That does not rule out the possibility of a different

monetary channel before 1879. Even before 1879, the U.S. stock of monetary gold, which

was affected by the trade balance (p. 79), served a number of purposes ordinarily

associated with high-powered money: Friedman and Schwartz (1960) argue that gold was

“a second species of money” (p. 58) “used for monetary purposes alongside greenbacks”

(p. 83), and that as 1879 approached gold became a better way to hold funds for domestic

purposes because the future dollar-gold exchange rate became more certain (p. 79).12

Calomiris (1988) argues that already by 1876 resumption was nearly certain and gold

flows were related to the money supply, broadly defined. Even on these arguments,

however, one would not expect a monetary channel to operate until the later 1870s.

         There is one obvious puzzle: why did wheat harvests fail to affect IP? We argue

that this can be explained as a result of another essentially monetary phenomenon.

Harvest fluctuations were also positively related to high-powered money demand, so the

effect of a crop’s harvest on economic activity depended on the strength of its export-

revenue effect relative to its money-demand effect. Money-demand effects of wheat

harvest fluctuations were stronger relative to the crop’s export revenue effects, so wheat

harvests failed to affect IP even though they were positively related to export revenue.

We illustrate this point in a standard Keynesian open-economy model tailored to fit the

pre-1914 U.S. The model has implications for a variety of available data which we test in

the final section of the paper.

         Before presenting the model, we explain why money-demand effects of harvests



12
  "Gold dollars" - the quantity of gold corresponding to a dollar at the antebellum parity - served as the
medium of exchange for nearly all purposes in the far West; many bond payments were fixed in gold
dollars; banks offered gold dollar accounts and held gold reserves (Friedman and Schwartz, 1960, pp. 26-
27, 58, 83) before 1879. Unfortunately, it is difficult to analyse the domestic monetary role of gold before
                                                     19
are plausible, and describe some characteristics of the pre-1914 U.S. economy that guide

the model’s particular assumptions.

        Harvest effects on money demand

        It is well-known that, in the gold standard period, demand for high-powered

money was subject to a regular seasonal peak during the fall harvest months, falling off to

seasonal lows in the summer just before the next harvest season (Kemmerer 1910). A

modern economics literature has examined the corresponding seasonals in gold flows,

interest rates and financial market conditions (Goodhart 1968, pp. 51-52; Miron 1986;

Clark 1986; Barsky, Mankiw, Miron and Weil 1988). Apart from harvests’ seasonal

effects on money demand, there is reason to believe that the size of a harvest could affect

the magnitude of the associated money-demand shock.

        High-powered money was held by banks for payments and reserve requirements,

and by households and nonbank businesses as cash. Compared with later eras, fewer

households held bank deposits; cash was a larger share of high-powered money or

standard monetary aggregates (Cagan 1965, pp. 119-123). To bridge the gap between

periodic income payments and day-to-day expenses, households without bank accounts

held cash hoards and used “book” credit extended by merchants (Fisher 1913, p. 81).

        Rural households were especially unlikely to hold bank deposits or make

payments with checks (Fisher 1913, p. 51; James 1978, pp. 32-33). Contemporaries

observed that in the harvest season “Farmers require payment very largely in cash to pay

labourers and frequently for their own use where, as often happens, they have no account

with a business bank” (Sprague 1903, p. 36). Farmers and laborers used cash hoards

along with book credit to cover expenses between harvest seasons, including spring

planting costs and mortgage payments (e.g. Wright 1922, pp. 71, 92; Young 1925, p. 21).

Farm mortgages were short-term (five years or less); paid off when a farmer’s income

was high, renewed or allowed to fall into arrears when income was low; payments were


1879 because banking data from the period do not distinguish between greenback dollar and gold dollar
assets (Kindahl, 1961).
                                                   20
made just once a year, usually around May (Murray 1933, p. 381; Hinman and Rankin

1933, pp. 30-35; Bogue 1955, pp. 53, 66, 72). The Indianapolis Monetary Commission

(1898, p. 313) described farmers’ use of cash hoards:

The farmer on selling his crops may indeed receive a check in payment; but as he and a
large part of the community with which he deals do not find the check and deposit system
convenient, he is not satisfied with that sort of payment. He cashes the check at the bank,
or through some merchant, and thus secures the form of currency which he requires. If he
cashes it with a merchant, a portion may be merely offset against his account at the
“store” where he deals...But not so with the balance: for that he must have coin or notes.
Some of this currency is used at once in settling outstanding accounts, and thus gets back
to the bank almost immediately through the deposits of the tradesmen. To this extent the
demand is of short duration. The rest of the currency is paid out from time to time during
the fall and winter for “help,” and in the purchase of the winter’s supplies, or is held in
cash to meet spring payments on a mortgage.

The seasonal pattern in rural cash demand was an obvious cause of the seasonal in high-

powered money demand. Data on inter-regional cash shipments show massive flows to

the rural midwest and south from the urban northeast from August through December,

and return shipments over the following months through the early summer (Kemmerer

1910, pp. 128-129).

       Given the cash-intensity of rural economic activity, we propose that large harvests

tended to boost rural cash demand, not only within the harvest season but also through

following months. A larger crop might cause farmers to hire more wage labor to bring it

in, resulting in larger cash wage payments and laborers’ cash-holdings. The behavior of

commodity-market prices (Table III) suggests that harvest fluctuations were also

positively related to farmers’ harvest-season income, at least for postbellum wheat and

cotton. Harvests of these crops could thus be positively related to farmers’ cash-holdings

– for example, as farm owners made bigger mortgage payments in a high-income year.

       There is also reason to believe money-demand effects could be stronger for wheat

than for cotton harvests. Inter-regional cash-shipment data indicate that southern cash

demand fell off sharply after the harvest season, while midwestern cash demand

remained high through early summer (Kemmerer 1910, pp. 224-227). Many factors that

appeared to boost rural cash demand were weaker in the cotton-growing South.

                                            21
Compared with the midwest, a smaller fraction of farms (by number or land area) were

mortgaged (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1914, pp. 159, 162-163). Cash wages of hired

labor were a smaller fraction of crop value in cotton than in wheat (U.S. Bureau of the

Census 1900, Part II, p. cxxix) and wages were less likely to be paid in cash: “scrip”

redeemable at a local store was used “especially..in country districts throughout the

South. These are issued in payment of wages, and reduce the amount of money paid out

in wages as well as in retail payments” (U.S. Comptroller of the Currency 1894, p. 21;

see also Woodman 1968, p. 302). “Crop lien” laws, unique to the southern states, allowed

tenant farmers to finance most expenditures with store credit as they gave a merchant

creditor a first claim on a tenant’s standing crop (Ransom and Sutch 1977, p. 123). A

typical northern farmer sold his crop to grain dealers or grain-elevator operators (U.S.

Industrial Commission 1901, pp. 50, 62-63). A cotton-growing farmer or tenant often

sold his crop to the same enterprise that furnished him credit between harvests (a factor,

local merchant or plantation) so that little if any cash changed hands: the sale merely

reduced a debt or created a credit on the books of the enterprise (Ransom and Sutch 1977,

p. 123; Brooks 1898, p. 242; Brown 1927, pp. 374-375; Hammond 1896, p. 382;

Woodman 1968, pp. 288, 302, 308). In the rural south “Merchants are frequently found

who are unable to give the difference between their cash and credit prices, because none

of their customers ever buys for cash” (Hammond 1897, p.155).

        Given these differences between wheat and cotton regions, we propose that the

money-demand shock associated with the wheat harvest was larger relative to its effect

on export revenue, not only because wheat crop sales were larger relative to export

revenue (Table II), but also because of the cotton belt’s peculiar farm credit and tenancy

institutions.

        Unfortunately, there are no data to directly indicate effects of harvest fluctuations

on rural cash demand. Measures of inter-regional cash flows are available for only a few

years in the 1900s. For most postbellum years there is no way to estimate cash held by


                                             22
the nonbank public (Friedman and Schwartz 1970, p. 208-211), let alone cash held by

rural households. But money-demand effects can be inferred from the behavior of

observable variables, given a few more features of the gold-standard economy.

         Other features of the pre-1914 U.S. economy

         Under the gold standard, rates of exchange between financial centers were tied to

the "parity" value defined by currencies’ gold content. An exchange rate could not remain

outside the bounds – the “gold points” - that just covered costs of transporting gold

between the locations. In the U.S. most international payments were negotiated through

“sight” exchange claims to London sterling funds (even if the ultimate counterparty was

outside England) purchased from, or sold to, financial institutions in New York City

(Myers 1931, pp. 338-350). Thus, the effective foreign exchange rate was the New York

dollar price of London sight exchange, for which data are available from January 1879

on. The New York-London gold points were narrow enough to hold this rate within a

range that was too small to make a difference for the relative price of foreign goods. At

the same time, the exchange rate did vary measurably within the gold points. Thus, the

direction of international gold flow over a span of months could be reflected in the

average value of the exchange rate over those months, as the rate was driven to (or

perhaps just beyond) the gold point for a larger fraction of days.13

         As the exchange rate was practically fixed for purposes of foreign trade, dollar

prices of internationally-traded commodities such as cotton and wheat may have been

directly determined on international markets. But most U.S. prices were not tied down by

purchasing-power parity except in the very long run (Diebold, Husted and Rush 1991;

Lothian and Taylor 1996). Empirical studies of price inflation in the pre-1914 U.S. (e.g.

Gordon 1990; Backus and Kehoe 1992) generally find a positive relation between real

13
   Canjels, Prakash-Canjels and Taylor (2004) observe that from 1879 through 1913 the largest deviation
from parity in the New York-London rate on any day was 1.06 percent (p. 870). They also argue that the
marginal costs of shipping gold at a particular point in time increased with the amount of gold shipped. If
so, the average exchange rate over a period could indicate the direction of gold flow not only because the
rate was driven to a gold point, but also because the rate on a particular day could range further from parity
– in effect, the gold points widened - when the gold flow was bigger.
                                                     23
activity and the rate of price inflation along the lines of the original Phillips curve, in

contrast to the “accelerationist” Phillips curve apparent in post-1950s data. The pre-1914

Philips curve matches a standard expectations-augmented aggregate supply function,

assuming prices were expected to return to a PPP level in the long run (Alogoskoufis and

Smith 1991). Thus, the inflation rate could be positively related to output fluctuations

caused by aggregate demand shocks.

         The central U.S. financial market, New York, was tightly linked to London, the

central European market.14 Financial institutions and individual investors engaged in

many types of arbitrage between the two cities’ asset markets, responding to differences

in interest rates and expected future exchange-rate movements within the gold points

(Goodhart 1969). In London, the benchmark short-term liquid asset was bank-backed

bills of exchange, for which open-market rate data are available starting in the early

nineteenth century. As bills of exchange and banker’s acceptances were not traded in the

U.S., the most comparable American asset was perhaps commercial paper, which was

actively traded in New York with rate data available from the late 1850s on. Thus, the

difference between rates on New York commercial paper and London bills indicates the

international interest-rate spread in this era.

         The weight of empirical evidence suggests capital flows to the U.S. were sensitive

to expected rate-of-return differentials, but not infinitely sensitive: uncovered interest-rate

parity did not hold between New York and London.15 Thus, it is possible that


14
   Bordo and MacDonald (2005) show that short-term interest rates in continental financial centers were
tightly linked to London’s, less tightly linked from one continental center to another.
15
   Studies have examined whether New York-London interest-rate spreads were related to probable future
change in exchange rates in a manner consistent with uncovered interest-rate parity. At times, the spread
obviously exceeded the range of possible future exchange-rate variation assuming the dollar remained tied
to gold (Giovannini 1993, pp. 133-136). But financial market participants may have factored in a risk that
the dollar would be devalued or floated, at least before 1896. Foster (1994) finds clear evidence against
uncovered interest-rate parity in seasonal patterns: month to month, New York interest rates were relatively
low just when just when financial market participants should have been expecting a regular seasonal
depreciation of the dollar. Studies of the covered differential - the spread between London interest rates and
New York investments that were not subject to the risk of a dollar devaluation - generally indicate that
covered interest-rate parity failed to hold at business-cycle frequencies (Obstfeld and Taylor 1998, pp.
361-363; Juhl, Miles and Weidenmier, 2005). Calomiris and Hubbard (1996) conclude that "Clearly,
interest rate parity did not hold perfectly across the Atlantic" (p. 195).
                                                     24
international capital mobility to the U.S. was imperfect, in the sense that the spread

between expected returns on U.S. commercial paper and London bills (accounting for

expected future exchange-rate movements) was positively related to the volume of capital

flow to the U.S. Before 1896, the spread was also affected by a perceived risk that the

dollar would again be devalued or floated. This perception largely disappeared after the

1896 presidential election, which was taken to signal a firm U.S. commitment to the gold

standard: the long-run trend value of the London-New York spread was narrower after

the election than it had been over 1879-1896 (Friedman and Schwartz 1982, pp. 515-

517).

         For American banks and investors outside New York, commercial paper was the

most important (often the only) traded short-term asset: banks all over the country,

including rural banks, bought commercial paper, in the New York market through the

agency of a correspondent bank or locally from an agent of a national commercial-paper

dealer (James 1978, pp. 102, 174-98). Thus, commercial paper rates can be taken to

indicate the opportunity cost of holding high-powered money, and also banks’

opportunity costs of making loans to local borrowers (Sylla 1969).16

         The bank-credit channel, that is the cost and availability of bank loans as distinct

from rates on traded assets such as commercial paper, may have been more important

before 1914 than in later eras (Miron, Romer and Weil 1994). To the degree that credit-

channel disturbances are triggered by changes in market rates (as discussed by Romer

and Romer 1990, p. 187; Bernanke and Gertler 1995, p.28), this could have tended to

amplify standard IS effects of interest rates on output. Certainly, the pre-1914 U.S. was

extraordinarily subject to bank panics, which must have affected the supply of bank loans

at any given level of short-term market rates. Unfortunately, there are no pre-1914 data

that indicate changes in required returns to bank lending or the degree of credit rationing

16
  Another money-center asset held by banks all across the U.S., and which might represent banks'
opportunity cost of local loans, was correspondent bank accounts in New York. But the return to holding
these accounts is unobservable, as it included the value of various services provided by the correspondent
bank (James, 1978, pp. 103, 109-111).
                                                    25
in a straightforward way.17

           Model

           To describe the pre-1914 U.S. economy we rely on a textbook “old Keynesian”

model rather than a “new Keynesian” model, because at least two key features of the pre-

1914 economy for harvests’ possible monetary effects are at odds with simplifying

assumptions that make New Keynesian models tractable. One is imperfect international

capital mobility: in standard New-Keynesian open-economy models (e.g. Clarida, Gali

and Gertler, 2002), uncovered interest-rate parity holds. Another is the nature of rural

cash demand, in our view essentially related to limited financial-market participation:

new Keynesian models (including those that allow for money-demand shocks such as

Ireland [2004]) assume households have access to perfect capital markets and complete

consumption insurance. Of course, such models may be appropriate to analyse other

aspects of the pre-1914 U.S. economy.

           In our model, variable levels are average values over a period covering the harvest

season and following months, ending before the next harvest season. First-differences are

changes across the same span of time. Variables subscripted (-1) are dated to the

preceding period. Variables other than interest and inflation rates are logs or deviations of

logs from long-run trends. Parameters’ signs are positive except where noted.

           The nonagricultural output gap over the post-harvest period, as indicated by the IP

gap, is:

           (1)     y = - γr (i - Eπ ) + γlag y-1 + εy

where the real interest rate (i – Eπ) is normalized to trend, and the nominal interest rate i

corresponds to the period’s average New York commercial paper rate. Eπ is the average

expected rate of price inflation over corresponding maturities. The disturbance term gy

reflects all other factors affecting nonagricultural output. To the degree that credit-


17
  A number of studies (e.g. Bodenhorn 1995) have used pre-1914 bank call reports to calculate the ratio of
reported earnings from loans to outstanding loan balances. This figure can indicate long-term trends in the
return to bank loans. Its relation to cyclical-frequency movements is doubtful.
                                                    26
channel shocks are triggered by high interest rates, they would boost the magnitude of the

interest-rate coefficient in (1).

        Realized inflation over the post-harvest period is:

        (2)     ∆p = α y + εp

where Δp is the change in the (log) price level across the period and εp reflects “cost-

push” shocks.

        High-powered money demand (following standard empirical specifications

[Goldfeld and Sichel, 1990]) is:

        (3)      m - p = μy y - μi i + μlag ( m-1 - p-1 ) + εmd   where 0 ≤ μlag ≤ 1

where m is the quantity of high-powered money outside the Treasury and p is the price

level at the end of the post-harvest period. The change in the money supply across the

harvest and post-harvest period is:

        (4)     ∆m = g + εms

g is international gold inflow as a fraction of the pre-harvest money supply and εms

reflects other factors affecting the high-powered money supply (changes in the supply of

nongold currency and/or the quantity of money held in Treasury vaults).

        Gold inflow is reflected in the exchange rate:

        (5)     e = - ηg + εe

where e is the post-harvest period's average dollar price of London sight exchange. Gold

inflow is also equal to the balance of international payments from capital flows and net

exports. Assuming exchange-rate fluctuations are too small to affect the relative price of

foreign goods, a log approximation is:

        (6)     g = θCF ( i - i* - Eė ) - θy y - θp p + εbop

The first term on the right-hand side of (6) describes capital flow, determined by the

spread between the domestic interest rate and the expected return to foreign short-term

assets. i* denotes the London open-market bill rate. Eė is the expected future change in

the log exchange rate over corresponding maturities. The next two terms account for
                                                27
possible effects on net exports of nonagricultural output (through domestic demand for

imports) and the price level (a higher domestic price level reduces the relative price of

foreign goods).

       Finally, expected inflation in (1) can be related to experienced inflation:

       (7)     Eπ = - φπ ∆p + εEπ

and exchange-rate expectations in (6) can be related to the average exchange rate:

       (8)     Eė= - φe e + εEe

Making some substitutions gives nonagricultural output and gold inflow as functions of

the domestic interest rate:

       (9)     y = [ - γr i + γlag y-1 + εy - γr ( φπ εp - εEπ ) ] / β1

                                                          where β1 = ( 1 + α φπ γr ).

       (10)    g = [ - θy - θp p + θCF ( i - i* ) + εbop + θCF ( φe εe - εEe ) ] / β2

                                                          where β2 = (1+ θCF φeη).

We must assume β1 > 0 : an exogenous increase in the domestic interest rate tends to

reduce output. This condition is consistent with, but not limited to a case where φπ ≥ 0 ,

which holds if the price level is believed to be mean-reverting or a random walk – a

plausible assumption for the gold standard era. We must also assume that β2 > 0 : an

exogenous interest-rate hike tends to draw in gold. This condition is consistent with, but

not limited to a case where φe > 0 , which holds if a relatively low exchange rate is

accompanied by expectations of a future rise – again plausible under the gold standard.

       Under these assumptions, variations in the model’s disturbance terms have the

standard effects in Keynesian models. “IS shocks” εy create output fluctuations that are

positively related to the domestic interest rate and the international interest-rate spread;

under gold-standard conditions they are also positively related to gold inflow and money-

supply growth. “Money-demand shocks” εmd create output fluctuations that are positively

                                                28
related to gold inflow and money-supply growth, but negatively related to the domestic

interest rate and the international interest-rate spread. Both types of shocks, along with

exogenous variations in the foreign interest rate i*, create positive relations between

output and inflation. “Cost-push” shocks εp create negative correlations between output

growth and inflation. Overall the model has no general implications for correlations

between IP gaps and other variables.

       Effects of harvest fluctuations enter the model through the disturbance terms.

“Real” effects on production costs or spending correspond to relations between harvest

fluctuations and gy in (1) and/or εp in (2). We focus instead on effects on net exports and

money demand, which affect output and inflation through the interest rate i.

       Denoting a crop’s harvest fluctuation by h, a positive effect on net exports means

∂gbop / ∂h > 0 . By itself, this would create a positive relation between the harvest and

nonagricultural output growth. For example, a positive balance-of-payments disturbance

associated with a bumper harvest must be accompanied by some combination of a

smaller international interest-rate spread and larger gold inflow (or smaller outflow) in

expression (6). In (4), larger gold inflow means faster money-supply growth. From (3)

and (1), faster money-supply growth must be accompanied by a decrease in the U.S.

interest rate (matching the decrease in the international interest-rate spread) and an

increase in nonagricultural output.

       A positive effect of a crop’s harvest fluctuation on rural cash demand means a

positive relation between the harvest and total demand for high-powered money at a

given interest rate and level of nonagricultural output: ∂gmd / ∂h > 0. Allowing for this

money-demand effect along with the balance-of-payments effect gives:

(11) ∂∆y /∂h = ( 1 / β3 ) [ ( 1 / β2 ) ∂gbop/∂h - ∂gmd/∂h ]      where

 β3 = α + μy + β1 (μi / γr ) + ( 1 / β2 ) ( θy + α θp + β1 ( θCF / γr ) > 0

(12)   ∂g /∂h = ∂∆m /∂h = ∂gmd/∂h + ( α + μy + β1 (μi / γr ) ) ∂∆y/∂h

                                             29
(13)   ∂e/∂h = - η ( ∂g /∂h)

(14)   ∂( i – i*) /∂h = ∂∆i /∂h = - ( β1 / γr ) ∂∆y/∂h

(15)   ∂Δp/∂h = α ∂∆y/∂h

       Expression (11) shows that a crop harvest is positively related to nonagricultural

production only if its balance-of-payments effect is strong enough relative to its money-

demand effect. It is plausible that this could be true for cotton and not for wheat. For the

cotton crop, export revenue was larger relative to crop sale income (Table 2). Also, the

cotton belt’s peculiar credit institutions appear to have reduced the use of cash relative to

credit, so southern rural cash demand may have been smaller relative to crop sale income.

       We hypothesize that cotton harvest fluctuations affected IP because their money-

demand effects were weak relative to their export-revenue effects. Wheat harvests failed

to affect IP because their money-demand effects were relatively strong.

       Testable implications

       If cotton harvests affected IP through this monetary channel, then cotton harvest

fluctuations and cotton-caused variations in IP growth should be positively correlated

with gold inflow and money-supply growth (expression 12); negatively correlated with

the exchange rate (expression 13); negatively correlated with the international interest-

rate spread and the change in the short-term interest rate (14); and positively correlated

with price inflation (15) reflecting the interaction between an aggregate-demand shock

and the Phillips curve. Importantly, these patterns need not hold for IP growth

fluctuations due to causes other than the cotton harvest. These could appear uncorrelated

with monetary quantities and interest rates, for example, if they reflected a mix of IS and

money-demand shocks. Thus, one test of our explanation is to observe relations between

IP growth and measures of the model’s other variables, comparing IP fluctuations most

likely due to the cotton harvest with other IP fluctuations.

       Another test of our explanation is to observe relations between variables and

harvests of cotton, wheat and corn. If wheat harvest fluctuations failed to affect IP

                                             30
because their associated money-demand shocks were strong relative to their effects on net

exports, then wheat harvests should appear unrelated to inflation, the international

interest-rate spread and the change in the domestic interest rate. But wheat harvests

should be positively related to gold inflow and money-supply growth. Corn harvests

should be unrelated to any of these variables.

       VI. Tests: monetary quantities, interest and exchange rates, inflation

       VI.A) Cotton-caused IP fluctuations versus other IP fluctuations

       To observe relations between variables and IP changes most likely due to cotton,

we ran 2SLS regressions on the first-difference of log IP, with IP change instrumented in

the first stage by the preceding autumn’s cotton harvest fluctuation (deviation from

quadratic trend). To observe relations between variables and IP changes more likely due

to other causes, we ran OLS regressions on the residual from the first-stage regression of

IP change on cotton. Finally, we ran OLS regressions on IP changes in general.

       As left-hand side variables, for gold inflow we use total net gold imports over the

months from July of the harvest season through the following June, as a fraction of the

initial July’s high-powered money supply. High-powered money supply growth is the

July-to-July change in the log of high-powered money. The exchange rate is the average

New York dollar price of London sight exchange across months from harvest July

through the following June. The international interest-rate spread is the average July-

through-June value for the New York commercial paper rate minus the London bill rate.

The change in the domestic interest rate is the change in the average commercial paper

rate from the July-to-June period preceding the harvest to the following July-to-June. For

the change in the price level we use the July-to-July change in the log of wholesale price

indexes, which are the only reliable cyclical-frequency measures of the price level in this

period (Hanes 1999). The standard monthly wholesale price index for pre-1914 eras

(Warren and Pearson [1932] linked to the BLS index) puts heavy weight on prices of raw

cotton, wheat and corn. Therefore, in addition to the standard series we use a special WPI


                                            31
constructed from the standard series’ components excluding raw farm products and foods

(but including cotton textiles). Samples begin with 1879-1880, the first harvest season of

the gold standard period. When the left-hand side variable is the international interest-rate

spread, we add a dummy variable for post-1896 years, to allow for the change in the

spread associated with the decreased probability of dollar devaluation.

       Results for cotton-caused IP changes (2SLS regressions) are shown in Table XIII,

row (a). All coefficients have signs consistent with the hypothesized monetary channel

and are significantly different from zero at the five percent level or better. Results from

regressions on other IP changes (residual from first stage of (a)), shown in (b), are

different: coefficients are not significantly different from zero and some differ in sign

from (a). Coefficients on IP changes in general, in (c), have magnitudes between those in

(a) and (b). Estimated coefficients with inflation on the left-hand side (columns 6 and 7)

are an exception: across (a), (b) and (c) all are positive, significant at 2 percent and about

the same magnitude. This suggests all causes of IP fluctuations tended to create positive

relations between output and inflation (cost-push shocks were unimportant). Coefficients

on the post-1896 dummy variable for the international interest-rate spread, shown at the

bottom of the Table, are all negative and significantly different from zero at one percent.

       VI. B) Cotton versus wheat and corn harvests

       Table XIV shows results of regressing the same LHS variables on cotton, wheat

and corn harvest fluctuations (quadratic trends). We add one more LHS variable: a rough

estimate of the change in (log) cash outside national banks, from the early-summer

months preceding the harvest to the early-summer months of the following year. This is

the closest one can get to cash held by the nonbank public, but it includes cash held by

financial institutions other than national banks (see data appendix). In addition to OLS

regressions we ran three sets of 2SLS regressions, one for each crop, using Table VIII’s

weather variables. OLS estimates are most efficient if harvest fluctuations generally were

caused by exogenous events. But 2SLS regressions are a useful check for wheat, given


                                              32
Table IV's evidence of a positive relation between wheat harvest fluctuations and IP in

the same year.

       OLS results in panel A are consistent with predicted differences across crops. For

growth in cash outside national banks, gold inflow or the change in high-powered money

supply, both the cotton and wheat harvest coefficients are positive and significantly

different from zero at the five percent level or better. For the exchange rate, both the

cotton and wheat coefficients are negative and significant at the two percent level or

better. For the international interest-rate spread and the interest-rate change, only the

cotton coefficient is negative and significantly different from zero. Corn harvest

coefficients for these variables are generally of small magnitude, not significantly

different from zero. For inflation, results depend somewhat on the price index. For the

standard WPI the corn coefficient is negative and significant at the ten percent level. For

the WPI excluding farm and food prices, the corn coefficient is much smaller in

magnitude and not significantly different from zero, suggesting that the corn harvest’s

negative effect on the standard WPI merely reflects its direct effect on corn prices (which

have heavy weight in the standard WPI). For either WPI, the cotton harvest coefficient is

positive and significant at five percent. In 2SLS results, panel B, cotton coefficients are

similar in magnitude to their OLS counterparts, as are wheat coefficients for monetary

quantities and exchange rates. They generally have larger standard errors, so some are not

significant at conventional levels.

VII. Conclusion

       From about 1880 to the First World War, fluctuations in the cotton harvest due to

weather, crop diseases and other factors exogenous to the industrial economy caused

most major American business cycles, including the depressions of 1884, 1893, 1895 and

1910. This phenomenon is apparent in the relation between harvest fluctuations and

measures of industrial production (IP). Wheat and corn harvests did not affect IP. Cotton

harvests did not affect IP in the antebellum era.


                                              33
       We explain the unique postbellum effect of cotton harvests on IP as the outcome

of interactions between harvests, export revenues and high-powered money demand.

Under America’s gold-standard regime of 1879-1914, a positive export-revenue shock

tended to boost nonagricultural output as it allowed for larger gold inflows, faster growth

in the high-powered money supply and lower U.S. interest rates. A positive money-

demand shock tended to depress nonagricultural output as it boosted high-powered

money supply through gold inflows but increased U.S. interest rates. In the 1879-1914

period, cotton harvests affected IP because they were positively related to export revenue

and their money-demand effects were relatively weak. Wheat harvests failed to affect IP

because their money-demand effects were stronger relative to their export-revenue

effects. In the antebellum era, cotton harvests failed to affect IP because they were not

positively related to export revenue.

       Data on international gold flows, interest rates, exchange rates and inflation are

consistent with our monetary explanation of the cotton harvest’s effect on IP. Large

cotton harvests boosted gold inflows, money-supply growth and the foreign exchange

value of the dollar, while they decreased American short-term interest rates and

American interest rates relative to London rates. Large wheat harvests boosted gold

inflows, the money supply and the dollar’s exchange value but did not decrease U.S.

interest rates. Of course, we have left many aspects of this mechanism unexplored in this

paper, including the role of financial panics in the transmission of the cotton harvest’s

monetary shock to industrial output, and the possibility that a variant of the mechanism

was already at work in the later 1870s.

       We believe that alternative explanations based on real channels may prove

difficult to reconcile with the lack of an IP effect from the wheat or corn harvests, the

lack of a cotton effect on British IP, and the positive effect of cotton harvests on price

inflation, which is consistent with interactions between a Phillips curve and aggregate

demand shocks, rather than supply shocks. But whether or not we are correct about the

                                             34
channel from the cotton harvest to nonagricultural production, our results leave little

doubt that cotton harvest fluctuations were the ultimate, exogenous cause of many pre-

World War I business cycles.




                                             35
Data appendix

General note: “NBER series” refers to National Bureau of Economic Research Macro
History database (http://www.nber.org/databases/macrohistory/)
Values of crop-related exports: Export values starting 1851 are from USDA, Bureau of
Statistics (1910) and USDA Yearbook (1913, 1916). Value of cotton exports for earlier
years from USDA, Bureau of Statistics (1912). Wheat (and flour) and corn (and meal)
exports for the earlier years from the U.S. Department of Treasury (1848, 1849, 1850,
1851). All of these figures are based on U.S. customs officials’ estimates of outward
shipment values, which were supposed to reflect the actual current selling price of the
commodity shipped. Annual figures for years before 1843 are for twelve-month spans
ending September 30th. After 1843, figures are for spans ending June 30th. Figures for
1843 cover the nine months from October 1842 through June 1843. We exclude that
year's figure from our samples.

Commodity market crop prices: Cotton prices on the New York cotton exchange, through
1861 from Cole (1938); beginning September 1870 from NBER (series 04006a); for
years ending June 1870 and June 1871 calculated from quarterly data in Mitchell (1908,
Appendix Table II.). Wheat and corn prices in Chicago from NBER (04001, 04005).

U.S. high-powered money supply and components: Monthly data on components of the
high-powered money stock begin with June 1878 (Friedman and Schwartz 1970, pp. 205-
211): high-powered money outside the Treasury (NBER 14135); gold held in the
Treasury (NBER 14137). Nongold money outside the Treasury calculated as money
outside the Treasury minus gold (gold coins and gold certificates) outside the Treasury
(14131). Total monetary gold, in or outside the Treasury, is NBER 14076.

U.K. high-powered money supply: Capie and Webber (1985), Table I.1, “Monetary
Base.”

International gold inflow to U.S.: Monthly net gold export from NBER 14112.

New York – London exchange rate: Neal and Weidenmier (2003) collected weekly-
frequency New York bid and ask prices for London exchange from the New York
Commercial and Financial Chronicle. Weidenmier kindly provided these data (at the
time of this writing, available on his website ebutts05.tripod.com/nealweidenmiergsd).
We calculate monthly averages of the bid-ask mean, for sight exchange. For most weeks,
the Commercial and Financial Chronicle gave exchange rates as dollar prices per pound
sterling. For some weeks in January 1881, exchange rates were given as percent of par
value, during a short-lived effort by foreign-exchange dealers to shift the market to
quotations on that basis (Myers 1931, p. 347). For these weeks, we assumed a par value
of $4.8665. We corrected the Commercial and Financial Chronicle quote for January 8,
1881, faithfully reproduced in the Neal-Weidenmier database. This was the first week
that exchange dealers gave quotes as percent of par, and the Chronicle wrongly recorded
the percent figures as dollar figures. (Converted to dollars, the values for this week are
bid 4.8242, ask 4.83.) For months prior to January 1880, sight exchange rates taken from
Schneider, Schwarzer and Zellfelder (1991, p. 330).



                                            36
Interest rates: New York commercial paper rate is NBER series 13002. London open-
market bill rate is NBER series 13016.

WPI: Warren and Pearson (1932) wholesale price index before 1890 linked to the BLS
wholesale price index thereafter (NBER series m04048). Index excluding farm products
and foods is calculated from the other component indexes using Warren and Pearson’s
1889 weights (p. 184).

Cash outside national banks: For national banks only, Annual Reports of the Comptroller
of the Currency give figures on vault cash (the sum of a bank’s holdings of specie,
fractional currency, Treasury-issued notes and national bank notes issued by other banks)
at Call Report dates, available as NBER series 14177. Call Reports took place at irregular
points in the year. To estimate cash outside national banks in spring and early summer,
we took call reports occurring in the months of May, June or July. We subtracted this
vault cash figure from the average value of high-powered money outside the Treasury
across May, June, and July.

Weather variables: Weather station data are available from the United States Historical
Climatology Network (USHCN,
www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/research/ushcn/ushcn.html) and the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, Nineteenth Century U.S. Climate Data Set Project
(lwf.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/onlinedata/forts/forts.html ). Temperature data are
available beginning in 1822; precipitation data in 1838. To create a monthly weather
variable for the cotton belt, we used observations of all weather stations located in North
Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Tennessee, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana,
Arkansas, and Texas; for the grain belt, Ohio, Indiana, Michigan, Illinois, Wisconsin,
Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, and Kansas. For
each variable and region, we ran a fixed-effect regression with dummies for each year
and weather station. Estimated coefficients on year dummies are our measure of the
monthly weather variable.




                                            37
References

Aguiar-Contraria, Luis, and Yi Wen, “Understanding the Large Negative Impact of Oil
Shocks.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39 (2007), 925-44.

Alogoskoufis, George S., and Ron Smith, “The Phillips Curve, the Persistence of
Inflation, and the Lucas Critique: Evidence from Exchange-rate Regimes,” American
Economic Review, 81 (1991), 1254-75.

Andrew, A. Piatt, “The Influence of the Crops upon Business in America.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 20 (1906), 323-52.

Backus, David K., and Patrick J. Kehoe, “International Evidence on the Historical
Properties of Business Cycles,” American Economic Review, 82(1992), 864-888.

Ball, Laurence, “Policy Rules for Open Economies,” in Monetary Policy Rules, John B.
Taylor, ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1999.)

Balke, Nathan S., and Robert J. Gordon, “The Estimation of Prewar Gross National
Product: Methodology and New Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 97 (1989), 38-
92.

Barsky, Robert B., N. Gregory Mankiw, Jeffrey A. Miron, and David N. Weil, “The
Worldwide Change in the Behavior of Interest Rates and Prices in 1914,” European
Economic Review, 32 (1988), 1123-1147.

Basu, Susanto, and Alan M. Taylor, “Business Cycles in International Historical
Perspective,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13 (1999), 45-68.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Mark Gertler, “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of
Monetary Policy Transmission,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9 (1995), 27-48.

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler and Mark Watson, “Systematic Monetary Policy and the
Effects of Oil Price Shocks,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (1997), 91-142.

Bodenhorn, Howard, “A More Perfect Union: Regional Interest Rates in the United
States, 1880-1960,” in Anglo-American Financial Systems: Institutions and Markets in
the Twentieth Century, Michael D. Bordo and Richard Sylla, eds. (Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin,
1995.)

Bogue, Allan G., Money at Interest: The Farm Mortgage on the Middle Border, (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1955.)

Bordo, Michael D., and Ronald McDonald, “Interest Rate Interactions in the Classical
Gold Standard, 1880-1914: Was there any Monetary Independence?” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 52(2005), 307-327.

Brown, Harry B, Cotton: History, Species, Varieties, Morphology, Breeding, Culture,
Diseases, Marketing, and Uses, (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1927.)

                                           38
Brooks, Christopher P., Cotton: Its Uses, Varieties, Fibre Structure, Cultivation and
Preparation for the Market, (New York: Spoon and Chamberlain, 1898.)

Burns, Arthur F., “Mitchell on What Happens During Business Cycles,” in Conference
on Business Cycles, (New York: NBER, 1951.)

Cagan, Phillip, Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money, 1875-1960,
(New York: Columbia University Press for NBER, 1965.)

Calomiris, Charles, “Price and Exchange Rate Determination during the Greenback
Suspension,” Oxford Economic Papers, 40 (1988), 719-750.

Calomiris, Charles, and Christopher Hanes, “Historical Macroeconomics and American
Macroeconomic History,” in Macroeconometrics: Developments, Tensions and
Prospects, Kevin D. Hoover, ed. (Boston: Kluwer, 1995.)

Calomiris, Charles, and R. Glenn Hubbard, “International Adjustment under the Classical
Gold Standard: Evidence for the United States and Britain, 1879-1914.” in Modern
Perspectives on the Gold Standard, Tamim Bayoumi, Barry Eichengreen and Mark P.
Taylor, eds. (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996.)

Canjels, Eugene, Gauri Prakash-Canjels and Alan M. Taylor, "Measuring Market
Integration: Foreign Exchange Arbitrage and the Gold Standard, 1879-1913," Review of
Economics and Statistics, 86 (2004), 868-882.

Capie, Forrest, and Alan Webber, A Monetary History of the United Kingdom, 1870-
1982, Vol. I. (London: Allen and Unwin, 1985.)

Carter, Susan, Scott S. Gartner, Michael R. Haines, Alan L. Olmstead, Richard Sutch,
and Gavin Wright, eds., Historical Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to the
Present. Millennial Edition, (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.)

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler, “A Simple Framework for International
Monetary Policy Analysis.” Journal of Monetary Economics. 49:5, (July 2002): 879-904.

Clark, Truman A., “Interest Rate Seasonals and the Federal Reserve.” Journal of
Political Economy, 94(1986), 76-125.

Cole, Arthur Harrison, Wholesale Commodity Prices in the United States 1700-1861.
Statistical Supplement: Actual Wholesale Prices of Various Commodities, (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1938.)

Comstock, J. Henry, Report upon Cotton Insects, (Washington, DC: GPO, 1879.)

Covert, James R., "Seedtime and Harvest: Cereals, Flax, Cotton and Tobacco," United
States Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Statistics Bulletin 85, (Washington, DC:
GPO, 1912.)


                                            39
Da Rocha, Jose Maria, and Diego Restuccia, “The Role of Agriculture in Aggregate
Business Cycles,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 9(2006), 455-482.

Davis, Joseph H., “An Annual Index of U.S. Industrial Production, 1790–1915,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (2004), 1177-1215.

---, “An Improved Annual Chronology of U.S. Business Cycles,” Journal of Economic
History, 66 (2006), 103-121.

Davis, Joseph H., Christopher Hanes and Paul W. Rhode, "Harvests and Business Cycles
in Nineteenth Century America," NBER Working Paper, 2009.

Diebold, Francis X., Steven Husted and Mark Rush, "Real Exchange Rates under the
Gold Standard," Journal of Political Economy, 99 (1991), 1252-71.

Fels, Rendigs, American Business Cycles 1865-1897, (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1959.)

Fisher, Irving, The Purchasing Power of Money, (New York: MacMillan, 1913.)

Flandreau, Marc, “The French Crime of 1873: An Essay on the Emergence of the
International Gold Standard, 1870-1880,” Journal of Economic History, 56 (1996), 862-
897.

Foster, Ellen L., Seasonal Movements of Exchange Rates and Interest Rates under the
Pre-World War I Gold Standard, (New York: Garland, 1994.)

Frickey, Edwin, Production in the United States 1860-1914, (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1947.)

Friedman, Milton, “Bimetallism Revisited,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 4
(1990), 85-104.

Friedman, Milton, and Anna Jacobson Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United
States, 1867-1960, (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.)

Friedman, Milton, and Anna Jacobson Schwartz, Monetary Statistics of the United States:
Estimates, Sources, Methods, (New York: Columbia University Press, 1970.)

Friedman, Milton, and Anna Jacobson Schwartz, Monetary Trends in the United States
and the United Kingdom, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982.)

Gallman, Robert E., “Commodity Output, 1839-1899,” in Trends in the American
Economy in the Nineteenth Century, William N. Parker, ed. (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1960.)

---, “Gross National Product in the United States, 1834-1909,” in Output, Employment,
and Productivity in the United States after 1800, Dorothy S. Brady, ed. (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1966.)

                                          40
Giovannini, Alberto, “Bretton Woods and Its Precursors: Rules versus Discretion in the
History of International Monetary Regimes,” in A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods
System: Lessons for International Monetary Reform, Michael D. Bordo and Barry
Eichengreen, eds. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993.)

Goodhart, Charles A. E., The New York Money Market and the Finance of Trade, 1900-
1913, (Cambridge. MA: Harvard University Press, 1969.)

Gordon, Robert A., Business Fluctuations, (New York: Harper and Row, 1952.)

Gordon, Robert J., “What is New-Keynesian Economics?” Journal of Economic
Literature, 28 (1990), 1115-71.

Hamilton, James D., “Oil and the Macroeconomy since World War II,” Journal of
Political Economy, 91 (1983), 228-248.

---, “A Neoclassical Model of Unemployment and the Business Cycle,” Journal of
Political Economy, 96 (1988), 593-617.

---, “What is an Oil Shock?” NBER Working Paper 7755, 2000.

Hammond, Harry, “The Uses and Handling of Cotton,” in The Cotton Plant: Its History,
Botany, Chemistry, Culture, Enemies, and Uses, Charles W. Dabney, ed. (Washington
DC: GPO, 1896.)

Hammond, Matthew B., The Cotton Industry: An Essay in American Economic History.
Part I. The Cotton Culture and the Cotton Trade, (New York: MacMillan, 1897.)

Hanes, Christopher, “Degrees of Processing and Changes in the Cyclical Behavior of
Prices in the United States, 1869-1990,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 31
(1999), 35-53.

Hanney, Annie, The Influence of Weather on Crops, 1900-1930: Selected and Annotated
Bibliography, USDA Miscellaneous Publication No. 118, (Washington, DC: GPO, 1931.)

Henderson, William O., The Lancashire Cotton Famine, (Manchester, UK: Manchester
University Press, 1934.)

Henry, A. J., J. B. Kincer, H.C. Frankenfield, W. R. Gregg, B. B. Smith, and E. N.
Munns, “Weather and Agriculture,” in USDA, Agricultural Yearbook 1924,
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1925.)

Hinman, Eleanor H., and J. O. Rankin, Farm Mortgage History of Eleven Southeastern
Nebraska Townships 1870-1932, Nebraska Agricultural Experiment Station Research
Bulletin 67, (Lincoln, NB: August 1933.)

Hoffmann, Walther G., British Industry: 1700-1950, (Oxford: B. Blackwell, 1955.)


                                           41
Indianapolis Monetary Commission, Report of the Monetary Commission of the
Indianapolis Convention, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1898.)

Ireland, Peter. “Money’s Role in the Monetary Business Cycle.” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking. 36:6, (Dec. 2004): 969-84.

James, John, Money and Capital Markets in Postbellum America, (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1978.)

Jevons, William Stanley, “On the Frequent Autumnal Pressure in the Money Market, and
the Action of the Bank of England,” Journal of the Statistical Society of London, 29
(1866), 235-253.

---, Investigations in Currency and Finance, (London: MacMillan, 1884.)

Jevons, H. Stanley, “The Causes of Fluctuations of Industrial Activity and the Price-
Level,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 96 (1933), 545-605.

Juhl, Ted, William Miles and Marc D. Wiedenmier, “Covered Interest Arbitrage: Then
vs. Now,” Economica, 73 (2006), 341-352.

Kemmerer, E. W., Seasonal Variations in the Relative Demand for Money and Capital in
the United States, National Monetary Commission, U.S. Senate Document 588.
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1910.)

Kincer, Joseph B., “Weather and the Cotton Boll Weevil,” Monthly Weather Review, 56
(1928), 301-304.

Kincer, J. B., and W. A. Mattice, “Statistical Correlations of Weather Influence on Crop
Yields,” Monthly Weather Review, 56 (1928), 53-57.

Kindahl, James K., “Economic Factors in Specie Resumption, the United States, 1865-
79,” Journal of Political Economy, 69 (1961), 30-48.

Kuznets, Simon, "Comment" on Joseph Schumpeter, in Conference on Business Cycles,
(New York: NBER, 1951.)

Lothian, James R., and Mark P. Taylor, “Real Exchange Rate Behavior: the Recent Float
from the Perspective of the Past Two Centuries,” Journal of Political Economy, 104
(1996), 488-509.

Madsen, Jakob B., “Agricultural Crises and the International Transmission of the Great
Depression,” Journal of Economic History, 61(2001), 327-365.

Mattice, W. A., “Weather and Corn Yields,” Monthly Weather Review, 59: 3, (1931):
105-112.

Meissner, Christopher, “A New World Order: Explaining the International Diffusion of
the Gold Standard.” Journal of International Economics, 66 (2005), 385-406.

                                            42
Miron, Jeffrey A., “Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest Rate, and
the Founding of the Fed,” American Economic Review, 76 (1986), 25-140.

Miron, Jeffrey A., and Christina D. Romer, "A New Monthly Index of Industrial
Production, 1884-1940," Journal of Economic History, 50 (1990), 321-332.

Miron, Jeffrey A., Christina D. Romer and David N. Weil, “Historical Perspectives on
the Monetary Transmission Mechanism,” in Monetary Policy, N. Gregory Mankiw,
ed.(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.)

Mitchell, Wesley C., What Happens During Business Cycles: A Progress Report, (New
York: NBER, 1951.)

Moore, Henry L., Economic Cycles: Their Law and Cause, (New York: MacMillan,
1914.)

---, Forecasting the Yield and Price of Cotton, (New York: MacMillan, 1917.)

---, “Forecasting the Crops of the Dakotas,” Political Science Quarterly, 35(1920), 204-
235.

Myers, Margaret G., The New York Money Market, Volume I: Origins and Development,
(New york: Columbia University Press, 1931.)

Murray, William G., An Economic Analysis of Farm Mortgages in Story County, Iowa,
1854-1931, Iowa State College Agricultural Experiment Station Research Bulletin 156,
(Ames, IA: Jan. 1933.)

Neal, Larry, and Marc Weidenmier, “Crises in the Global Economy from Tulips to
Today,” in Globalization in Historical Perspective, Michael D. Bordo, Alan M. Taylor
and Jeffrey Williamson, eds. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.)

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor, “The Great Depression as a Watershed:
International Capital Mobility over the Long Run,” in The Defining Moment: The Great
Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, Michael D. Bordo,
Claudia Goldin and Eugene N. White, eds. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998.)

Odell, Kerry A., and Marc D. Weidenmier, “Real Shock, Monetary Aftershock: the 1906
San Francisco Earthquake and the Panic of 1907,” Journal of Economic History, 64
(2004), 1002-1027.

Olmstead, Alan L., and Paul W. Rhode, “The Red Queen and the Hard Reds:
Productivity Growth in American Wheat, 1800-1940,” Journal of Economic History,
62(2002), 929-966.

Parker, William N., Europe, America, and the Wider World: Essays on the Economic
History of Western Capitalism, Vol. 2, (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991.)


                                           43
Pigou, Arthur C., Industrial Fluctuations, (London: MacMillan, 1927.)

Ransom, Roger L., and Richard Sutch, One Kind of Freedom: The Economic
Consequences of Emancipation, (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1977.)

Ravn, Morten O., and Harald Uhlig, “On Adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott Filter for the
Frequency of Observations,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2002), 371-380.

Rhode, Paul W., “Gallman’s Annual Output Series for the United States, 1834–1909,”
NBER Working Paper No. 8860, 2002.

Robertson, Dennis H., A Study of Industrial Fluctuation, (London: P.S. King, 1915.)

Romer, Christina D., “Remeasuring Business Cycles,” Journal of Economic History, 54
(1994), 573-609.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer, “New Evidence on the Monetary
Transmission Mechanism,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1990:1, 149-213.

Sayers, R. S., The Bank of England, 1891-1944, (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1976.)

Schneider, Jurgen, Oskar Schwarzer and Friedrich Zellfelder, Wahrungen der Welt I:
Europaische und nordamerikanische Devisenkurse 1777-1914. (Stuttgart, Germany:
Franz Steiner Verlag, 1991.)

Solomou, S. N., and W. Wu, “Weather Effects on European Agricultural Output, 1850-
1913,” European Review of Economic History, 3 (1999), 351-373.

Sprague, O. M. W., “The New York Money Market.” Economic Journal, 13 (1903), 30-
57.

---, “The Crisis of 1914 in the United States,” American Economic Review, 5 (1915), 499-
533.

Stevens, Albert C., "'Futures' in the Wheat Market," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2
(1887), 37-63.

Strauss, Frederick, and Louis H. Bean, Gross Farm Income and Indices of Farm
Production and Prices in the United States, 1869-1937. USDA Technical Bulletin No.
703, (Washington, DC: GPO, 1940.)

Sylla, Richard, “Federal Policy, Banking Market Structure, and Capital Mobilization in
the United States, 1863-1913,” Journal of Economic History, 29 (1969), 657-686.

Temin, Peter, Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? (New York: Norton,
1976.)

Thorp, Willard L., Business Annals, NBER Publication No. 8. (New York: NBER, 1926.)

                                           44
United States Bureau of the Census, Cotton Production in the United States, 1909,
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1910.)

---, Tenth Census of the United States, 1900, Vol. V and VI, Agriculture, Parts I and II,
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1902.)

---, Thirteenth Census of the United States: 1910, Vol. V, Agriculture: General Report
and Analysis, (Washington, DC: GPO, 1914.)

United States Comptroller of the Currency, Annual Report [1879, 1894, 1896],
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1880, 1894, 1896.)

United States Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Statistics, Exports of Farm Products
from the United States, 1851-1908, Bulletin 75, (Washington, DC: GPO, 1910.)

--, Cotton Crop of the United States 1790-1911, Circular 32, (Washington, DC: GPO,
1912.)

United States Department of Agriculture,, Yearbook [1912, 1915, 1920, 1921],
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1913, 1916, 1921, 1922.)

United States Department of Agriculture, Crop Reporting Board, Corn: acreage, yield,
and production, by states, 1866-1943, (Washington, DC: 1954.)

United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Marketing Service, Wheat:
acreage, yield, production, by states, 1866-194, Statistical Bulletin 158, (Washington,
DC: 1955.)

United States Department of Treasury, Exports and Imports, (Washington, DC: GPO,
1849.)

---, Commerce and Navigation of the United States [1848, 1849, 1850], (Washington,
DC: GPO, 1849, 1850, 1851.)

---, Bureau of Statistics, Finance, Commerce, and Immigration of the United States.
(Washington, DC: GPO, 1895.)

United States Industrial Commission, Report of the Industrial Commission on the
Distribution of Farm Products, Vol. VI, (Washington, DC: GPO, 1901.)

Warren, George F., and Frank A. Pearson, Wholesale Prices for 213 Years, 1720 to 1932,
Cornell University Agricultural Experimental Station Memoir 142, (Ithaca, NY: 1932.)

Woodman, Harold D., King Cotton and his Retainers: Financing and Marketing the
Cotton Crop of the South, 1800-1925, (Lexington, KY: University of Kentucky Press,
1968.)

Wright, Gavin, “Cotton Competition and the Post-Bellum Recovery of the American

                                            45
South,” Journal of Economic History, 34 (1974): 610-35.

Wright, Ivan, Bank Credit and Agriculture, (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1922.)

Young, Allyn A., “An Analysis of Bank Statistics for the United States,” Review of
Economic Statistics, 7 (1925), 19-37.




                                           46
   Table I: Descriptive Statistics: IP and Harvest Deviations from Trend
  A)
Trend:                              Quadratic                                                         Hodrick-Prescott
Series:            IP                   Cotton          Wheat    Corn                    IP              Cotton        Wheat    Corn
Period    1828-         1869-    1828-      1869-     1869-   1869-             1828-      1869-     1828-      1869-  1869-     1869-
            1860         1913      1860      1913      1913    1913              1860       1913       1860      1913   1913      1913
             (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)             (7)        (8)       (9)       (10)    (11)      (12)
Max.       0.175        0.115    0.229       0.203    0.228    0.159           0.117      0.115      0.209      0.234   0.239     0.170
Min.      -0.186        -0.164   -0.227     -0.224    -0.201  -0.373           -0.136     -0.147    -0.223     -0.223  -0.192    -0.374

Std. Dev. 0.101         0.082    0.116      0.116     0.120        0.139       0.066      0.069     0.111     0.112    0.110    0.133

Serial    0.76          0.60     -0.152    -0.21       0.02        -0.11       0.54       0.47      -0.22     -0.28   -0.15     -0.18
Corr.
Coeff.

    B) Contemporaneous Correlations
                                                       1828-1860                        1869-1913
                                                         IP               IP             Cotton      Wheat
                                 Cotton              -0.210          -0.14

                                 Wheat                               0.16               0.13

                                 Corn                                -0.16              0.12          -0.02




                                                                       47
Table II: Statistics on staple crops 1840-1910
                                                               Per cent
                                            1840-1860          1869-1913        1880-1913
Exports/U.S. merchandise exports
 Cotton                               51.7                     29.3             25.6
 Wheat and wheat flour                                         14.0             13.0
  Corn and corn meal                                           3.9              3.6
Value of harvested crop/GNP
 Cotton*                               3.6                     2.4              2.3
 Wheat                                                         3.0              2.6
 Corn                                                          6.3              5.9
Farmers' income from crop sales/GNP
 Cotton                                3.6                     2.4              2.3
 Wheat                                                         2.5              2.2
 Corn                                                          1.3              1.2
Export revenues/farmers' income from crop sales
 Cotton                                91.7                    71.4             71.4
 Wheat and wheat flour                                         35.0             37.1
  Corn                                                         18.7             18.9
Cotton consumed (value)/GNP
  U.S.**                                0.8                     1.1             0.9
   Britain***                           3.6                     3.1             2.7
Cotton consumed (value)/Nonagricultural GNP
  U.S.**                                1.4                     1.4             1.2
  Britain***                            4.5                     3.4             2.9
Imports of U.S. cotton by Britain (value)
  /GNP***                               3.0                     2.8           2.4
 /Nonagricultural GNP***                3.8                     3.1           2.6

* 1840-1860 average of values for 1839, 1844, 1849, 1854, 1859.
**Averages of values for 1840, 1850, 1860, 1870, 1880, 1890, 1900.
***Averages of values for 1841, 1851, 1861, 1871, 1881, 1891, 1901, 1907.

Sources:
Crop exports/ merchandise exports: Historical Statistics of the United States, Millennial Edition (2006): Series Ee366,
Ee571, Ee576. Corn exports valued at Chicago prices in Agricultural Statistics, 1936, pp. 32-33.
Value of harvest crop/GNP: 1840-1860 is cotton’s value added from Gallman (1960, pp. 46-47) over GNP from
Gallman (1966, p. 26). 1869-1913 and 1880-1913 are calendar-year crop farm value from Strauss and Bean (1937, pp.
36, 39-40, 64-65) over GNP from Balke and Gordon (1989, pp. 84-85).
Farmers' income from crop sales/ GNP: 1840-1860 are cotton’s value added from Gallman (1960, pp. 46-47) over
GNP from Gallman (1966, p. 26). 1869-1913 and 1880-1913 are calendar-year crop "gross income" from Strauss and
Bean (1940, pp. 36, 39-40, 64-65) over GNP from Balke and Gordon (1989, pp. 84-85).
Cotton consumption as share of national income: U.S. GNP from Historical Statistics (2006) series Ca10.
Nonagricultural GNP calculated using share of U.S. GNP outside agriculture from Gallman (2000, p. 50). U.S. cotton
consumption from U.S. Bureau of the Census (1911, p. 21). U.S. cotton price (to value consumption) from Historical
Statistics (2006), series Cc222, Cc223. British GNP, nonagricultural GNP, cotton consumption quantities, cotton
import quantities, and cotton prices (to value quantities) from Mitchell (1988, pp. 332, 334, 760, 822).




                                                          48
     Table III: Crop export revenue, cotton exports and crop prices, 1829-60 and 1870-1913
                                  Coefficient
                                  [Standard error]
LHS                               p-value
variable:    Total crop export revenue            Cotton export quantity            Crop price, year following harvest
                                                                                  Cotton           Wheat       Corn
Period:       1829-     1870-       1870-        1829-         1870-       1829-       1870-       1870-        1870
             1860*       1913        1913          1860*       1913        1860*         1913        1913       -1913
                (1)        (2)        (3)            (4)             (5)        (6)          (7)          (8)        (9)
Cotton(-1) 0.019         0.640      0.534         1.333          1.062       -0.868       -0.500
           [0.295]      [0.168]    [0.137]       [0.133]        [0.050]      [0.303]      [0.148]
            0.95        0.00       0.00           0.00          0.00         0.01         0.00
Wheat(-1)                           0.589                                                              -0.151
                                   [0.132]                                                            [0.193]
                                    0.00                                                               0.44
Corn(-1)                            0.210                                                                         -0.815
                                   [0.115]                                                                       [0.151]
                                    0.08                                                                          0.00
Pre-         0.862       0.325      0.312                                    0.703         1.053       0.581     2.003
harvest     [0.292]     [0.300]    [0.243]                                  [0.323]       [0.265]     [0.355]   [0.320]
 WPI         0.01        0.29       0.20                                     0.04         0.00         0.11      0.00

Time         0.034       0.021      0.020         0.106         0.051           -0.094     -0.025     -0.010     0.067
            [0.058]     [0.018]    [0.015]       [0.025]       [0.002]          [0.063]   [0.016]     [0.022]    [0.020]
             0.56        0.26       0.19          0.00          0.00            0.15      0.14        0.64       0.00
Time Sqr     0.135      -0.045    0.014              -0.418     -0.373       0.728         0.508       0.196     -0.979
/ 1000      [0.451]     [-0.333] [0.269]             [0.190]    [0.040]     [0.489]       [0.294]     [0.394]    [0.356]
             0.77       0.99      0.96               0.04        0.00       0.15           0.09        0.62      0.01

R2          0.90        0.79       0.87              0.98       0.99        0.41          0.88        0.52       0.76
     *Excluding 1843              Sources: see data appendix

                                                                           49
Table IV: Harvest Fluctuations Regressed on Current and Lagged IP Gaps
                                                         Coefficient
                                                         [standard error]
                                                         p-value
Trend:                                  Quadratic                                          Hodrick-Prescott
Period:                 1829-                    1870-1913                    1829-            1870-1913
                         1860                                                 1860
LHS variable:           Cotton      Cotton        Wheat           Corn      Cotton      Cotton       Wheat      Corn
                            (1)        (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)       (8)
           IP            -0.060     -0.084        0.471          -0.141      0.018     -0.045       0.581     -0.222
                        [0.317]     [0.322]      [0.279]        [0.318]     [0.361]    [0.334]     [0.266]    [0.323]
                        0.85        0.80          0.10           0.66        0.96      0.89        0.03       0.50
           IP(-1)       -0.321       0.011       -0.412        -0.153       -0.383      0.069      -0.132     -0.228
                        [0.325]     [0.302]      [0.275]       [0.319]      [0.363]    [0.303]     [0.267]    [0.327]
                         0.33        0.97         0.14          0.63         0.30       0.82        0.62       0.49
           Crop(-1)       -0.223    -0.186        -0.002       -0.130        -0.241    -0.259      -0.218     -0.208
                         [0.183]    [0.184]       [0.157]      [0.154]       [0.181]   [0.184]     [0.154]    [0.152]
                          0.23       0.32          0.99         0.40          0.19      0.17        0.17      0.18
           p-value
            test 1       0.32        0.58         0.37          0.67         0.41       0.35       0.13       0.37
            test 2        0.25       0.95         0.21          0.59          0.48       0.97      0.09       0.42

          Test 1: coefficients on all RHS variables equal to zero
          Test 2: coefficients on IP and IP(-1) equal to zero




                                                                       50
     Table V: IP Gaps Regressed on Lagged Harvest Fluctuations
                       Coefficient
                       [standard error]
     A)                 p-value
Trend                                             Quadratic
IP series           Davis        Davis exc. textiles, food Davis metals           Davis machinery
Period      1830-         1871-      1830-    1871-       1830- 1871-              1830-   1871-
              1860        1913       1860      1913        1860    1913             1860     1913
                (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)      (6)             (7)       (8)
Cotton(-1) -0.045       0.331      -0.169     0.315       -0.127   0.360            0.055     0.481
             [0.106] [0.081]       [0.110] [0.093]        [0.274] [0.152]          [0.241]   [0.193]
              0.68       0.00       0.14      0.00        0.65     0.02             0.82     0.02

Wheat(-1)                0.003                  0.012                  -0.051                 0.091
                        [0.083]                [0.096]                 [0.157]               [0.196]
                         0.96                   0.90                   0.75                   0.64

Corn(-1)                  -0.007                 -0.009                 0.030                -0.004
                         [0.068]                 [0.078]               [0.127]               [0.161]
                          0.92                   0.91                   0.81                  0.98

IP(-1)        0.917       0.790      1.037       0.795       0.374      0.484       1.150    1.022
             [0.181]     [0.162]    [0.172]     [0.163]     [0.187]    [0.164]     [0.174]   [0.158]
               0.00       0.00       0.00        0.00        0.06       0.01        0.00     0.00

Cotton(-2)    0.068      0.007       0.167       0.013       0.313      0.116       0.280     -0.044
             [0.109]    [0.099]     [0.116]     [0.110]     [0.269]    [0.167]     [0.249]    [0.221]
              0.54       0.95        0.16       0.91         0.25       0.49        0.27     0.84

Wheat(-2)                 -0.095                 -0.087                -0.211                -0.142
                         [0.077]                 [0.088]               [0.142]               [0.180]
                          0.22                    0.33                  0.15                 0.44

Corn(-2)                  0.051                  0.059                 0.082                  0.137
                         [0.067]                [0.076]                [0.122]               [0.157]
                          0.45                   0.45                   0.51                  0.39

IP(-2)        -0.172     -0.180      -0.277     -0.193      -0.105      -0.081     -0.432     -0.346
              [0.186]    [0.152]     [0.174]    [0.155]      [0.198]    [0.161]    [0.181]   [0.154]
               0.36       0.25       0.12        0.22        0.60       0.62        0.02      0.03

p-value1       0.50       0.36       0.14         0.43        0.40      0.42        0.04     0.15
     1 p-value for test of hypothesis that all coefficients on second lags equal to zero


                                                  51
            A) (cont)
Trend                                    HP                   Quadratic
IP series                               Davis                 Frickey
Period                             1830-    1871-              1871-
                                   1860       1913               1913
                                      (9)        (10)          (11)
                        Cotton(-1) -0.017      0.334           0.323
                                    [0.089] [0.075            [0.103]
                                     0.85      0.00           0.00

                        Wheat(-1)                0.017        -0.030
                                                [0.082]       [0.107]
                                                 0.84         0.78

                        Corn(-1)                    -0.013    -0.047
                                                    [0.064]   [0.087]
                                                     0.84      0.60

                        IP(-1)        0.634          0.625     0.534
                                     [0.171]        [0.159]   [0.165]
                                      0.00           0.00     0.00

                        Cotton(-2)    0.074          0.047     0.102
                                     [0.091]        [0.091]   [0.112]
                                       0.42          0.61      0.39

                        Wheat(-2)                   -0.091    -0.128
                                                    [0.078]   [0.097]
                                                     0.25      0.196

                        Corn(-2)                 0.048         0.058
                                                [0.064]       [0.083]
                                                  0.46         0.49

                        IP(-2)       -0.158         -0.197    -0.102
                                     [0.174]        [0.145]   [0.162]
                                      0.37           0.18      0.54

                        p-value       0.45          0.19      0.39




                                               52
B)
     Trend                                     Quadratic
                                      Davis               Davis metals               Davis machinery
 IP series         Davis          exc. textiles, food
 Period     1829- 1870-          1829-       1870-       1829-    1870-              1829-    1870-
             1860     1913        1860        1913        1860     1913               1860     1913
               (1)       (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)              (7)       (8)
 Cotton(-1) -0.047 0.312          -0.172       0.293      -0.125     0.315            -0.009    0.494
            [0.107] [0.078]       [0.115] [0.088]         [0.248]   [0.142]           [0.258]  [0.188]
             0.67     0.00        0.14        0.00         0.62     0.03               0.97     0.01

 Wheat(-1)              0.036                      0.051                   0.015                0.148
                       [0.076]                    [0.086]                 [0.140]              [0.182]
                        0.64                       0.56                    0.91                 0.42

 Corn(-1)              -0.018                      -0.023                  0.007                -0.035
                       [0.065]                     [0.074]                [0.119]               [0.160]
                        0.79                       0.75                    0.95                 0.83

 IP(-1)         0.769   0.640         0.792         0.644       0.345       0.449     0.787     0.742
               [0.126] [0.110]       [0.114]       [0.111]     [0.170]     [0.136]   [0.120]    [0.104]
                0.00    0.00          0.00         0.00         0.05        0.00      0.00      0.00
  Trend                                               HP              Quadratic
   IP series                                         Davis            Frickey
     Period                                     1829-       1870-      1870-
                                                 1860        1913       1913
                                                 (9)        (10)         (11)
                            Cotton(-1)         -0.022      0.307       0.290
                                               [0.093] [0.073]        [0.097]
                                                0.81        0.00      0.00

                            Wheat(-1)                        0.061     0.027
                                                            [0.076]   [0.095]
                                                             0.43      0.78

                            Corn(-1)                        -0.015    -0.048
                                                            [0.062]   [0.081]
                                                             0.81      0.56

                            IP(-1)          0.537           0.498      0.477
                                           [0.158]          [0.123]   [0.132]
                                            0.00             0.00     0.00




                                                       53
 Table VI: Allowing for shift in cotton harvest effect 1870-1879

     Specification:

IP = Const. + Dummy1870-1879 + βCotton(-1) + γ (Dummy1870-1879*Cotton(-1)) + η IP(-1)

                                                     Davis exc.
   IP Series                      Davis              text. & food
   Trend              Quadratic         HP     Quadratic       HP
                           (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)
     β                 0.380          0.377     0.374         0.370
     Cotton(-1)       [0.080]        [0.078]   [0.092]       [0.089]
                       0.00           0.00      0.00          0.00

     γ                 -0.367       -0.327     -0.430        -0.375
     Cotton(-1)        [0.179]      [0.169]    [0.204]       [0.194]
     coefficient        0.05         0.06       0.04          0.06
       shift

     η                  0.636        0.533      0.643       0.542
     IP(-1)            [0.102]      [0.113]    [0.104]     [0.116]
                        0.00         0.00       0.00        0.00

     β+γ               0.012         0.050      -0.055       -0.006




                                                54
Table VII: Harvest fluctuations and weather variables

                      1871-1913 (harvests 1870-1912) 1880-1913 (harvests 1879-1912)
                       R2    Rbar2 F-stat p-value    R2 Rbar2 F-stat p-value
Cotton harvest on
 cotton weather       0.43    0.32 3.812 0.00           0.61 0.51      5.824   0.00
 wheat weather        0.17   -0.06 0.726 0.68           0.26 -0.02     0.943   0.51
  corn weather        0.21   -0.00 0.993 0.46           0.28 0.02      1.063   0.42
Wheat harvest on
  cotton weather      0.12 -0.052 0.705 0.67            0.20 -0.02     0.930   0.50
  wheat weather       0.29 0.09 1.469 0.20              0.60 0.45      3.988   0.00
  corn weather        0.23  0.018 1.087 0.40            0.33  0.08     1.339   0.27
Corn harvest on
  cotton weather      0.19     0.03   1.188     0.33    0.22    0.00   1.019   0.44
  wheat weather       0.18    -0.05   0.790     0.63    0.19   -0.11   0.629   0.76
  corn weather        0.67     0.58 7.381       0.00    0.65    0.52   4.920   0.00




                                           55
          Table VIII IV estimates, Harvest effects on IP

          A) 2SLS regressions, IP gap on harvest fluctuations and lagged IP gap
                        1871-1913
LHS variable          IP gap, quadratic                ΔLn(IP)
               Cotton     Wheat       Corn    Cotton Wheat Corn
                 (1)     (2)        (3)      (4)           (5)       (6)
 Crop(-1)     0.444     0.101       0.006     0.502     0.035    0.041
             [0.121]   [0.166]     [0.097] [0.134] [0.182] [0.106]
              0.00      0.55       0.95       0.00      0.85     0.70

 IP(-1)      0.669       0.572      0.597
            [0.111]     [0.131]    [0.129]
             0.00        0.00       0.00

 R2*         0.52       0.37        0.36       0.25         0.00   0.01

          1880-1913
LHS variable IP gap, quadratic                           ΔLn(IP)
              Cotton   Wheat    Corn            Cotton Wheat       Corn
                (1)    (2)      (3)            (4)        (5)          (6)
 Crop(-1)    0.467   0.088     -0.011           0.517   0.038      -0.019
            [0.108] [0.127]    [0.108]         [0.124] [0.146]     [0.125]
             0.00    0.49       0.92            0.00    0.79       0.88

 IP(-1)      0.585      0.442       0.478
            [0.123]    [0.159]     [0.154]
             0.00       0.01        0.00

 R2*         0.52       0.27          0.24      0.37        0.00    0.00

          *Using TSLS coefficient estimates on actual harvest fluctuations (structural residuals)




                                                       56
         B) Corresponding OLS estimates
1871-1913
LHS variable        IP gap, quadratic                ΔLn(IP)
             Cotton     Wheat        Corn     Cotton Wheat Corn
                (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)     (5)     (6)
Crop(-1)      0.321    0.081      0.014      0.353   0.034   0.050
             [0.076] [0.088]     [0.079]    [0.084] [0.097] [0.087]
              0.00     0.36       0.86       0.00    0.73    0.56

IP(-1)          0.648   0.576     0.599
               [0.106] [0.127]   [0.128]
                0.00    0.00      0.00

R2              0.55    0.37     0.36        0.30        0.00   0.01


1880-1913
LHS variable        IP gap, quadratic              ΔLn(IP)
              Cotton Wheat        Corn     Cotton   Wheat          Corn
                (1)        (2)       (3)     (4)       (5)          (6)
Crop(-1)    0.372         0.125     -0.001   0.421   0.032       0.009
           [0.080]      [0.099]     [0.087] [0.093] [0.113]     [0.101]
             0.00        0.22         0.99   0.00    0.78        0.93

IP(-1)      0.564       0.427     0.479
           [0.120]     [0.156]   [0.154]
            0.00        0.01       0.00

R2             0.55     0.27       0.24      0.39        0.00   0.00




                                                    57
     Table IX: Cotton harvests and British versus American IP, 1880-1913
              (quadratic trends)
                                       Coefficient
                                       [Standard error]
                                       p-value

                           1829-1860               1870-1913               1880-1913
LHS variable      IP US          IP UK           IP US        IP UK     IP US        IP UK
                    (1)             (2)             (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)
Cotton(-1)       -0.083         0.115           0.292         0.036     0.340       0.067
                 [0.110]       [0.060]         [0.079]       [0.049]   [0.087]     [0.057]
                  0.46          0.07            0.00          0.46      0.00        0.25

IP (-1)           0.754         0.214           0.616        0.390      0.534      0.295
                 [0.126]       [0.179]         [0.113]      [0.133]    [0.124]    [0.057]
                  0.00          0.24            0.00         0.01       0.00       0.25

Other             0.406         0.096           0.217        0.140      0.266      0.089
 country IP      [0.328]       [0.068]         [0.235]      [0.071]    [0.270]    [0.092]
                  0.23          0.17            0.36         0.05       0.33       0.34

R2                0.60          0.15           0.56         0.33       0.56        0.28




                                                      58
  Table X: Harvests and Treasury money supply factors
                        1880-1913
LHS variables:
(1) Change in log (nongold money outside the Treasury, average of months from July to June)
(2) Change in log (gold in Treasury, average of months from July to June)


                          Coefficient
                          [Standard error]
                                      p-value
                       (1)              (2)
 Cotton(-1)         0.032            0.004
                   [0.039]          [0.236]
                   0.42              0.98

 Wheat(-1)          0.046            0.095
                   [0.037]          [0.224]
                    0.22             0.67

  Corn(-1)          0.015            0.202
                   [0.032]          [0.196]
                    0.64            0.31

  R2               0.10             0.04

       Sources: see data appendix




       Table XI: Volatility in high-powered money supply, international gold flow and crop
       export revenue, 1880-1913
                          Percent of preceding July’s high-powered money supply

                          ΔMoney       Gold            Crop-related export revenue
                           supply      inflow          Cotton       Wheat      Corn
 Mean                       4.4         2.9             16.8          8.8       2.5

 Standard deviation          4.7           4.0          3.3          5.6       1.5

 Maximum minus               24.4       17.2            13.8         26.1      5.9
    minimum
                          Sources: see data appendix




                                                       59
   Table XII: Harvests and British interest rates or money supply
                        1880-1913
LHS variables:
(1) Change in London bill rate (average of months from July to June)
(2) Change in log (U.K. high-powered money, average of months from July to June)
(3) Change in log (U.K. high-powered money, July to July)


                              Coefficient
                            [Standard error]
                              p-value
                         (1)            (2)       (3)
 Cotton(-1)          -1.321         -0.053     -0.029
                     [1.225]        [0.042]    [0.063]
                      0.30           0.21       0.66

 Wheat(-1)           -0.312          0.009     -0.007
                     [1.166]        [0.040]     [0.060]
                      0.79           0.83        0.91

  Corn(-1)            1.277         -0.023     -0.037
                     [1.200]        [0.035]     [0.053]
                      0.22           0.52        0.49

  R2                 0.08            0.07       0.03

       Sources: see data appendix




                                                 60
      Table XIII: Cotton-caused IP fluctuations versus other IP fluctuations, 1880-1913

      Left-hand side variables:

      Δg       Net gold imports/ money supply (previous July)
      Δm       Change in high-powered money stock (outside the Treasury), July to July
      e        Exchange rate, annual average ending June
      (i – i*) New York – London interest rate spread, annual average ending June
      Δi       Change in New York interest rate (annual average ending June)
      Δp WPI Change in log WPI, July to July
      Δp WPI exc. Change in log WPI excluding farm products and food, July to July

      Specifications:

      (a) Two-stage least squares with cotton harvest deviation as instrument for Δy
      (b) OLS with residual variation in Δy as RHS variable
      (c) OLS with Δy as RHS variable

                                        Coefficient
                                        [Standard error]
                                        p-value
                                                                               Δp
           Δg         Δm            e          (i – i*)         Δi       WPI        WPI exc.
           (1)        (2)            (3)        (4)              (5)        (6)         (7)
(a)      0.284      0.350         -0.083      -4.155            -7.262    0.459      0.542
        [0.124]     [0.174]       [0.038]     [1.902]          [3.314]   [0.192]    [0.193]
         0.03       0.05          0.04         0.04            0.04       0.02       0.01

(b)      0.055      -0.082         0.019       -1.105          -1.284     0.493      0.518
        [0.098]     [0.126]       [0.027]      [1.533]         [2.626]   [0.166]    [0.171]
        0.58         0.52         0.48         0.48            0.63       0.01       0.00

(c)      0.144       0.086         -0.021      -2.289          -3.604    0.480       0.527
        [0.073]     [0.098]       [0.021]      [1.137]         [1.961]   [0.120]    [0.120]
        0.06         0.39          0.34         0.05           0.08       0.00       0.00

      Post-1896 dummy for (i – i*): Coefficients [standard error]
                                                (a) –1.256 [0.188]
                                                (b) –1.263 [0.191]
                                                (c) –1.258 [0.181]
      Sources: see data appendix




                                                          61
           Table XIV: Macroeconomic variables and crop fluctuations, 1880-1913

           Left-hand side variables:
           ∆Cash Change in log cash outside national banks, spring to spring
           and as for Table 10
                                          Coefficient
                                          [Standard error]
                                          p-value
     A) OLS results                                                                         Δp
            ∆Cash           Δg         Δm           e           (i – i*)      Δi     WPI         WPI exc.
                (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)        (7)        (8)
Cotton(-1)    0.148       0.095     0.120        -0.027        -1.883      -3.592     0.192       0.205
             [0.063]     [0.044]   [0.058]       [0.011]       [0.779]     [1.247]   [0.093]     [0.096]
              0.03       0.04       0.05         0.02          0.02         0.01      0.05        0.04

Wheat(-1)     0.132       0.103     0.124        -0.036         0.781       2.182     0.071       0.122
             [0.060]     [0.042]   [0.056]       [0.011]       [0.742]     [1.187]   [0.088]     [0.092]
              0.04       0.02      0.03          0.00           0.30        0.08      0.43        0.20

Corn(-1)      0.049       0.048     0.058        -0.009        -0.186       1.220     -0.135     -0.002
             [0.052]     [0.037]   [0.049]       [0.009]       [0.650]     [1.038]   [0.077]     [0.080]
              0.36       0.20      0.24          0.35          0.78         0.25     0.09        0.98

R2            0.32       0.35      0.31          0.44          0.66        0.28      0.21        0.20

           B) 2SLS results
                                                                                      Δp
             ∆Cash          Δg         Δm           e           (i – i*)     Δi      WPI         WPI exc.
               (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)            (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)
Cotton(-1) 0.179          0.064     0.085       -0.023         -1.683      -2.654     0.232       0.338
           [0.084]       [0.062]   [0.080]      [0.017]        [0.942]     [1.646]   [0.119]     [0.123]
            0.04         0.31       0.30         0.18           0.08       0.12       0.06       0.01

Wheat(-1)     0.153       0.122     0.145       -0.041          0.264       1.604     0.003       0.039
             [0.081]     [0.057]   [0.074]      [0.015]        [0.972]     [1.663]   [0.121]     [0.124]
              0.07       0.04       0.06         0.01           0.79        0.34     0.98        0.76

Corn(-1)      -0.027    0.032      -0.027      0.007       -0.961     0.423           -0.247     -0.116
              [0.078] [0.057]      [0.072] [0.015]         [0.829] [1.442]            [0.105]    [0.111]
               0.73    0.58        0.71       0.66         0.26       0.77            0.02        0.31
           Post 1896 dummy for (i – i*): Coefficients [standard error]
                               OLS:       -1.252 [0.181]
                        TSLS, cotton: -1.245 [0.178]
                        TSLS, wheat: -1.264 [0.192]
                        TSLS, corn:       -1.237 [0.196]

           Sources: see data appendix

                                                          62
                             16000
                             12000

Thousand bales (log scale)
                              8000


                              4000




                                      30       40        50        60     80       90       00   10



                                           FIGURE I A)
                             Cotton Production and Quadratic Trends, 1828-1860, 1869-1913




                                                              63
                              800
                              700
                              600
Million bushels (log scale)




                              500

                              400


                              300




                              200
                                    70      75     80      85       90    95      00   05   10


                                                 FIGURE I B)
                                    Wheat Production and Quadratic Trend, 1869-1913




                                                               64
                              3500
                              3000

                              2500
Million bushels (log scale)




                              2000


                              1500



                              1000



                                     70   75     80      85       90     95       00   05   10



                                               FIGURE I C)
                                 Corn Production and Quadratic trend, 1869-1913




                                                             65
                    0.2



                    0.1
Change in log(IP)




                    0.0



                    -0.1


                                               1908
                    -0.2
                       -0.3    -0.2     -0.1      0.0       0.1      0.2   0.3

                              Harvest fluctuation, previous fall

                              FIGURE II A)
                       ΔLn(IP) and Cotton Harvest Fluctuation, 1870-1913




                                                 66
                      0.20

                      0.15
Change in log(IP)




                      0.10

                      0.05

                      0.00

                     -0.05

                     -0.10
                         -0.3       -0.2     -0.1      0.0      0.1     0.2   0.3

                                   Harvest fluctuation, previous fall


                                  FIGURE II B)
                    ΔLn(IP) and Cotton Harvest Fluctuation, 1829-1860




                                                     67
                    0.2



                    0.1
Change in log(IP)




                    0.0



                    -0.1


                                                     1908
                    -0.2
                       -0.3       -0.2       -0.1        0.0        0.1   0.2   0.3

                                 Harvest fluctuation, previous fall

                                   FIGURE II C)
                      ΔLn(IP) and Wheat Harvest Fluctuation, 1870-1913




                                                68
                    0.2



                    0.1
Change in log(IP)




                    0.0



                    -0.1


                                                            1908
                    -0.2
                       -0.4                  -0.2                   0.0   0.2

                                 Harvest fluctuation, previous fall

                            FIGURE II D)
                      ΔLn(IP) and Corn Harvest Fluctuation, 1870-1913




                                                69
0.15
                                                     Fit by regression 1
0.10                                                 Fit by regression 2


0.05

0.00

-0.05

-0.10

-0.15

-0.20
           75       80       85       90       95       00       05   10

         Regression 1 RHS: two lags cotton
         Regression 2 RHS: one lag cotton, one lag IP gap



                  FIGURE III A)
    IP Gaps Forecast by Cotton Harvest Fluctuations, 1871-1913
                  Quadratic trends




                                      70
0.15
                                                     Fit by regression 1
                                                     Fit by regression 2
0.10


0.05


0.00

-0.05


-0.10


-0.15
           75       80        85      90       95       00       05   10

         Regression 1 RHS: two lags cotton
         Regression 2 RHS: one lag cotton, one lag IP gap

           FIGURE III B)
    IP Gaps Forecast by Cotton Harvest Fluctuations, 1871-1913
                  HP trends




                                      71
           Estimated coefficients from Table 6 specification
                Ten-year spans ending 1879 - 1913
                          Quadratic trends
0.8



0.6
                                       Beta + Gamma


0.4



0.2                                         Beta



0.0
      80        85      90        95        00     05   10

                             Figure IV A)




                                  72
           Estimated coefficients from Table 6 specification
                Ten-year spans ending 1879 - 1913
                              HP trends
0.6


0.5                                         Beta + Gamma

0.4


0.3


0.2                                        Beta


0.1


0.0
      80        85      90            95    00    05       10

                       Figure IV B)




                                      73
