                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   GLOBAL IMBALANCES AND FINANCIAL FRAGILITY

                                        Ricardo J. Caballero
                                       Arvind Krishnamurthy

                                       Working Paper 14688
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14688


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2009




This article was written for the AEA meetings in San Francisco, 2009. We thank Ivan Werning and
Raghu Rajan for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Arvind Krishnamurthy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Imbalances and Financial Fragility
Ricardo J. Caballero and Arvind Krishnamurthy
NBER Working Paper No. 14688
January 2009
JEL No. E44,F32,F37,G12,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

The U.S. is currently engulfed in the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depression. A key
structural factor behind this crisis is the large demand for riskless assets from the rest of the world.
In this paper we present a model to show how such demand not only triggered a sharp rise in U.S.
asset prices, but also exposed the U.S. financial sector to a downturn by concentrating risk onto its
balance sheet. In addition to highlighting the role of capital flows in facilitating the securitization boom,
our analysis speaks to the broader issue of global imbalances. While in emerging markets the concern
with capital flows is in their speculative nature, in the U.S. the risk in capital inflows derives from
the opposite concern: capital flows into the U.S. are mostly non-speculative and in search of safety.
As a result, the U.S. sells riskless assets to foreigners, and in so doing, it raises the effective leverage
of its financial institutions. In other words, as global imbalances rise, the U.S. increasingly specializes
in holding its "toxic waste."


Ricardo J. Caballero
MIT
Department of Economics
Room E52-373a
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
caball@mit.edu

Arvind Krishnamurthy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
a-krishnamurthy@northwestern.edu
   The U.S. is currently engulfed in the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depres-
sion. The crisis was triggered by the crash in the real estate “bubble” and amplified by the

extreme concentration of risk in a highly leveraged financial sector.
   Conventional wisdom is that both the bubble and the risk concentration were the result

of mistakes in regulatory policy: an expansionary monetary policy during the boom period

of the bubble, and failure to reign in the practices of unscrupulous lenders. In this paper
we argue that, while correct in some dimensions, this story misses two key structural factors

behind the securitization process that supported the real estate boom and the corresponding

leverage: First, over the last decade, the U.S. has experienced large and sustained capital
inflows from foreigners seeking U.S. assets to store value (Ricardo J. Caballero et al 2008).

Second, especially after the NASDAQ/Tech bubble and bust, excess world savings have
looked predominantly for safe debt investments. This should not be surprising because

a large amount of the capital flow into the U.S. has been from foreign central banks and

governments who are not expert investors and are merely looking for a store of value (Arvind
Krishnamurthy and Annette Vissing-Jorgenson, 2008).

   In this paper we develop a stylized model that captures the essence of this environment.

The model accounts for three facts observed during the boom and bust phases of the current
crisis: First, during a period of good shocks –which we interpret as the period up to the

end of 2006– the growth in asset demand pushes up asset prices and lowers risk premia
and interest rates. It is interesting to observe that the value of risky assets rises despite

the fact that the increase in demand is for riskless assets. Second, foreign demand for debt

instruments increases the equilibrium level of leverage of the domestic financial sector. In
order to accommodate this demand, the U.S. financial sector manufactures debt claims out

of all types of products, which is the reason for the wave of securitization. Third, if shocks
turn negative –which we interpret as the period post-2006 – the foreign demand now turns

toxic; bad shocks and high leverage lead to an amplified downturn and rising risk premia.

                                              2
    In addition to highlighting the role of capital flows in facilitating the securitization boom,
our analysis also speaks to the broader issue of global imbalances. Many of the concerns

regarding global imbalances derive from emerging markets’ experiences, where capital flows

are often speculative and a source of volatility, as emphasized in the literature on sudden
stops. Our analysis shows that somewhat paradoxically, for a core economy such as the

U.S., the risk in “excessive” capital inflows derives from the opposite concern: capital flows

into the U.S. are mostly non-speculative and in search of safety. As a result, the U.S. sells
riskless assets to foreigners and in so doing it raises the effective leverage of its financial

institutions. In other words, as global imbalances rise, the U.S. increasingly specializes in
holding its “toxic waste.”



I    Foreign Flows and Fragility

Time is continuous and indexed by t. There is a continuum of U.S. financial institutions,
with mass one, that own assets which generate cash flows of Xtd per unit time, where,

                                       dXtd
                                            = gdt + σdZt ,
                                        Xtd

for constants g and σ. We can think of these cash-flows as arising from mortgage loans,

credit card loans, auto loans, etc. We assume the cash-flow process is exogenously given
and not affected by other developments in the economy. This is certainly counterfactual,

but simplifies the analysis of asset market equilibrium. In practice, some of these cash flows

were brought onto banks’ balance sheets as a response to the massive demand for assets.
Our analysis starts from a moment where these cash-flows already exist, but it may also be

interesting to model this process as a response to high asset demand. We denote the present

value of the cash-flows Xtd held by the financial institutions as Vt .
    The financial institutions have two liabilities, equity and short-term (instantaneous) debt.

We assume there are no bankruptcy costs. This implies, since our model is set in continuous

                                                3
time (and sample paths), that the short-term debt is risk-free.
       Our key assumption concerns the demand for the safe debt. The external demand for

U.S. assets, from foreign central banks for example, is in particular a demand for high-grade

debt. We capture this demand in a reduced form fashion. We assume that there is a measure
one of foreign investors who only invest in the debt of financial institutions. They allocate

an exogenous stream of funds,

                                       dXtf
                                              = gdt + (1 − ψ)σdZt ,
                                       Xtf

to investments in U.S. assets. The stream Xtf is perfectly correlated with U.S. income but

for most our analysis we assume that it is less volatile than domestic income. Hence ψ > 0
and, by themselves, capital flows are a source of income stability. We may also think of the

case of ψ < 0 as that corresponding to emerging markets, where capital flows exacerbate the
cycle.

       Foreigners’ bond holdings are denoted by Btf . We also assume that the foreign investors

repatriate some of their U.S. invested wealth at the rate ρ. Denote,


                                                 cft = ρBtf


as the repatriated flow of resources.1 Then the dynamics of foreign debt are


                                    dBtf = (Xtf − ρBtf )dt + rt Btf dt.


       Throughout our analysis we will imagine that there is a date, t0 , on which the foreign
   1
     Suppose foreigners are modeled as overlapping generations. They live from t to t + δ (δ → dt). The pre-
vious generation bequests Btf of wealth. Then the current generation receives Xt dt of income and consumes
ct to solve:
                                                                   f
                                    max ρδln ct + (1 − ρδ)Et [ln Bt+δ ]
Note that the utility for bequest is over wealth. If we take δ → dt, this model yields the assumed consumption
behavior of foreign investors.




                                                      4
investors’ demand for U.S. debt first arises. We refer to this as the date of foreign entry. We
analyze how this entry affects the equilibrium.

      The financial institutions’ owners/equity-holders are local investors who maximize pref-

erences:
                                         Z       ∞
                                    Et               e−ρ(s−t) ln cdt+s ds.
                                             t


The value of their ownership stake in the financial institutions, or the equity value of financial
institutions, is

                                                 Wt = Vt − Btf .

      A simple argument deriving from log preference allows us to derive the equity value.

The local investor has wealth Wt and given log preference, he consumes ρWt . The following
accounting identity must hold for cash-flows:


                                         Xtd + Xtf = cdt + cft .


On the left-side is the amount of cash generated by the financial institution plus the amount

of foreign savings invested in the U.S.. Thus it is the total amount of cash inflow into financial

institutions. On the right-side is the amount consumed by local investors plus the amount
of cash repatriated by foreign investors (i.e. cash outflows). This condition is basically a

market clearing condition for the consumption goods. Rewriting, yields:


                                    Xtd + Xtf = ρWt + ρBtf


or,
                                                     Xtd Xtf − ρBtf
                                    Wt =                +
                                                     ρ       ρ




                                                          5
which implies that the value of the assets held by the financial institutions is:

                                                Xtd + Xtf
                                         Vt =             .
                                                    ρ

These expressions lead to the first result of the analysis.


Proposition 1 (Asset Demand Effect)
An increase in foreign demand for riskless assets, Xtf , raises the value of risky domestic

assets, Vt , and of domestic financial wealth, Wt.        An increase in foreign riskless debt Btf ,
lowers the value of domestic financial wealth.


   Consider an initial condition when China begins to invest in U.S. debt so that Xtf turns

positive. Our proposition shows that this flow will push up the value of U.S. assets and
domestic financial wealth in the short run. It explains how the value of U.S. assets rose

in the early stages of external demand. This is the asset demand effect highlighted in the
riskless environment of Caballero et al (2008).

   We next solve for the interest rate, rt . Investors can purchase either equity or debt from

financial institutions. Thus the interest rate must satisfy the local investor’s marginal pricing
condition (Euler equation). Going through the usual asset pricing steps based on an investor

with consumption ct, we have,


                               rt = ρ + Et [dct/ct ] − V art [dct/ct ].


The local investor has log preferences and wealth Wt . Thus,


                                             ct = ρWt .


We can then compute Et [dWt /Wt ] and V art [dWt/Wt ] to find the equilibrium interest rate.

Before doing so, let us define the foreign debt-to-asset ratio (leverage) of financial institutions


                                                  6
as
                                            Btf     Bf
                                    bft ≡       =ρ f t d
                                            Vt    Xt + Xt

and the scaled foreign demand for domestic assets as

                                                    Xtf
                                       xft ≡                  .
                                               Xtf + Xtd

Proposition 2 (Interest Rate) The interest rate is

                                                                           2 
                                                         1−           ψxft
                      rt = ρ + g − σ 2 − ρxft + σ 2 1 −
                                      
                                                                               .
                                                                              
                                                          1 − bft


     The first term in parenthesis corresponds to the interest rate in the absence of foreign
capital flows. The next two terms capture opposing effects that foreign entry has on the

interest rate. The first effect comes from expanding Et [dWt/Wt ]. Upon entry, asset demand
rises and lowers interest rates (mechanically, from the Euler equation, local wealth jumps on

entry and thereafter grows more slowly, which requires a lower interest rate). The second

effect is from the precautionary savings term V art [dWt/Wt ]. When ψ > 0, external flows
reduce domestic volatility because these flows are more stable than local cash-flows. This

effect raises interest rates, as we can see by examining the precautionary savings term when
bft = 0,
                                      2 
                                      f
                           2
                          σ 1 − 1 − ψxt      = σ 2ψxft (2 − ψxft ).

This expression is positive since xft < 1 and ψ > 0.

     Whether interest rates rise or fall upon foreign entry at t0 depends upon parameters.

However, as time passes, the precautionary savings effect puts downward pressure on interest
rates. To see this, note that over time, as foreign debt accumulates, risk is brought back via

an increase in leverage, bft . Since foreign debt holders must be promised a fixed repayment,
the domestic equity holders hold a residual claim that becomes riskier as leverage rises. The


                                                7
corresponding rise in precautionary savings reduces interest rates.
    The interest rate expression also reveals a contrast between the emerging markets case

and the U.S. case. As we have noted, we may think of the emerging markets case as one

where foreign inflows are strongly procyclical, so that ψ < 0. In this case, foreign demand
raises local volatility and risk, lowering interest rates through this precautionary savings

effect.

    Foreign entry, although creating some ambiguity in signing the change in interest rates,
has a clear effect on risk premia. Let us consider a hypothetical asset-i, whose return depends

on innovations in the risk factor dZt :


                                   dRit = Et [dRit ]dt + σ idZt .


Thus, if we think of dZt as reflecting risk on mortgage loans held by financial institutions,
this asset can be thought of as a mortgage-backed security. In general, the asset’s return is

correlated with the risks held by financial institutions.

    Suppose that this asset is in zero net supply, then let us consider how Et [dRit ] will be
determined. At the margin, if one of the financial institutions purchases this asset, it is

taking on more risk, which then affects the risk held by the local investors. Thus, the

expected return has to compensate the local investors for bearing additional risk. Since the
local investors have wealth of Wt , we have,


                             Et [dRit ] − rt = Covt[dRit , dWt /Wt ]
                                                 1 − ψxft
                                                     i
                                            = σσ          .
                                                  1 − bft

Proposition 3 (Risk Premium)

If ψ > 0, an increase in foreign demand for riskless assets, xft , lowers the risk premium

on domestic assets. An increase in foreign leverage, bft , always raises the risk premium.



                                                 8
       The intuition here is similar to that offered for the precautionary savings effects. Since
ψ > 0, foreign inflows are more stable than domestic cash-flows, and hence the stabilization

effect lowers risk premia.2 This is the immediate effect of foreign flows on domestic risk

premia. This effect helps explain why the U.S. experienced a sustained period of low risk
premia beginning in 2000.3

       Over time, external leverage grows and transfers more residual risk onto the domestic

equity holders. This effect increases risk premia and as time passes becomes the dominant
driver of the risk premium. Moreover, leverage also leads to a dynamic amplification mecha-

nism. If U.S. shocks turn negative so that Xtd and Vt fall, the effective leverage, bft = Bt /Vt ,
rises. Thus the negative shock, through leverage, leads risk premia to rise further. We

interpret the magnified downturn beginning in mid-2007 as corresponding to this leverage

multiplier effect.

              0.05                                                              50


                                                                                45
             0.045                     Risk Premium
                                                                                40

                                                                                                  Domestic Asset Value
              0.04
                                                                                35


                                                                                30
             0.035

                                                                                25

              0.03                         Interest Rate
                                                                                20

                                                                                                      External Debt
                                                                                15
             0.025


                                                                                10

              0.02
                                                                                5


             0.015                                                              0
                 -2   -1   0   1   2       3          4     5   6   7   8       -2   -1   0   1   2       3       4      5   6   7   8

                                         Time                                                           Time




                                                          Figure 1: Model Simulation
       Notes: Risk premium and interest rate (left panel) and asset value and external debt (right panel) are graphed over
       time. Parameters are g = 0.03, σ = 0.20, ρ = 0.04 and ψ = 0.5. We set X f (t0 ) = 0.5X d(t0 ). We also use an initial
       condition for debt upon entry at t0 such that B(t0) = V (t0 )/5, which helps to pictorially see the results. Time 0 is
       the date of foreign entry. Time 6 is the date when shocks turn negative. Prior to Time 6, X f and X d grow at rate
       g, while after Time 6 they grow at rates g − 2σ and g − σ, respectively.

   2
     There is another channel through which risk premia may fall. Since foreign inflows raise domestic wealth,
through decreasing absolute risk aversion there is a wealth effect that will lower risk premia.
   3
     Note that if ψ < 0, foreign inflows raises local risk premia. In this sense, the case of emerging markets
experience with capital inflows is one of unambiguously rising risk.




                                                                            9
     Figure 1 illustrates these results. We set g = 0.03, σ = 0.20, ρ = 0.04, ψ = 0.5, and set
X f (t0) = 0.5X d (t0). We also use an initial condition for debt upon entry at t0 such that

B(t0) = V (t0)/5, which helps to pictorially see the results. Time 0 is the date of foreign

entry. We plot a particular realization of shocks such that prior to Time 6, X f and X d grow
at rate g, while after Time 6 they grow at rates g − 2σ and g − σ, respectively. Thus we

interpret Time 6 as the date when shocks turn negative.

     The left panel of the figure shows that the risk premium and interest rate fall upon entry.
The risk premium rises thereafter as leverage accumulates, rising faster after Time 6. The

interest rate uniformly falls as risk accumulates over time. The right panel of the figure
shows that the asset value rises upon entry before falling when shocks turn negative.



II      Securitization and Misperceived Safety

How is safe debt created and sold to satisfy debt demand? The model represents safe-debt
as a short-term claim on the financial institutions. Thus the model directly can account for

the increase in financial sector leverage ratios in the period preceding the crisis. In practice,
debt is also created through the process of securitization: pooling and tranching of mortgage

and related assets to form “Aaa” senior tranches; the financial sector writing credit default

insurance on risky loans, which is then packaged with the risky loans to form safe debt. The
process of safe-debt creation is evident in much of the financial innovation during the last

seven years.
     The events of the summer of 2007 revealed that some of the safe debt created by financial

innovations was not truly safe. The assumptions on cash-flow correlations underlying the

insurance benefits to the pooling aspect of securitization proved wrong. As a result, senior
tranches had higher default exposure than had been perceived by many investors. The

institutions that sold credit default insurance ran into trouble, calling into question the

value of the credit default insurance they had sold to support the safe status of some debts.



                                               10
In short, safe-debt has proven to be unsafe.
   The realization of misperceived safety can create a further leverage amplifier. Prior to

the investors’ realization, some investors were holding claims which they thought were safe-

debt but were in fact closer to equity. When investors realized this fact they shifted their
portfolios to sell the “equity” and demand safe-debt.

   It is straightforward to see the effect of such a portfolio shift: interest rates fall, the risk

premium rises, and leverage rises, further exposing the financial sector to negative shocks.
This realization of misperceptions effect is consistent with a “flight to quality.”



III      Conclusion

We have presented a model to show how global imbalances has driven the U.S. securitization

boom and bust. Since flows into the U.S. have been predominantly seeking safe debt, U.S.

financial institutions, in producing the safe debt have been left holding a levered claim on
local mortgage risks. Thus our analysis ties together the behavior of leverage and the demand

for U.S. assets. An important aspect of the story that our analysis only touches upon is that
in creating safe assets, the U.S. financial sector not only took on more leverage but also

sourced assets (i.e. subprime loans) that carried higher cash-flow risks. That is, part of

the response to the increase in asset demand was an increase in asset supply, which at the
margin may have led to more toxic assets being created. It is likely that this phenomenon,

also driven by external demand for U.S. assets, has played a part in the build-up to the
current financial crisis.




                                               11
IV     References

 1. Caballero, R.J, E. Farhi, and P.O. Gourinchas, “An Equilibrium Model of Global
     Imbalances and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, March 2008.

 2. Krishnamurthy, A., and A.Vissing-Jorgensen. “The Aggregate Demand for Treasury
     Debt,” working paper, Northwestern University, 2008.




                                          12
