                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       MUNICIPAL DEBT AND MARGINAL TAX RATES:
                        IS THERE A TAX PREMIUM IN ASSET PRICES?

                                          Francis A. Longstaff

                                          Working Paper 14687
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14687


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2009




UCLA Anderson School and NBER. I am very grateful for helpful discussions with Hanno Lustig,
Douglas Montague, Eric Neis, Mike Rierson, Derek Schaeffer, and Joel Silva. All errors are my responsibility.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Francis A. Longstaff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Municipal Debt and Marginal Tax Rates: ¸˛Is there a Tax Premium in Asset Prices?
Francis A. Longstaff
NBER Working Paper No. 14687
January 2009
JEL No. G12,H2

                                            ABSTRACT

We study the marginal tax rate incorporated into short-term tax-exempt municipal rates using a unique
new data set from the municipal swap market. By applying an affine term-structure framework, we
are able to identify both the marginal tax rate and the credit/liquidity spread in one-week tax-exempt
rates. Furthermore, we obtain maximum likelihood estimates of the risk premia associated with these
variables. The average marginal tax rate during the sample period is 41.6 percent. We find that the
marginal tax rate is significantly positively related to returns in the stock and bond markets. The risk
premium associated with the marginal tax rate is negative, consistent with the strong contracyclical
nature of aftertax fixed-income cash flows which increase in bad states of the economy as personal
income and the effective marginal tax rates applied to those cash flows decline.


Francis A. Longstaff
UCLA
Anderson Graduate School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza, Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu
                               1. INTRODUCTION


One of the most fundamental issues in Finance is the question of how taxes aﬀect
security values. This important topic has been the focus of an extensive literature
which now dates back nearly a century. Despite the many important contributions
in this area, however, there is still much about the eﬀects of taxation on investment
values that is not yet fully understood.
     The challenge is particularly evident in studying municipal debt markets. Many
researchers have documented that the ratio of municipal bond yields to Treasury or
corporate bond yields appears to imply marginal tax rates that are much smaller than
would be expected given Federal income tax rates. Key papers discussing this muni-
bond puzzle include Trzcinka (1982), Livingston (1982), Arak and Gentner (1983),
Stock and Schrems (1984), Ang, Peterson, and Peterson (1985), Buser and Hess (1986),
Kochin and Parks (1988), and Green and Oedegaard (1997). A number of papers con-
sider whether the puzzle can be explained by municipal credit risk, including Kidwell
and Trzcinka (1982), Skelton (1983), Chalmers (1998), and Neis (2006). In an im-
portant paper, Green (1993) develops a simple model that takes into account the
asymmetries between the taxation of capital gains and losses as well as the treatment
of coupon income and shows that the resulting eﬀect of these tax asymmetries may
help explain the muni-bond puzzle.

      This paper presents a new and fundamentally diﬀerent approach to estimating the
marginal tax rate τt incorporated into tax-exempt municipal debt rates. In doing this,
we take advantage of an extensive new data set that includes both the yields of one-
week tax-exempt municipal debt as well as the term structure of rates for municipal
swaps exchanging this tax-exempt yield for a percentage of Libor. Using this data,
we estimate an aﬃne term structure model of the municipal swap curve via maximum
likelihood and obtain estimates of both the marginal tax rate and the credit/liquidity
spread embedded in municipal yields.
     This new approach has a number of important advantages. First, by estimating
the marginal tax rate from one-week municipal yields, our results are free of the types
of tax-asymmetry or tax-trading complications that Green (1993), Constantinides and
Ingersoll (1982), and others show may aﬀect yields on longer-term municipal bonds.
Second, this approach allows us to estimate the market risk premia incorporated into
the term structure as compensation to investors for bearing the risk of time variation in
the marginal tax rate. Thus, we can directly evaluate whether there is a tax premium
embedded in asset prices stemming from the progressive nature of income taxation in
the U.S. Third, our approach allows us to study directly how changes in marginal tax
rates are related to ﬁnancial and macroeconomic shocks.



                                           1
     The empirical results are very striking. We ﬁnd that the average marginal tax rate
during the 2001-2008 sample period is 41.6 percent. This value is slightly higher than
the maximum Federal income tax rate of 39.1 percent during 2001, 38.6 percent during
2002, and 35.0 percent during the remainder of the sample period. Thus, these results
are consistent with a scenario in which the marginal tax reﬂects both Federal and state
income taxes. The estimated marginal tax rate, however, varies substantially through
time and ranges from roughly 31 to 49 percent during the sample period. These
estimates of the marginal tax rate are also consistent with the higher marginal rates
identiﬁed by Ang, Bhansali, and Xing (2008) in an important recent paper studying
the cross-sectional pricing of discount municipal bonds.
     The estimated values of the marginal tax rate are also signiﬁcantly larger than
those obtained by a naive comparison of the short-term tax-exempt rate to the cor-
responding fully-taxable riskless rate. Intuitively, the reason for this is that there is
a substantial credit/liquidity spread incorporated into short-term tax-exempt munici-
pal yields. We ﬁnd that the average value of this spread during the sample period is
106 basis points. The estimated spread, however, increased dramatically during the
early stages of the subprime credit crisis as monoline municipal bond insurers suﬀered
major credit-related losses and auction failures in the short-term auction-rate-security
markets became widespread.
     To explore how the marginal tax rate evolves over time, we regress changes in the
marginal tax rate on a number of variables proxying for changes in investors’ personal
income. We ﬁnd that the marginal tax rate is signiﬁcantly and positively related to
returns on the S&P 500 and on U.S. Treasury bonds. In contrast, the marginal tax rate
is not signiﬁcantly related to broader measures of aggregate personal income growth.
These results provide intriguing insights into the nature of the marginal investor in
the municipal bond markets.

     One of the most surprising empirical results is that the market risk premium
for the marginal tax rate is negative in sign. In particular, the long-run expected
marginal tax rate is 41.7 percent which is substantially higher than the long-run for-
ward marginal tax rate of 29.4 percent. This means that the present value of the
product of a ﬁxed cash ﬂow and 1 − τt (which is just the aftertax value of that cash
ﬂow) can be signiﬁcantly larger than its expected value discounted at the riskless rate.

     To understand the reason for this negative risk premium, observe that marginal
tax rates are very procyclical because of the progressivity of the Federal income tax
system. In good states of the economy, personal income increases and investors move
into higher marginal tax brackets, while the opposite is true in bad states of the
economy. This means that c(1−τt), where c is the coupon on a bond, is actually highly
contracyclical. Thus, the risk premium for this cash ﬂow can be negative because of
its “negative consumption beta.”


                                           2
     A key implication of these results is that the negative risk premium for the
marginal tax rate may help explain a signiﬁcant portion of the muni-bond puzzle. In
particular, our results suggest that the negative risk premium may reduce the spread
between longer-term Treasury and tax-exempt municipal yields by 50 basis points or
more during the sample period. Thus, these results complement and extend those
provided by Green (1993), Chalmers (1998), and others.
     Other important recent research on municipal debt markets includes Green and
Oedegaard (1997), Downing and Zhang (2004), Nanda and Singh (2004), Green (2007),
Green, Holliﬁeld, and Schürhoﬀ (2007a, b), Green, Li, and Schürhoﬀ (2007), and Ang,
Bhansali, and Xing (2008). Important papers addressing the impact of taxation on
bond prices and trading strategies include Livingston (1979), Constantinides and In-
gersoll (1982), Schaefer (1982), Litzenberger and Rolfo (1984), Jordan (1984), Dybvig
and Ross (1986), Dammon and Green (1987), Graham (2003), and Dammon, Spatt,
and Zhang (2004).
     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an in-
troduction to the municipal swap market. Section 3 describes the data used in the
study. Section 4 presents the aﬃne model of the term structure of municipal swap
rates. Section 5 describes the maximum likelihood estimation of the model. Sec-
tion 6 presents the empirical results. Section 7 summarizes the results and presents
concluding remarks.


                    2. THE MUNICIPAL SWAP MARKET


In this section we provide a brief introduction to the municipal swap market. Since
swaps in this market are tied to the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Asso-
ciation Municipal Swap Index (MSI), we ﬁrst explain how this index is constructed.
We then describe the various types of municipal swap contracts available in the over-
the-counter ﬁnancial markets.
2.1 The Municipal Swap Index

The MSI is a high-grade market index reﬂecting the yields on seven-day-resettable
tax-exempt variable-rate demand obligations (VRDOs). Thus, the MSI is eﬀectively
a one-week tax-exempt rate. The index is produced by Municipal Market Data which
maintains an extensive database containing information for more than 15,000 active
VRDOs. Municipal Market Data is a subsidiary of Thompson Financial Services.1
1
 This section is based on the description of the market provided by the Securities Indus-
try and Financial Markets Association (www.sifma.org/capital markets/swapindex.sht
ml).

                                           3
     VRDOs are long-term tax-exempt ﬂoating-rate notes issued by municipalities.
Typically, the ﬂoating rate on the notes is reset at a weekly frequency, although both
shorter and longer frequencies occur in the markets. Although the maturities of VR-
DOs are often 30 to 40 years, they are eﬀectively shorter-term securities since they can
be put back or tendered to the investment dealer or remarketing agent on a schedule
coinciding with the weekly yield reset.
     The remarketing agent, which is often the ﬁnancial institution that originally
issued the VRDO for the municipality, has two ongoing roles. First, the remarketing
agent functions as a broker in that if VRDOs are tendered at the weekly yield reset, the
remarketing agent attempts to ﬁnd a buyer for the tendered VRDOs. Second, as part
of this process, the remarketing agent sets the weekly yield to whatever level is required
for the market to clear the tendered VRDOs (and which may also incorporate market
information about market-clearing rates for similar VRDO issues). In this respect,
VRDOs have a number of features in common with auction-rate securities which also
reset frequently via a market clearing mechanism. Note, however, that the weekly
reset for a VRDO is determined by the remarketing agent while the weekly reset for
an auction-rate note is determined via a constrained Dutch auction (which may fail
in that the maximum allowable yield is below the rate needed to clear the market.2
VRDOs are typically issued at par. When they are put back to the remarketing
agent, an investor receives par plus accrued interest. Criscuolo and Faloon (2007)
estimate that 70 percent of VRDOs are held by money market funds, 15 percent are
held by corporations, 7 percent are held by bond funds, and 8 percent are held by
trust departments. The VRDO market presents a large and rapidly growing segment
of the $2.6 trillion municipal debt market. In particular, the Securities Industry and
Financial Markets Association reports that $63.3 billion of variable-rate municipal
bond obligations were issued during 2007, and that $94.9 billion were issued through
August of 2008.
     There are a number of criteria which a VRDO must satisfy for its yield to be
included in the MSI. First, the VRDO must have a weekly reset, eﬀective on Wednes-
day. Second, the VRDO must not be subject to alternative minimum tax. Third,
the VRDO must have an outstanding amount of at least $10 million. Fourth, the
VRDO must have the highest short-term rating which is VMIG1 by Moody’s or A-1+
by Standard and Poor’s. Historically, a municipal issuer of VRDOs would need to
obtain some sort of credit enhancement (such as a letter of credit from a highly-rated
bank) to obtain the highest short-term rating.3 Fifth, the VRDO must pay interest

2
 For a discussion of the auction-rate markets, see McConnell and Sarreto (2008) and
Sulzberge and Flynn (2008).
3
 For a discussion of the role of credit enhancement in VRDO issuance, see Criscuolo
and Faloon (2007).


                                            4
on a monthly basis, calculated on an actual/actual basis. Finally, only one quote per
obligor per remarketing agent can be included in the MSI. The MSI can include issues
from any state. The MSI is calculated weekly on Wednesday and released on Thursday.

     The underlying source data for the index comes from Municipal Market Data’s
Variable Rate Demand Note Network. This network collects market data from over 80
remarketing agents who download daily rate change information to Municipal Market
Data’s network. The actual number of VRDOs included in the weekly index ﬂuctuates,
but is estimated to include roughly 650 issues in any given week.

2.2 The Municipal Swap Market
The primary type of municipal swap contract available in the ﬁnancial markets is
the percentage-of-Libor contract. This contract is very similar to a standard ﬂoating-
for-ﬂoating basis swap contract. Speciﬁcally, one counterparty to the municipal swap
contract agrees to pay the other the numerical value of the MSI at some frequency, say,
monthly. In exchange, the other counterparty commits to pay the ﬁrst counterparty
a ﬁxed percentage P of the numerical value of the Libor rate. Both payments are
made relative to a speciﬁc notional amount and are accrued on a standard actual/360
daycount convention. For example, if payments are exchanged monthly, the ﬁrst coun-
terparty would pay the second the average value of the one-week MSI rate during the
month times the daycount fraction on the swap notional amount. The second coun-
terparty would pay the ﬁrst P times the one-month Libor rate set at the beginning of
the month times the same daycount fraction on the swap notional.

     It is important to stress that the cash ﬂows from both the MSI and Libor legs of
a municipal swap contract will typically be fully taxable to the swap counterparties.
The tax-exempt status of the interest from the VRDOs included in the MSI does not
carry over to ﬁnancial contracts with cash ﬂows that are tied to the numerical value
of the index. Thus, the marginal tax rate enters into the pricing of a muncipal swap
only through its eﬀect on the one-week MSI rate. It is this feature that enables us
to abstract completely from the types of tax asymmetries that aﬀect the valuation of
longer-maturity municipal bonds as described by Green (1993).

     In this market, municipal swaps are quoted in terms of the percentage P required
to make both legs of the swap have equal value. Intuitively, the reason for the per-
centage P is easily seen. Since the MSI is a tax-exempt rate, its numerical value will
likely be substantially lower that the numerical value of the fully-taxable Libor rate.
Thus, the counterparty paying Libor would generally not be willing to pay Libor ﬂat
in exchange for the MSI rate. Typically, the market-clearing value of P is signiﬁcantly
lower than 100 percent. Like conventional interest rate swaps, municipal swaps are
traded in the OTC markets. Market quotations for municipal swaps with 1-, 2-, 3-,
4-, 5-, 7-, 10-, 12-, 15-, 20-, 25-, and 30-year maturities are currently readily available
in the Bloomberg system and from other market data sources.

                                            5
     A popular alternative type of municipal swap contract is given by combining
a percentage-of-Libor contract with a standard ﬁxed-for-ﬂoating Libor interest rate
swap. To illustrate, imagine that municipal swap market participants are willing to
pay 70 percent of Libor to receive the MSI rate over the next 10 years. Furthermore,
imagine that swap market participants are also willing to pay Libor to receive a ﬁxed
rate of 6 percent over the next 10 years in a standard swap. Then a simple arbitrage
argument implies that market participants should be willing to pay a ﬁxed rate of
0.70 × 0.0600 = 0.0420 to receive the MSI rate over the next 10 years. Thus, there is
a simple equivalence between percentage-of-Libor swaps and these ﬁxed-for-MSI-rate
swaps.


                                   3. THE DATA


The data for the study include the one-week tax-exempt MSI rate, market rates for
percentage-of-Libor municipal swaps, as well as Treasury, repo, and swap market rates.
The diﬀerent categories of data are described individually below.
3.1 The Municipal Swap Index Data

We obtain weekly observations of the one-week tax-exempt MSI rate directly from
the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association website for the period from
August 1, 2001 to June 18, 2008; see http://archives.sifma.org/swap data.html. We
choose this time period since municipal swap data is only available for this horizon.
The time period provides a total of 360 weekly observations. The vast majority of
these weekly observations are for Wednesday.4 Table 1 provides summary statistics for
the data.
3.2 Treasury Repo Rate Data

In solving for the marginal tax rate incorporated into the one-week tax-exempt MSI,
it will be helpful to have a fully-taxable one-week riskless rate to use as a benchmark.
While one-month, three-month, and six-month Treasury bill yield data are readily
available in the ﬁnancial markets, data for shorter maturities are diﬃcult to obtain
and are likely to be less reliable. To circumvent this diﬃculty, we will use the one-week
Treasury repo rate as a proxy for the one-week riskless rate.5 We obtain midmarket
data for the one-week Treasury repo data from the Bloomberg system for the same
4
 In a few instances, the MSI is reported for an alternative day of the week such as
Thursday.
5
 The empirical results of this study are virtually the same when the one-month Trea-
sury bill rate is used as a proxy for the one-week riskless rate.


                                           6
dates as the MSI data.
     There are a number of justiﬁcations for the use of the Treasury repo rate as a
proxy for the riskless rate. First, as argued in Longstaﬀ (2000), repo rates reﬂect
the actual cost of capital to government bond dealers for their positions in Treasury
bonds. Second, Treasury repo contracts are fully collateralized, or more generally,
overcollateralized by the underlying Treasury bonds associated with the transaction.
Thus, there is little default risk associated with a short-term government repo con-
tract. Third, as discussed by Duﬀee (1998) and others, Treasury bill yields display a
signiﬁcant amount of idiosyncratic variation which may not be related to movements in
the economic riskless rate. For example, Longstaﬀ (2004) shows that Treasury yields
can be aﬀected by ﬂights-to-quality or ﬂights-to-liquidity.


    6
                MSI Rate
    5           Repo Rate

    4

    3

    2

    1

    0
         2002          2003   2004       2005      2006       2007      2008



   2.5

    2

   1.5

    1

   0.5

    0
         2002          2003   2004       2005      2006       2007      2008




    Figure 1. The MSI and Repo Rates. The upper panel plots the MSI
    rate and the repo rate. The lower panel plots the ratio of the MSI rate to
    the repo rate.

                                         7
Finally, Treasury securities may not actually be default free. In particular, the ﬁve-
year credit default swap premium for the U.S. Treasury has been quoted at levels as
high as 24 basis points.6

     To provide some preliminary perspective on the relation between taxable and tax-
exempt rates, Figure 1 plots the the MSI and repo rates in the upper panel and the
ratio of the MSI rate to the repo rate in the lower panel. As illustrated, the relation
between the taxable and tax-exempt rates is fairly complex. On average, the MSI
rate is 85.4 percent of the repo rate. At a ﬁrst glance, this seems to suggest that the
average marginal tax rate is only 100 − 85.4 = 14.6 percent. In reality, however, this
simplistic measure of the marginal tax rate fails to take into account the credit risk
incorporated into the tax-exempt curve. While the MSI rate is based on yields for
VRDOs with the highest short-term credit rating, the MSI rate may still reﬂect the
default risk inherent in the municipal bond issuers and/or the ﬁnancial institutions
providing credit enhancement for the VRDOs. Thus, if the MSI rate contains a credit
risk spread, the simple ratio of the MSI rate to the repo rate would give a downward
biased measure of the marginal tax rate.

     In fact, Figure 1 shows that the tax-exempt rate has frequently exceeded the
repo rate. For example, the ratio of the tax-exempt MSI rate to the taxable repo
rate reached a level of 2.33 on March 19, 2008. Recall that on March 17, 2008 J. P.
Morgan oﬀered to purchase Bear Stearns for a price of $2 per share, which allowed
Bear Stearns to avoid ﬁling bankruptcy. Thus, the premium of the tax-exempt rate
over the taxable rate was very likely due to the perceived increase in systemic credit
risk in the debt markets, or equivalently, the concurrent ﬂight-to-quality that occurred
in the Treasury markets. A key advantage of the empirical approach we adopt in this
paper is that it allows us to identify the marginal tax rate separately from the credit
and/or illiquidity spread incorporated into the tax-exempt curve.

3.3 The Municipal Swap Data
We obtain midmarket rates for 1-, 2-, 3-, 4-, 5-, 7-, 10-, 12-, 15-, and 20-year percentage-
of-Libor municipal swaps from the Bloomberg system for the same dates as described
above. Recall that these municipal swap rates are quoted as percentages.7
     Table 1 provides summary statistics for these municipal swap rates. Figure 2
plots the average values of the municipal swap rates during the sample period. As
shown, the average percentage swap rate is not monotonic in the maturity of the
swap. The average percentage is 76.06 for the 1-year swap, declines to 74.48 for the
6
 Based on intraday Bloomberg quotations on September 29, 2008 when the Dow Jones
Industrial Index declined by over 777 points.
7
 We do not include the 25- and 30-year maturities in the study since data for these
swaps are not available for much of the sample period.


                                             8
4-year swap, and then increases to a maximum of 78.17 percent for the 20-year swap.
Although the average percentage swap rates are not monotonic, we observe that there
are many dates during the sample period when the percentage swap rates are either
monotonically increasing or decreasing with swap maturity. Table 1 shows that there
is considerable time series variation in the percentage swap rates. In particular, the
standard deviation of the percentage swap rate ranges from 8.35 percent for the 1-year
swap to 2.53 percent for the 20-year swap. Thus, longer-term percentage swap rates
are signiﬁcantly less volatile than are shorter-maturity percentage swap rates. This
suggests the possibility that there could be a mean-reverting nature to the relation
between tax-exempt and taxable rates.


             79


           78.5


             78


           77.5


             77


           76.5


             76


           75.5


             75


           74.5


             74
                  0   2   4     6     8     10       12   14   16   18   20
                                          Maturity




    Figure 2. Average Municipal Swap Rates. This plot shows the average
    values of the municipal swap rates during the sample period. These rates are
    expressed as a percentage of Libor.


3.4 Treasury Term Structure and Interest Rate Swap Data

In the analysis later in the paper, we discount cash ﬂows using a riskless discount
function bootstrapped from the Treasury yield curve. Speciﬁcally, we obtain constant
maturity Treasury (CMT) rates from the Federal Reserve Board’s historical H.15 data
for 1-month, 3-month, 6-month, 1-year, 2-year, 3-year, 5-year, 7-year, 10-year, and 20-

                                           9
year maturities for the same dates as for the other time series. Using a standard cubic
spline algorithm, we then solve for the riskless discount function Dt (T ) for weekly
maturities up to 20 years for each date during the sample period. This algorithm in
described in Longstaﬀ, Mithal, and Neis (2005).

     We also use midmarket data for conventional ﬁxed-for-ﬂoating Libor interest rate
swaps in the analysis. In particular, we collect midmarket rates for 1-, 2-, 3-, 4-, 5-,
7-, 10-, 12-, 15-, and 20-year interest rate swaps from the Bloomberg system for the
same dates as above.8


                  4. THE MARGINAL TAX RATE MODEL


In this section, we describe the approach used to model the marginal tax rate incor-
porated into the tax-exempt MSI rate. In doing this, it is important to allow for the
possibility that the MSI rate may include a spread reﬂecting the higher credit risk of
even highly-rated VRDOs relative to the riskless rate. Furthermore, our approach will
also address the possibility that VRDO yields may include a component reﬂecting the
lower liquidity of municipal securities relative to that of Treasury securities.

     Let Mt denote the tax-exempt one-week MSI rate. This rate can be expressed in
the following way,


                             Mt = (rt + λt ) (1 − τt ),                             (1)

where rt is the riskless pretax interest rate. In this expression λt is a pretax spread
reﬂecting either the credit risk of the tax-exempt index, the illiquidity of the VRDOs
incorporated in the index, or some combination of both. The term τt designates the
marginal tax rate of the marginal investor in VRDOs. We also assume that the taxable
one-month Libor rate Lt can be expressed as


                                   Lt = rt + μt ,                                   (2)

8
 These swap data represent the market rate for exchanging ﬁxed coupons for three-
month Libor. In contrast, the Libor leg of the municipal swaps involves one-month
Libor. During the sample period, however, the midmarket value of the basis swap for
exchanging one-month Libor for three-month Libor is within a fraction of a basis point
of zero. Thus, there is little or no loss of accuracy in treating the Libor legs of the
municipal and conventional interest rate swaps as if they were on the same underlying
Libor index.


                                          10
where μt also represents a credit/liquidity spread incorporated into the Libor rate.
    We will make the simplifying assumption that rt , λt , μt , and τt all follow inde-
pendent processes. This assumption has little eﬀect on the results and could easily
be relaxed. By making this assumption, however, we avoid the need to specify the
dynamics of the riskless rate rt and the Libor credit/liquidity spread μt .
    The dynamics of the VRDO credit/liquidity spread λt are given by



                           dλt = (a − b λt ) dt + c dZλt ,                          (3)

                           dλt = (â − b̂ λt ) dt + c dZλt ,                        (4)


under the risk-neutral Q measure and the actual P measure, respectively. Thus, we
allow both of the constant parameters in the drift of the above processes to diﬀer
between the risk-neutral and actual measures. This simple but general speciﬁcation
has the advantage of allowing the market price of risk for λt to be time varying. The
process Zλt is a standard Brownian motion. These dynamics allow the credit/liquidity
spread to be mean reverting and to take on negative values. This latter feature is
important since it is at least theoretically possible that under some extreme scenarios,
the liquidity of the highest-rated municipal securities might equal or even exceed that
of Treasury securities; these dynamics allow us to address this possibility.

    Similarly, the dynamics of the marginal tax rate τt are assumed to follow,



                           dτt = (α − β τt ) dt + σ dZτ t ,                         (5)

                           dτt = (α̂ − β̂ τt ) dt + σ dZτ t ,                       (6)


under the Q and P measures, respectively. These dynamics again imply that τt fol-
lows a mean-reverting Gaussian or Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. The motivation for
allowing for mean reversion in these dynamics comes from the observation that the
volatility of longer-term municipal swap rates is a decreasing function of maturity. The
motivation for assuming Gaussian dynamics, which can allow τt to take on negative
values, is to allow for the fact that an investor’s marginal tax rate can actually be
slightly negative under some extreme circumstances.
    Turning now to the valuation of percentage-of-Libor municipal swap contracts,
observe that all of the cash ﬂows associated with the swap will typically be taxable;

                                          11
the tax-exempt status of the VRDOs underlying the MSI rate does not transfer to
swaps even though these swaps have cash ﬂows tied to the tax-exempt rate. Thus,
in present valuing swap cash ﬂows, it is appropriate to use the usual pretax riskless
discount function applied in standard valuation problems in Finance.

     Let Dt (T ) denote the value at time t of a riskless zero-coupon bond with a maturity
of T years.9 Under the risk-neutral pricing measure, the present value of the ﬂoating
MSI leg of a percentage-of-Libor municipal swap contract with maturity T can be
expressed formally as

                                                                                                                                     
                        T                            s
          EQ                exp −                        rt+u du                  (rt+s + λt+s ) ( 1 − τt+s ) ds                              .    (7)
                    0                            0



Similarly, the present value of the Libor leg of this swap can be expressed as

                                                                                                                             
                                             T                                s
               Pt (T ) EQ                        exp −                            rt+u du          (rt+s + μt+s ) ds                  ,            (8)
                                         0                                0



where Pt (T ) designates the fraction of Libor paid in this percentage-of-Libor swap.

     This latter expression depends on the Libor credit/liquidity spread μt . This
spread, however, can be substituted out of the model by noting that in a standard
interest rate swap, the present value of receiving 100 percent of Libor is just the
present value of receiving the current market swap rate which we designate St (T ).
Speciﬁcally, the present value of the Libor leg in a standard interest rate swap

                                                                                                                     
                                     T                                s
                    EQ                   exp −                            rt+u du              (rt+s + μt+s ) ds              ,                    (9)
                                 0                                0



equals the present value of receiving an annuity of St (T ) from the ﬁxed leg of the swap,

                                                                                                             
                                                                  T                        s
                             St (T ) EQ                                   exp −                rt+u du       ds       ,                           (10)
                                                              0                        0


9
 Throughout this section, we assume that swap cash ﬂows are paid continuously. In
actuality, however, cash ﬂows from swaps are paid discretely. This assumption greatly
simpliﬁes the exposition and has virtually no eﬀect on the empirical results.


                                                                                  12
which can also be expressed as

                                                         T
                                        St (T )               Dt (s) ds.                                           (11)
                                                      0



Combining these results implies that the present value of the percentage-of-Libor leg
of the municipal swap is given by

                                                                 T
                                     St (T ) Pt (T )                   Dt (s) ds.                                  (12)
                                                              0


    To solve for the percentage swap rate Pt (T ), we observe that,

                                                                s                       
                          −Dt (s)   = EQ exp −                        rt+u du       rt+s       .                  (13)
                                                               0


Setting the present values in Equations (7) and (12) equal to each other and solving
for Pt (T ) gives



                    T                                            T
               −   0    Dt (s) EQ [1 − τt+s ] ds +             0 D(s) EQ [λt+s ]           Et [1 − τt+s] ds
   Pt (T ) =                                                  T
                                                                                                               .   (14)
                                            St (T )           0
                                                                 D(s) ds


From Equations (3) and (5),



                                                                             α
                        EQ [ 1 − τt+s ] = 1 − τt e−βs −                        (1 − e−βs ),                        (15)
                                                                             β
                                                                       a
                             EQ [ λt+s ] = λt e−bs +                     (1 − e−bs ).                              (16)
                                                                       b


The Appendix shows that substituting these expressions into Equation (14) and eval-
uating the integrals gives the following solution for Pt (T )


                   Pt (T ) = φt (T ) + ψt (T ) τt + ξt (T ) λt + ζt (T ) λt τt ,                                   (17)

                                                       13
where
                                                                        a(β−α)
                        1 − (1 − α
                                 β (1 − e
                                         −βT
                                             ))Dt (T ) +                  bβ   At (0, T )
          φt (T ) =
                                              St (T )At (0, T )
                        a(α−β)                    α(a−bβ)                        aα
                          bβ
                               At (b, T )     +      bβ
                                                          At (β, T )         −      A (b
                                                                                 bβ t
                                                                                           + β, T )
                  +                                                                                   ,   (18)
                                                   St (T )At (0, T )


                    −1 + e−βT Dt (T ) + (β − ab )At (β, T ) + ab At (b + β, T )
          ψt (T ) =                                                             ,                         (19)
                                       St (T )At (0, T )


                        (1 − α               α
                             β )At (b, T ) + β At (b + β, T )
            ξt (T ) =                                                    ,                                (20)
                                   St (T )At (0, T )


                        −At (b + β, T )
            ζt (T ) =                     ,                                                               (21)
                        St (T )At (0, T )


and where

                                                            T
                                    At (u, T ) =                 Dt (s)e−us ds.                           (22)
                                                         0


From this equation, we see that given the discount function Dt (s), the percentage swap
rate Pt (T ) is simply a bilinear function of τt and λt . Thus, since the MSI rate is also
an explicit function of τt and λt , we can solve for τt and λt directly from the MSI and
percentage swap rates.


                  5. MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION


To estimate the model, we use a maximum likelihood approach similar to that often
used in estimating term structure models. Important examples of the applications of
this methodology to term structure estimation include Duﬃe and Singleton (1997),
Duﬀee (2002), Liu, Longstaﬀ, and Mandell (2006).
    Paralleling Duﬃe and Singleton (1997), we assume that the MSI rate and the
10-year percentage swap rates are measured without error. Thus, given rt and the

                                                         14
discount function Dt (T ), and conditional on the parameter vector θ, we can invert
Equations (1) and (17) to solve explicitly for λt and τt . In fact, given the simple
functional form of Equation (1) and the bilinear form of Equation (17), the value of
τt is given from a simple quadratic equation. Speciﬁcally, the solutions for λt and τt
are given by


                                   Mt
                         λt =              − rt ,                                           (23)
                                 (1 − τt )

                                 −κt (T ) −     κt (T )2 − 4νt (T )χt (T )
                          τt =                                             ,                (24)
                                                 2νt (T )




where

            νt (T ) = −ψt (T ) + ζt (T )rt ,                                                (25)


            κt (T ) = Pt (10) − φt (T ) + ψt (T ) + ξt (T )rt + ζt (T )Mt − ζt (T )rt ,     (26)

            χt (T ) = −Pt (10) + φt (T ) + ξt (T )Mt − ξt (T )rt .                          (27)

Thus, λt and τt can be expressed as explicit functions of Mt and Pt (10). Let Jt denote
the Jacobian of the mapping from Mt and Pt (10) to λt and τt .

       From the values of λt , τt and the parameter vector θ, we can now solve for the
percentage swap rate implied by the model for any maturity. Let t denote the time-t
vector of diﬀerences between the market and model values of Pt (T ) implied by the
values of τt , λt , and θ for the 1-, 2-, 3-, 4-, 5-, 7-, 12-, 15-, and 20-year municipal
swaps. Under the assumption that t is conditionally multivariate normal with mean
vector zero and a diagonal covariance matrix Σ with diagonal values v12 , v22 , v32 , v42 , v52 ,
v72 , v12
       2     2
          , v15        2
                , and v20 (where the subscripts denote the maturities of the corresponding
municipal swaps), the log likelihood function for Mt+Δt , Pt+Δt , and t+Δt conditional
on Mt , Pt (10), and the term structure information is

                      11                           1             1
           LLKt = −       ln(2π) + ln | Jt+Δt | − ln | Σ | − t+Δt Σ−1 t+Δt
                       2                           2             2
                                        ⎛                                          ⎞
                                                           −β̂Δt    α̂       −β̂Δt 2
          1        2
                  σ (1 − e −2β̂Δt
                                  )       β̂ τ t+Δt − τ t e      −  β̂
                                                                       (1 − e     )
         − ln                       −⎝                                               ⎠
          2              2β̂                          σ (1 − e
                                                         2       −2 β̂Δt )

                                                    15
                                       ⎛                                         2 ⎞
         1       2
                c (1 − e −2b̂Δt
                                  )      b̂ λt+Δt − λt e−b̂Δt − âb̂ (1 − e−b̂Δt )
        − ln                          −⎝                                             ⎠.   (28)
         2             2b̂                          c2 (1 − e−2b̂Δt )


The total log likelihood function is then given by summing LLKt over all of the weekly
observations.

     We maximize the log likelihood function over the 19-dimensional parameter vec-
tor θ with a standard quasi-Newton algorithm using a ﬁnite-diﬀerence gradient. As
a robustness check that the algorithm achieves the global maximum, we repeat the
estimation using a variety of diﬀerent starting values for the parameter vector. Ta-
ble 2 reports the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters along with their
asymptotic standard errors.


                        6. THE EMPIRICAL RESULTS


In this section, we focus ﬁrst on the estimated municipal default/liquidity spread λt
and its risk premium. We then report the results for the estimated marginal tax rate
τt and examine the implications for asset prices and ﬁnancial markets. Finally, we
address the issue of the eﬃciency of prices in the municipal swap market and the
relative valuation of municipal swap contracts.

6.1 The Credit/Liquidity Spread

Table 3 provide summary statistics about the estimated values of the municipal credit/
liquidity spread λt . Figure 3 plots the time series of the estimated values of λt . As
shown, there is a substantial credit/liquidity spread incorporated into the MSI rate.
The average value of λt during the sample period is 106.0 basis points. The value of
λt , however, has varied signiﬁcantly throughout the sample period, ranging from -85.0
basis points to 423.8 basis points. The standard deviation of λt is 70.8 basis points.

     Figure 3 shows that the value of λt is generally positive. Of the 360 weeks in
the sample period, the estimated value of λt is positive for 351 weeks, or equivalently,
for 97.5 percent of the sample. For most of the ﬁrst two-thirds of the sample period,
the credit/liquidity spread hovers between roughly 25 basis points to 100 basis points.
Beginning about mid 2006, however, the value of λt starts to increase, often reaching
levels in excess of 200 basis points or more as the subprime crisis of 2007 unfolded.
The largest negative value of λt occurs on February 13, 2008 which was close to the
height of the period during which auction failures in the auction-rate security markets
became widespread. Thus, the quality of market data in the closely-related VRDO
market could easily have been adversely impacted during this period.

                                               16
             450


             400


             350


             300


             250


             200


             150


             100


              50


               0


             −50


            −100
                   2002    2003    2004     2005    2006     2007     2008




    Figure 3. The Credit/Liquidity Spread. This plot shows the estimated
    credit/liquidity spread λt during the sample period.


6.2 The Credit/Liquidity Risk Premium

The maximum likelihood estimates of â and b̂ in Table 2 imply that the long-run mean
of λt under the actual measure is 104.6 basis points. This is in close agreement with the
average value of λt reported in Table 3. In contrast, the maximum likelihood estimates
of a and b imply that the long-run mean of λt under the risk-neutral measure is 150.0
basis points. Thus, there is clearly a signiﬁcant risk premium associated with λt ; the
market prices securities as if the long-run value of λt were about 45 basis points higher
than its actual long-run value.

     To put these results into asset-pricing terms, Table 4 reports summary statistics
for the diﬀerence between the expected value of λt under the risk-neutral and actual
measures, EQ [ λT ] − EP [ λT ]. Recall that the expected value of λT under the risk-
neutral measure Q is just the no-arbitrage price for a futures or forward contract that
settles to λT . Thus, these diﬀerences capture the spread between the forward value of
λT and the expected spot value of λT . As such, the spread directly measures the risk
premium that hedger would be willing to pay to lock in the future value of λT via a
futures or forward contract.

                                           17
     As shown, the average risk premium is an increasing function of the horizon. The
average risk premium is 28.8 basis points for the one-year horizon, 39.2 basis points
for a two-year horizon, and 45.4 basis points for a ten-year horizon. Table 4 also shows
that there is considerable variation in the risk premium, at least for some of the shorter
horizons. For longer horizons, the risk premium is less volatile which is not surprising
given the rapid estimated speeds of mean reversion for λt under both measures.
6.3 The Marginal Tax Rate

Table 3 also reports summary statistics for the estimated marginal tax rate τt . Figure
4 plots the time series of the estimated values of τt . The average value of τt during
the sample period is 41.57 percent. This average value is somewhat higher than the
highest Federal income tax rate during the sample period. Speciﬁcally, the highest
Federal income tax rate was 39.1 percent during 2001, 38.6 percent during 2002, and
35.0 percent during 2003-2008.


            52


            50


            48


            46


            44


            42


            40


            38


            36


            34


            32


            30
                 2002     2003     2004     2005    2006     2007     2008




    Figure 4. The Marginal Tax Rate. This plot shows the estimated
    marginal tax rate τt during the sample period.


    It is important to recognize, however, that the MSI rate is a average of yields
on VRDOs from a broad collection of municipal issuers from virtually every state.

                                           18
Thus, the marginal tax rate incorporated into the index may in fact reﬂect Federal,
state, and possibly county, city, or other local income taxes as well. For example, a
resident of New York City faces a maximum Federal income tax rate of 35 percent, a
maximum New York State income tax rate of 8.14 percent, and a maximum New York
City income tax rate of 4.00 percent. The overall maximum tax rate, however, is not
just the sum of these rates since state and local income taxes may be deductible from
Federal income taxes (subject to limitations such as those imposed by the alternative
minimum tax; see Feenberg and Poterba (2004)). Assuming that the New York State
and New York City income taxes were fully deductible, the maximum income tax rate
faced by a New York City taxpayer would be 35.00 + 0.65 × (8.14 + 4.00) = 42.89
percent. Similarly, California taxpayers face a maximum state income tax rate of 10.3
percent. Again assuming full deductibility, this implies that the maximum income tax
rate faced by a California taxpayer would be 35.00 + 0.65 × 10.3 = 41.695 percent.
These maximum tax rates closely approximate the average value of τt during the
sample period.
     The estimated value of τt varies throughout the sample period. During the ﬁrst
two-thirds of the sample period, τt hovers around 40 percent. During the early part
of 2007, τt begins to increase and then ranges between 40 and 50 percent for the rest
of the sample period. The marginal tax rate is clearly much more volatile during the
2007-2008 period. The maximum value of τt occurs on March 21, 2007. The minimum
value of τt occurs on March 5, 2008, coinciding with the period during which Bear
Stearns was in imminent danger of going bankrupt.

6.4 The Tax Risk Premium
As with the credit/liquidity spread, we can also examine whether there is a tax risk
premium embedded into security prices to compensate investors for being exposed to
changes in the marginal tax rate. Turning again to Table 2, we see that the maximum
likelihood estimates of α̂ and β̂ imply that the long-run mean of τt under the actual
measure is 41.69 percent which is very close to the average value reported in Table 3.

     Surprisingly, however, the maximum likelihood estimates of α and β imply that
the long-run mean of τt under the risk-neutral pricing measure is only 29.37 percent.
Thus, these results indicate that there is a tax risk premium. This tax risk premium,
however, actually has a negative sign. This suggests that investor would require a
lower expected return to hold a security with cash ﬂows that are sensitive to changes
in the tax rate. In other words, investors view tax risk as being contracyclical.
     To make this latter result more intuitive, let us consider the case of a taxable
investor who holds a Treasury bond. For concreteness, assume that the bond has a
market value of 100 and a ﬁxed coupon of 6 percent. From an aftertax perspective, the
actual cash ﬂow received by the investor each year is 6(1 − τt). Since Federal marginal
tax rates are progressive, this means that the investor’s tax rate τt generally declines

                                          19
when his income decreases, and vice versa (we are abstracting from the discreteness
of the Federal income tax schedule). Thus, the aftertax cash ﬂows received from the
Treasury bond increase when the investor’s income and marginal tax rate decline,
and vice versa. Thus, the aftertax cash ﬂows from the Treasury bond have almost
a perfect negative correlation with the investor’s income, which, in turn, maps into
a strong negative consumption beta. Thus, in the same way that, for example, gold
mining stocks have negative market betas and, therefore, lower required expected
returns, Treasury bonds should have lower yields or expected returns because of their
negative consumption betas.

     To illustrate the size of the risk premium, Table 4 also reports summary statistics
for the diﬀerence between the expected values of τT under the Q and P measures
for various values of T . As shown, the average diﬀerence between the forward and
expected values of τT ranges from about −0.017 for a one-year horizon, to more than
−0.093 for horizons of ten years or more. The table also shows that there is signiﬁcant
time variation in the tax risk premium. For example, the tax risk premium for the
one-year horizon ranges from −0.106 to 0.054. Thus, the tax premium can sometimes
take on positive values. For horizons of three years or more, the tax risk premium is
always negative throughout the sample period.
6.5 What Drives the Marginal Tax Rate?

To explore the nature of the marginal tax rate in more detail, we regress changes in the
estimated marginal tax rate on a number of measures potentially aﬀecting the taxable
income of the marginal municipal bond participant. In doing this, we ﬁrst compute
changes in the marginal tax rate over a monthly horizon (rather than over a weekly
horizon as in the previous analysis). Speciﬁcally, we calculate the monthly change in
τt using the ﬁrst estimated value of τt for each month.

     As explanatory variables, we use a variety of measures. First, we include the
monthly return on the S&P 500 index (omitting dividends). Second, we use the
monthly return on a broad portfolio of Treasury bonds with maturities ranging from 2
to 30 years. The data for this return series is reported by Bloomberg. Third, we use the
monthly return on a broad index of commodity prices, also calculated and reported
by Bloomberg. These three measures attempt to proxy for the components of the
marginal municipal bondholder’s income that may be ﬁnancial-market-value based.
The ﬁnal measure is the monthly change in per capita personal income reported by
the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
    Table 5 reports the results from this regression. As shown, changes in the marginal
tax rate are signiﬁcantly and positively related to stock market returns. Similarly,
changes in the marginal tax rate are highly positively related to returns on Treasury
bonds; the t-statistic for the Treasury bond returns is 3.74. These results strongly
support the hypothesis that the marginal tax rate is procyclical, and therefore, that

                                          20
cash ﬂows that are multiplied by (1−τt ) are countercyclical. These results also support
the interpretation of the negative risk premium embedded in long-term municipal swap
rates as a premium for the contracyclical behavior of aftertax ﬁxed-income cash ﬂows.
In addition, the relation between the marginal tax rate and the ﬁnancial markets
provides interesting insights into the nature of the marginal investor.10

6.6 The Relative Valuation of Municipal Swaps
Since only the short-term tax-exempt rate Mt and the 10-year municipal swap per-
centages Pt (10) are ﬁtted exactly, the other municipal swap percentages implied by
the model will typically not match the corresponding market values exactly. To ex-
amine whether there are systematic diﬀerences between model and market values, we
report summary statistics for these diﬀerences (which are the t terms described in the
previous section). Table 6 reports these summary statistics.

     As shown, the mean pricing errors range from a minimum of -0.923 for the 15-year
municipal swap contract to a maximum of 2.607 for the 1-year contract. To test for
statistical signiﬁcance, we calculate the t-statistics for the mean where the standard
deviation of each mean is adjusted for the serial correlation of the pricing errors. In
general, these mean values are not signiﬁcant. The exceptions are the 1-year, 2-year,
and 20-year contracts which are all signiﬁcantly positive.
     Although not signiﬁcant on average, Table 6 also shows that many of the pricing
errors display a substantial amount of serial correlation. For example, the ﬁrst-order
serial correlation coeﬃcients for the 1-, 2-, 3-, 12-, and 15-year pricing errors are
all in excess of 0.70. Since we do not have transaction cost estimates for trading
these municipal swap contracts, we cannot evaluate whether the persistence in these
pricing errors could be the basis for a trading strategy. Nevertheless, the results raise
interesting issues about relative valuation in the municipal swap market.


                                 7. CONCLUSION


This paper uses a unique new data set of municipal swap rates to identify both the
marginal tax rate and the credit/liquidity spread embedded in one-week tax-exempt
municipal yields. By inferring these values from the one-week rate, our approach has
the important advantage of completely avoiding the complexities of the tax treatment
of long-term municipal bonds which Green (1993) illustrates can be very formidable.

     We ﬁnd that the average marginal tax rate incorporated into the one-week MSI
rate is 41.6 during the 2001-2008 sample period. This average corresponds closely to
10
     See Feenberg and Poterba (1991).


                                           21
the actual maximum marginal Federal, state, and local income tax rates faced by indi-
viduals in California and New York. Furthermore, the marginal tax rate incorporated
into tax-exempt rates is strongly related to both Treasury bond and stock market
returns.

     Most surprisingly, we ﬁnd market prices imply a negative risk premium for bearing
the risk of time varying marginal tax rates. This result, however, is fully consistent
with the contracyclical behavior of aftertax cash ﬂows. This follows simply from the
fact that the marginal tax rate is higher in good states of the economy and vice versa.
Thus, aftertax ﬁxed-income cash ﬂows, which are multiplied by (1 − τt ), are negatively
correlated with the state of the economy. Thus, aftertax cash ﬂows essentially have
negative consumption betas, and therefore, negative risk premia.

     In summary, our results indicate that the marginal tax rate is actually much
higher than has been generally documented in the literature. The reason for the
diﬀerence is that previous work has attempted to infer marginal tax rate from longer-
term municipal bonds. Green (1993) oﬀers a potential explanation for the muni-bond
puzzle by showing how the simple comparison of longer-term municipal bond yields to
corresponding taxable rate is problematic because of their asymmetric tax treatment.
Our results complement those of Green by suggesting that an additional explanation for
the muni-bond puzzle may be the existence of a signiﬁcant negative tax risk premium
embedded in municipal bond yields.




                                          22
                                                    APPENDIX


After multiplying through, the numerator in Equation (14) can be expressed as the
sum


                       T
            −               Dt (s) ds
                    0
                       T
                                                α −βs α
            +               Dt (s)      τt −     e  +             ds
                    0                           β      β
                       T
                                                a −bs a
            +               Dt (s)       λt −     e  +             ds
                    0                           b      b
                       T
                                                a −bs a                        α −βs α
            −               Dt (s)       λt −     e  +               τt −        e  +          ds.   (A1)
                    0                           b      b                       β      β


The integral in the ﬁrst line of Equation (A1) reduces to 1 − Dt (T ). The integral in
the second line reduces to


                              α  −βT                           α
                    τt −         e    Dt (T ) − 1 + βAt (β, T ) + (Dt (T ) − 1),                     (A2)
                              β                                  β


after an integration by parts. The integral in the third line reduces to


                                                a                  a
                                         λt −       At (b, T ) +     At (0, T ).                     (A3)
                                                b                  b

The integral in the fourth line reduces to



                 aα              α      a
             −      At (0, T ) −   λt −                   At (b, T )
                 bβ              β      b

                 a      α                                      a               α
             −     τt −                  At (β, T ) −   λt −            τt −       At (b + β, T ).   (A4)
                 b      β                                      b               β

                                                         23
Substituting these expressions into the numerator of Equation (14) and collecting
terms in λt , τt , and λt τt gives the expression in Equation (17).
     Turning now to the solutions for λt and τt in Equations (23) and (24), observe that
Equation (23) follows immediately from Equation (1). Substituting this expression of
λt into Equation (17) results in a quadratic equation for τt . Taking the smallest
positive root of the quadratic equation gives the solution for τt in Equation (24).




                                          24
                                  REFERENCES


Ang, Andrew, Vineer Bhansali, and Yuhang Xing, 2008, Taxes on Tax-Exempt Bonds,
 Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Ang, James, David Peterson, and Pamela Peterson, 1985, Marginal Tax Rates: Evidence
 from Nontaxable Corporate Bonds: A Note, Journal of Finance 40, 327-332.
Arak, M., and K. Guentner, 1983, The Market for Tax-Exempt Issues: Why are the
  Yields so High? National Tax Journal 36, 145-161.

Buser, Stephen A., and Patrick J. Hess, 1986, Empirical Determinants of the Relative
  Yields on Taxable and Tax-Exempt Securities, Journal of Financial Economics 17,
  335-355.

Chalmers, John M. R., 1998, Default Risk Cannot Explain the Muni Puzzle: Evidence
 from Municipal Bonds that are Secured by U.S. Treasury Obligations, Review of Fi-
 nancial Studies 281-308.

Constantinides, George M., and Jonathan E. Ingersoll, Jr., 1982, Optimal Bond Trading
  with Personal Tax: Implications for Bond Prices and Estimated Tax Brackets and
  Yield Curves, Journal of Finance 37, 349-352.
Criscuolo, Anthony C., and Michael Faloon, 2007, Variable Rate Demand Obligations,
  Standish Mellon Asset Management.

Dammon, Robert M., and Richard C. Green, 1987, Tax Arbitrage and the Existence of
 Equilibrium Prices for Financial Assets, Journal of Finance 42, 1143-1166.

Dammon, Robert M., Chester S. Spatt, and Harold H. Zhang, 2004, Optimal Asset
 Location and Allocation with Taxable and Tax-Deferred Investing, Journal of Finance
 59, 999-1037.
Downing, Chris and Frank Zhang, 2004, Trading Activity and Price Volatility in the
 Municipal Bond Market, Journal of Finance 59, 899-931.

Duﬀee, Gregory R., 1998, Idiosyncratic Variation in Treasury Bill Returns, Journal of
 Finance 51, 527-551.

Duﬀee, Gregory R., 2002, Term Premia and Interest Rate Forecasts in Aﬃne Models,
 Journal of Finance 57, 405-443.
Duﬃe, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1997, An Econometric Model of the Term
 Structure of Interest Rate Swap Yields, Journal of Finance 52, 1287-1323.



                                          25
Dybvig, Philip H., and Stephen A. Ross, 1986, Tax Clienteles and Asset Pricing, Journal
 of Finance 41, 751-762.
Feenberg, Daniel, and James M. Poterba, 1991, Which Households Own Municipal
  Bonds? Evidence from Tax Returns, National Tax Journal 44, 93-103.

Feenberg, Daniel, and James M. Poterba, 2004, The Alternative Minimum Tax and
  Eﬀective Marginal Tax Rates, National Tax Journal 57, 407-427.

Graham, John R., 2003, Taxes and Corporate Finance: A Review, Review of Financial
  Studies 1075-1129.
Green, Richard C., 1993, A Simple Model of the Taxable and Tax-Exempt Yield Curves,
  Review of Financial Studies 6, 233-264.

Green, Richard C., 2007, Issuers, Underwriter Syndicates, and Aftermarket Transpar-
  ency, Journal of Finance 62 1529-1550.
Green, Richard C., Burton Holliﬁeld, and Norman Schürhoﬀ, 2007a, Financial Interme-
  diation in Opaque Markets, Review of Financial Studies 20, 275-314.

Green, Richard C., Burton Holliﬁeld, and Norman Schürhoﬀ, 2007b, Dealer Intermedia-
  tion and Price Behavior in the Aftermarket for New Bond Issues, Journal of Financial
  Economics 86, 643-682.

Green, Richard C., Dan Li, and Norman Schürhoﬀ, 2007, Price Discovery in Illiquid
  Markets, Working paper, Carnegie-Mellon University.
Green, Richard C., and Bernt A. Oedegaard, 1997, Are There Tax Eﬀects in the Relative
  Pricing of U.S. Government Bonds? Journal of Finance 52, 609-633.

Jordan, James V., 1984, Tax Eﬀects in Term Structure Estimation, Journal of Finance
  39, 393-406.

Kidwell, David S., and Charles A. Trzcinka, 1982, Municipal Bond Pricing and the New
  York City Fiscal Crisis, Journal of Finance 37, 1239-1246.
Kochin, Levis A., and Richard W. Parks, 1988, Was the Tax-Exempt Bond Market
 Ineﬃcient or were Future Expected Tax Rates Negative? Journal of Finance 43, 913-
 931.

Litzenberger, Robert H., and Jacques Rolfo, 1984, An International Study of Tax Eﬀects
  on Government Bonds, Journal of Finance 39, 1-22.

Livingson, Miles, 1979, Bond Taxation and the Shape of the Yield-to-Maturity Curve,
  Journal of Finance 34, 189-196.



                                           26
Livingston, Miles, 1982, The Pricing of Municipal Bonds, Journal of Financial and Quan-
  titative Analysis 17, 179-193.
Liu, Jun, Francis A. Longstaﬀ, and Ravit E. Mandell, 2006, The Market Price of Risk in
  Interest Rate Swaps: The Roles of Default and Liquidity Risks, Journal of Business
  79, 2337-2359.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 2000, The Term Structure of Very Short Term Rates: New Evi-
  dence for the Expectations Hypothesis, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 397-415.

Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 2004, The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond
  Prices, Journal of Business 77, 511-526.
Longstaﬀ, Francis A., Sanjay Mithal, and Eric Neis, 2005, Corporate Yield Spreads: De-
  fault Risk or Liquidity? New Evidence from the Credit-Default Swap Market, Journal
  of Finance 60, 2213-2253.
McConnell, John, and Alessio Saretto, 2008, Auction Failures and the Market for Auction
 Rate Securities, Working paper, Purdue University.

Nanda, Vikram, and Rajdeep Singh, 2004, Bond Insurance: What is Special About
  Munis? Journal of Finance 59, 2253-2279.
Neis, Eric, 2006, Liquidity and Municipal Bonds, Working paper, UCLA.

Schaefer, Stephen M., 1982, Tax-Induced Clientele Eﬀects in the Market for British
  Government Securities, Journal of Financial Economics 10, 121-159.
Skelton, Jeﬀrey L., 1983, Relative Risk in Municipal and Corporate Debt, Journal of
  Finance 38, 625-634.

Stock, Duane and Edward L. Schrems, 1984, Municipal Bond Demand Premiums and
  Bond Price Volatility: A Note, Journal of Finance 39, 535-539.

Sulzberge, Frank, and Andrew Flynn, 2008, Lessons From Tough Times: Understanding
  VRDO Failures, The Bond Buyer July 21.
Trzcinka, Charles, 1982, The Pricing of Tax-Exempt Bonds and the Miller Hypothesis,
  Journal of Finance 37, 907-923.




                                           27
                                                                Table 1

Summary Statistics for the Municipal Index and the Municipal Swaps. This tables report summary statistics for the indicated variables.
The 1-week MSI rate is expressed as a percentage. The municipal swap rates are expressed as percentages of Libor. The sample consists of weekly
(Wednesday) observations for the August 1, 2001 to June 18, 2008 period.



                                                    Standard                                                        Serial
     Index                              Mean        Deviation      Minimum        Median       Maximum         Correlation       N


     1-Week MSI Rate                     2.179          1.032          0.700        1.875           3.970            0.985      360

     1-Year Municipal Swap              76.062          8.352         66.500       72.938          98.000            0.987      360
     2-Year Municipal Swap              75.044          6.593         67.250       72.938          91.250            0.988      360
     3-Year Municipal Swap              74.571          5.433         67.625       73.469          89.500            0.983      360
     4-Year Municipal Swap              74.480          4.690         68.125       73.880          87.250            0.981      360
     5-Year Municipal Swap              74.616          4.265         68.500       74.313          85.750            0.985      360
     7-Year Municipal Swap              75.090          3.553         69.563       75.130          83.250            0.962      360
     10-Year Municipal Swap             75.850          2.970         70.563       76.065          82.630            0.979      360
     12-Year Municipal Swap             76.422          2.794         71.125       76.630          82.630            0.977      360
     15-Year Municipal Swap             77.169          2.653         71.813       77.500          82.630            0.977      360
     20-Year Municipal Swap             78.166          2.528         72.813       78.630          82.880            0.975      360
                                    Table 2

Maximum Likelihood Estimates of the Model Parameters. This table reports the maximum likeli-
hood parameters of the model along with their asymptotic standard errors.



                Parameter                           Value                 Std. Error


                        a                         0.01466                   0.00013
                        â                        0.13606                   0.01411
                        b                         0.97737                   0.00781
                        b̂                       13.00384                   1.10734
                        c                         0.03697                   0.00138

                        α                         0.04190                   0.00017
                        α̂                        2.44900                   0.05126
                        β                         0.14265                   0.00051
                        β̂                        5.87452                   0.12277
                        σ                         0.13463                   0.00503

                        v1                        0.07010                   0.00262
                        v2                        0.03817                   0.00143
                        v3                        0.02488                   0.00093
                        v4                        0.02614                   0.00098
                        v5                        0.02044                   0.00076
                        v7                        0.01612                   0.00060
                       v12                        0.01405                   0.00052
                       v15                        0.02917                   0.00109
                       v20                        0.01846                   0.00069


            Log Likelihood                                  -11074.3947
                                                           Table 3

Summary Statistics for the Credit/Liquidity Spread and the Marginal Tax Rate. This table reports summary statistics of the estimated
credit/liquidity spread λt and the marginal tax rate τt .



                                       Standard                                                         Serial
      Variable              Mean       Deviation       Minimum        Median       Maximum         Correlation       N


      λt                  0.01060        0.00708       −0.00850       0.00879        0.04238            0.765       360

      τt                  0.41574        0.03784        0.31369       0.41489        0.49826            0.884       360
                                                               Table 4

Risk Premia. This table reports the mean, minimum, and maximum values for the credit/liquidity and marginal tax rate risk premia for the
indicated horizons (in years). The risk premium is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the forward value of the variable and its expected value, where
the forward value represents the expected value of the variable under the risk-neutral measure.




                                                         1               2              3              5             10             ∞


     λt Risk Premium        Mean                  0.00288         0.00392        0.00430        0.00451         0.00454        0.00454
                            Minimum              −0.00430         0.00121        0.00329        0.00436         0.00454        0.00454
                            Maximum               0.01484         0.00842        0.00600        0.00475         0.00454        0.00454


     τt Risk Premium        Mean                 −0.01736       −0.03143        −0.04362       −0.06336       −0.09384       −0.12314
                            Minimum              −0.10556       −0.10815        −0.11014       −0.11337       −0.11835       −0.12314
                            Maximum               0.05396        0.03061         0.01017       −0.02292       −0.07403       −0.12314
                                          Table 5

Regression Results. This table reports the results from the regression of monthly changes in the estimated
marginal tax rate on the indicated explanatory variables.



           Explanatory Variable                              Coeﬃcient             t-Statistic


           Intercept                                          −0.00186                 −0.46
           S&P 500 Return                                      0.21955                  2.20
           Treasury Bond Return                                0.93231                  3.74
           Commodity Index Return                             −0.08607                 −1.12
           Personal Income Growth                             −0.00302                 −0.67


           R2                                                                          0.1743

           Number of Observations                                                          82
                                                              Table 6

Municipal Swap Pricing Errors. This table reports summary statistics for the diﬀerence between the model-implied values of the indicated
municipal swap rate and the market municipal swap rate. Municipal swap rates are expressed as percentages of Libor. Pricing errors for the 10-year
swap are not reported since the 10-year swap rate is ﬁtted exactly in the estimation algorithm.



                                                                                                              Serial
            Swap Contract                                      Mean               t-Statistic            Correlation              N


            1-Year Municipal Swap                              2.607                   3.05                    0.725             360
            2-Year Municipal Swap                              1.111                   2.27                    0.734             360
            3-Year Municipal Swap                             −0.034                  −0.08                    0.807             360
            4-Year Municipal Swap                             −0.152                  −0.53                    0.620             360
            5-Year Municipal Swap                              0.215                   1.05                    0.573             360
            7-Year Municipal Swap                              0.227                   1.30                    0.624             360
            10-Year Municipal Swap                                −                      −                        −               −
            12-Year Municipal Swap                            −0.488                  −1.36                    0.931             360
            15-Year Municipal Swap                            −0.923                  −1.06                    0.948             360
            20-Year Municipal Swap                             1.320                  10.37                    0.558             360
