                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         RETHINKING THE ROLE OF FISCAL POLICY

                                          Martin S. Feldstein

                                        Working Paper 14684
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14684


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2009




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Martin S. Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Rethinking the Role of Fiscal Policy
Martin S. Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 14684
January 2009
JEL No. E6,E62,H3

                                             ABSTRACT

As recently as two years ago there was a widespread consensus among economists that fiscal policy
is not useful as a countercyclical instrument. Now governments in Washington and around the world
are developing massive fiscal stimulus packages, supported by a wide range of economists in universities,
governments, and businesses.

Why has this change occurred? What are the principles for designing a potentially useful fiscal stimulus?
And what will happen if the current fiscal stimulus fails?


Martin S. Feldstein
President Emeritus
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
and NBER
msfeldst@nber.org
                      Rethinking the Role of Fiscal Policy


                             Martin Feldstein∗


       As recently as two years ago there was a widespread consensus among economists

that fiscal policy is not useful as a countercyclical instrument. Now governments in

Washington and around the world are developing massive fiscal stimulus packages,

supported by a wide range of economists in universities, governments, and businesses.


       Why has this change occurred? What are the principles for designing a potentially

useful fiscal stimulus? And what will happen if the current fiscal stimulus fails?


I. The Rise and Fall of Fiscal Activism


       Despite a wide array of government programs introduced by the Roosevelt

administration during the depression of the 1930s, the unemployment rate remained at

double digit levels until 1941 when the government began massive military spending for

the lend lease program and the start of World War II. Economists saw this favorable effect

of the military spending on employment and economic activity as a clear example of the

power of Keynesian fiscal policy.


       After the war, most American macroeconomists focused on the potential

contribution of Keynesian fiscal policy to preventing unemployment. For some, the new



∗
 Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President Emeritus of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was prepared for presentation at the January
2009 meeting of the American Economic Association.




                                               1
econometric models held out the hope of eliminating or at least significantly damping the

business cycle.


       But further analysis and experience soon raised doubts about the efficacy of these

new tools. Empirical research indicated that the Keynesian multiplier was much smaller

than earlier analyses had assumed, reduced by a crowding out of interest sensitive

spending caused by an induced increase in the demand for money and by the effect of the

larger national debt on long‐term interest rates. The leakage of demand through imports

and the effect of the fiscal expansion on the exchange rate further reduced the multiplier.


       Despite improvements in data and in econometric techniques, it remained difficult

for economists to assess the current state of the business cycle and even harder to discern

where the economy was heading and how much it would be affected by a fiscal stimulus.

The resulting uncertainty implied that an activist fiscal policy could actually increase

cyclical volatility. Moreover, the long lags between decisions to raise spending or cut taxes

and the subsequent fiscal flows often meant that the stimulus occurred after the trough in

activity, adding undesirable increases in demand to a rapidly expanding economy. The

simultaneous rise in both inflation and unemployment in the 1960s made it clear that the

Keynesian fiscal strategy was not working.


       The focus of countercyclical policy therefore shifted from fiscal policy to monetary

policy. Economists recognized that monetary policy could be adjusted more rapidly and

that changes in the interest rate could be effective in modulating aggregate demand

through a variety of channels. The low inflation rate since the early 1980s and the

decreased cyclical volatility both reinforced the case for relying on monetary policy.


                                              2
II. The Recent Revival of Fiscal Policy


       Why then the recent revival of interest in fiscal stimulus? By the fall of 2007 it

became clear to many economists that the current downturn is different from previous

recessions and that monetary policy would not be effective in bringing us back to full

employment.


       Past recessions generally began after the Federal Reserve had raised interest rates

sharply to counter excess inflation. When the Fed felt that it had succeeded, it reversed

policy and lowered the interest rate. That was enough to trigger a recovery, driven in large

part by the responsiveness of housing starts to lower interest rates.


       In contrast, the current downturn was not due to high interest rates and therefore

could not be fixed by a reversal of Fed policy. The seeds of this recession were sown in the

underpricing of risk and the resulting excessive leverage. A sharp rise in defaults on

subprime mortgages alerted market participants that risk had been mismeasured and

therefore underpriced. The resulting general repricing of risk caused sharp falls in the

prices of mortgage‐backed securities, of share prices, and of the values of homes. The

massive destruction of household wealth led to a sharp decline in consumer spending,

followed by falls in business investment and commercial real estate values.


       The continuing declines in the value of mortgage backed securities and of the

derivatives based on them reflected the fear of an increasing future volume of mortgage

defaults. This eroded the capital of financial institutions, undermining their willingness to

make loans. The result was a dysfunctional credit market that no longer provided credit or

responded to changes in interest rates.

                                              3
       The Federal Reserve therefore could not reverse the downturn by lowering interest

rates. Although it reduced the federal funds rate substantially, mortgage rates and

corporate bond rates remained high. Even if mortgage rates had come down, the

continuing sharp decline in house prices would have prevented a rise in housing starts.


       By the end of 2007, an anticipation of the Fed’s inability to prevent a serious

recession caused some of us to advocate a fiscal stimulus. A temporary one‐time tax rebate

was chosen as something that could get bipartisan support and be implemented quickly.

We recognized that both economic theory and much past experience implied that most of a

one‐time tax cut would be saved rather than contributing to consumer spending. But we

were encouraged by the stronger response to the 2001 tax cut even though we recognized

that that was technically more than a one time tax change.


       The Congress quickly passed a tax rebate of $80 billion and the money was in the

hands of taxpayers by May and June. Unfortunately, consumer spending responded only

very weakly. I presented evidence in the Wall Street Journal (August 6, 2008) that

consumer spending in the second quarter rose by only $12 billion. The monthly personal

income and expenditure data confirmed this picture, with consumer spending in May and

June rising a total of only $11 billion.


       More recently, Stephen Miran and I estimated a consumer expenditure equation

using monthly data from January 1980 through November 2008. While the marginal

propensity to consume out of real per capita disposable income is estimated to be 0.70, the

estimated MPC from the corresponding rebate variable is only 0.13 (standard error 0.05).

(The other variables in the equation are the unemployment rate, the 10‐year interest rate,


                                              4
and a quadratic time trend.) A variety of short distributed lag specifications confirms this

result and indicate that there is no delayed impact of the rebate; all of the monthly lag

coefficients are completely insignificant and their sum is negative.


       In recent months, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury have taken a variety of

steps to help the credit markets. These policies have succeeded in preventing a further

meltdown of credit availability in banks, money market mutual funds, and in the ability of

firms to issue commercial paper. But these measures have neither expanded total credit

nor dealt with the fundamental problem of a dysfunctional credit market caused by the

foreclosures that result from the rising loan to value ratios on non‐recourse mortgage

loans. Although fixing the credit market is necessary for long‐run sustained growth, would

not be sufficient to reverse the downward spiral of aggregate demand.


II. Designing the Current Fiscal Package


       This brings us to the current situation and the perceived need for a large fiscal

package. The fall in the stock market and in the value of owner occupied real estate has

depressed household wealth by about $10 trillion. The estimated wealth effects imply a

decline of annual consumer spending by $400 billion or more. That reduction in consumer

spending implies reduced production, lower incomes, and therefore further reductions in

consumer spending. This could reduce aggregate demand by an additional $200 billion a

year or more. Automatic stabilizers – i.e., the reductions in personal and corporate taxes

and the increases in unemployment insurance and other transfers – probably offsets about

one‐third of this, leaving a net GDP gap of about $400 billion.




                                              5
       The current decline in demand is different from typical past business cycles in

which demand recovers as inventories and excess capacity is absorbed.


       So that is the challenge: how to increase domestic spending by some $400 billion a

year in 2009 and 2010, and perhaps further into the future. Some of that may come from a

more competitive dollar, although the increased competitiveness of the dollar may only be

enough to offset the decline in export demand that results from the reduced level of foreign

incomes. So it falls to fiscal policy to support the increase in aggregate spending.


       Some of the past problems in using fiscal policy to stimulate demand may be less of

an impediment in the current circumstances.          Government borrowing to finance fiscal

deficits will not be offset by higher interest rates since the current environment is

characterized by very easy money and a dysfunctional credit market. The delays in starting

infrastructure projects and the long tail in that spending are not likely to be as much of a

problem now because the current downturn is likely to last much longer than previous

ones. In the past, the average recession lasted only 12 months from peak to trough. This

recession has already lasted 12 months and probably will last a good deal longer. I believe

we will be lucky if we see the recession end in 2009. Once the recovery begins, the upturn

will be very slow because households need to increase their saving – i.e., to consume less ‐‐

to rebuild their wealth for retirement and other purposes. So fiscal policy is likely to be

useful even if it is not strongly effective in 2009. It is not likely to overheat the economy if it

continues to add significantly to demand in 2010 and 2011.


       Although a one‐time tax cut may not be effective, other forms of tax cutting can

increase aggregate demand. During his campaign, candidate Obama promised a permanent


                                                6
tax cut of $500 per employed person. That would generate an annual tax cut of about $70

billion and would probably raise annual consumer spending by about $50 billion.


       Experience confirms that some form of investment tax credit could stimulate

business investment, especially if it is not recaptured later. A larger R&D tax credit could

help to offset the currently predicted decline in private R&D spending. And lowering the

corporate tax rate to that of other industrial countries would encourage more business

investment and job creation in the United States.


       The president elect announced that he would postpone increasing the tax rate on

high‐income individuals until 2011. But taxpayers, especially higher income ones, look

ahead. The future tax rise reduces the present value of their lifetime income and that can

be expected to reduce current spending. A statement now by the president‐elect that he

will postpone those tax increases indefinitely would raise aggregate spending now.


       Finally, the taxes on dividends and capital gains are also scheduled to rise in the

near future. A promise to leave those tax rates unchanged would raise share prices,

offsetting some of the fall in the stock market, which would lead to more consumer

spending and increased business investment.


       But while good tax policy can contribute to ending the recession, the heavy lifting

will have to be done by increased government spending. To be effective, that spending

should be big, quick, and targeted at increasing aggregate activity and employment. How

big depends on the form of the spending and the timing.




                                              7
       The speed of the outlays is an important consideration. A project that begins in

2009 but continues to spend at a high level in 2011 and 2012 is not likely to be as useful as

a countercyclical instrument as one that spends quickly and is then finished.


       Bottlenecks are also a potential problem that could reduce the effectiveness of a

spending program. While there is no doubt a need to rebuild bridges and other

infrastructure, there are limited numbers of design engineers and other bridge builders.


III. Spending Priorities


       The Obama campaign has identified five priority areas for increased spending:

health, energy, education, infrastructure , and support for the poor. Some of that spending

would be by the federal governments but much of it would be delegated to the states and

local governments. Although these are important areas that can benefit from increased

spending, there are other parts of the budget that could also be useful as part of the

stimulus package.


       Since the defense budget is as large as all of the other discretionary spending

combined, it is surprising that defense is not proposed as a part of the overall stimulus

package. It is surprising also to read in the press that there will be reductions in military

spending because, according to those stories, of the weakness of the economy. That logic is

exactly backwards. The overall weakness of demand in the economy implies that the next

two years are a time when all forms of government spending can be expected to rise as a

way of stimulating an economic recovery.




                                               8
          The actions of the military in Iraq and Afghanistan have depleted supplies and

increased the wear and tear on equipment. Both supplies and equipment will eventually

need to be replaced. It would be more cost‐effective to do that in the next two years when

there is substantial slack in the industrial economy. More generally, the large extent of

unused industrial capacity imply that the real resource cost of maintenance and

replacement in both the military and civilian departments of the government are lower

now than they will be when the economy returns to full employment.


          Military recruiting and training could be expanded in response to the larger than

usual numbers of unemployed young men and women. Raising the military’s annual

recruitment goal by 15 percent would provide jobs for an additional 30,000 young men and

women in the first year. It would also be possible to depart from the military’s traditional

enlistment rules and bring in recruits for a short two‐year period of training followed by a

return to the civilian economy. As a minimum, this would provide education in a variety of

technical skills – electronics, equipment maintenance, computer programming, nuclear

facility operations, etc – that would lead to better civilian careers for this group. It would

also provide a larger reserve force that could be called upon if needed by the military in the

future.


          A 10 percent increase in defense outlays for procurement and for research would

contribute about $20 billion a year to the overall stimulus budget. A 5 percent rise in

spending on operations and maintenance would add an additional $10 billion. That

spending could create about 300,000 additional jobs. And raising the military’s annual




                                                9
recruitment goal by 15 percent would provide jobs for an additional 30,000 young men and

women in the first year.


       The intelligence community and the FBI are also apparently facing potential budget

cuts at a time of increasing terrorism and greater crime rates. A temporary increase in

funding for these agencies could fill important gaps in training and facilities.


       Another important omission in the current stimulus plan is funding for research.

Government spending for research is projected to fall in 2009 even though additional

research grants from the NIH and NSF could allow universities and hospitals to expand a

wide range of useful research activities that are now unfunded because of limited grant

budgets.


       No doubt there are other important areas of government spending in which outlays

can be raised rapidly on useful activities that would also raise incomes and employment


IV. What if it fails?


       It is of course possible that the planned surge in government spending will fail. Two

or three years from now we could be facing a level of unemployment that is higher than

today and that shows no sign of coming down.


       While it is too soon to examine in detail what might then be done, it is useful to

consider the three possibilities. First, the level of government spending could be increased

even more. To know whether this would help, it is important to study in detail the

effectiveness of each of the different components of the spending surge. Second, the fiscal

stimulus could shift from increased spending to a substantial permanent reduction in


                                              10
personal and corporate taxes. If this strategy is chosen, changes in spending policies would

have to be adopted to limit the growth of the national debt. The third way out would be a

fall in the value of the dollar, either spontaneous or planned, that is large enough to

eliminate today’s large trade deficit, thus boosting exports and substituting American made

goods and services for imports from the rest of the world.


       While these possibilities should be kept in mind, we can only hope that the new

program of tax changes and government spending in combination with mortgage market

reforms will be sufficient to return the economy to full employment.


Cambridge MA




                                              11
