                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DYNAMICS OF THE GENDER GAP FOR YOUNG PROFESSIONALS IN THE CORPORATE
                       AND FINANCIAL SECTORS

                                         Marianne Bertrand
                                          Claudia Goldin
                                         Lawrence F. Katz

                                        Working Paper 14681
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14681


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2009




We thank Hilary Harr and German Munoz for their assistance with the survey and the University of
Chicago Booth School of Business for providing the administrative data. Jessica Pan was an invaluable
research assistant both in Chicago and Cambridge. We are also grateful to Rebecca Diamond and Naomi
Hausman for helpful research assistance. We thank Stacey Kole, Julie Morton, and seminar participants
at Cornell University, Harvard University, the London School of Economics, Princeton University,
Stanford University, the University of California at Berkeley, the University of Chicago, the University
of Michigan, and Yale University for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Marianne Bertrand, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young Professionals in the Corporate and Financial Sectors
Marianne Bertrand, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz
NBER Working Paper No. 14681
January 2009, Revised September 2009
JEL No. J16,J24,J44

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper assesses the relative importance of various explanations for the gender gap in career outcomes
for highly-educated workers in the U.S. corporate and financial sectors. The careers of MBAs, who
graduated between 1990 and 2006 from a top U.S. business school, are studied to understand how
career dynamics differ by gender. Although male and female MBAs have nearly identical (labor) incomes
at the outset of their careers, their earnings soon diverge, with the male annual earnings advantage
reaching almost 60 log points at ten to 16 years after MBA completion. We identify three proximate
reasons for the large and rising gender gap in earnings: differences in training prior to MBA graduation;
differences in career interruptions; and differences in weekly hours. These three determinants can
explain the bulk of gender differences in earnings across the years following MBA completion. The
presence of children is the main contributor to the lesser job experience, greater career discontinuity
and shorter work hours for female MBAs. Some MBA mothers, especially those with well-off spouses,
slow down in the labor market within a few years following their first birth. Disparities in the productive
characteristics of male and female MBAs are small, but the pecuniary penalties from shorter hours
and any job discontinuity are enormous for MBAs.


Marianne Bertrand                                    Lawrence F. Katz
Booth School of Business                             Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                Harvard University
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                           Cambridge, MA 02138
Chicago, IL 60637                                    and NBER
and NBER                                             lkatz@harvard.edu
marianne.bertrand@gsb.uchicago.edu

Claudia Goldin
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu
A. Introduction


        Positions in the business and financial sectors have commanded exceptionally high
earnings in recent years and attracted extraordinary talent.1 Professionals in these sectors often
have a master’s in business administration (MBA) and the degree has grown in popularity among
graduates of the best universities and colleges. Among individuals with a BA from a selective
institution, those earning an MBA within ten years of graduation increased from 4.3 percent for
those finishing college in the early 1970s to 7.1 percent in the early 1990s.2 During the same
period, the share of MBAs among the graduates of selective undergraduate institutions earned by
females increased by more than a factor of three.3 The fraction female among all MBAs
increased from 1970 to 2006 by a factor of ten, rising from 4 percent to 43 percent.4


        Despite the narrowing of the gender gap in business education, there is a growing sense
that women are not getting ahead fast enough in the corporate and financial world. Bertrand and
Hallock (2001) document the under-representation of women among the five highest paid
executives in Execucomp’s (S&P 1500) firms from 1992 to 1997. Only about 2.5 percent of the
executives in their sample are women, and the under-representation is especially severe at the

1
  Among men who received their BAs from Harvard University around 1970, 5 percent had positions in
the financial sector 15 years later in 1985. But among those who graduated around 1990, fully 15 percent
worked in the financial sector in 2005. Considering both the corporate and financial sectors the change
was from 22.1 percent to 38.5 percent across the two graduating cohorts. The increase for women was
from 11.7 percent to 22.5 percent. The premium to working in the financial sector among Harvard
graduates was a whopping 195 percent and the premium in the corporate sector (executive and
management jobs) was 25 percent relative to the average of other occupations in 2005. See Goldin and
Katz (2008) on the Harvard data and Philippon and Reshef (2009), more generally, for an analysis of the
growth of the financial sector across the past century.
2
  The 2003 National Survey of College Graduates (NSCG) is used to obtain the fraction of BAs
graduating from Research University I and Liberal Arts I colleges (Carnegie classifications) from 1970 to
1973 and from 1990 to 1993 who received an MBA within ten years of graduating. In this manner we
exclude those who obtained an MBA in mid-career through an executive MBA program and those who
obtained an MBA without having graduated from a U.S. university. By limiting the undergraduate
institutions to selective ones, we attempt to hold student quality constant over the two decades.
3
  Using the NSCG and restricting the sample to BAs from selective universities and colleges gives 12.7
percent in 1970-73 and 39.5 percent in 1990-93 for the fraction female among those earning MBAs.
4
  In fact, the fraction female among all graduating MBAs has exceeded 30 percent for each of the past 25
years (Source: U.S. Department of Education, NCES, Digest of Education Statistics, includes all masters
in business fields). The fraction has been lower in the top MBA programs. It exceeded 30 percent at
Harvard Business School starting around 2000 (HBS website) and has only just exceeded 30 percent at
the University of Chicago Booth School of Business (UC Booth administrative data).

                                                                            12-August-09, Dynamics 1
highest levels of the corporate ladder. The number of female CEOs among Execucomp firms
increased from just four in 1992 to 34 in 2004, according to Wolfers (2006), but women still
represent only 1.3 percent of the CEO-year observations in his sample.


        Various explanations have been proposed for women’s underperformance in the
corporate and financial sectors. Experimental evidence suggests that women have less taste for
the highly-competitive environments in top finance and corporate jobs (Niederle and Vesterlund
2007), and female MBAs may be less willing to aggressively negotiate for pay and promotion
(Babcock and Laschever 2003). MBA women may be subject to implicit or explicit gender
discrimination (Bertrand, Chugh, and Mullainathan 2005), and even talented female MBAs may
encounter difficulty getting recognized in male-dominated workplaces.5 Women may also fall
behind because of the career-family conflicts arising from the purportedly long hours, heavy
travel commitments and inflexible schedules of most high-powered finance and corporate jobs.


        This paper speaks to the relative importance of these alternative explanations of the
gender gap in career outcomes for highly-educated personnel in the U.S. corporate and financial
sectors. We study the careers of MBAs who graduated between 1990 and 2006 from a top U.S.
business school—the Booth School of Business of the University of Chicago—and how career
dynamics differ by gender. We explore the evolution of the gender gap in earnings and labor
supply for young professionals employed primarily in corporate, consulting and financial
services jobs.


        We find that at the outset of their careers male and female MBAs have nearly identical
labor incomes. Their earnings, however, soon diverge. The male annual earnings advantage
reaches 30 log points five years after MBA completion and almost 60 log points ten to 16 years
after MBA completion. The share of female MBAs not employed also rises substantially in the
decade following MBA completion with 13 percent of the women not working at all at nine
years after MBA completion as compared with 1 percent of the men.


5
  See also Bell (2005), who finds that women-led firms (e.g., firms where the CEO or the chairman of the
board is a women) have a higher share of female executives in the other “top five paid” positions and
remunerate these female executives more than non-women led firms do.

                                                                           12-August-09, Dynamics 2
        Most interesting is why female MBAs have not done as well as their male peers. We
identify three proximate reasons for the large and rising gender gap in earnings that emerges
within a few years of MBA completion: differences in training prior to MBA graduation,
differences in career interruptions, and differences in weekly hours worked. These three
determinants can explain the bulk of the gender differences in earnings across the years
following MBA completion, but their relative importance changes with years since MBA
completion. We use our sample to explore this evolution by analyzing the gender gap by years
after the MBA and by comparing women without any career interruptions to men.


       Male and female MBAs begin their careers with somewhat different training. Men take
more finance courses and have higher GPAs in business school. Gender differences in grades
and courses are not large but contribute to the earnings gap because of large labor market returns
to these components of MBA training. The large growth in the gender gap in earnings for MBAs
during their first 15 years out is mainly a consequence of gender differences in career
interruptions and weekly hours worked. Women have more career interruptions and work shorter
hours, including more work in part-time positions and self-employment. Although these
differences are modest, the remuneration disparity they entail is exceptionally large. The
relationship between income and time off is highly non-linear for those in our sample. Any
career interruption—a period of six months or more out of work—is costly in terms of future
earnings, and at ten years out women are 22 percentage points more likely than men to have had
at least one career interruption. Deviations from the male norm of high hours and continuous
labor market attachment are greatly penalized in the corporate and financial sectors.


       The presence of children is the main contributor to the lesser job experience, greater
career discontinuity and shorter work hours for female MBAs. Across the first 15 years
following the MBA, women with children have about an eight month deficit in actual post-MBA
experience compared with the average man, while woman without children have a 1.5 month
deficit. Similarly women with children typically work 24 percent fewer weekly hours than the
average male; women without children work only 3.3 percent fewer hours. Women in our
sample with children are not negatively selected on predicted earnings; MBA mothers are, if
anything, positively selected on business school performance and earnings in the first few years

                                                                       12-August-09, Dynamics 3
following MBA completion. By estimating panel data models with individual fixed-effects, we
can observe exactly when women with children shift into lower hours positions and leave the
labor force. The careers of MBA mothers slow down substantially within a few years following
their first birth. But almost no decline in labor force participation and only a modest decline in
hours worked are apparent in the two years before the first birth.


        MBA mothers seem to actively choose jobs that are family friendly and avoid jobs with
long hours and greater career advancement possibilities. The dynamic impact of a first birth on
women’s labor market outcomes greatly depends on spousal income. New MBA mothers with
higher-earnings spouses reduce their labor supply considerably more than mothers with lower-
earnings spouses. In fact, the first birth has only a modest and temporary impact on earnings for
MBA women with lower-earnings spouses.


       Our finding that human capital and labor supply factors can account for most of the
gender gap in earnings among MBAs comports with that of Black, Haviland, Sanders and Taylor
(2008) for a broader group of U.S. college-educated women between 25 and 60 years old in the
1993 NSCG. Our finding of a large increase in the gender gap during the first ten to 15 years in
the careers of MBAs is similar to other studies exploring the dynamics of the gender earnings
gap for new lawyers (Wood, Corcoran, and Courant 1993) and for broader samples of young
workers (e.g., Light and Ureta 1995; Loprest 1992; and Manning and Swaffield 2008).6


B. University of Chicago MBA Survey and Sample


       Our data come from a web-based survey we conducted of University of Chicago MBAs
from the graduating classes of 1990 to 2006.7 The participants were asked detailed questions
about each of the jobs or positions they had since graduation, including earnings (both at the
beginning and end of a given position), usual weekly hours worked, job function, sector, size of
firm, and type of firm. The earnings questions asked for total annual earnings, before taxes and

6
  Weinberger (2009) presents somewhat contrasting evidence on the career dynamics of the gender gap
for college graduates, using samples largely restricted to those remaining in full-time work.
7
  The survey was taken between November 2006 and June 2007. Only full-time MBA graduates were
included; part-time MBAs and executive MBAs were excluded.

                                                                         12-August-09, Dynamics 4
other deductions, in the first and last year at each job.8 The responses to the earnings questions
and usual weekly hours worked in each position were collected in discrete bins that were
transformed into real-valued variables (at the mid-point of each bin).9 Respondents were also
asked why they had left a position and the reasons they took a subsequent job. Each position, or
spell with an employer, lasting six months or more constituted a separate “stage,” and all stages
were surveyed for the variables just listed. Information was gathered on all post-MBA spells of
non-employment (periods of six months or longer in which an individual was not working for
pay) and the reasons for these spells.


        The survey responses were converted into an (unbalanced) individual-year panel dataset.
Individual earnings in a given year were computed by linear extrapolation based on earnings in
the first and last year of a given stage and the length of that stage. Administrative data from the
University of Chicago were matched to our individual-level survey data providing information
on MBA courses and grades, undergraduate school, undergraduate GPA, GMAT scores, and
demographic information (age, ethnicity, and immigration status). Respondents were also asked
about their current marital status and, for those currently married or living with a partner (we will
use “married” for both), about their spouse’s educational attainment, employment status and
earnings. All respondents were asked whether they had any children (biological or adopted), the
year of birth of each child and the allocation of childcare responsibilities in pre-school years
between themselves, their spouse, other family members, home care, and day care.


        Among the MBAs in these classes with known e-mail addresses about 31 percent
responded to the survey.10 Of this group 2,485 (or 97 percent) were matched to University of
Chicago administrative records. These 1,856 men and 629 women form the basis of our sample.

8
  Employees were asked to include salary and bonuses; the self-employed were asked for total earnings.
9
  Possible answers to the earnings question were < $50K, $50-$75K, $75-$100K, $100-$150K, $150-
$200K, $200-$300K, $300-$400K, $400-$500K,$500-$750K, $750K-$1MM, $1-$2MM, and > $2MM.
We converted the answers into a real-valued earnings variable using the mid-point of each earnings bin;
we assigned earnings of $25K to those that responded earning less than $50K and earnings of $3MM to
those who indicated earning more than $2MM. The response bins for the usual weekly hours worked
questions ranged were < 20 hours, 20-30 hours, 30-40 hours, …, 90-100 hours, and > 100 hours.
10
   Because e-mail addresses can fail without generating a return e-mail, the 31 percent response rate
should be considered a lower bound. The survey was sent to each MBA’s “life-time” University of
Chicago e-mail address and, when available, to his or her e-mail addresses listed in the Business School’s
alumni directory.

                                                                             12-August-09, Dynamics 5
The University of Chicago has awarded about 570 MBAs annually since 1990 and 24 percent of
these have gone to women. The figure is considerably lower than the national average of MBAs
earned by women, which was about 40 percent for the same period, although it is less out of line
with the University of Chicago’s closest competitors.11


       The respondents do not differ much from the non-respondents based on the observables.
Respondents are, to a slight degree, disproportionately female and U.S. citizens, and they had
somewhat better undergraduate and graduate records than the non-respondents (see Table A1).
We find about the same gender differences in pre-MBA background, MBA course selection and
MBA grades in the full sample of 1990-2006 graduates as in the sub-sample of those that
participated in our survey (Table A2). The women in our survey are slightly positively selected
on their undergraduate GPA compared with their male peers, and the survey respondents for both
genders are somewhat positively selected on GMAT scores and MBA GPA.


       Relative to the male MBAs, the women are a bit younger at graduate school entry and
more often U.S. citizens; they did better as undergraduates but less well on the GMAT (Table
A2). Because the University of Chicago MBA program offers a flexible curriculum,
considerable variation exists in course selection. Women take relatively fewer finance and
accounting classes but relatively more marketing classes. Because of a school policy imposing a
maximum mean grade per class, the Chicago MBA program has not been subject to much grade
inflation and, in consequence, the MBA grades are reasonably comparable over time and reflect
performance in the program. Women have slightly lower graduate GPAs across all fields of
study with the largest gender gap in grades found in finance courses.


       At the time of the survey, the female MBAs in the sample were less apt to be married
than their male counterparts (0.65 versus 0.81).12 If married, female MBAs were far less likely
to have a husband with fewer years of schooling than they. Female MBAs were less likely to
have any children by the year they exited the program (4 percent versus 16 percent), and they
remained less likely to have children by the time of the survey (42 percent versus 60 percent).

11
  Among Harvard Business School MBAs for the same period, 31 percent were female.
12
  Summary information on the career and family characteristics of our survey respondents overall and by
sex are given in Table A3.

                                                                          12-August-09, Dynamics 6
Among the sub-sample of survey respondents that we can observe nine years after the MBA
program, 45 percent of women were still childless compared with 30 percent of men. Female
MBAs were more apt to have taken any time off work since receiving their MBA (27 percent
versus 10 percent). And 11 percent of the women across all cohorts were not working at the time
of our survey as compared to just 2 percent of the men.


        Weekly hours are high for almost all MBA positions. They are highest in investment
banking and consulting, the two areas in which almost two-fifths of our sample took their first
post-MBA jobs (13 percent and 26 percent, respectively).13 The average investment banker put
in a whopping 74 hours per week, the average consultant 61 hours per week.14 Also reaching
close to the 60 hours per week mark are those employed in venture capital and sales and trading.


        The share of MBAs working in the high hours sectors declines rapidly in the years
following graduation. The share working as consultants was 26 percent initially but 17 percent
four years after graduation and 12 percent at seven years or more after. MBAs also shift out of
investment banking with only 6 percent still working as investment bankers at seven or more
years after graduation. Employment shares in investment management, company finance, and
product management remain stable in the 15 years following graduation, and MBAs increasingly
move into general management as their careers progress.


C. Descriptive Dynamics


     1. Labor Supply


        Early in their careers labor force participation among the MBAs in our Chicago alumni
sample is extremely high and similar by gender (Table 1). But the gender gap in labor force
participation widens as careers progress with no more than 1 percent of males not working in any
given post-graduation year as compared to 13 percent of women not in the labor force by year


13
   In contrast, only about one-fifth of MBA graduates worked in either consulting or investment banking
prior to entering the MBA program.
14
   See Table A4 data for mean weekly hours for the most common job functions in our MBA sample.
                                                                           12-August-09, Dynamics 7
nine and 17 percent of women not in the labor force ten or more years since their MBA.15
Differences are yet more pronounced comparing the fraction of men and women working full-
time and full-year in a given year (Table 1).16 The fraction of men working full-time, year-
round, ranges between 91 and 94 percent in all years following graduation. Although 90 percent
of women are employed full-time and full-year immediately following graduation, 80 percent are
five years out, 70 percent nine years out, and 62 percent ten or more years out.17 For women
with at least one child, 52 percent work full-time and full-year ten or more years after MBA
completion and the figure is about the same (50 percent) for women with two or more children.


        Gender differences in labor force participation translate into differences in actual post
MBA labor market experience. The fraction of men who had at least one career interruption (a
period of six months or more without working) is 4 percent a year after graduation and 10
percent by ten years out. In contrast, the fraction of women with at least one post-MBA career
interruption is 9 percent a year after graduation but 32 percent by year nine and 40 percent ten to
16 years after graduation.


        Non-work spells are generally brief for both men and women, as indicated by the
tabulations of cumulative years not working by years since graduation in Table 1. The average
woman spends 0.22 years out of work by year five and 0.57 years out of work by year nine; for
men, the equivalent figures are 0.06 at year five and 0.10 at year nine. Ten years or more post-
MBA, mean cumulative years not working are 1.05 for women and just 0.12 for men.


        Weekly work hours are high for all MBAs and highest among the newly minted. Men in
their first year out average 61 hours per week; women average 59 hours, despite being less likely
to start in investment banking where hours are especially long.18 Hours of work decline for male

15
   The employment rate is relatively low for both men and women in the year of MBA graduation since
the entry-level MBA market takes some time to clear.
16
   Our survey did not include a question on “full-time” versus “part-time” work. We assign “full-time”
(“part-time”) status to those who report working > [30-40] hours/week (at most [30-40] hours/week).
17
   Our figure of 62 percent is close to that from an often-cited Catalyst study by Hollenshead and Wilt
(2000), showing that 66 percent of the female graduates from 12 top MBA programs were working full-
time (but not necessarily year-round) approximately ten to 16 years after receiving their MBA.
18
   See Landers, Rebitzer and Taylor (1996) on the role of similarly long hours for law associates at large
U.S. law firms in the career dynamics of young lawyers.

                                                                              12-August-09, Dynamics 8
and female MBAs in the years following graduation, but far more so for women. Four years
after receiving their MBA, women work around 55 hours per week while men work around 59
hours; nine years out, women work around 51 hours per week, while men work around 57 hours.


       Although hours of work are long for most MBAs, a large share of MBA women work
part-time (defined as 30 to 40 hours or less per week). The incidence of part-time work among
employed MBA women increases with years since graduation, from 5 percent during the first
year to 22 percent at ten to 16 years out. Whereas about 17 percent of MBA women are not
working at ten to 16 years out, another 18 percent [0.22 × (1 – 0.17)] are working part-time.19
Part-time work, therefore, is more prevalent than is non-employment for MBA women, even
more than a decade after the MBA. But part-time positions are rare for those who remain in the
corporate sector, especially in investment banking and consulting. One year after graduation, 4
percent of salaried women work part-time, 8 percent by year five, and 12 percent at ten years or
more post-MBA. How, then, do 22 percent of MBA women 10 to 16 years out work part-time?


       MBA women use self-employment as a means to work fewer hours and 57 percent of the
MBA women who work part-time do so through self-employment. Immediately following
graduation, 29 percent of self-employed women work part-time; 32 percent do by year five. Ten
years or more post-MBA, 62 percent of self-employed women work part-time.20 In contrast,
only 15 percent of self-employed men work part-time ten to 16 years out. The shares of working
men and women who are self-employed are similar up to nine years following graduation
(growing from less than 2 percent at graduation to 11 to 13 percent nine years out), but a surge in
self-employment among MBA women occurs ten to 16 years out, with 20 percent of working
women being self-employed compared with 14 percent for men.

19
   Gender differences in labor supply for Chicago Booth MBAs are quite similar to gender gaps around
ten years after MBA completion for those in the 1989 to 1992 BA cohort of the Harvard and Beyond
(H&B) sample who went on to get an MBA. The H&B male MBAs in these cohorts had a 98 percent
employment rate as compared with an 82 percent employment rate for the H&B female MBAs in 2006.
Conditional on being employed in 2006, the H&B male MBAs worked 55 hours per week on average
with only 3 percent working part-time, and the H&B female MBAs worked 44 hours per week on average
with 29 percent working part-time. A substantial gender gap in hours of work for those who received
MBAs from 1990 to 2003 is also apparent for the 2003 NSCG with employed male MBAs working 49
hours per week on average as compared to 44 hours per week for employed female MBAs.
20
   The share of part-timers is even higher among self-employed women with no employees: nearly 75
percent of them work part-time ten to 16 years out.

                                                                        12-August-09, Dynamics 9
        By far the most common job function among self-employed part-timers is consulting.
More than 30 percent of self-employed part-timers are consultants, whereas among full-timers
only 18 percent are. For those who work in established firms, however, consulting offers less
opportunity for part-time work: fewer than 3 percent of salaried part-timers are consultants.


        In summary, MBAs in our sample are concentrated in job functions that generally have
long hours. Hours decline with time since MBA for both men and women, in part reflecting a
move out of investment banking and consulting and towards general management positions in
corporations. But weekly hours worked drop considerably more for women, driven largely by a
growing share working part-time, often self-employed. Women are increasingly more likely to
be out of the workforce with years since MBA, although the average female MBA accumulates
only half a year of non-employment in the first nine years after graduation. Part-time work for
women is a more important factor than “opting out” behavior (non-employment) in explaining
the lower incidence of full-time and full-year work for women than for men in the first 15 years
after MBA completion.


     2. Earnings


        Labor market earnings are a key summary measure of career progress and ultimate
success. We construct earnings for each calendar year by taking the annualized total earnings
(including bonuses) from the stage worked at the end of that calendar year. In this manner,
earnings per year are constructed as “full year” earnings in the last job held in that year and not
necessarily actual earnings for the year.21


        Earnings (expressed in 2006 dollars) advance substantially with time since MBA, as is
clear from Table 2 and Figure 1. The growth is a hefty 8.9 percent average annual rate for all



21
  We have also averaged the annualized earnings of all working stages during the calendar year for those
with multiple stages in a year (weighting each stage by its length). This definition also computes full-year
earnings, which may differ from actual earnings for those employed only part of the year. There are no
notable differences in the findings between the two earnings measures.

                                                                            12-August-09, Dynamics 10
MBAs.22 The average MBA earns $126K at graduation (median is $122K) and close to $370K
nine years out (median is around $190K). Both the level and rate of change are greatest for those
starting in investment banking, which attracts a substantial number of recent MBA graduates.
Those starting their careers in investment banking earn on average $170K at graduation (median
is $160K) and close to $700K nine years out (median is $470K), whether or not they are still
employed in investment banking. Earnings levels and growth are similar for investment
management (not reported in the table). The consulting track, the other most prevalent career
option among MBAs, is less remunerative than investment banking and investment management.


           Mean earnings by sex are comparable directly following MBA receipt, but they diverge
every subsequent year. Women earn $115K on average at graduation and $250K nine years out;
men earn $130K on average at graduation and $400K nine years out. Median salaries by sex
also diverge in favor of men with years since graduation but not by as much as do mean salaries.


           Mean differences in earnings between men and women (conditional only on all cohort ×
year dummies) are given in Table 3 arrayed by years since receipt of the MBA. The 11 log point
gender earnings gap at graduation jumps to 31 log points at five years out, 40 log points at nine
years out and nearly 60 log points at ten or more years out (col. 2). The time profile of the
earnings gap is roughly similar for the subset who start a new job in that year (col. 3).


D. Explaining the Gender Gap in Labor Supply


           Gender differences in labor supply expand substantially with years since completing an
MBA even when adding cohort (MBA graduating class) effects, calendar year effects, and their
interactions (Table 3, cols. 4 to 8). Nine years out, women are about 12 percentage points less
likely than men to be working (col. 5) and have spent half a year more than the average man out
of work since the MBA (col. 4). Although only a 3 log point difference in weekly hours worked
exists in the first post-MBA job, the difference grows to about 14 log points nine years out and to
20 log points at ten or more years after graduation (col. 8).



22
     The calculation assumes an average of 13 years for the ten to 16-year cell.
                                                                               12-August-09, Dynamics 11
       The reasons for gender differences in labor supply are explored in Tables 4 and 5, which
include a full set of cohort × year dummies as well as controls for pre-MBA characteristics and
MBA performance.23 The unit of observation is a survey respondent in a given year. Table 4
explores the role of children and Table 5 adds comparisons by spousal income.


       The 8.4 percentage point gap in employment between men and women, perhaps not
surprisingly, is largely driven by women with children, as can be seen by comparing the first two
columns of Table 4. A woman with at least one child is 20 percentage points less likely to work
in a given year than the average man, whereas a woman without children is only 3 percentage
points less likely to be employed than the average man (col. 2). A woman with at least one child
has about 0.7 fewer years of actual labor market experience than the typical man in the sample;
this difference is only 0.1 year for a woman without children (col. 4). Although there is a 9 log
point mean difference in weekly hours worked between employed men and women, it is 24 log
points for women with kids and only 3 log points for women without kids (col. 6).


       More interesting is that the “impact” of children on female labor supply differs to a large
degree by spousal earnings (Table 5). Because our survey asked for spousal earnings only in the
current year, we use spousal current (survey date) earnings as a proxy for spousal earnings in any
prior year. We then separate women into those with “lower” earnings (less than $100K per year)
spouses, “medium” earnings (between $100K and $200K per year) spouses and “high” earnings
(more than $200K per year) spouses. These spousal earnings categories are then interacted with
an indicator variable for whether or not a woman has at least one child in a given year, thereby
comparing the average man to six different groups of women.24


       The effect of motherhood on the likelihood that a woman is not working is more than
twice as large if the woman has a high-earnings spouse rather than a lower-earnings spouse:


23
   The pre-MBA controls include a quadratic in age; a U.S. citizen dummy; dummies for race; dummies
for “top 10” and “top 10 to 20” undergraduate institutions (from the U.S. News & World Report
rankings); undergraduate GPA; quantitative and verbal GMAT scores; and dummies for industry and job
function in the last job before entering the MBA program. Our controls for MBA performance are the
MBA GPA and the fraction of finance-related classes taken during the program.
24
   Sample sizes differ between Tables 4 and 5 since the Table 5 specifications include only women who
were married or living with someone at the survey date.

                                                                        12-August-09, Dynamics 12
these mothers are 30 percentage points less likely to work than the average man (Table 5, col. 1;
0.119 + 0.185). Mothers with a medium-earnings spouse also work less than those with a
lower-earnings spouse, but the difference is smaller and not statistically significant. Similarly,
mothers with high-earnings spouses accumulate about six months more in non-employment
spells following MBA completion and, even when employed, have a workweek that is 19 log
points shorter than mothers with low-earnings spouses (cols. 2 and 3).


        Among women without children greater spousal earnings appear to increase, rather than
decrease, labor supply. In fact, a woman without children married to high-earnings spouse is
about as likely to work (the gap is only 2 percentage points), to accumulate post-MBA work
experience, and to put in a long work week (women are actually higher by 3 log points) as the
typical male in our sample. These findings suggest positive assortative mating based on
preferences for work. The sharp reversal in labor supply patterns for MBA women by spousal
income that occurs with motherhood seems most consistent with the notion that previously hard-
working women slow down after their first birth if they have a high-earnings spouse.


        Because spousal income may be endogenous to own labor supply choices and because we
measure spousal income only in the survey year, we have replicated the analysis using spousal
education levels. We contrast the labor supply of mothers married to men who are at least as
educated as they (having MBA, JD, MD and related degrees, or PhD) to that of mothers with
less-educated spouses. We find the same qualitative pattern of results as in Table 5.25


        MBA mothers whose spouses earn over $150K indicate being responsible for 52 percent
of their children’s care as compared with only 32 percent for MBA mothers with lower-earnings
spouses.26 The difference is almost fully explained by the use of formal day care center (12
percent with high-earnings spouses versus 31 percent with lower-earnings spouses). That is,
MBA mothers with better-off husbands take a larger share of the responsibility for child care
(relative to their spouses and others) than do other MBA women. Greater spousal income

25
   We also investigated how children affect male labor supply based on wives’ earnings (and education),
but found no significant impacts of the presence of children or of spousal income on male labor supply.
26
   When we use three types of earnings we called the > $200K group “high,” but when we use two
groups, as we do here, we term the > $150K group “high.”

                                                                          12-August-09, Dynamics 13
purchases more high-priced child-care time of the MBA mother, not more nannies.


        In summary, parental status accounts for the bulk of the difference in labor supply
between male and female MBAs. The impact of children on female labor supply is strongly
related to spousal income, with mothers in better-off households slowing down much more.27


E. Explaining the Gender Gap in Earnings


        To understand why female MBAs have lower incomes than male MBAs, we estimate
(log) annual earnings equations that pool all individual-year observations. The impact of the
various factors discussed, including pre-MBA characteristics, MBA courses, post-MBA job
experience, and non-working spells, on the gender gap in earnings, is explored. The estimation
in Table 6 is done with and without controlling for weekly hours worked. The novelty of the
estimation is our use of information on all job stages previously held by an individual.


        The raw gap in earnings between men and women in the pooled sample is about 29 log
points including only cohort × year dummies (col. 1). The inclusion of pre-MBA characteristics,
MBA GPA, and fraction of finance classes reduces the gender gap to 19 log points (col. 2). The
difference in mean MBA GPA between men and women in the sample of 0.13 (3.38 versus 3.25)
implies (using the estimated coefficient of 0.429 on MBA GPA in col. 2) that the gender
difference in MBA grades alone can account for a gender earnings gap of nearly 6 log points.
Each additional finance class increases earnings by about 8 log points and women take about half
a class less in finance than men.28


        Labor supply factors explain most of the remaining gender gap in earnings. The
inclusion of a full set of dummy variables for weekly hours worked reduces the raw gender gap
of 29 log points (col. 1) to 17 log points (col. 4). Adding hours worked to the specification
including pre-MBA characteristics and MBA performance lowers the remaining gender gap to 9

27
   Of course, neither marital nor parental statuses are randomly assigned and it is possible that women’s
decisions to get married, whom to marry and whether or not to have children are related to unobservable
characteristics that might directly impact earnings. We explore that possibility below.
28
   Finance classes pay off even for those not starting in investment banking or investment management.
                                                                           12-August-09, Dynamics 14
log points (col. 5). The gender earnings gap is reduced to just 6.4 log points (col. 6) with the
further addition of a quadratic term for post-MBA years of actual work experience and a dummy
variable for the presence of any post-MBA career interruption. Augmenting the model with
(arguably less exogenous) variables to control for reasons for choosing one’s current job, job
function, and employer type further reduces the coefficient on the female dummy to a
(statistically insignificant) –3.8 log points (col. 9).29


        The estimates from our preferred specification in col. (6) of Table 6 can be used to obtain
the earnings penalty from taking time out. The loss is 23 log points from taking any time out
plus an additional amount from accumulating less post-MBA experience. An MBA observed six
years after business school graduation with at least one non-employment spell in that period had
an average employment spell of 4.97 years and thus an average non-employment spell of 1.03
years. The penalty from taking that amount of time off is 37 log points of which about two-
thirds is due to the discrete earnings loss from taking any time off.30 The earnings loss from
time out is even greater using the estimates that do not hold hours constant (col. 3). The full
earnings loss (among the employed), using those coefficients, is around 46 log points. Wage
penalties we estimate (for the typical out-of-work spell at six years after MBA completion) are
uniformly high across all career tracks: 36 log points in consulting, 45 log points in investment
banking or investment management, and 45 log points in other functions. 31 The earnings loss
from any career interruption is large in our MBA sample.


        The models in Table 6 restrict the impact of career interruptions to be identical for men
and women. Although it is possible that women are more heavily penalized for taking time out,
estimates from separate earnings regressions by sex using the specification from Table 6, col. (6)
do not support that suspicion. The wage penalty for men, using our standardized career
interruption at six years out, is 45 log points whereas that for women is 26 log points. Taking


29
   The basic findings are almost identical for log hourly wage regressions as for log annual earnings
regressions that include controls for weekly hours worked. See Table A5 for log hourly wage regressions,
comparable to the specifications in Table 6, for the full pooled sample.
30
   The penalty for an average non-work spell of an individual 6 years out from the MBA would be:
[(0.085 × 4.967) + (0.005 × 4.9672) – 0.228] – [(0.085 × 6) + (0.005 × 62)] = 0.372. Note that in the
entire sample 27 percent of the women, but 10 percent of the men, took time off.
31
   We re-estimated the specification in col. (6) separately for each of the subgroups.
                                                                         12-August-09, Dynamics 15
any time out appears more harmful for men (26 log points) than for women (11 log points).32
Similar calculations for a standardized career interruption based on the col. (3) specification,
which does not hold hours constant, result in penalties for taking time out of 48 log points for
men and 38 log points for women. For women, but less so for men, a career interruption usually
goes hand in hand with a substantial reduction in weekly hours upon returning to work. The data
do not indicate that MBA women lose more than MBA men for taking time out. It appears that
everyone is penalized heavily for deviating from the norm.


        An analysis of the gender earnings gap by years since MBA graduation is given in Table
7. The (uncorrected) gender wage gap is 9 log points just after MBA completion. It rises to 25
log points three years out, to 38 log points at nine years out, and to 57 log points for the ten to 16
years out group. But even the largest of these gender gaps in earnings is entirely eliminated by
the inclusion of the observables, particularly job interruptions and hours of work. That detail,
however, overlooks the changing importance of the various factors with time since MBA.


        Within the first three years after receipt of the MBA the earnings gap between men and
women expands by 16 log points. As much as a third of the increase appears to be due to
growing labor market returns with experience to pre-MBA characteristics as well as MBA course
performance. Gender differences in career interruptions and the accumulation of years of labor
market experience do not expand much in the first three years in the labor market (as seen in
Table1), but the gender gap in hours worked is already an important factor for the gender
earnings gap by year three (as suggested by comparing the gender gap estimates in rows 4 and 5
of Table 7). During the next six years (from year three to nine), the gender earnings gap grows
by another 12 log points. At this juncture career interruptions become a more important factor
and weekly hours also play a key role. The addition of controls for career interruptions reduces
the 12.4 log point increase from year three to nine by 5.6 log points and the inclusion of controls
for weekly hours (in row 5) more than eliminates the remaining growth of the gender earnings
gap. Of the increase in the gender earnings gap by 29 log points in the first nine years following



32
   A larger discrete earnings loss associated with having any career interruption for men than for women
is also found in earnings regressions including person fixed effects.

                                                                           12-August-09, Dynamics 16
MBA completion, 8 log points can be accounted for by adding pre-job characteristics and a
further 19 log points by adding controls for career interruptions and hours of work.


       Because our full sample is an unbalanced panel, the dynamics of change in the gender
gap could reflect differential changes in sample composition by sex with years since MBA
completion. To address this issue, we have replicated the analysis in Table 7 limiting the sample
to those who completed their MBA prior to 1998, holding sample composition constant up to
eight years out. The results are similar for the full sample and for the pre-1998 cohorts.


       Large earnings differences relative to men are apparent even for women who have taken
no career breaks up to the post-MBA year considered (see Table A6). The total change in the
earnings gap to year nine is 20 log points. Most (70 percent) of this total change can be
accounted for by the increasing importance of pre-job (MBA and pre-MBA) characteristics and
rising differences in weekly hours between men and this group of women.


       Even women with no career interruptions have children and some of these women will
work fewer hours and be less available for career moves. Limiting the sample to women without
children and with no career interruptions by ten years out makes the career paths of the women
in the sample more similar to those of men. For that comparison, the gender earning gap starts
out slightly larger than for all women, but it grows less rapidly (see Table A7). The gap in
earnings between this sub-group of women and all men increases by 15 log points in the first ten
years after the MBA. This entire increase in the gender pay gap can be accounted for by the
greater importance of pre-MBA and MBA characteristics with years since MBA receipt.
Furthermore, we find no growth in the gender gap in weekly hours worked with years since
MBA for the women in this sub-group.


F. Selection and Family Status


       A large part of the difference between male and female earnings comes from job
interruptions and most job interruptions are due to children. MBA women who become mothers
might be selected on unobservables that could directly lead to lower earnings in the absence of

                                                                       12-August-09, Dynamics 17
children. But we uncover no evidence that MBA women who marry and have children are
drawn from the lower part of the female earnings distribution (Table 8). To the contrary, we find
that married women have slightly higher predicted earnings than unmarried women and those
with children have slightly higher predicted earnings than those without children, using a
measure of predicted earnings based on pre-MBA characteristics and MBA performance.33
MBA women who have children are not negatively selected in terms of predicted earnings levels
and may even be positively selected. MBA mothers are, as well, positively selected on actual
early career earnings as well. In unreported regressions, we find that the MBA women with a
first birth three or more years following MBA completion earned about 4 log points more in the
first two years following MBA completion than their female classmates who do not have
children by our survey date. We also find some positive assortative mating on earnings potential
with women whose spouses are more-educated having slightly higher predicted earnings than
women who marry less educated men (col. 3 of Table 8).

G. More on the Role of Children and Career Interruptions in the Dynamics of the Gender Gap


        Because differences in earnings and employment between male and female MBAs appear
to be largely associated with the presence of children, we use the (retrospectively-constructed)
panel structure of the data to explore career dynamics after a first birth in Tables 9 and 10. The
regressions include person fixed effects, cohort × year dummies, a quadratic in age, and a set of
indicator variables for the year surrounding the first child’s birth—dummy variables for one or
two years before the birth, the year of the birth, one or two years after the birth, three or four
years after the birth, and greater than four years after the birth. The coefficients on these
variables summarize the dynamics of labor supply and earnings responses to a first birth relative
to the base period of three or more years prior to the first birth.34


        MBA women reduce their labor supply on both the extensive and intensive margins after
a birth. There is a large decline in labor force participation in the year of the first birth and a

33
   The predicted value of log (annual earnings) for all individuals is regressed on interactions of marital
status and sex in one regression and, in a separate regression, on interactions of sex with whether an
individual has a child. The predicted value of earnings is based on a full set of pre-MBA characteristics
and MBA performance measures (see the notes to Table 8 for details).
34
   The regression samples exclude individuals who had children prior to completing their MBA.
                                                                             12-August-09, Dynamics 18
further reduction over the next four years. A woman’s likelihood of not working in a year is
about 13 percentage points higher in the two years immediately following her first birth than in
the base period, increasing to 18 to 19 percentage points higher at three years following the birth
and beyond (Table 9, col. 2). Similarly, weekly hours worked for the employed (col. 10)
decrease discretely in the year of the first birth and continue to decline over the next four years,
reaching a 24 log point deficit relative to the pre-birth base period. This reduction in weekly
hours is associated with a large shift into part-time work and self-employment in the four years
following a first birth. 35 In contrast, there is no decline in labor force participation and only a
small (4 log points) decline in weekly hours worked in the one or two years before the first birth.
MBA moms are, if anything, slightly more likely to work in the two years that precede the birth
of their first child than in the base period of three or more years before their first birth.


        Women’s earnings (among those remaining employed) decline only modestly in the year
of the first birth but decline sharply over the next several years especially around three to four
years after the birth (Table 9, col. 4). A woman’s earnings drop by about 30 log points relative
to the pre-birth base period at three years or more after the birth. When we control for hours
worked (col. 11), we find that annual earnings (essentially hourly wage rates) are unchanged in
the two years immediately following the first birth but decrease by 6 to 7 log points after that.


        Thus, earnings decline linearly with hours worked in the first two years after the first
birth, but (hourly) wage penalties (associated with career interruptions) become evident for MBA
women about three years after the birth. A woman’s annual earnings (including the non-
employed) fall modestly in the year of the first birth and continue declining over the next several
years reaching a $100K deficit relative to the base period by five years after the birth (col. 8).


        The decreases in women’s labor supply and earnings that expand three to four years after
a first birth could reflect the impact of subsequent births. But we find large reductions in labor


35
  The share of MBA women working part-time increases from 5 percent two years before a first birth to
34 percent four years after a first birth with about half of this increase accounted for by women shifting
into self-employment. Herr and Wolfram (2009) emphasize that corporate work environments contribute
to MBA mothers’ decisions to exit the labor force at motherhood. We find, in addition, that MBA
mothers shift into self-employment, and also that self-employment enables part-time work.

                                                                           12-August-09, Dynamics 19
supply and earnings four years after a first birth even for women who do not have a subsequent
birth.36 In fact, we find the birth of a second child has little additional adverse effect on women’s
labor supply and earnings.


        In contrast, MBA men with children see their earnings increase, not decrease, especially
five years and more after birth of their first child (Table 9, cols. 3, 5, and 7). Male labor supply
is virtually unaffected by fatherhood in our MBA sample (cols. 1 and 9).


        Obvious reasons exist why women choose to cut back on work after giving birth. But
MBA mothers may also be forced out, or at least out of the fast-track. Suggestive evidence
exists, however, that the observed patterns of decreased labor supply and earnings substantially
reflect women’s choices given family constraints and the inflexibility of work schedules in many
corporate and finance sector jobs. The differential impact of children on women’s labor supply
by her spouse’s income and education (see Table 5) seems consistent with such an interpretation.


        The differential dynamic impacts of a first birth on women’s labor market outcomes by
husband’s income are illustrated in Table 10, where we estimate separate regressions (using the
Table 9 specifications) for married women by spousal earnings (more than or less than $200K).37
New MBA mothers with higher-earning spouses reduce their likelihood of working by 17
percentage points in the year of first birth (relative to the base period) and by 28 percentage
points three to four years after the birth (col. 6). In contrast, MBA women with lower-earning
spouses have an increased employment rate in the two years prior to a first birth and experience
no noticeable change in the likelihood of employment (relative to the pre-birth base period)
following the birth (col. 1). Weekly hours (conditional on employment) drop for both groups in
the year of a first birth and in the four years following the birth (cols. 4 and 9). The total annual
earnings decline (including those not working) associated with motherhood is large and
persistent for MBA women with higher-earning spouses. The decline is quite modest for women
with lower-earning spouses and does not persist beyond the first four years after the first birth.


36
   These findings derive from (unreported) regressions in which we add a dummy variable, to the
specifications in Table 9, for the two years immediately following the birth of a second child.
37
   These results are replicated in Table A8 for spouses by education group rather than income.
                                                                         12-August-09, Dynamics 20
        Corroborating evidence arguing for some type of choice can be gleaned from the reasons
MBA women give for not working, leaving their previous job, and for choosing a new job (Table
11). The probability that a woman is not working for career-related reasons (which include
“layoff” and “suitable job not available”) does not change post-birth (col. 2). Instead, all of the
reduction in labor force participation for MBA women following a first birth observed in Table 9
can be attributed to an increase in the likelihood of not working for family-related reasons
(which include “do not need or want to work,” “home taking care of parents or other relatives”
and “home raising children”) as seen in Table 11, col. (1).


        What motivates mothers to choose their current job largely differs from what motivated
them before they had children. Post-birth, women are 20 to 26 percentage points more likely to
be in a job chosen for family-related reasons than in the pre-birth base period (col. 3) and 13 to
21 percentage points less likely to have chosen their job for career-related reasons (col. 4).
These changes in career orientation are not limited to when their children were infants but persist
five or more years after the first birth.38


        Choice does not mean that earnings are not greatly affected, and large negative wage
changes are associated with taking a new job for family-related reasons and for leaving a prior
job for family-related reasons (Table A9, panel B). Earnings decline 64 log points when the new
job is chosen because of “flexible hours,” 20 log points when the new job is chosen because of
an “opportunity to work remotely,” and 7 log points when the new job is chosen because of a
“limited travel schedule.” The large role of family factors and desires for flexible hours in the
job mobility decisions of women with children generates the striking differences in the wage
changes by gender and parental status associated with job changes (Table A9, panel A). Job
changes in our MBA sample are income neutral for women without children and for men. But
women with children lose nearly 18 log points in earnings when they shift jobs.


        MBA mothers may emphasize family over career in choosing their jobs, but it is still
possible that their jobs involve lower earnings and fewer career advancement opportunities

38
   Family reasons for choosing a given job include: “flexible hours”; “opportunity to work remotely”; and
“limited travel schedule.” Career reasons for choosing a given job include: “career advancement or
broadening”; “compensation and other benefits,” and “prestige.”

                                                                           12-August-09, Dynamics 21
because of differential treatment. This claim is difficult to evaluate directly. We examine the
likelihood of leaving a given job, as well as the likelihood of leaving for family or career-related
reasons, conditioning on the stated reasons for originally choosing that job (Table 11, cols. 5 to
8). If MBA mothers were being sidelined in their current jobs, one might have expected them to
be more likely to quit (or even be forced out) for career-related reasons. Yet, we find little
evidence of that (cols. 5, 7 and 8). We do find that women are more likely to leave a job for
family reasons in the two years before a birth (col. 6), suggesting some re-optimization of job
choices in anticipation of children. Of course, the evidence does not rule out discrimination
since women facing such career barriers still may give family reasons for job changes.


H. Summary and Conclusions


       We have examined gender differences in the career dynamics of MBAs who graduated
from a top U.S. business school—the Booth School of Business of the University of Chicago —
from 1990 to 2006. Immediately following MBA completion male and female MBAs from this
elite program have nearly identical labor incomes and work nearly the same weekly hours. But
the gender gap in annual earnings expands considerably as their careers progress reaching almost
60 log points at ten to 16 years after MBA completion.


       We identify three proximate factors that can explain the large and rising gender gap in
earnings: (1) a modest male advantage in training prior to MBA graduation combined with rising
labor market returns to such training with post-MBA experience; (2) gender differences in career
interruptions combined with large earnings losses associated with any career interruption (of six
or more months); and (3) growing gender differences in weekly hours worked with years since
MBA. Differential changes by sex in labor market activity in the period surrounding a first birth
play a key role in this process. The presence of children is associated with less accumulated job
experience, more career interruptions, shorter work hours, and substantial earnings declines for
female but not for male MBAs. The one exception is that an adverse impact of children on
employment and earnings is not found for female MBAs with lower-earning husbands.




                                                                       12-August-09, Dynamics 22
        Are career-family tradeoffs faced by female MBAs in the corporate and financial sectors
similar to those in other high-powered occupations? We have done a preliminary exploration of
these issues using the Harvard and Beyond (H&B) project to examine the careers of Harvard
graduates from the undergraduate classes of 1969 to 1973, 1979 to 1982, and 1989 to 1992.39
We find that female MBAs appear to have a more difficult time combining career and family
than do female physicians, PhDs, and lawyers.40


        Fifteen years after obtaining their BA women who earned an MBA had the lowest labor
force participation rates, the lowest share working full-time and full-year, and took the greatest
amount of (non-educational) time off from employment compared with others having
professional degrees and PhDs (Goldin and Katz 2008). The differences are greatest for those
with children.41 Less than 50 percent of the MBA women were both in the labor force (part-time
or full-time) and had children 15 years out; in contrast, the same figures for the other groups are
65 percent for MDs and about 55 percent for the PhDs and JDs. Female physicians take the
briefest non-employment spells after having a child, followed by PhDs, then lawyers, and finally
MBAs who take the greatest amount of time off for family reasons. For those graduating college
around 1990, only 75 percent of mothers with MBAs were employed 15 years after Harvard
graduation compared with 96 percent of those with MDs, 89 percent of those with PhDs, and 82
percent of those with JDs; only mothers without any post-graduate education were less likely to
work 15 years out than mothers with MBAs (73 percent).42


        Log earnings regressions for 2005 annual earnings in the H&B sample using a
specification similar to that in Table 6, col. (6), indicate larger earnings costs to career

39
   See Goldin and Katz (2008) for details.
40
   For analyses of gender earnings and promotion gaps, and career-family trade-offs, for professions, see
Wood, Corcoran, and Courant (1993) on lawyers; Sasser (2005) and Reyes (2006) on physicians; Preston
(2004) and Ginther and Kahn (2006) on science professionals; and Ginther (2006) on academics. In
related work, Ellwood, Wilde, and Batchelder (2004) find larger negative impacts of childbearing on the
wage trajectories of high skill (high AFQT) women than of less skilled (low AFQT) women.
41
   Working with a partially overlapping sample of women who received BAs from Harvard University
between 1988 and 1991, Herr and Wolfram (2009) find nearly identical results to those in the H&B
sample for labor force participation rates among those graduating college around 1990.
42
   Women with children in our MBA sample were slightly more likely to be employed than in the H&B
sample (77 percent were working ten or more years after their MBA). If we restrict the H&B data to
MBAs from top business schools the results are closer to the University of Chicago MBA sample.

                                                                           12-August-09, Dynamics 23
interruptions for MBAs than for MDs, JDs, or PhDs. The earnings penalty in 2005 for an 18
month career interruption for those in the Harvard graduating classes of 1989 to 1992, at around
six to 12 years after completing a graduate or professional degree, was 0.16 log points for MDs,
0.34 log points for JDs and PhDs, and 0.53 log points for MBAs. Furthermore, a large discrete
and persistent earnings loss is associated with any career interruption for MBAs, while for MDs
the cost of taking time off is fairly linear in foregone labor market experience.


       We can only speculate about why different costs exist to taking time off and opting for
lower hours across professions. Inherent differences in production technologies and in the
organization of work may make the productivity costs to discontinuous experience and more
flexible hours greater in the business and corporate sectors than in medicine or academia. The
economic benefits of re-organizing work to reduce the productivity costs of career interruptions
and more flexible work options may be greater in professions where there is a larger share (or
critical mass) of women in the talent pool. A tipping point may have been reached in fields
where women have become a majority (or nearly the majority) of the young talent (such as
medicine, veterinary medicine, optometry, pharmacy, and accounting) but not yet for MBAs and
the business and financial sectors. It is also possible that there is more career commitment in
those professions requiring greater upfront time investment, such as a PhD or an MD as opposed
to an MBA. Additionally, female MBAs often have husbands with higher earnings than female
PhDs and MDs allowing them the luxury to slowdown in the market and spend more time with
their children. The career costs of that decision may not be evident until much later.




                                                                       12-August-09, Dynamics 24
                                         References

Babcock, Linda, and Sara Laschever. 2003. Women Don’t Ask: Negotiation and the Gender
   Divide. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Bell, Linda. 2005. “Women-led Firms and the Gender Gap in Top Executive Pay,” Institute for
   the Study of Labor (IZA) working paper.

Bertrand, Marianne, Dolly Chugh, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2005. “Implicit Discrimination,”
   American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 95 (May), pp. 94-98.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Kevin Hallock. 2001. “The Gender Gap in Top Corporate Jobs,”
   Industrial and Labor Relations Review 55 (October), pp. 3-21.

Black, Dan A., Amelia M. Haviland, Seth G. Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor. 2008. “Gender
   Wage Disparities among the Highly Educated,” Journal of Human Resources 43 (Summer),
   pp. 630-59.

Ellwood, David, Ty Wilde, and Lily Batchelder. 2004. “The Mommy Track Divides: The
   Impact of Childbearing on the Wages of Women of Differing Skill Levels,” Harvard
   University, March.

Ginther, Donna K. 2006. “The Economics of Gender Differences in Employment Outcomes in
   Academia.” In Biological, Social, and Organizational Components of Success for Women in
   Science and Engineering: Workshop Report. Committee on Maximizing the Potential of
   Women in Engineering and Science. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, pp.
   99-112.

Ginther, Donna K., and Shulamit Kahn. 2006. “Does Science Promote Women? Evidence from
   Academia, 1973 to 2001.” NBER Working Paper no. 12691 (Nov.).

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. “Transitions: Career and Family Life Cycles of
   the Educational Elite,” American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 98 (May), pp.
   363-69.

Herr, Jane L., and Catherine Wolfram. 2009. “Opt-Out Rates at Motherhood Across High-
   Education Career Paths: Selection versus Work Environment.” NBER Working Paper No.
   14717 (February).

Hollenshead, Carol, and Jeanne Wilt. 2000. Women and the MBA: Gateway to Opportunity.
   University of Michigan, Center for the Education of Women and Catalyst.




                                                                  12-August-09, Dynamics 25
Landers, Renée M., James B. Rebitzer, and Lowell J. Taylor. 1996. “Rat Race Redux: Adverse
   Selection in the Determination of Work Hours in Law Firms,” American Economic Review
   86 (June), pp. 329-48.

Light, Audrey and Manuelita Ureta. 1995. “Early-Career Work Experience and Gender Wage
   Differentials,” Journal of Labor Economics 13 (January), 121-54.

Loprest, Pamela J. 1992. “Gender Differences in Wage Growth and Job Mobility,” American
   Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 82 (May), pp. 526-32.

Manning, Alan, and Joanna Swaffield. 2008. “The Gender Gap in Early-Career Wage Growth,”
  Economic Journal 118 (July), pp. 983-1024.

Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund. 2007. “Do Women Shy Away from Competition? Do
   Men Compete too Much?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (August), pp. 1067-1101.

Philippon, Thomas, and Ariell Reshef. 2009. “Human Capital in the U.S. Financial Industry:
    1909-2006.” NBER Working Paper No. 14644, January.

Preston, Anne E. 2004. Leaving Science. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Reyes, Jessica Wolpaw. 2006. “Do Female Physicians Capture Their Scarcity Value? The Case
   of OB/GYNs.” NBER Working Paper, no. 12528 (September).

Sasser, Alicia. 2005. “Gender Differences in Physician Pay: Tradeoffs between Career and
   Family,” Journal of Human Resources 40 (Spring), pp. 477-504.

Weinberger, Catherine. 2009. “In Search of the Glass Ceiling: Cohort Effects Among U.S.
  College Graduates in the 1990s,” UC Santa Barbara, February.

Wolfers, Justin. 2006. “Diagnosing Discrimination: Stock Returns and CEO Gender,” Journal of
  the European Economic Association 4 (May), pp. 531-41.

Wood, Robert G., Mary E. Corcoran, and Paul N. Courant. 1993. “Pay Differences among the
  Highly Paid: The Male-Female Earnings Gap in Lawyers’ Salaries,” Journal of Labor
  Economics 11 (July), pp. 417-41.




                                                                  12-August-09, Dynamics 26
Table 1
Labor Supply by Gender and Number of Years since Graduation: Descriptive Statistics

                  Number of Years since Graduation
                  0         1           2           3           4          5          6           7           8          9           ≥ 10
                  Share Not Working at All in Current Year
Female            0.054     0.012       0.017       0.027       0.032      0.050      0.067       0.084       0.089      0.129       0.166
Male              0.028     0.005       0.002       0.003       0.007      0.004      0.008       0.008       0.006      0.011       0.010
                  Share Working Full-time/Full-year (52 weeks and > 30 to 40 hours per week)
Female            n.a.      0.89        0.85        0.84        0.82       0.79       0.78        0.76        0.72       0.69        0.62
Male              n.a.       0.93       0.93        0.94        0.94       0.91       0.93        0.94        0.93       0.93        0.92
                  Cumulative Share with Any No Work Spell (until given year)
Female            0.064     0.088       0.116       0.143       0.161      0.193      0.229       0.259       0.287      0.319       0.405
Male              0.032     0.040       0.052       0.064       0.071      0.077      0.081       0.082       0.090      0.095       0.101
                  Cumulative Years Not Working
Female            0         0.050       0.077       0.118       0.157      0.215      0.282       0.366       0.426      0.569       1.052
Male              0         0.026       0.036       0.045       0.057      0.060      0.069       0.075       0.084      0.098       0.120
                  Mean Weekly Hours Worked for the Employed
Female            59.1      58.8        57.1        56.2        55.3       54.8       54.7        53.7        52.9       51.5        49.3
Male              60.9      60.7        60.2        59.5        59.1       58.6       57.9        57.6        57.6       57.5        56.7
                  Share Working Part-time (≤ 30 to 40 hours per week)
Female            0.04      0.05        0.06        0.07        0.08       0.10       0.09        0.10        0.11       0.15        0.22
Male              0.02      0.02        0.02        0.02        0.02       0.02       0.03        0.03        0.03       0.03        0.04
                  Share Working Fewer than 52 Weeks
Female            n.a.      0.07        0.08        0.07        0.08       0.09       0.09        0.07        0.10       0.06        0.06
Male              n.a.       0.05       0.05        0.04        0.04       0.06       0.03        0.03        0.04       0.03        0.03
Notes:
Individuals who do not work at all in a given year are excluded from those “working part-time” and “working fewer than 52 weeks” and are
included as zeros in the definition of “working full-time/full-year.”




                                                                                                                      9/22/2009 Dynamics 27
Table 2
Earnings Trajectories (in 2006 dollars) by Years since MBA Graduation and Starting Job Function

              Females   Males       Females      Males             All Survey         Start in Consulting     Start in I-Banking
Number of                                                        Respondents
years since    Mean      Mean       Median      Median        Mean        Median       Mean       Median       Mean     Median
graduation:     (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)       (10)
0             114,928   130,156     105,882     125,000      126,356      122,076     129,623     129,032     173,740   160,612
1             130,321   162,785     113,404     136,520      154,691      129,032     143,649     140,307     248,639   232,411
2             146,616   196,208     121,184     146,237      184,111      139,516     159,823     151,261     306,221   280,156
3             163,835   227,143     125,000     154,601      212,043      146,342     176,254     154,601     352,911   314,019
4             182,103   258,785     129,412     169,657      240,861      154,601     196,798     160,085     410,985   332,016
5             204,702   294,934     136,957     180,645      274,186      168,093     221,059     170,311     470,608   369,076
6             230,084   330,114     143,874     196,109      307,451      175,000     246,169     180,645     500,979   380,645
7             235,733   359,822     146,342     204,878      332,762      186,766     263,166     196,109     565,927   398,419
8             242,528   391,075     151,261     204,878      357,991      191,739     288,272     191,739     635,775   434,572
9             252,421   400,488     148,432     211,573      367,601      186,766     299,331     196,109     691,156   468,120
10 or more    243,481   442,353     146,342     242,367      400,715      217,121     362,274     238,710     815,914   559,802

Notes:
Cols. (1) to (4): Mean and median annual earnings by number of years since graduation for males and females. Cols. (5) and (6):
Mean and median annual earnings by number of years since graduation across all survey respondents. Remaining columns give
means and medians for survey respondents whose first post-MBA job function was consulting (cols. 7 and 8) or investment banking
(cols. 9 and 10). The existence of duplicate numbers (e.g., 204,878) is because these are medians in 2006 dollars.




                                                                                                            9/22/2009 Dynamics 28
Table 3
Gender Gap in Earnings and Labor Supply

                       Annual     Log (annual   Log (annual     Cumulative   Not working    Annual weeks     Annual hours     Log (weekly
Number of             earnings     earnings)     earnings)       years not     at all in      worked in        worked in        hours
years since                                     first year in    working     current year   current year a   current year a    worked)
receipt of                                            job
MBA                        (1)         (2)            (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)               (7)             (8)
0                       -16,943     -0.113          -0.110        -0.001        0.024          -1.628           -181.94         -0.034
                       [2,223]*    [0.018]*       [0.018]*       [0.000]§     [0.009]§        [0.530]*         [46.71]*        [0.012]*
1                       -31,083      -0.17          -0.174         0.022        0.006          -0.907           -111.71         -0.036
                       [3,999]*    [0.022]*       [0.050]*       [0.008]*      [0.004]        [0.357]§         [39.74]*        [0.012]*
2                       -49,976     -0.216          -0.270         0.038        0.014          -1.744           -210.59         -0.060
                       [7,072]*    [0.027]*       [0.056]*       [0.012]*     [0.005]§        [0.423]*         [41.76]*        [0.013]*
3                       -65,799     -0.260          -0.189         0.070        0.023          -2.059           -260.89         -0.074
                       [9,238]*    [0.033]*       [0.075]§       [0.017]*     [0.007]*        [0.512]*         [45.99]*        [0.015]*
4                       -78,198     -0.284          -0.314         0.099        0.027          -2.427           -297.42         -0.088
                      [11,334]*    [0.036]*       [0.067]*       [0.023]*     [0.009]*        [0.559]*         [49.04]*        [0.016]*
5                       -90,252     -0.311          -0.198         0.154        0.046          -3.426           -337.65          -0.09
                      [15,011]*    [0.042]*       [0.081]§       [0.031]*     [0.011]*        [0.695]*         [52.63]*        [0.017]*
6                       -97,662     -0.320          -0.272         0.212        0.059          -4.665           -363.46         -0.083
                      [21,093]*    [0.048]*       [0.125]§       [0.041]*     [0.013]*        [0.812]*         [61.16]*        [0.019]*
7                      -123,253     -0.352          -0.119         0.294        0.077          -5.101           -438.56         -0.094
                      [24,038]*    [0.053]*        [0.105]       [0.052]*     [0.016]*        [0.891]*         [63.70]*        [0.021]*
8                      -149,901     -0.375          -0.476         0.342        0.082          -6.152           -487.39         -0.097
                      [27,328]*    [0.057]*       [0.121]*       [0.062]*     [0.017]*        [0.976]*         [66.86]*        [0.019]*
9                      -152,002     -0.402          -0.360         0.476        0.116          -7.029           -622.55         -0.138
                      [31,672]*    [0.066]*       [0.170]§       [0.079]*     [0.021]*        [1.136]*         [77.33]*        [0.026]*
≥ 10                   -195,576     -0.583          -0.604         0.925        0.155          -8.812           -789.90         -0.195
                      [40,295]*    [0.084]*       [0.112]*       [0.143]*     [0.025]*        [1.345]*         [96.23]*        [0.035]*
Cohort × year             Yes         Yes            Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes
Observations            20,161      20,161          5,220         21,290       21,290          21,286           20,925          20,430
R-squared                 0.11        0.15           0.21           0.14         0.08           0.08              0.09            0.07

a
    Including zeros



                                                                                                                 9/22/2009 Dynamics 29
Notes: The unit of observation is a survey respondent in a given post-MBA year. Each column
corresponds to a different regression and each includes (cohort × year) dummies and interactions
between a female dummy and dummy variables for the number of years since receipt of the
MBA. The table reports the estimated coefficients on the interaction terms between the female
dummy and years since receiving the MBA. “Annual earnings” is defined as total earnings
before taxes and other deductions, including salary and bonus, and is coded as missing when the
individual is not working. “Hourly wage” is computed by dividing annual earnings by (weekly
hours worked × 52). Col. (3) includes only the first year at a given job. Standard errors (in
brackets) are clustered at the individual level; § significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.




                                                                        9/22/2009 Dynamics 30
Table 4
Determinants of the Gender Gap in Labor Supply: The Role of Children

Dependent Variable             Not working           Actual post-MBA         Log (weekly hours
                                                        experience                worked)
                               (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)
Female                        0.084                  -0.286                  -0.089
                            [0.009]*                [0.039]*                [0.013]*
Female with child                         0.200                  -0.660                  -0.238
                                        [0.024]*                [0.094]*                [0.031]*
Female without child                      0.034                  -0.126                  -0.033
                                        [0.007]*                [0.031]*                [0.012]*

Pre-MBA characteristics        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
MBA performance                Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Cohort × year dummies          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Constant                     -0.175       -0.111      5.929       5.757       3.951       3.914
                             [0.145]     [0.126]    [0.618]*    [0.550]*    [0.462]*    [0.426]*
Observations                 19,366      19,286      19,366      19,286      18,611      18,535
R-squared                      0.07        0.11       0.98        0.98        0.14         0.16

Notes: The unit of observation is a survey respondent in a given post-MBA year. “Female with
child” (“Female without child”) is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent is a female
and has at least one child (no child) in that year. Pre-MBA characteristics include: a dummy for
U.S. citizen, a White dummy, an Asian dummy, a dummy for “top 10” undergraduate institution,
a dummy for “top 10-20” undergraduate institution, undergraduate GPA, a dummy for missing
undergraduate GPA, a quadratic in age, verbal GMAT score, quantitative GMAT score, a
dummy for pre-MBA industry and a dummy for pre-MBA job function. MBA performance
includes overall MBA GPA and fraction of finance classes. Standard errors (in brackets) are
clustered at the individual level; * significant at 1%.




                                                                         9/22/2009 Dynamics 31
Table 5
Female Labor Supply and Spousal Income

                                      Not working       Actual post-MBA       Log (weekly hours
                                                           experience              worked)
                                           (1)                 (2)                    (3)
Female with child                         0.119              -0.420                 -0.169
                                        [0.046]*            [0.175]§               [0.041]*
Female with child × spouse with           0.185              -0.538                 -0.189
high earnings                           [0.061]*            [0.240]§               [0.078]§
Female with child × spouse with           0.026              -0.148                 -0.045
medium earnings                          [0.059]             [0.235]                [0.063]
Female without child                      0.047              -0.162                 -0.067
                                        [0.021]§             [0.087]               [0.025]*
Female without child × spouse            -0.028               0.122                  0.100
with high earnings                       [0.023]             [0.088]               [0.034]*
Female without child × spouse            -0.011               0.100                 -0.008
with medium earnings                     [0.023]             [0.086]                [0.030]
Pre-MBA characteristics                    Yes                 Yes                    Yes
MBA performance                           Yes                 Yes                    Yes
Spouse salary dummies                     Yes                 Yes                    Yes
Cohort × year dummies                     Yes                 Yes                    Yes
Constant                                   -0.138               5.795                 3.891
                                           [0.119]            [0.520]*              [0.426]*
Observations                               17,655              17,655                17,010
R-squared                                    0.14                0.99                  0.18
Notes: The unit of observation is a survey respondent in a given post-MBA year. The sample
includes only women who were married or living with someone at the survey date and also
dropped women with missing information on spousal income; men are included regardless of
marital status. “Female with child” (“without child”) is a dummy variable that equals one if the
respondent is a female and has at least one child (no child) in that year. “Spouse with high
earnings” is a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent reports that his/her spouse or
significant other earns at least $200,000 in the survey year, 0 otherwise. “Spouse with medium
earnings” is a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent reports that his/her spouse or
significant other earns at least $100,000 and at most $200,000 in the survey year, 0 if the
respondent reports that his/her spouse or significant other earns at most $100,000 or at least
$200,000 in the survey year. Pre-MBA characteristics include: a dummy for US citizen, a White
dummy, an Asian dummy, a dummy for “top 10” undergraduate institution, a dummy for “top 10
to 20” undergraduate institution, undergraduate GPA, a dummy for missing undergraduate GPA,
a quadratic in age, verbal GMAT score, quantitative GMAT score, a dummy for pre-MBA
industry and a dummy for pre-MBA job function. MBA performance includes overall MBA
GPA and fraction of finance classes. Standard errors (in brackets) are clustered at the individual
level; § significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.



                                                                          9/22/2009 Dynamics 32
Table 6
Wage Regressions

                           Dependent Variable: Log (Annual Earnings)
                              (1)        (2)           (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)       (8)        (9)
Female                      -0.287     -0.190        -0.146    -0.173     -0.094      -0.064     -0.054     -0.045     -0.038
                           [0.035]*   [0.033]*     [0.032]*   [0.030]*   [0.029]*   [0.029]§    [0.028]    [0.026]    [0.025]
MBA GPA                                 0.429         0.406                0.369       0.351      0.367      0.341      0.347
                                      [0.054]*     [0.053]*              [0.051]*   [0.051]*   [0.049]*   [0.044]*   [0.043]*
Fraction finance classes                1.833         1.807                1.758       1.737       1.65      0.464      0.430
                                      [0.211]*     [0.206]*              [0.199]*   [0.194]*   [0.193]*   [0.181]§   [0.180]§
Actual post-MBA exp                                   0.046                            0.085      0.056      0.044      0.029
                                                    [0.075]                          [0.071]    [0.068]    [0.066]    [0.064]
Actual post-MBA exp2                                  0.010                            0.005      0.008      0.006     0.007
                                                   [0.004]*                          [0.004]   [0.003]§    [0.003]   [0.003]§
Any no work spell                                    -0.290                           -0.228     -0.218     -0.181     -0.173
                                                   [0.067]*                         [0.062]*   [0.061]*   [0.056]*   [0.054]*

Dummy variables:
 Weekly hours worked         No          No         No          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Pre-MBA characteristics     No          Yes        Yes         No         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
 Reason for choosing job     No          No         No          No         No         No         Yes        No         Yes
 Job function                No          No         No          No         No         No         No         Yes        Yes
 Employer type               No          No         No          No         No         No         No         Yes        Yes
 Cohort × year               Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes

Constant                    12.156       9.493      8.809      10.385      8.08       7.525      8.229      7.744      8.324
                           [0.018]*    [0.585]*   [0.667]*    [0.151]*   [0.603]*   [0.694]*   [0.733]*   [0.521]*   [0.547]*
Observations                18,272      18,272     18,272      18,272     18,272     18,272     18,272     18,272     18,272
R-squared                    0.15         0.31       0.34       0.26       0.40        0.41       0.43       0.53       0.54




                                                                                                           9/22/2009 Dynamics 33
Notes: The unit of observation is a survey respondent in a given post-MBA year. The results are
robust to limiting the sample to only survey respondents with non-missing pre-MBA
characteristics. Pre-MBA characteristics include: a dummy for U.S. citizen, a “white” dummy,
an Asian dummy, a dummy for “top 10” undergraduate institution, a dummy for “top 10 to 20”
undergraduate institution, undergraduate GPA, a dummy for missing undergraduate GPA, a
quadratic in age, verbal GMAT score, quantitative GMAT score, a dummy for pre-MBA
industry and a dummy for pre-MBA job function. “Any no work spell” is a dummy variable that
equals 1 for a given individual in a given year if the individual experiences a period of at least
six months without work between MBA graduation and that year. “Weekly hours worked”
dummies include: < 20 hours, 20 to 29, 30 to 39, 40 to 49, 50 to 59, 60 to 69, 70 to 79, 80 to 89,
90 to 99, and ≥ 100 hours. “Reason for choosing job” dummies include: Compensation and
other benefits; Career advancement or broadening; Prestige; Culture/people/environment;
Flexible hours; Reasonable total hours per week; Limited travel schedule; Opportunity to work
remotely; Location; Other. “Employer type” dummies include: Public for-profit, < 100
employees; Public for-profit, 100 to 1,000 employees; Public for-profit, 1,000 to 15,000
employees; Public for-profit, > 15,000 employees; Private for-profit, < 100 employees; Private
for-profit, 101 to 1,000 employees; Private for-profit, 1,000 to 15,000 employees; Private for-
profit, > 15,000 employees; Not-for-profit; Other. Standard errors (in brackets) are clustered at
the individual level; § significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.




                                                                         9/22/2009 Dynamics 34
Table 7
Gender Wage Gap by Years since MBA

                     Number of Years since MBA Receipt
                       0          1         2          3            4          5          6          7          8          9        ≥ 10
1. With no            -0.089     -0.154     -0.213     -0.253     -0.274     -0.299     -0.308     -0.331     -0.358     -0.376     -0.565
controls             [0.020]*   [0.025]*   [0.032]*   [0.038]*   [0.043]*   [0.048]*   [0.056]*   [0.062]*   [0.069]*   [0.079]*   [0.045]*

With controls:
2. Pre-MBA            -0.080     -0.136     -0.172     -0.204     -0.221     -0.257     -0.248     -0.271     -0.296     -0.320     -0.479
characteristics      [0.021]*   [0.026]*   [0.033]*   [0.039]*   [0.044]*   [0.049]*   [0.057]*   [0.065]*   [0.072]*   [0.084]*   [0.045]*

3. Add MBA            -0.054     -0.103     -0.129     -0.154     -0.166     -0.189     -0.180     -0.200     -0.234     -0.257     -0.446
performance          [0.021]*   [0.025]*   [0.032]*   [0.037]*   [0.042]*   [0.047]*   [0.055]*   [0.063]*   [0.070]*   [0.082]*   [0.044]*

4. Add labor          -0.053     -0.093     -0.118     -0.134     -0.147     -0.171     -0.143     -0.141     -0.164     -0.181     -0.312
market exp.          [0.021]§   [0.025]*   [0.031]*   [0.037]*   [0.042]*   [0.047]*   [0.055]*   [0.063]§   [0.070]§   [0.082]§   [0.044]*

5. Add weekly         -0.036     -0.073     -0.069     -0.073     -0.079     -0.090     -0.079     -0.054     -0.085     -0.047     -0.098
hours worked         [0.020]    [0.023]*   [0.030]§   [0.036]§   [0.041]    [0.045]§   [0.053]    [0.060]    [0.067]    [0.078]    [0.042]§

6. Add reason for     -0.033     -0.067     -0.058     -0.064     -0.073     -0.089     -0.075     -0.052     -0.086     -0.031     -0.066
choosing job         [0.020]    [0.023]*   [0.030]§   [0.035]    [0.040]    [0.045]§   [0.053]    [0.060]    [0.067]    [0.079]    [0.042]

7. Add job setting    -0.025     -0.060     -0.051     -0.064     -0.046     -0.065     -0.080     -0.070     -0.052     0.002      -0.010
characteristics      [0.019]    [0.022]*   [0.027]    [0.032]§   [0.037]    [0.041]    [0.048]    [0.054]    [0.060]    [0.071]    [0.037]




                                                                                                               9/22/2009 Dynamics 35
Notes: The dependent variable in each equation is log (annual earnings). Each cell corresponds
to a different regression. The unit of observation is a survey respondent in a given post-MBA
year. In the regression without any controls, the sample is restricted to those survey respondents
with non-missing pre-MBA characteristics. All regressions include (cohort × year) dummies and
a female dummy. In each column, the sample is restricted to (individual × year) observations
that correspond to the number of years since graduation listed in that column. Each cell gives the
estimated coefficient on the female dummy. The controls for Pre-MBA characteristics, Weekly
Hours Worked, and Reason for Choosing a Job are the same as those described in the notes to
Table 6. MBA performance includes overall MBA GPA and fraction of finance classes. Labor
market experience includes a quadratic in actual experience since MBA graduation, a dummy
variable for “any no work spell” and dummy variables for weekly hours worked. Job setting
characteristics include job function dummies and “Employer type” dummies. “Employer type”
dummies include: Public for-profit, < 100 employees; Public for-profit, 100 to 1,000 employees;
Public for-profit, 1,000 to 15,000 employees; Public for-profit, > 15,000 employees; Private for-
profit, < 100 employees; Private for-profit, 101 to 1,000 employees; Private for-profit, 1,000 to
15,000 employees; Private for-profit, > 15,000 employees; Not-for-profit; Other. Standard errors
are in brackets; § significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.




                                                                         9/22/2009 Dynamics 36
Table 8: Who gets married? Who has kids?

                                                Dependent Variable: Predicted Log (Annual Earnings)
                                                      (1)                (2)                (3)
Female, married                                     -0.066
                                                   [0.025]*
Female, unmarried                                   -0.084
                                                   [0.029]*
Male, married                                       0.052
                                                   [0.020]*
Female with spouse as or more educated                                 -0.110
                                                                      [0.024]*
Female with spouse less educated                                       -0.127
                                                                      [0.038]*
Male with spouse as or more educated                                    0.006
                                                                       [0.017]
Female with child                                                                         -0.073
                                                                                        [0.025]*
Female without child                                                                      -0.088
                                                                                        [0.022]*
Male with child                                                                            0.056
                                                                                        [0.016]*
Constant                                            -0.061             -0.013             -0.053
                                                   [0.018]*            [0.014]          [0.012]*
Observations                                        2,317               1,764              2,310
R-squared                                            0.02               0.02               0.03

Notes: The unit of observation is a survey respondent. Each column corresponds to a different regression.
The sample in column (2) is restricted to respondents who were married at the time of the survey. The
dependent variable in all regressions is predicted log (annual earnings) constructed as follows. In the
sample of male respondents, log (annual earnings) at the individual × year level is regressed on cohort ×
year dummies. The residual from that regression is then regressed on pre-MBA characteristics and MBA
performance. Predicted log (annual earnings) is the predicted value from that second regression. The
controls for pre-MBA characteristics are the same as those described in the notes to Table 6. MBA
performance includes overall MBA GPA and fraction of finance classes. “Female, married” (“Male,
married”) is a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent is female (male) and married or living
with a significant other at the time of the survey. “Female, unmarried” is a dummy variable that equals
one if the respondent is female and is neither married nor living with a significant other at the time of the
survey. “Female with spouse as or more educated” (“Male with spouse as or more educated”) is a
dummy variable that equals one if the respondent is a female (male) living with someone that holds
strictly more than a college degree. “Female with less educated spouse” is a dummy variable that equals
one if the respondent is a female living with someone that holds at most a college degree. “Female with
child” (“Male with child”) is a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent is a female (male) who
reports having at least one child at the time of the survey. “Female without child” is a dummy variable
that equals one if the respondent is a female who reports being without child at the time of survey.
Standard errors are in brackets; * significant at 1%.




                                                                                 9/22/2009 Dynamics 37
 Table 9
 Impact of First Birth on Employment Status, Salary, and Working Hours

                        Not Working           Log (Annual         Annual Earnings        Annual Earnings       Log(Weekly Hours        Log
                                               Earnings)           (conditional on       (0 if not working)        Worked)           (Annual
                                                                       working)                                                     Earnings)
                       (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)      (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)        (11)
                      Male      Female      Male      Female      Male       Female      Male      Female       Male      Female     Female
Year of birth of
first child           -0.001      0.096     0.008      -0.096      1,880     -32,690    -2,315     -45,666      -0.006    -0.126      0.016
                     [0.007]    [0.032]*   [0.036]    [0.054]    [21,228]   [21,003]   [20,942]   [20,936]§    [0.010]   [0.029]*    [0.049]
Years after birth
of first child:
1 or 2                 -0.009     0.131      0.040     -0.164      7,817    -41,129      5,117      -64586     -0.013     -0.168     -0.008
                      [0.007]   [0.036]*    [0.040]   [0.066]§   [24,606]   [27,000]   [24,118]   [26,335]§    [0.011]   [0.036]*    [0.060]
3 or 4                 -0.007     0.178      0.065     -0.292     14,701    -60,050      9,721      -99,397    -0.011     -0.238     -0.069
                      [0.008]   [0.045]*    [0.049]   [0.092]*   [30,833]   [36,118]   [29,915]   [34,839]*    [0.013]   [0.049]*    [0.079]
5 or more               0.000     0.190      0.162     -0.301     69,385    -63,664     62,581     -101,719     0.000     -0.233     -0.079
                     [0.0012]   [0.054]*   [0.060]§   [0.119]§   [39,072]   [50,035]   [37,872]   [44,384]§    [0.017]   [0.071]*    [0.097]
Years before birth
of first child:
1 or 2                -0.006     -0.015    -0.008      -0.051     -5,740    -21,501     -7,830      -19,137    -0.005     -0.043     -0.016
                     [0.005]    [0.021]    [0.030]    [0.041]    [16,341]   [14,794]   [16,303]    [15,226]    [0.009]    [0.023]    [0.037]

Observations         14,490      5,070     13,969      4,545     13,969       4,545     14,523      5,070      14,193     4,560       4,523
R-squared             0.29       0.46       0.77       0.73       0.68        0.72       0.66        0.68       0.72       0.68        0.79

 Notes: The unit of observation is a survey respondent in a given post-MBA year. Individuals who had children prior to completing
 their MBA are not included in the regressions. Each column corresponds to a different regression. All regressions include (cohort ×
 year) dummies, person fixed effects and a quadratic in age. Each row reports the coefficient on a dummy variable indicating the year
 of first birth or the number of years after or before the birth of the first child. Col. (11) also includes a vector of dummy variables to
 control for hours worked (i.e., < 20 hours, 20-29, 30-39, … , 90-99, and ≥100 hours). Standard errors (in brackets) are clustered at the
 individual level; § significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.


                                                                                                                  9/22/2009 Dynamics 38
Table 10
Impact of Birth of First Child on Female Employment Status, Salary, and Working Hours: by Spouse’s Income Level in 2006

                             Spouse Earns at Most $200K in 2006                                      Spouse Earns More than $200K in 2006
                                          Annual                                                                    Annual
                                         earnings       Log      Annual                                            earnings       Log              Annual
                                Log     (condition-   (weekly   earnings                                 Log      (condition-   (weekly           earnings
                  Not         (annual      al on       hours    (0 if not                Not           (annual       al on       hours            (0 if not
                 Working     earnings) working)       worked)   working)                Working       earnings)    working)     worked)           working)
                   (1)          (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)                    (6)            (7)          (8)         (9)               (10)
Year of birth
of first child    0.006        -0.003       -18,220        -0.141       -9,659            0.170          -0.043       -63,146        -0.088        -89,785
                 [0.040]      [0.089]      [23,492]       [0.046]*     [23,599]         [0.070]§        [0.099]      [64,143]       [0.060]       [62,741]
Years after
birth of first
child:
1 or 2            0.003       -0.040        -22,952        -0.162       -10,100           0.224         -0.120        -84,144        -0.158       -128,393
                 [0.047]      [0.102]      [28,570]       [0.054]*     [28,203]         [0.081]*        [0.124]       [79,826]      [0.077]§       [78,332]
3 or 4            0.025       -0.100        -23,451        -0.238       -13,151           0.281         -0.264       -128,180        -0.206       -198,134
                 [0.064]      [0.142]      [41,993]       [0.071]*     [38,170]         [0.096]*        [0.180]      [109,853]       [0.105]      [105,466]
5 or more         0.013        0.069         -1,425        -0.234        3,236            0.315         -0.382       -135,986        -0.194       -216,101
                 [0.087]      [0.192]      [56,470]       [0.099]§     [49,555]         [0.107]*        [0.233]      [136,768]       [0.153]      [123,738]
Years before
birth of first
child:
1 or 2            -0.066       -0.047       -19,397        -0.082       -1,574            0.018          0.078        -25,788        0.043         -38,502
                 [0.030]§     [0.068]      [16,397]       [0.036]§     [16,604]          [0.044]        [0.074]      [37,108]       [0.048]       [42,786]
Observations       1,841        1,674        1,674          1,672        1,841            1,422          1,198         1,198         1,190          1,422
R-squared          0.50          0.69         0.69          0.66          0.64             0.53           0.82          0.79          0.77           0.74

Notes: The unit of observation is a female survey respondent in a given post-MBA year. The sample includes those who were married at the
survey date and excludes those who had children prior to completing their MBA. Each column corresponds to a different regression. All
regressions include (cohort × year) dummies, person fixed effects and a quadratic in age. Each row reports the coefficient on a dummy variable
indicating the year of first birth or the number of years after or before the birth of the first child. Standard errors (in brackets) are clustered at the
individual level; § significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.



                                                                                                                                 9/22/2009 Dynamics 39
Table 11
Impact of Birth of First Child on Women’s Reasons for Not Working, Choosing or Leaving a Job, and Job Characteristics

                      Not Working:          Choosing Job:       Leave Job        Leave Job: Reasons          Characteristics of Current Job
                        Reasons               Reasons                                                                  Function
                     Family    Career     Family    Career                  Family     Career    Career2    Mean Fraction ≤ Fraction
                                                                                                            hours     [30-40]      ≤ [40-50]
                                                                                                                       hours         hours
                       (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)    (9)        (10)          (11)
Year of birth of
first child            0.119     -0.011     0.125     -0.080      -0.014     0.039      -0.014     -0.019    -0.018    -0.003       -0.019
                     [0.030]*   [0.008]   [0.032]*   [0.041]     [0.035]    [0.022]    [0.014]    [0.021]   [0.420]   [0.004]      [0.013]
Years after birth
of first child:
 1 or 2                0.152     -0.008     0.197     -0.132      -0.007     0.028      -0.019     -0.017    0.156     -0.004       -0.033
                     [0.034]*   [0.010]   [0.040]*   [0.051]*    [0.031]    [0.017]    [0.013]    [0.019]   [0.491]   [0.005]      [0.016]§
 3 or 4                0.200     -0.009     0.256     -0.214      -0.043     0.035      -0.009     -0.017    0.552     -0.008       -0.053
                     [0.042]*   [0.013]   [0.050]*   [0.061]*    [0.034]    [0.018]    [0.016]    [0.022]   [0.618]   [0.006]      [0.020]*
 5 or more             0.233     -0.018     0.231     -0.135      -0.065     0.005       0.000     -0.007    1.068     -0.012       -0.066
                     [0.050]*   [0.014]   [0.062]*    [0.074]    [0.038]    [0.019]    [0.019]    [0.025]   [0.770]   [0.007]      [0.026]§
Years before birth
of first child:
 1 or 2               -0.006     -0.004    0.040      -0.040      0.003       0.059     -0.014    -0.040     -0.483    0.004        0.014
                     [0.016]    [0.008]   [0.022]    [0.032]     [0.027]    [0.017]*   [0.013]   [0.018]*   [0.351]   [0.003]      [0.010]
Reason for              No         No       No          No         Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes         No       No           No
choosing job
dummies
Observations          5,070     5,070      4,577      4,577       5,070      5,070      5,070     5,070     5,070      5,070        5,070
R-squared             0.49      0.38       0.61        0.68       0.19       0.17       0.16      0.18       0.69      0.57         0.57




                                                                                                               9/22/2009 Dynamics 40
Notes: Unit of observation is a female survey respondent in a given post-MBA year. Individuals
who had children prior to completing their MBA are not included in the regressions. Each
column corresponds to a different regression. All regressions include cohort × year fixed effects,
person fixed effects and a quadratic in age. Also included in columns (5) to (8) are dummies for
the reasons for choosing current job. Each row reports the coefficient on a dummy variable
indicating the year of first birth or the stated number of years after or before the birth of the first
child. “Not Working: Reasons – Family (Career)” is a dummy variable that equals one if the
respondent reports not working in that year and the reason for not working is family (career)
related. Family reasons include: “Do not need or want to work”; “Home taking care of parents
or other relatives” and “Home raising children.” Career reasons include: “Layoff” and “Suitable
job not available.” “Choosing Job: Reasons – Family (Career)” is a dummy that equals one if the
respondent reports family-related (career-related) reasons for choosing the job she/he is holding
in that year. Family reasons include: “Flexible hours”; “Opportunity to work remotely”;
“Limited travel schedule.” Career reasons include: “Career advancement or broadening”;
“Compensation and other benefits” and “Prestige.” “Leave Job” is a dummy variable that equals
one if the respondent reports leaving a job in that year. “Leave Job: Reasons – Family (Career)”
is a dummy variable that equals one if the respondent reports leaving a job in that year and
indicates family-related (career) reasons for leaving. Family reasons include: “Family reasons”
and “Lifestyle (long hours, inflexible hours, extended travel schedule, etc).” Career reasons
include: “Limited scope for career advancement and broadening” and “Limited scope for future
earnings gain.” Career2 reasons also include: “Job did not match my strengths and interests” and
“Issues with culture/people/environment.”         “Fraction ≤ [30-40] hours” is the fraction of
individual × year observations in that job function where hours worked are below 20, between 20
and 30, or between 30 and 40.” “Fraction ≤ [40-50] hours” is the fraction of individual × year
observations in that job function where hours worked are below 20, between 20 and 30, between
30 and 40 or between 40 and 50. See Appendix A2 for more details. Standard errors (in
brackets) are clustered at the individual level; § significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.




                                                                             9/22/2009 Dynamics 41
Appendix Table A1
Who Responded to the Survey

                                MBA Classes 1990 to 2006 a
                                  Respondent         Non-respondent b            p-value
Sample size                          2,485                 6,636
Fraction female                       0.25                  0.23                  0.063
Fraction US citizen                   0.78                  0.72                  0.000
Fraction White                        0.64                  0.59                  0.000
Fraction Asian                        0.13                  0.16                  0.000
Age at entry                         27.57                 27.62                  0.525
Top 10 undergraduate                  0.13                  0.13                  0.880
institution
Top 10 to 20 undergraduate              0.10                 0.09                 0.097
institution
Undergrad GPA                           2.68                 2.65                 0.456
Undergrad GPA (missing)                0.19                 0.20                  0.357
Total GMAT                              668                  655                  0.000
Quantitative GMAT                      43.31                42.79                 0.000
Verbal GMAT                            38.65                37.43                 0.000
MBA GPA                                 3.35                 3.31                 0.000
Fraction finance classes                0.17                 0.19                 0.000
a
  Includes only those who were matched to University of Chicago Booth School of Business
administrative records (355 could not be matched).
b
  “Non-respondent” also includes several hundred individuals who could not be contacted by e-
mail.

Notes:
The unit of observation is an individual. The table compares mean pre-MBA characteristics and
MBA performance between survey respondents and non-respondents. The last column reports a
p-value on a test of comparison of means between the two groups. The top ten undergraduate
institutions are Caltech, Columbia, Duke, Harvard, MIT, Princeton, Stanford, University of
Chicago, University of Pennsylvania, and Yale; the top 20 undergraduate institutions add to this
group: Brown, Cornell, Dartmouth, Emory, Johns Hopkins, Northwestern, Rice, University of
Notre Dame, Vanderbilt, and Washington University (Source: US News and World Report 2008,
http://colleges.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/usnews/edu/college/rankings/brief/t1natudoc_bri
ef.php) . The Quantitative and Verbal GMAT scores are out of a total of 60; the Total GMAT
score averages the percentage rankings of the two components and scales the average out of a
total of 800.




                                                                        9/22/2009 Dynamics 42
Appendix Table A2
Gender Differences in Background, Test Scores, MBA Course Selection, and MBA Grades

                                  All 1990-2006 Graduates               Survey Respondents
                                 Females Males p-value              Females    Males   p-value
                                   (1)       (2)     (3)              (4)       (5)       (6)
Sample size                       2,185     6,936                     629      1,856

U.S. citizen                      0.78       0.72      0.000         0.83        0.77       0.001
White                             0.58       0.61      0.026         0.66        0.63       0.129
Asian                             0.19       0.14      0.000         0.15         0.12      0.059
Age at entry                      27.05      27.78     0.000         26.96       27.78      0.000
Top 10 undergraduate              0.14       0.12      0.062         0.15         0.12      0.091
institution
Top 10 to 20 undergraduate         0.09       0.09     0.665          0.10       0.10       0.939
institution
Undergrad GPA                     2.79       2.62      0.000          2.87        2.61      0.000
Undergrad GPA (missing)           0.17       0.21      0.000         0.21        0.14       0.000
Total GMAT                         642        664      0.000          654         673       0.000
Quantitative GMAT                 41.14      43.49     0.000         41.77       43.81      0.000
Verbal GMAT                       37.23      37.94     0.000         38.26       38.78      0.035
MBA GPA                            3.23       3.34     0.000          3.25        3.38      0.000

Fraction MBA classes in:
  Finance                          0.16       0.19     0.000          0.15       0.18       0.000
  Accounting                       0.13       0.15     0.000          0.13       0.14       0.003
  Economics                        0.15       0.15     0.842          0.15       0.15       0.928
  Marketing                        0.12       0.09     0.000          0.12       0.09       0.000
  Statistics                       0.06       0.06     0.000          0.06       0.06       0.005
  Entrepreneurship                 0.02       0.03     0.000          0.03       0.04       0.030

Average GPA in:
  Finance                          3.03       3.27     0.000          3.04       3.31       0.000
  Accounting                       3.09       3.29     0.000          3.13       3.33       0.000
  Economics                        3.14       3.30     0.000          3.14       3.33       0.000
  Marketing                        3.26       3.30     0.002          3.30       3.34       0.085
  Statistics                       3.22       3.38     0.000          3.23       3.38       0.000
  Entrepreneurship                 3.21       3.33     0.000          3.26       3.37       0.007

Notes: The unit of observation is an individual. The table compares pre-MBA characteristics
and MBA experience and performance between male and female individuals. Cols. (1) to (3)
include all individuals who graduated from the MBA program between 1990 and 2006; cols. (4)
to (6) are for those who responded to the survey. Cols. (3) and (6) report p-values of the test of
equality of the means between females and males for each variable. Information on the top 10
and top 10 to 20 undergraduate institutions is given in the notes to Appendix Table A1.



                                                                          9/22/2009 Dynamics 43
Appendix Table A3
Career and Family Statistics

                                                 All        Male       Female
Career variables:
  First job post-MBA:
     Consulting                                 0.26        0.27        0.25
                                               (0.44)      (0.44)      (0.43)
     Investment banking                         0.13        0.14        0.10
                                               (0.33)      (0.34)      (0.29)
     Investment management                      0.09        0.10        0.06
                                               (0.29)      (0.30)      (0.23)
  Fraction of post-MBA working years in:
    Consulting                                   0.19        0.19        0.19
                                                (0.33)      (0.34)      (0.33)
     Investment banking                          0.10        0.11        0.07
                                                (0.27)      (0.28)      (0.24)
     Investment management                       0.11        0.12        0.07
                                                (0.29)      (0.31)      (0.23)
  Ever entrepreneur                              0.15        0.16        0.11
                                                (0.36)      (0.37)      (0.32)
  Ever not working                               0.14        0.10        0.27
                                                (0.35)      (0.30)      (0.45)
  Fraction post-MBA years not working            0.03        0.02        0.07
                                                (0.10)      (0.07)      (0.16)
  Currently not working                          0.05        0.02        0.11
                                                (0.21)      (0.15)      (0.32)
  Total years not working                        0.24        0.11        0.62
                                                (0.92)      (0.44)      (1.60)
  Average length of a working stage (years)      3.41        3.54        3.03
                                                (2.89)      (3.00)      (2.50)
  Average weekly working hours                  58.29       59.15       55.75
                                               (12.42)     (12.06)     (13.11)
  Mean post-MBA annual earnings ($2006)        228,236     249,938     164,417
                                              (242,140)   (259,786)   (164,879)
Family variables:
  Married                                       0.77        0.81        0.65
                                               (0.42)      (0.39)      (0.48)
  Spouse with lower education                   0.35        0.38        0.22
                                               (0.48)      (0.49)      (0.42)
  Number of children                            1.11        1.23        0.77
                                               (1.18)      (1.21)      (1.03)
  Fraction without children                     0.44        0.40        0.58
                                               (0.50)      (0.49)      (0.49)




                                                          9/22/2009 Dynamics 44
Notes: The unit of observation is a survey respondent. “Ever not working” is defined as having
spent a period of at least six months since MBA graduation without working. “Annual earnings”
is defined as total earnings, before taxes and other deductions, including salary and bonus.
“Annual earnings” is missing when individual is not working. “Hourly wage” is computed by
dividing annual earnings by (weekly hours × 52). All family variables are measured as of the
year the survey was conducted. Spouse with lower education is defined as a spouse with a BA
degree, some college, a high school degree, or some high school.




                                                                      9/22/2009 Dynamics 45
Appendix Table A4
Hours Worked by Job Function

Function                    Mean      Mean     Fraction Fraction Fraction             Individual
                            hours     hours    ≤ [30-40] ≤ [40-50] women                × year
                                    (men only)   hours     hours                       observa-
                                                                                         tions
Accounting                  52.1        51.4        0.06        0.55        0.24          161
Administration              53.2        55.3        0.08        0.38        0.19          161
Advertising                 51.6        52.5        0.06        0.44        0.59          156
Business Development        55.8        55.9        0.04        0.29        0.17          842
Client Services             58.1        60.7        0.06        0.26        0.24          187
Commercial Banking          55.8        56.2        0.07        0.27        0.17          323
Company Finance             53.4        53.6        0.04        0.35        0.29         1693
Consulting                  60.7        61.6        0.03        0.15        0.23         3643
Customer Relations          50.5        51.3        0.05        0.57        0.23          120
General Management          57.0        57.4        0.03        0.26        0.14         1869
Human Resources             51.0        56.4        0.16        0.40        0.71          126
Investment Banking          73.6        73.1        0.01        0.05        0.15         1871
Investment Management       57.8        58.7        0.03        0.24        0.15         2021
Law                         58.3        58.1        0.06        0.25        0.19          188
Management                  49.7        52.5        0.05        0.69        0.30          136
Multiple                    59.0        59.0        0.09        0.26        0.22          515
Operations                  50.8        51.0        0.11        0.48        0.13          227
Product Management          52.9        54.0        0.04        0.37        0.42          383
Project Management          52.4        52.1        0.08        0.48        0.26         1639
Real Estate                 55.3        56.7        0.05        0.35        0.13          407
Research                    52.2        54.7        0.09        0.36        0.30          275
Risk Management             54.5        54.0        0.01        0.25        0.14          265
Sales                       54.0        53.6        0.03        0.36        0.30          161
Sales and Trading           59.3        58.1        0.02        0.16        0.18          491
Strategic Planning          53.7        55.1        0.04        0.40        0.30          691
Venture Capital             59.4        59.6        0.02        0.23        0.08          812
Other                       55.8        55.9        0.10        0.31        0.54          740

Notes: Job function categories are from the Business School Career Services Department. The
sample is restricted to those job functions where the number of (individual × year) observations
is ≥ 100. “Fraction ≤ [30-40] hours” is the fraction of (individual × year) observations where
hours worked are: below 20, between 20 and 30, or between 30 and 40. “Fraction ≤ [40-50]
hours” is the fraction of (individual × year) observations where hours worked are: below 20,
between 20 and 30, between 30 and 40 or between 40 and 50. “Fraction women” is the fraction
of (individual × year) observations where individual is a female.




                                                                         9/22/2009 Dynamics 46
  Table A5
  Hourly Wage Regressions

                                             Dependent Variable: Log (Hourly Wage)
                              (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)      (6)        (7)
Female                      -0.193     -0.148    -0.102      -0.068      -0.05    -0.038     -0.029
                           [0.030]§   [0.030]§ [0.029]§ [0.029]*       [0.028]   [0.025]    [0.025]
MBA GPA                                           0.369       0.349      0.359     0.332      0.336
                                                [0.051]§ [0.051]§ [0.050]§ [0.044]§        [0.044]§
Fraction finance classes                          1.729       1.705       1.62     0.472      0.449
                                                [0.198]§ [0.194]§ [0.193]§ [0.180]§        [0.179]*
Actual post-MBA exp                                           0.091      0.069     0.059      0.049
                                                            [0.074]    [0.071]   [0.068]    [0.066]
Actual post-MBA exp2                                          0.005      0.007     0.005      0.006
                                                            [0.004]    [0.004]   [0.004]    [0.003]
Any no work spell                                            -0.216     -0.200    -0.158     -0.150
                                                           [0.065]§ [0.063]§ [0.056]§      [0.054]§
Dummy variables:
 Pre-MBA characteristics     No         Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes
 Reason for choosing job     No         No         No        No        Yes        No         Yes
 Job function                No         No         No        No        No         Yes        Yes
 Employer type               No         No         No        No        No         Yes        Yes
 Cohort × year               Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes

Constant                     4.156      2.285      1.582     0.893     1.477     0.955       1.487
                           [0.017]§   [0.609]§   [0.603]§   [0.717]   [0.780]   [0.548]    [0.597]*
Observations                18,272     18,272     18,272    18,272    18,272    18,272      18,272
R-squared                     0.18       0.28       0.32      0.34      0.36      0.47        0.48

  Notes: The unit of observation is a survey respondent in a given post-MBA year. Hourly wage
  is defined as annual earnings divided by (52 × usual weekly hours worked). Pre-MBA
  characteristics include: a dummy for U.S. citizen, a “white” dummy, an Asian dummy, a dummy
  for “top 10” undergraduate institution, a dummy for “top 10 to 20” undergraduate institution,
  undergraduate GPA, a dummy for missing undergraduate GPA, a quadratic in age, verbal GMAT
  score, quantitative GMAT score, a dummy for pre-MBA industry and a dummy for pre-MBA job
  function. “Any no work spell” is a dummy variable that equals 1 for a given individual in a
  given year if the individual experiences a period of at least six months without work between
  MBA graduation and that year. “Reason for choosing job” dummies include: Compensation and
  other benefits; Career advancement or broadening; Prestige; Culture/people/environment;
  Flexible hours; Reasonable total hours per week; Limited travel schedule; Opportunity to work
  remotely; Location; Other. “Employer type” dummies include: Public for-profit, < 100
  employees; Public for-profit, 100 to 1,000 employees; Public for-profit, 1,000 to 15,000
  employees; Public for-profit, > 15,000 employees; Private for-profit, < 100 employees; Private
  for-profit, 101 to 1,000 employees; Private for-profit, 1,000 to 15,000 employees; Private for-
  profit, > 15,000 employees; Not-for-profit; Other. Standard errors (in brackets) are clustered at
  the individual level; § significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.




                                                                          9/22/2009 Dynamics 47
Appendix Table A6
Gender Wage Gap by Years since MBA, for Females without Career Interruptions versus All Males

                     Number of Years since MBA Receipt
                       0          1         2          3            4          5           6          7          8           9          10
1. With no            -0.088    -0.162     -0.173     -0.218      -0.197     -0.229     -0.184      -0.208     -0.250     -0.288       -0.343
controls             [0.047]   [0.053]*   [0.061]*   [0.068]*    [0.071]*   [0.073]*   [0.078]§    [0.083]§   [0.087]*   [0.093]*     [0.097]*

With controls:
2. Pre-MBA            -0.082    -0.122      -0.106    -0.146      -0.160     -0.203      -0.153     -0.159     -0.201     -0.247       -0.282
characteristics      [0.052]   [0.059]§    [0.068]   [0.074]§    [0.079]§   [0.081]§    [0.088]    [0.093]    [0.097]§   [0.103]§     [0.106]*

3. Add MBA            -0.057     -0.082     -0.058     -0.088     -0.100      -0.140     -0.088     -0.092      -0.140     -0.176      -0.217
performance          [0.051]    [0.057]    [0.066]    [0.071]    [0.075]     [0.076]    [0.084]    [0.089]     [0.093]    [0.099]     [0.103]§

4. Add labor          -0.057     -0.102     -0.087     -0.113     -0.118     -0.155      -0.107     -0.124      -0.182    -0.214       -0.261
market exp.          [0.051]    [0.057]    [0.065]    [0.070]    [0.075]    [0.077]§    [0.084]    [0.089]     [0.093]   [0.099]§     [0.103]§

5. Add weekly         -0.050     -0.093     -0.075     -0.084     -0.075      -0.102     -0.085     -0.056      -0.116     -0.107      -0.100
hours worked         [0.050]    [0.055]    [0.063]    [0.068]    [0.072]     [0.075]    [0.080]    [0.084]     [0.089]    [0.095]     [0.100]

6. Add reason for     -0.044     -0.082     -0.064     -0.084     -0.067      -0.102     -0.070     -0.046      -0.108     -0.099      -0.085
choosing job         [0.050]    [0.056]    [0.063]    [0.068]    [0.072]     [0.076]    [0.081]    [0.084]     [0.088]    [0.095]     [0.099]

7. Add job setting    -0.040     -0.073     -0.044     -0.095     -0.060      -0.076     -0.066     -0.079      -0.116     -0.089      -0.070
characteristics      [0.051]    [0.055]    [0.061]    [0.066]    [0.068]     [0.071]    [0.077]    [0.080]     [0.082]    [0.089]     [0.091]

Notes: The sample is restricted to the first ten years out for individuals who graduated at least ten years before. We include only
females without a career interruption ten years post-graduation. See also notes to Table 7. Standard errors are in brackets; §
significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                 9/22/2009 Dynamics 48
Appendix Table A7
Gender Wage Gap by Years since MBA, for Females without Children and without Career Interruptions versus All Males

                     Number of Years since MBA Receipt
                       0          1         2          3            4          5          6           7          8          9           10
1. With no            -0.130     -0.210     -0.223     -0.221     -0.158     -0.198      -0.137     -0.194     -0.235     -0.237       -0.279
controls             [0.068]    [0.078]*   [0.088]§   [0.097]§   [0.101]    [0.104]     [0.113]    [0.119]    [0.126]    [0.133]      [0.138]§

With controls:
2. Pre-MBA            -0.151     -0.194     -0.172     -0.130     -0.097     -0.139      -0.077     -0.113     -0.159     -0.153       -0.141
characteristics      [0.074]§   [0.087]§   [0.100]    [0.107]    [0.114]    [0.116]     [0.128]    [0.136]    [0.140]    [0.148]      [0.152]

3. Add MBA            -0.129     -0.163     -0.133     -0.084     -0.047     -0.090      -0.024     -0.059     -0.110     -0.094       -0.090
performance          [0.073]    [0.084]    [0.096]    [0.102]    [0.107]    [0.109]     [0.122]    [0.130]    [0.135]    [0.143]      [0.148]

4. Add labor          -0.129     -0.182     -0.161     -0.110     -0.067     -0.103      -0.040     -0.089     -0.156     -0.134       -0.136
market exp.          [0.073]    [0.083]§   [0.095]    [0.101]    [0.107]    [0.109]     [0.122]    [0.129]    [0.135]    [0.142]      [0.148]

5. Add weekly         -0.125     -0.173     -0.157     -0.082     -0.050     -0.089      -0.065     -0.124     -0.172     -0.147       -0.125
hours worked         [0.072]    [0.081]§   [0.093]    [0.098]    [0.103]    [0.106]     [0.117]    [0.123]    [0.128]    [0.136]      [0.143]

6. Add reason for     -0.109     -0.161     -0.149     -0.077     -0.046     -0.086      -0.049     -0.109     -0.154     -0.128       -0.103
choosing job         [0.071]    [0.081]§   [0.093]    [0.098]    [0.103]    [0.108]     [0.117]    [0.123]    [0.128]    [0.136]      [0.142]

7. Add job setting    -0.082     -0.153     -0.121     -0.072     -0.045     -0.047      -0.015     -0.103     -0.158     -0.112       -0.038
characteristics      [0.071]    [0.079]    [0.090]    [0.096]    [0.096]    [0.100]     [0.110]    [0.114]    [0.117]    [0.126]      [0.129]

Notes: The sample is restricted to the first ten years out for individuals who graduated at least ten years before. We include only
females without children and without a career interruption ten years post-graduation. See also notes to Table 7.
Standard errors are in brackets; § significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                9/22/2009 Dynamics 49
Appendix Table A8
Impact of Birth of First Child on Female Employment Status, Salary, and Working Hours: by Spouse’s Education Level

                                  Spouse Is Less Educated                                           Spouse Is As Or More Educated
                  Not          Log       Annual         Log          Annual           Not            Log        Annual       Log             Annual
                 Working     (annual    earnings      (weekly       earnings         Working       (annual     earnings    (weekly          earnings
                            earnings) (condition-      hours        (0 if not                     earnings) (condition-     hours           (0 if not
                                           al on     worked)        working)                                     al on     worked)          working)
                                        working)                                                               working)
                   (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)              (6)          (7)          (8)        (9)              (10)
Year of birth
of first child    -0.086      -0.028        909         -0.158       27,227            0.145        -0.045       -51,531       -0.102       -72,015
                 [0.057]     [0.134]      [44,150]     [0.049]*     [42,228]         [0.044]*      [0.070]      [36,032]      [0.042]§     [34,016]§
Years after
birth of first
child:
 1 or 2            -0.126     -0.012         896        -0.139       46,778            0.210       -0.107       -62,063        -0.171       -99,846
                 [0.063]§    [0.148]      [52,830]     [0.055]§     [48,058]         [0.051]*      [0.089]      [46,053]      [0.059]*     [43,235]§
 3 or 4            -0.088     -0.098       -24,674      -0.226        6,971            0.260       -0.228       -85,510        -0.254      -136,980
                  [0.099]    [0.200]      [71,447]     [0.063]*     [65,573]         [0.060]*      [0.122]      [62,895]      [0.080]*     [58,035]§
 5 or more         -0.179     -0.098       -67,470      -0.286       11,636            0.283       -0.189       -72,073        -0.258      -130,666
                  [0.132]    [0.275]      [98,356]     [0.097]*     [88,582]         [0.065]*      [0.164]      [82,226]      [0.116]§      [72,155]
Years before
birth of first
child:
 1 or 2           -0.095      0.074        11,955        -0.052      38,708           0.004        -0.040       -35,854        -0.028       -39,946
                 [0.038]§    [0.089]      [31,464]      [0.036]     [32,009]         [0.029]       [0.053]      [22,973]       [0.034]      [23,337]

Observations      881          814          814          808          881             2,625         2,281         2,281         2,276         2,625
R-squared         0.46         0.8          0.77         0.75         0.69             0.51          0.74         0.76           0.71         0.72

Notes: The unit of observation is a female survey respondent in a given post-MBA year. The sample includes those who were married at the
survey date. Each column corresponds to a different regression. All regressions include (cohort × year) dummies, person fixed effects and a
quadratic in age. Each row reports the coefficient on a dummy variable indicating the year of first birth or the number of years after or before the
birth of the first child. Standard errors (in brackets) are clustered at the individual level; § significant at 5%; * significant at 1%.



                                                                                                                           9/22/2009 Dynamics 50
Appendix Table A9: Wage Changes Associated with Job Changes
Panel A: By Gender and Parental Status     Log (entry salary) in stage t – Log (end salary) in stage t-1
                                            Mean          Median       25th percentile 75th percentile
Overall                                     -0.012         0.000             0.000            0.336
Female:                                     -0.028         0.000            -0.260            0.336
With at least one child                     -0.177         0.000            -0.357            0.336
No children                                  0.019         0.000             0.000            0.336
Male:                                       -0.008         0.000             0.000            0.336
With at least one child                     -0.010         0.000            0.000             0.336
No children                                 -0.004         0.000             0.000            0.336

Panel B: By Reason for Job Change          Log (entry salary) in stage t – Log (end salary) in stage t-1
                                                                     Standard             Number of
                                               Mean                 Deviation           Observations
Reasons for choosing job in stage t:
  Career advancement or broadening               0.04                  0.61                  1514
  Compensation and other benefits                0.27                  0.67                   355
  Culture/people/environment                    -0.02                  0.60                   230
  Flexible hours                                -0.64                  0.85                   67
  Reasonable total hours per week               -0.21                  0.60                   83
  Location                                      -0.09                  0.49                   135
  Prestige                                       0.09                  0.48                    26
  Opportunity to work remotely                  -0.20                  0.88                    20
  Limited travel schedule                       -0.07                  0.48                    34
  Other                                         -0.53                  0.99                   211
  Missing response                              -0.23                  0.40                    3
Reasons for leaving job in stage t-1:
  Company was acquired                          -0.23                  0.83                  164
  Limited scope for career advancement          0.07                   0.64                  617
  and broadening
  Issues with culture/ people/                  -0.08                  0.69                  244
  environment
  Limited scope for future earnings gain         0.33                  0.73                  224
  Family reasons                                -0.23                  0.79                   80
  Involuntary separation                        -0.23                  0.71                  191
  Lifestyle                                     -0.19                  0.54                  272
  Medical or health reasons                     -0.82                  1.16                   2
  Company went out of business                   0.05                  0.78                  134
  Needed to relocate                             0.07                  0.44                  145
  Job did not match strengths and               0.02                   0.63                  259
  interests
  Other                                          0.01                  0.69                  333
  Missing response                              -0.30                  0.78                  13




                                                                              9/22/2009 Dynamics 51
Notes: The unit of observation is a working stage (stage t) that was immediately preceded by
another working stage (stage t-1). For each observation, we compute the difference between log
(entry salary) in stage t and log (end salary) in stage t-1. All salary figures are in 2006 dollars.
In Panel A, observations are divided based on whether or not the individual had at least one child
when stage t begins. In Panel B, observations are divided based on the reason for choosing job in
stage t, or reason for leaving job in stage t-1.




                                                                           9/22/2009 Dynamics 52
Figure 1
Male and Female Mean and Median Annual Salaries (2006 dollars) by Years since MBA




Notes: See Table 1.




                                                                  9/22/2009 Dynamics 53
