                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 WEALTH AND PORTFOLIO COMPOSITION:
                       THEORY AND EVIDENCE


                           Mervyn   A.   King
                         Jonathan I. Leape



                      Working Paper No. i68




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 19814




This study was funded by the National Science Foundation (grant no.
SES—8141O896) and the National Bureau of Economic Research. For
helpful discussions and coniments, we thank Dan Feenberg, Ben
Friedman, Roger Gordon, Zvi Griliches, Jerry Hausman, Adam Jaffe,
Dan McFadden, Ariel Fakes, Jim Poterba, Jim Powell and David Wise.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics, Economic Fluctuations,
Pensions and Taxation and project in Government Budget. Any opin-
ions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                          NBER Working Paper #1468
                                                          September 1984


             Wealth   and   Portfolio   Composition: Theory and Evidence



                                         ABSTRACT


     In this paper, we examine a new survey of 6,oio U.S. households and esti-
mate a model for the allocation of total net worth among different assets. The
paper has three main aims. The first is to investigate the extent to which a
conventional portfolio choice model can explain the differences in portfolio
composition among households. Our survey data show that most households hold
only a subset of the available assets. Hence we analyze a model in which
investors choose to hold incomplete portfolios. We show that the empirical spec-
ification of the joint discrete and continuous choice that characterizes house-
hold portfolio behavior is a switching regressions model with endogenous
switching.
     The second aim is to examine the impact of taxes on portfolio composition.
The survey contains a great deal of information on taxable incomes and deduc-
tions which enable us to calculate rather precisely the marginal tax rate facing
each household.
     The third aim is to estimate wealth elasticities of demand for a range of
assets and liabilities. We test the frequently made assumption of constant
relative risk aversion.




Mervyn A. King                                           Jonathan I. Leape
London School of Economics                               National Bureau of
Lionel Robbins Building                                  Economic Research
Room 404                                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
10, Portugal Street                                      Cambridge, MP 02138
London WC2A 2HD
ENGLAND
               Wealth and Portfolio Composition: Theory and Evidence


                                  Mervyn King

                                 Jonathan Leape


 1.   Introduction

      Empirical studies of household savings behavior have focused primarily on

 the total level of savings rather than its allocation among different types of

 assets. Although there is a substantial theoretical literature on portfolio

behavior, there are few empirical studies of the composition of household

portfolios using individual data and these studies are rather dated. For

example, Bluine and Friend (1975), Feldstein (1976), and Projector and Weiss

(1966) used the 1962 Federal Reserve Board data, and Uhier and Cragg (1971) used

data from the 1960—62 Michigan Surveys of Consumer Finances. In this paper, we

examine a new survey of 6,oio U.S. households and estimate a model for the

allocation of total net worth among different assets.

      The paper has three main aims. The first is to investigate the extent to

which a conventional portfolio choice model can explain the differences in

portfolio composition among households. In the finance literature the model

has been tested using data on security prices rather than household asset

demands. Our survey data show that most households hold only a subset of the

available assets. Hence we analyze a model in which investors choose to hold

incomplete portfolios. We show that the empirical specification of the joint

discrete and continuous choice that characterizes household portfolio behavior

is a switching regressions model with endogenous switching. This involves esti—

mating equations both for the probability of owning particular combinations of
                                          —2--



assets (the discrete choice), and for the asset demand system conditional upon

ownership (the continuous choice).

      The   second aim is   to examine the impact of taxes on portfolio composition.

The   survey contains a great deal of information on taxable incomes and
deductions   which enable us to calculate rather precisely the marginal tax rate

facing each household. Much of the current interest in tax reform, and the

debate over the merits of income or consumption as the personal tax base,

concerns the distortions created by the present tax system in the composition of

household savings. Proposals       for reform often include the elimination of
deductions for a range of tax—sheltered investments. Yet there is       very little

empirical    evidence on the effect of taxes on portfolio composition; only
Feldstein    (19T6) has   examined this issue with U.S. data.
      The third aim is to     estimate wealth elasticities of demand for a range of
assets and liabilities. Although. mich attention has been paid to estimating the
demand for money, less effort has been devoted to estimating the demand for
other assets (primarily because of lack of data). An assumption frequently made
in some macroeconomic literature is that households exhibit constant relative
risk aversion. This implies unit wealth elasticities of demand. We test this
hypothesis below. A change in wealth alters both the number of households that
own an asset and the demand for the asset conditional upon ownership. We shall

estimate wealth elasticities at both the intensive and extensive margins. We
shall also estimate an aggregate elasticity for the household sector as a whole,
and   test the hypothesis that the impact of a change in wealth depends upon how

that change is distributed among households. Because the financial structure of
                                          —3-.



 the private sector's net worth is an important determinant of real decisions,

 sich as corporate investment, the macroeconomic consequences of a change in

 total household net worth will depend upon the magnitude of the wealth elastici-

 ties of demand for different assets. Although our results are based on micro—

 data, they have macroeconomic implications.

      In section 2, we describe the pattern of household portfolio composition

that emerges from the survey and present some summary statistics. In section 3,

we   derive   a specification for the portfolio decision and discuss an appropriate

estimation procedure. The estimation and results are described in section 4.
Estimates of the effects of taxes on portfolio composition are presented in sec-
tion 5 and the wealth elasticities in section 6.


2.    Portfolio Composition of the Sample
      Our data are taken from the 1978 Survey of Consumer Financial Decisions

conducted by SRI International.      The survey is a stratified random sample of

6,010 U.S. households. It includes detailed information on household

characteristics, such as age,    education,   region and area of residence, marital

status and family composition, occupation, race, arid housing. It also includes

information on family income as well as portfolio composition and net worth.

The asset data refer to market values in May and June 1978 and the income data

to the calendar year 1977. The survey heavily oversampled high income families

and therefore provides a rich source of information on household portfolio

behavior.l No fewer than 2,1430 households (140.14 percent of the sample) reported

net worth in excess of $100,000 in 1978. The sample contains 2014 millionaires

and the largest value of reported net worth is $73 million.
                                         _14_.




     The survey is remarkable for the information it provides on the asset

holdings of each of the 6,010 households. The dollar holdings of over one

hundred different specific assets and liabilities were recorded for each

household. These were grouped by SRI into 23 different assets and 13 types of

liability. Table 1 shows these 36 categories. They include different types of

bank and savings account, money market funds, bonds of various types, stocks,

mutual funds, convertible securities, owner—occupied housing, real estate and

other tangibles, IRA—Keogh accounts, tax shelters and life insurance.2 For

purposes of estimation, we have grouped these thirty—six categories into eleven

aggregate asset and liability classifications. These are shown as the main

headings in Table 1. The survey data exclude social security and certain types

of private pension wealth, ordinary consumer durables, and the expected value of

future inheritances.3 Table 1 also shows the percentage of the total net worth

of the sample that is held in each of the assets. Most of the wealth of

households is held in the form of homes, stocks, and investment real estate.

The implausibly low percentage accounted for by home mortgages is due to a high

degree of non—reporting ——   close   to fifty percent ——     of   the value of first

mortgages on primary residences. This is analyzed further below.

     Table 2 presents summary   statistics       on the portfolio composition of

households   in the sample. The mean level of net worth in 1978 was almost a
quarter of a million dollars. This oversampling of the rich is a great
advantage for the analysis of portfolio composition. Not surprisingly, certain
assets   are held by households with above average wealth levels, notably

corporate equity, bonds and "other assets" (tax shelters, etc.). Of the 6,oio
                                       —5—


 households only 593 owned manicipal bonds but the mean net worth of this

 group was almost a million dollars. The SRI survey is particularly well

 suited to a study of the effects of taxes on household portfolio behavior. It

provides a detailed account of the sources of income in each household and of

tax—deductible expenses. Twenty—two sources of income and twenty—one types of

 expense are distinguished. This information, combined with the demographic

data provided for each household and the specific information on the household's

tax filing status, made it possible to derive accurate estimates of the marginal

tax rates faced by each household. We computed these tax rates using the TAXSIM

program developed at the National Bureau of Economic Research, which generated

tax liabilities for each household using both the federal and state tax code

relevant for the appropriate tax year. The information available to construct

marginal tax rates is, to our knowledge, more detailed than that used in any

previous study of the incentive effects of taxation.

     It is clear from rows 1 and 2 of Table 2 that most households owned

incomplete portfolios. In only two cases, checking accounts and liquid savings,

was an asset held by more than 90 percent of the sample. At the other extreme

the proportions of the sample owning rminicipal bonds and taxable bonds were 9.9

and 10.5 percent respectively. Almost one—half of the sample owned corporate

equity and 81 percent were home—owners. In fact, for the complete classification

no household held more than 23 out of the possible 36 assets and liabilities,

and for the aggregated classification only O households held a complete

portfolio with all eleven assets and liabilities. The modal number of assets

owned was eight for the complete classification and seven for the aggregated
                                           —6—




classification,   accounting for 12.0 and 19.6 percent of the sample respectively.

The median number owned was eight and six for the two classifications. Given

that the mean net worth of the sample was almost a quarter of a million dollars,

it   is surprising that the number of assets held was so small. It     is important,

therefore,    to take into account the phenomenon of incomplete ownership when
estimating   the demand for individual assets; this problem is the focus of
section 3.
      The survey provides    indicators of ownership for each asset that are

independent   of the dollar holdings reported. Some households do not report
dollar   values for every asset they own and the existence of independent

responses indicating ownership and dollar holdings enables us to measure the

extent of this non—reporting (although not, of course, under—reporting). The

additional information allows us to obtain more efficient estimates by

exploiting techniques to deal with the problem of missing data. Of the 6,010

households, 2,048 provided a complete set of dollar values or the assets that

they owned. In section )4 we describe how data for both the sample of 2,048

households with complete responses and the full sample of 6,010 households may

be used in estimation. Although SRI used the ownership indicators to impute

values in cases of non—reporting, we were able to separate out the imputed

values and used only the raw     data   actually reported by the survey respondents in

our   analysis.
       To test the quality   of the survey data, we compared the estimated

population    holdings for each asset (constructed by   using the grossing—up factors

described    in footnote 1) with the estimated aggregates shown in the year—end
                                            —7—



 balance sheets published by the Federal Reserve. The comparison is of necessity

 inexact. The two sources use different classifications of assets and refer to

 different dates in the year. Moreover, the FRB estimates for the household

 sector are a residual in the balance sheet calculations. it was possible to make

 a direct comparison for seven of our eleven categories of asset and liability,

 and an approximate compaisoñ for the remaining assets. For most of the assets

 the survey population totals are quite close to the FRB figures. The largest

 discrepancies were for taxable bonds and "other assets" where the survev data

were only one—half and two—thirds of the balance sheet totals
                                                                   respectively,5
Overall, it seems reasonable to conclude from these comparisons that the

survey     data   used here are worthy of study.

       We turn now to the specification and estimation of a model of household

portfolio     composition that allows for incomplete portfolios.


3.     A   Model of Incomplete Portfolios
       It is clear from the    survey data that most households own only a subset of
the   possible array of assets that they could hold, It is therefore necessary
to model both the probability of ownership of each asset and the demand for the
asset conditional upon ownership. The problems created by incomplete ownership
are twofold. First, the existence of zero holdings for some assets will have
"spillover" effects on the demand for the remaining assets. Conditional upon

the values of observable characteristics, the demand for an asset will depend

upon the particular combination of other assets in the portfolio, Second, there

is the more familiar problem that estimates based on observations with positive
                                        —8—




holdings    of the asset are subject to sample selection bias. Previous empirical

studies of household portfolio behavior have not tackled these problems,

especially the first, satisfactorily. Ignoring such problems results in a

misspecification of the model and biased estimates of the parameters of

interest.

       Previous theoretical discussions of incomplete portfolios have not analyzed

the Joint discrete and continuous choice of which combinations to own and, con-

ditional    upon ownership, what fraction of net worth to invest in each asset.
Brennan (1975) and Goldsmith (1976) both analyze the optimal number of securi-
ties in    a portfolio (taken to be a continuous variable) in the presence of tran-

sactions costs. Optimal asset demands for a given combination have been

examined by Levy (1978) and Mayshar (1981). Only Mayshar (1979) examines the

choice of which assets to own.

       There are several reasons for the existence of incomplete portfoLios. Two

of the most important are the following. First, the existence of transactions

costs, interpreted broadly to include the "holding costs" in both money and time

of monitoring and managing a portfolio, means that the optimal portfolio may

contain only a small number of assets. Second, it is possible that the

optimal portfolio may imply negative holdings of certain assets, and these may

be infeasible because of constraints on short sales (Auerbach and King 1983).

To prevent tax arbitrage, the revenue authorities adopt rules, such as the

asymmetric treatment of gains and losses and of interest receipts and interest

payments, that lead to nonlinear budget constraints. These constraints may be

very   similar   in practice to non—negativity constraints on asset holdings. In
                                           —9—


 other instances it may be very difficult or impossible to hold certain assets,

 such as checking accounts, pension rights and housing, in negative quantities.

 We shall therefore examine the optimal portfolio of a household with both

 positive holding costs for each asset and non—negativity constraints on asset

 holdings 6

        The specification we derive involves estimating equations both for the

 probability of ownership of an asset and    also   for its demand conditional upon

 ownership.  If the incompleteness of portfolios results from either the
 existence of holding costs or an optimization problem subject to non—negativity
constraints on holdings of individual assets, then the demand system is a
switching regressions model with as many regimes as there are distinct
combinations     of assets that may be owned. It is important   to note that the
extension of the univariate Tobit model to the multivariate case does not
represent the behavior of an individual investor optimizing subject to holding
costs or non—negativity constraints. This is demonstrated below.T The way in

which the asset demand function changes
                                            according to the regime is shown to be a
particular form of     structural shift. These shifts   represent the "spillover"
effects   of   the absence of certain assets in the optimum portfolio on the demands

for   those assets that do appear.
      To examine the optimal portfolio we consider an
                                                      investor whose

preferences can be represented by the following utility function which is

assumed to be additively separable over time.
                                              —10—



    V =   E                                                              (3.1)
              fu(c,t)dt

U is assumed to be a strictly concave function of a single consumption good, C,

and time (or age), denoted by t. T is either the investor's maximum life span

(uncertainty about date of death may be incorporated in the time—dependency

of U) or a longer planning horizon which allows for a bequest motive. The two

constraints are the initial condition for wealth and the budget constraint.


     w(o) = w0                                                            (3.2)


     dW =                 +   Y(t)dt   —   C(t)dt                         (3.3)
              Y1N(t)dP
where N(t) is the number of units of asset j         held   at time t

               is the price of one unit of asset j at time t

      Y(t) is the nonstochastic flow of labor income

      c(t) is the consumption flow at time (t).

     The budget constraint given by (3.3) embodies two strong assumptions.

First, the only source of uncertainty is assumed to be that concerning returns on

the J risky assets. Second, investors are assumed to be able to trade

continuously with no costs of buying or selling securities.8

     1±' one further assumption is added, namely that asset prices follow a

continuous time Markov process and do not exhibit jumps, then investors choose

their current portfolio to maximize V subject to equations (3.2) and (3.3) as if

they were optimizing over the mean and variance of the portfolio given the level

of current wealth (Merton 1971, 1973, 1982). The stochastic process generating

asset prices is not required to be stationary, but it must change in a way that
                                                   —11—


 is either random or time—dependent in a nonstochastic manner.9 With this

 assumption on the way in which exogenous shocks affect asset returns, we may

 analyze portfolio decisions as if investors maximized the following function

 defined over the mean and variance of their portfolios

        Fh = fh[11h      (ah)21                                                            (3.11)


 subject   to the budget constraint

        J Ii     =   h     h
                         + b
                     W
                                                                                       (3.)

where ji      denotes the mean    return      on the portfolio of household h, (ah)2 the

variance of the portfolio, e' the demand for asset j,                net worth, and bh the

amount borrowed at the nonstochastjc interest rate R. For the moment we shall

assume the existence of a riskiess asset and return later to a model with no

riskiess asset.

     The mean return on the portfolio is

        h =      h         h       h      h
                               — Rb
                                       (1_tb)                                          (3.6)


where                                                                            h
           is the mean pre—tax return per dollar invested in asset j,           t is
Investor h's effective tax rate on the return from asset j, and t is the tax

rate against which interest payments may be deducted. An important determinant

of portfolio composition is the way in which effective tax rates vary across

both assets and households.

     The   variance      of the portfolio is

     (ah)2 =
                                                                                       (3.7)

where C1 is the covariance of the per dollar returns on assets i and j. Short
                                      —12—


sales constraints will be assumed to exist for all risky assets

        ) 0                            V j,h                               (3.8)


     Maximizing (3.4) subject to (3.5) and (3.8) yields a set of first—order

conditions together with the complementary slackness conditions corresponding

to the non—negativity constraints.-° Once it is known which assets are owned in

positive amounts in the optimal portfolio then the first—order conditions can be

inverted to yield a conditional asset demand system.11 The values of asset

demands conditional upon the combination of assets that is owned is given by

      b AhThV(ROh)                                                          (3.9)


where k denotes which of the possible (2J_1) combinations of positive asset

holdings characterize the optimal portfolio. The subscript k denotes that the

matrix or vector includes only those rows and columns of the original matrix

which correspond to the assets contained in combination Ice   Ah is equal to the

inverse of the investor's degree of absolute risk aversion.12 V is the inverse

of the covariance matrix C, Th is a diagonal matrix with i/(i—t) as the

element of the leading diagonal, and 0h is a vector with       element equal to


(l—t)/(l—t).
     It is convenient to assume that the differences in the tax treatment of

assets can be captured by the following specification for the effective tax rate

on asset j

        =                              j   =   l...J,b                      (3.10)


The value of th is the statutory marginal tax rate facing household h.
                                                    —13—


         Equation (3.10) encompasses most of the important differences in effective

 tax rates across assets (for example, the tax—exempt nature of pension funds and

 the failure to tax the imputed income of home—owners).13 With this assumption,

 the demand for asset j, conditional upon ownership, as a proportion of net worth
 (denoted by p) may be written as

              h   =   (Ah)(
                       W l—5 t
                                1
                                    hickj - R(bh)}v 1—ô.t
                                                                              (3.11)
                                                       1


where vk denotes            .th element of the matrix Vk. Using the approximation
                        the ij

ln(l+x) =    x, we have

        in p =              —        rh   +
               aj(k,th)                       6th                             (3.12)


where rh is the degree of relative risk aversion and (kt) summarizes the way

in which demands depend upon the particular combination of assets in the

households portfolio. Risk aversion depends upon household wealth (human

and non—human), age and other observable characteristics. We assume that


                                                                             (3.13)

where       is a vector of observable household characteristics (including net

worth), and c accounts for unobservable differences in risk aversion. The SRI

survey   asked households to describe their degree of aversion to risk on a scale

from one to five. The responses are used as an explanatory variable in the

estimation of the model discussed in Section .

       Finally,   we take a linear approximation of a and assume that1
                                                    —l4—




        a(k,t)      =
                            + 1th                                                           (3.l1)


Combining (3.12), (3.13) and (3.114) yields the following equation for asset

demands      conditional upon ownership
                                 +X                                                         (3.15)
       in P1    =
                    jk +               +
                                            U1


where                ÷       and u =        ÷ n (where ii     represents measurement and
optimization error) is assumed to be distributed N(O,2).

       The demand system (3.15) is a switching regressions model with endogenous

switching. The advantage of deriving an explicit model is that the assumption

of   utility maximization restricts the structural shift between regimes to a
rather simple form. The intercept in (3.15) depends upon the                    particular com-

bination of      assets (other than I)           that   are present in the household's portfolio.

The   functional form        of (3.15) is independent of the regime and demands are a

linear    function of the same set of explanatory variables in each regime with the
constant term varying according to the combination                 of assets owned. This form

of    shift is easily modelled in terrns of dumnr variables, dk, denoting the corn—
                                                                                     J—1
bination      of assets other than j in the portfolio.             There are N = (2    —1) such

combinations.            Hence the equation which we shall estimate may be        written as

        in      =
                    k=ljkdk
                                 +      +          +u             j =   i...j              (3l6)


       Equation (3.16) gives asset demands conditional upon ownership. To

determine which combination of assets a household owns it is not sufficient to

examine the first—order conditions. Rather, the levels of utility corresponding
                                                 —15—



 to each combination must be compared. This means that the household faces a
 discrete choice problem with as many alternatives as there are distinct
combinations      of assets, which (ignoring the null portfolio) is 2i. For

combination k, define the maximum level of utility (as a function of wealth, the

distribution of asset returns and other household characteristics) that can be

attained with that combination of assets as


        =   v(x
               hhh
                ,t   ,€          =   max     fh h,(ah2
                                                     ) )                   (3.11)
                          —             I 1ctr

The conditional demands that characterize the optimum at      are given by (3.9).

The probability that combination k characterizes the optimum portfolio is thus

     Pr(k) =           = max Vt1; i =
               Pr(V                                                       (3.18)


     The structure of portfolios varies across households because of differences

in observable and unobservable household characteristics. The observables

include the tax rate, wealth and other socioeconomic characteristics recorded in

the survey. The unobservables include the differences in risk aversion captured

by h and differences in beliefs about the distribution of asset returns. In

this nxdel taxes and heterogeneous expectations play a crucial role in producing

incomplete portfolios. With homogeneous beliefs about the distribution of asset

returns and in the absence of taxes, the constraints on short sales would never

be binding. The separation theorem implies that with a riskiess asset the two

mutual funds that span the set of available returns are the riskiess asset

itself and a risky portfolio. All investors own the same risky portfolio and
                                         —16—



this can be chosen to be the market portfolio. By construction it      has positive

amounts of the risky assets. A portfolio optimum is characterized      by

non—negative holdings of the two mutual funds, and so no investor would wish to

sell short any of the risky assets.15 In the presence of taxes or of

heterogeneity in beliefs about the distribution of asset returns, investors

will no longer wish to hold the same risky portfolio, and there will be

opportunities for trade to exploit differences in tax rates (or beliefs).1G At

the optimum some investors may wish to engage in short sales. With constraints

on short sales the result will be that some, or more likely many, investors will

hold incomplete portfolios. Another factor leading to incomplete portfolios is

holding costs, and we analyze these below.

     To model the household's discrete choice among the           mutually

exclusive alternative portfolios would involve estimating the joint distribution

of the unobservables (differences in (i) risk aversion, (ii) beliefs about the

distribution of asset returns and (iii) holding costs), and would be

computationally infeasible given the number of alternatives and assets examined

here. We shall, therefore, estimate reduced form equations for the probability

of owning a particular combination of assets, and also for the probability of

owning a given asset j. The latter probability is given by


                                                                             (3.19)
     Pr(own j) =
                   ki Ck(1c)
     We assume that the probabilities in (3.18) and (3.19) can be described as

if they were generated by a probit model, but we provide no rigorous

justification for the implied assumption of normally distributed errors.

Estimates of probit models for (3.18) and (3.19) are described in Section 4.
                                         —11-.



       One strong restriction implied by the model in (3.16) is that    , the
 coefficient vector of household characteristics, is the same in all asset demand

equations. This implies that the wealth elasticities of conditional demands are

the same for all risky assets. As we shall see in Section 6, the null

hypothesis that wealth elasticities are the same for all assets is rejected by

the data.

       To generalize the model we relax two of the assumptions made above. The

first is the existence of a riskiess asset.1T When all assets are risky, the

wealth elasticities of conditional demands vary across assets. This is because

the   separation theorem now implies that the two imxtual   funds that span the set
of returns both consist of particular combinations of risky assets. We shall
regard (3.16) with replaced by . as a linear approximation to the underlying
demands i8
      The second assumption is that of zero holding costs of monitoring and

managing a portfolio. We can incorporate holding costs in the model in a

limited fashion. Suppose that such costs comprise two components: a fixed

cost that is independent of the size of the holding and a variable cost propor-

tional to the amount owned. As far as the variable costs are concerned, the

first—order conditions and the demand system (3.9) are unchanged with the

single exception that      is now equal to (l—t)(1+c)/(i—t), where c is

the variable holding cost per dollar for asset j. Assuming that investors face

the same cost schedule the influence of the holding costs is absorbed into the

coefficients of the ownership combination dumnr variables in (3.16). The fixed

costs have no effect on the conditional demand system, but both types of cost
                                       —18—


influence the decision as to which assets will appear in the optimal portfolio

and affect the coefficients of the reduced form probit models (3.18) and (3.19).

The existence of holding costs can, therefore, also lead to incomplete port-

folios with the conditional demand system given by (3.16). Transactions costs

of the more conventional kind defined over trades rather than the size of

holdings are equivalent to holding costs in a one—period model. In a continuous

time model, however, trading costs lead to infrequent revisions of the portfolio

and thus undermine the equivalence of the mean—variance model and the life—cycle

model with continuous trading.



ii.   Econometric Estimation and Results

      With either non—negativity constraints or holding costs of the type

analyzed above, the asset demand system conditional upon ownership is given by a

switching regressions model with as many regimes as there are distinct

combinations of assets. The way in which the demand system changes according to

the regime represents the "spillover" effects of the absence of certain assets

in the optimal portfolio on the demands for those assets that do appear. It

would be impossible to estimate separate functional forms for each regime

because with 2i regimes even a large data set such as that used here does

not provide adequate degrees of freedom. To derive a model for which estimation

is feasible we have tried to exploit the economic structure of the consumer's

programming problem. This led to a specification in which the shift in

functional form across regimes was rather straightforward in that only the

intercept varied with regime. The choice of the optimal combination of assets
                                             —19—


 is made by a comparison of the utility levels associated with the

discrete alternative combinations. Empirically we shall ndel this choice by

estimating reduced form probits for the probability of owning particular

combinations of assets,19

       Several problems arise in the estimation of the demand system (3.16).

First, since the demand equation for each asset is estimated using observations

on only those households with    positive     holdings of the asset, there is potential

sample selection bias. To correct for this, we use a standard two—stage proce-

dure to yield consistent estimates. We first estimate reduced form probit

equations for the ownership probabilities of each asset and then include the

estimated hazard as an additional regressor in the demand system (Heckman 1976,

1979).20

      Second, only a subset of   the full sample, namely 2,0148    households, reported
the   value of holdings for each asset which they owned. Provided nonreporting is

either    random or, more generally, "ignorable" (Griliches 1981), then estimation
on the sample of 2,018 households yields consistent estimates. Nonreporting is
"ignorable"   if it is a function of the explanatory variables in (3.16) but riot

of the error term u. More efficient estimates can, however, be obtained by

using the information contained in the remaining observations. Nonreporting of

dollar values leads to the problem that reported wealth understates true net

worth if values of assets are not reported, and overstates it if liabilities are

not reported. Net worth is   an important explanatory variable in the ide1, and
we wish   to test the hypothesis that risk aversion, as given by (3.13), is a
function   of net   worth. Hence we   must   allow for the effect of nonreporting in
                                      —20—


estimation. One approach would be to treat all instances of nonreporting as

missing observations on net worth and use existing nthods for dealing with

missing data (Dagenais 1973, Gourieroux and Monfort 1981, and Conniffe 1983).

This would, however, be very inefficient because nonreporting is usually of the

form where a household fails to report values for only one or two of its assets,

and reported net worth contains valuable information on holdings of other assets

which could be used in estimation. The values of net worth are incomplete

rather than missing. In the appendix therefore we describe a two—step methodS

for dealing with the problem of nonreporting and which exploits the information

contained in recorded net worth.

     Third, because of the differential tax treatment of assets, the marginal

tax rate is endogenous to the choice of portfolio. Under a nonlinear tax sche-

dule, such as that in the U.S., a household's marginal tax rate depends upon the

composition of its portfolio. For example, a household can lower its marginal

tax rate for a given level of net worth by investing in rainicipal bonds rather

than taxable bonds. To deal with this we estimate (3.16) by instrumental

variables. FI estimation is infeasible here because of the number of dirnen—

sions (eleven assets) over which the nonlinear budget set is defined. We calcu-

late the marginal tax rate that each household would face at an exogenously

given hypothetical portfolio using the actual nonlinear tax schedule applicable

to the household. With this constructed tax rate as an instrument for the

actual marginal tax rate consistent estimates of the parameter vector nay be

obtained.21 To construct the exogenous portfolio we have assumed that households

hold all of their wealth in short-term government securities (3—month Treasury

Bills), the return on which is taxed as ordinary income.22
                                          —21--



         Fourth, the theoretical specification
                                                  implies that the intercept in (3.16)
 consists of a sum of dunmtr
                               variables, each one corresponding to the ownership of

 a particular combination of assets other than that in the dependent variable.

 In principle the required number of duxnnr variables is 2J—l•1 (J is the nwnber

 of assets), which for J = 11 is equal to 1,023. It would
                                                          clearly be infeasible
 to estimate a demand system with
                                    that number of durnnr variables in each
 equation. Moreover, some combinations are not held by any household in the

 sample, and hence some of the duinnr variables
                                                    would be prfectly collinear. We
 have, therefore, aggregated the assets into four groups for the purpose of

 defining the ownership dunmr variables in (3.16).       The four groups are (1)
checking accounts and liquid savings, (2)
                                             equity, municipal bonds, taxable bonds
and other assets, (3) homes, contractual and less liquid savings, and ()
                                                                         home
mortgages and other liabilities. The criterion for selecting the groups was

that the correlation coefficient between
                                            the ownership dummies of any pair of

assets within a group be greater than 0.75 and that between any pair of assets

in different groups be less than 0.75.    This criterion was sufficient to deter-
mine both the number and composition of
                                          our aggregate groups with one exception.

Membership of contractual savings schemes was more highly correlated with posi-

tive holdings of liabilities than with holdings of assets, but we chose on a

priori grounds to group contractual savings with homes and less liquid savings

(which had correlation coefficients of 0.5k and 0.50 with membership of contrac-

tual savings schemes). Grouping assets in this way means that in each of the
eleven conditional demand equations there are a n.ximum of seven ownership dumnr
variables. In cases where the number of households owning a particular corn—
                                      —22—


bination was very small (well below 1 percent of the sample) the dummy

corresponding to that combination was omitted to avoid problems of collinearity.

The ownership dummies used in each equation are shown in Table 14,

     Fifth, the ownership combination dummy variables in (3.16) are endogenous.

The optimal portfolio choice determines both the combination of assets   that   are

owned and the demands conditional upon ownership. Hence the dummy variables

that enter into (3.16) are endogenous. Several estimation methods can be used

to obtain consistent estimates in the presence of endogenous dummy variables

(Heckman 1978, Dubin and McFadden 19814). We use the reduced form method in

which probit models are estimated for each ownership combination and then ordi-

nary least squares is applied to (3.16) with predicted probabilities replacing

the ownership combination dummies. Coefficient estimates of the asset demand

equations and heteroskedastic—consistent standard errors are shown in Table 14.

     The estimated reduced—form probit equations are shown in Table 3 and the

estimated asset demand equations in Table 4.   The explanatory variables in the

probit equations include terms in total net worth, current employment income,

the marginal tax rate, the age of the head of household, marital status, occupa-

tion, education, employment status, and the subjective perception of aversion to

risk. The explanatory variables in the demand equations include all of these

variables plus the relevant set of dummy variables corresponding to the

ownership of different combinations of assets. Because the dependent variable

in the demand equations is the logarithm of the asset share, the adding up

constraint is not imposed on the model. One equation may therefore be regarded

as redundant.
                                          —23—


       We focus on the estimated tax and wealth effects in sections 5 and 6, and

 summarize briefly here the results for the other explanatory variables. Income

 from employment has (as predicted by the model in which net worth is the rele-

vant variable) little effect on asset ownership or demands except for homes and

home   mortgages   where the consumption services provided are likely to be corre-

lated with employment income. Age is an important determinant of ownership.

The results in Table 1 reveal a pronounced quadratic relationship.23       In the con-

ditional demand equations age effects are significant only for the first four

assets, where a quadratic relationship is again evident. The most significant

effect of marriage appears to be on the size of checking accounts. The effects

of occupation and, in particular, education suggest that information Costs may

be an important determinant of portfolio behavior. Both occupation and educa-

tion significantly affect the probability of owning    corporate   equities, taxable

bonds, rminicipal bonds, and "other assets," the four asset Categories for which

we would expect information costs to be highest. Consistent with this explana-

tion is the finding that neither education nor occupation play a significant

role in the conditional demand equations. Being employed has a positive effect

on the probability of awning most assets (except for equity and bonds). It

appears, however, to have no effect on the level of conditional demands. Risk

averse households are more likely both to own and to invest a higher proportion

of net worth in contractual savings and taxable bonds. They invest correspon—

dingly less in the more unusual and risky assets that are included in the

"other" assets and liabilities categories.

    The coefficients on the ownership combination dummies would generally be

expected to be negative, either because the assets are substitutes or because
                                         214

the greater the number of assets in the portfolio the smaller is likely to be

the share of any one asset. Positive coefficients would arise when assets were

complements. Of the fifteen ownership combination coefficients that are signi—

ficant at the 5 percent level, eleven are negative and four are positive. In

the cases of positive coefficients the results suggest compleinentarily between

less liquid assets and ownership group 2 (equity and bonds), contractual savings

and group   (liabilities),   and between homes and group 2.


5.   Effects of Taxes on Portfolio Composition

     The way in which taxes affect portfolio choices has been at the center of

the recent debates about the merits of fundamental reform of the tax system.        A

switch to either a comprehensive income tax or a consumption tax would eliminate

the differential tax treatment of assets and consequent distortions associated

with the current system. Very little empirical evidence has been brought to

bear on this issue. The SRI survey is well suited to an examination of the

problem because of the very   detailed   information on the components of taxable

incomes and deductions recorded for each household (see section 2 above).

     In Table 5 are shown the marginal tax rates for those households owning

 each of our eleven categories of assets and liabilities. We show both the

unweighted average for holders of each asset, and also the average marginal tax

 rate weighted by households' shares of the total holdings in the sample. Not

 surprisingly, the weighted average marginal tax rates are higher than the

 unweighted means. For the sample as a whole the unweighted average marginal tax

 rate is 2T.l percent in 1977 and the weighted (by shares of net worth) average
                                       —25—


 marginal tax rate is L2.7 percent. There are larger differences in marginal tax

 rate among the holders of different types of asset. These are particularly pro-

 nounced for the weighted averages. For checking accounts, liquid and less

 liquid savings, owner—occupied housing and home mortgages, the marginal tax

rates are noticeably less than the weighted average marginal tax rate for the

whole sample. The two highest marginal tax rates are for holders of municipal

bonds (which are tax—exempt) and corporate equity, where the weighted averages

are 50.5 and 119.9 percent respectively.

     There are two ways in which taxes affect portfolio composition. The first

is that differences in effective tax rates among assets and households may lead

to portfolio specialization in order that households can exploit their com-

parative advantage in the production of post-tax income streams (Auerbach and

King 1983). Households with lower marginal tax rates will hold more of the

taxed securities, such as liquid and less liquid savings, and those facing

higher marginal tax rates will hold nre of the tax—privileged securities, such

as municipal bonds and equity. The second effect is that taxes alter the trade—

off between risk and return. The impact of this on the demands for risky assets

is theoretically ambiguous (see Feldstein 1976 for a survey of the literature).

     The evidence from Table 5 bears out the predictions of the theory of com-

parative advantage. But this is not the whole story. Taxable bonds, for

instance, are owned by households with very high marginal tax rates which

contradicts the pure comparative advantage model. Moreover, Tables 3 and J4 show

rather mixed results. The ownership probabilities are generally positively

related to the tax rate which suggests that taxes increase the demand for risky
                                       —26—


assets. But in Table     the tax rate coefficients are insignificantly different

from zero in most cases.

      One potential difficulty with the estimated tax coefficients is the identi-

fication problem associated with including both the tax rate and current income

as explanatory variables. The tax rate is a known nonlinear transformation of

income and other exogenous variables, and if the way in which income enters into

the true behavioral model is unknown the separate effects of the tax rate

cannot be identified. This problem is likely to be less irnportant for our data

set than in many other cases because (a) we include employment income not

taxable income in the model, and (b) we are able to construct accurate estimates

of taxable income. The correlation coefficient between the marginal tax rate

and employment income was only 0.53,   and that between the tax rate and the

logarithm of net worth was 0.37. Moreover, it is wealth rather than current

income that should be the forcing variable behind portfolio allocation, and so

the potential identification problem is unlikely to be serious.

      It appears that tax rates are more important in determining the probability

of   ownership of an asset than its share in net worth conditional upon ownership.
It   is perhaps surprising that our econometric estimates do not corroborate the

clientele   effects apparent from Table 5. The failure of our estimation proce-

dure, using a seemingly accurate measure of the marginal tax rate, to identify

more pronounced tax effects suggests, contrary to raich of the recent literature,

that taxes donot play a decisive role in explaining the differences in port-

folio composition across households.
                                              —27—


6.   Wealth Elasticities

     The model estimated above allows us to calculate the wealth elasticities of

demand for each asset, at both the intensive and extensive margins, as a

function of the estimated coefficients and values of the exogenous 'v.riables. A

change in wealth has two effects. First, it alters the probability that a

household owns an asset. Secondly, conditional upon ownership it changes the

demand for each asset. The expected demand for an asset is the product of the

ownership probability, ¶ and the conditional demand, e,, and we define the
                                                               J

total wealth elasticity as the elasticity of the expected demand with respect to

wealth. This is given by (dropping household superscripts)

                        d(ire)
              =
     E                                                                               (6.1)

This expression may be written as the sum of the intensive and extensive

elasticities



     E =f-                           E+E                                           (6.2)

where E° and ED         are the ownership and demand elasticities, respectively.
          j         j

     The ownership probability model is
          ZY
     11 = f
      j           -f(u)du                                                            (6.3)
where f( ) is the standard normal density, Z is the vector of values of the

explanatory variables included in the probit model, and            the vector of

coefficients for which our estimates are given in Table 3. The specification

we have used implies that
                                                —28—


         =
              .in   W +
                          2(in   w)2 +
                                         Zy                                       (6.1k)


Hence the wealth elasticity of the ownership probability is

      0 =
                  + 2.in w)h                                                      (6.5)


where h is the value of the hazard function for asset j (the ratio of the

density of 1' to the ownership probability for asset j) and   depends   upon house-.

hold characteristics, including wealth.2'

     The asset demand equations shown in Table ) also include in w and      (in    w)2

as explanatory variables and if their coefficients are denoted by cx1 and

respectively, then the conditional demand wealth elasticity is

             ln e
      D —    ___  = 1 +          + 22j   in W                                     (6.6)
     E       91n

Hence the total wealth elasticity is

         =   i+       + 1h.)     +
                                     2(a2
                                            +
                                                2h)ln w                           (6.7)


     This expression shows that the estimated model allows a reasonably flexible

specification for the wealth elasticities. They depend upon the level of wealth

itself both directly (though the linear dependence on in w) and indirectly

through the value of the hazard h. Household characteristics other than wealth

enter via their influence on the hazard. Because the hazard appears in (6.7),

the wealth elasticity is a nonlinear function of the estimated parameters. If

all four of the wealth coefficients are zero then the wealth elasticity is

unity. This is useful because a natural null hypothesis to test is that the

wealth elasticity is equal to unity. If household preference orderings exhibit

constant relative risk aversion then the wealth elasticities of all assets will
                                        —29—


be equal to unity. It is clear, however, that the hypothesis of constant rela-
tive risk aversion is strongly rejected by the data, contrary to the findings of
Blume and Friend (1975). Only in the case of taxable bonds are all
                                                                    four of the
estimated   wealth coefficients insignificantly different from zero at the 1 per-

cent level. One caveat to this conclusion is that neither we nor Blume and

Friend included social security wealth in the measure of net worth. Given the

high wealth levels of our sample this may not be of great importance.    An addi

tional caveat is that we ignore the possibility that households see through the

"institutional veil," and condition their portfolios on the assets in which

their defined contribution pension plans and IRA/Keogh accounts are invested.

     For the conditional demand equations Table 6 shows the value of the chi—

square statistic to test the null hypothesis that the coefficients on both

wealth   terms are zero. The   critical values of chi—square with two degrees of

freedom are 5.1 at the 5 percent    level and 9.21 at the 1 percent level. The
             of constant relative risk aversion can be rejected for all assets
hypothesis
 except equity and bonds at the 1 percent level.25
                                                           demand, and total wealth
     Table 7 presents point estimates of the ownership,

 elasticities for each asset evaluated for two representative households. The

 first is a household with wealth equal to the estimated population mean net

 worth of $57,14O8, and the second is one with wealth equal to the sample mean net

 worth of $223,188.26 In both cases the households are assumed to have values of

 other household characteristics equal to the sample mean. The ownership elasti-

 cities are small for most assets but for corporate equity, taxable bonds, mini—

 cipal bonds and other assets, an increase in wealth has a sizeable positive
                                       —30—



impact on the probability of ownership. In    Figure   1 we plot the predicted
ownership probabilities as a function of wealth implied by the probit estimates
reported in   Table 3. The probabilities are evaluated at sample means for all

household characteristics other than wealth. The plots show clearly that the

relationship between ownership and wealth differs across assets. Of particular

interest are the sigmoid—shaped curves for equity and "other assets."

     The demand elasticities also vary significantly across assets. At the

sample mean level of net worth the demand elasticities for equity and municipal

bonds are very close to unity. For checking accounts (a large component of

money demand) and liquid savings the elasticities are around one—half, in

contrast to the presumption in much of the macroeconomic literature that they

are close to zero. The elasticity for contractual savings is also      around    one—

half and that for housing about one—third. The only negative elasticity is that

for taxable bonds and here none of the estimated wealth coefficients were signi-

ficantly different from zero. At the opposite end of the spectrum, the largest

total elasticities are for municipal bonds, corporate equity and other assets,

and at the sample mean value for net worth all three exceed unity.

     For both types of liability the elasticities are less than unity. From

this and the balance sheet constraint that net worth equals assets minus liabi-

lities we may deduce that the wealth elasticity of the nine assets taken as a

group is less than unity. Both assets and liabilities are measured as positive

amounts. Let A denote total assets, L denotes total liabilities, EA and            the

wealth elasticities of assets and liabilities (averages of the individual asset

and liability elasticities weighted by the shares of each asset (liability) in

total assets (liabilities)). Then the condition that W = A - L implies that
                                                 —31--




                        +
        EA =   EL(14)                                                                 (6.8)
        Since 0     W/A      1, if both liability elasticities are less than unity, then

EL <     1 and by (6.8) EA <     1.      It is not surprising, therefore, that for most of

the assets the elasticities in Table 7 are less than unity.21

        Because the magnitude of the wealth elasticities depends upon wealth and

other household characteristics, the aggregate effect of a change in wealth

depends upon how that change is distributed among the population. Table 7 shows

that the elasticities are different for households with different levels of net

worth.28 In Table 8 we show the aggregate wealth elasticity for each asset under

the assumption that the proportionate change in wealth is uniform among the

sample. The predicted aggregate demand for asset j is


     aj =      hjeJ                                                                   (0.9)

The aggregate wealth elasticity is


     Eaj =
                hjh     +
                            Eh)sjh
                                     =      +                                         (6.10)

where          is the predicted share of household hts demand for asset j in the
        Sjh
aggregate demand for the asset                           The first three columns of

Table 8 show the aggregate ownership, demand and total elasticities for the full

sample of households with positive net worth. For those households which did

not report the dollar values of all asset holdings, the predicted level of net

worth (as described in the discussion of missing data in Section 1) was used to

calculate the elasticities.

     The broad pattern of elasticities shown in Table 7 holds also for the

aggregate elasticities in Table 8. Taking into account the variation in wealth
and other   characteristics among the sample leads to somewhat larger elasticities

for equity, "other assets," and liabilities other than mortgages. Because the

sample is drawn heavily from upper-income groups, we calculate also aggregate

elasticities for the population as a whole where the individual elasticities are

weighted not only by predicted asset shares but also by population weights. The

population estimates of the aggregate elasticities are displayed in the final
three columns of Table 8. These are our best estimates of the elasticities
relevant for macroeconomic behavior. The largest elasticity is for municipal
bonds, followed by equity and other assets. The smallest elasticities are for

owner—occupied housing, home mortgages and less liquid savings.




7.    Conclusions

      Examining the pattern of household portfolio composition that emerges from

a new survey of 6,010 U.S. households, we have found that the vast majority of

households hold only a subset of the available assets. This has implications

for both the theoretical modelling of portfolio behavior and the econometric

estimation of asset demand equations that have not been dealt with satisfac-

torily in earlier studies. We have shown that if the incomplete portfolios are

the result of an optimization subject to holding costs and constraints on short

sales   then the asset demand system is a switching regressions model with as many
regimes as there are distinct possible portfolios. The specification we derived
involved equations both for the probability of owning each asset   and combination

of   assets and for the asset demand system conditional upon ownership. An esti-
mation procedure was developed to respond to the problems caused by incomplete
                                         —33—


portfolios, non—reporting of dollar holdings, and the endogeneity of the tax

rate and of the portfolio composition dummies.

      We have used this model to examine the impact of taxes on portfolio com-

position. The information provided by the survey on taxable incomes and deduc-

tions has enabled us to calculate the marginal tax rate facing each household.

Our   results show that tax rates are a significant determinant of asset ownership
but, surprisingly, not of the share of net worth invested in the asset. Though
far from conclusive, this finding suggests that the magnitude of the distortion
induced    by capital taxation on household portfolio choices may be less than pre-
viously thought.

      We   have estimated wealth elasticities of demand for a range of assets and
liabilities at both the intensive and   extensive margins. The presumption that

the wealth elasticity of demand for money    is zero and that for other assets is
unity   was shown to be unjustified. For corporate equity, municipal bonds and

"other assets," the estimated wealth elasticities were greater than unity.

Other assets, such as wealth in contractual savings schemes and short—term

financial assets, had elasticities of around one—half. These estimates suggest

that changes in total household net worth will change the structure of household

balance sheets and consequently affect real decisions, such as corporate invest—

ment, in the economy.

      Finally, this study suggests that the differences in portfolio composition

across households cannot be fully explained within the framework of the conven-

tional portfolio choice model. The households in our sample, though wealthy,

own a surprisingly small number of assets and liabilities and this lack of
diversification was found to be important when estimating asset demand

equations. Given that the mean net worth of the sample was almost a quarter of

a million dollars in 1978, it is bard, to imagine that transactions costs, as
traditionally defined, played a decisive role in producing incomplete port-
folios.

     One alternative explanation is that some assets produce joint products.

For example, housing produces both a stream of returns on the investment and a

consumption flow of housing services. Other assets may be held as part of a

labor contract, either on the part of senior managers or in own businesses, in

which case the desire to diversify portfolio risks may be constrained by

contracts that preserve incentives for managers. Still others may offer

liquidity, as in the case of checking accounts or liquid savings, or insurance,

as in the case of contractual savings. The joint nature of the services pro-

vided by some assets means that the separation of the optimal consumption plan

and the optimal portfolio allocation no longer holds. Differences in consump-

tion patterns across households could therefore lead to incomplete portfolios.

     A second and more compelling explanation of this phenomenon is the

existence of significant holding costs in the management of a portfolio that

increase with the number of assets owned. In particular, our results suggest

that a major factor affecting household portfolio behavior may be the costs of

acquiring and processing the information required to make decisions about how

best to allocate resources across different assets. We would expect such costs

to vary among households and, in particular, with observable variables such as

the level of educational attainment and occupation. Our results show that edu—
                                         —35—


cation and occupation are important
                                       determinants of the ownership decision for

corporate equities, taxable bonds, .inicipal bonds, and   "other   assets"——the four
types of assets for which we would
                                     expect information costs to be highest. The
existence of such household_specific
                                       information costs casts doubt on the tradj—
tiQnal assumption of homogeneous
                                   expectations and suggests the need for greater
attentior in both theoretical and
                                    empirical work on portfolio behavior to the
process and costs of acquiring information.
                                             —36—


                                          Appendix


       We describe here a two—step procedure for dealing with the problem of

nonreportirig of asset values. At the first stage we estimate an equation for

the logarithm of net worth as a function of exogenous and observable household

characteristics using data for the sample of 2048 households which report values

for all assets owned.

       lnW=Xb+e                                                                 (A.l)



       As   explanatory variables we include a piece—wise linear f'.inction of age
(using the method proposed in King and Dicks—Mireaux 1982), income from

employment, marital status, education, occupation, household composition,
religion, pension status, and a farm family dummy. The sample selection bias

induced by using only observations with positive values of net worth was

corrected by a standard two—step procedure (Heckman 1976, 19T9). The parameter

estimates, b, can be used to construct estimates of the logarithm of net worth

for    households with incomplete responses. In fact, if we stopped at this point
and    used Xb as an estimate of in w in (3.16) for nonreporting households, then
this   procedure would be equivalent to a Dageriais estimator for the missing data

problem (Dagenais 19T3). But because net worth is not missing but only

incompletely recorded we use a second step which improves efficiency.         We assume

that we nay approximate the relationship between recorded and true net worth

(denoted by WR and W, respectively) by

        lnlnW-Ead.U         j=l j j
                                                                                 (A.2)


        where       = 1   if asset j is owned and value of holding is not reported
                d
                                          —37—


                   =   0   otherwise.
       We obtain estimates of the coefficients a by regressing (in WR — Xb)

the nonreporting dummies using observations on households where the value

of at least one holding is not reported ((A.2) holds exactly for households

which report all holdings). Our estimate of net worth for households with

incomplete reporting is given by

       ln w) = ln W + Ji—i
       /                   R
                           — a E
                              j U

       If nonreporting is t'ignorabiet' (Griiic'ries 198)4), then the norreporting
dumr       variables are exogenous and (A.2) can be estimated by OLS. Where this

condition is not satisfied instrumental variables estimation can be employed.

In the estimation of both the reduced form probits and the asset demand system

(3.16), we use predicted et worth as given by (A.3).
                                        —38—


                                     Footnotes


1.   The sample has two parts. The "NFO" file consists of 3,801 households with

incomes of less than $30,000. The "Gallup" file consists of 2,206 households

with incomes of $30,000 or more.    Weighting    factors for each household are

provided on the tape that allow us to gross—up sample totals to provide

population estimates.

2.   The recorded data on the value of partnerships and unquoted businesses of

which   the household was the principal owner were imputed using sales figures.
Because of the arbitrary nature of the imputation we excluded "own business
value" from our analysis.
3.      Durables such as boats, planes, works of   art, etc. are included in the

category    "other assets".
4.      For a description of TAXSIM see Feldstein and Frisch (1977) and Feenberg
and Rosen (1983).

5.      A detailed discussion of the comparison of the two sets of estimates for

personal sector asset holdings may be found in King and Leape (l98).

6.      A further reason might be the existence of a number of "mutual funds" (less

than the number of assets and liabilities distinguished in our survey) which in

themselves are sufficient for a portfolio optimum. Given the nature of the

eleven assets and liabilities used in this study (see Table 1) the existence of

such mutual funds is improbable. The number of funds that would be required

depends upon the stochastic process generating asset returns.

7.      For further discussion of this point see King (1981).
                                           —39—


 8.    It is important to distinguish between transactions costs of trades and

 "holding costs" of different assets. The
                                               latter are discussed below; the former
 we shall ignore.

 9.   If preferences are restricted such that U belongs to the HARA
                                                                       (hyperbolic
 absolute risk aversion) class, then the one—period portfolio problem equivalence

 result holds for a more general
                                   nonstationary stochastic process (Merton 1911).
 10. The second—order conditions will be satisfied if
                                                             is a concave function
 of the equity holdings and a suitable constraint qualification holds.

 11. This model and its relationship to the econometric literature on

inultivariate tobit and related models is discussed in more detail in King

 (l981).

12. In the continuous time model underlying (3.14), A11 is equivalent to the

inverse of the degree of absolute risk aversion of the derived utility of wealth

function. This function is defined below in (3.11).

13. One exception is that the effective tax rate on equity, which depends upon

the treatment of capital gains, varies with the frequency of trading because the

tax is based on realizations. The trading frequency nay, in turn, be a function

of household characteristics.

i14. We ignore here the effect of the combination of assets owned on the coef-

ficient of the tax rate in order to reduce the prDblems of collinearity

discussed in Section 14.

15. We assume that none of the risky assets are redundant in the sense that its

returns are a linear combination of the returns on other assets.
16. See also Tobin's (1958)   early   discussion of the effect of taxes on optimal
                                                                        —li.O —




portfolios.
iT. Bodie (1982) has argued that short—term Treasury Bills are reasonably close

to a riskiess investment.

18. This is not entirely satisfactory because when all assets are risky the

demand for asset j conditional upon ownership of combination k is

                                                          h-
       p   =   a.(k,t        )   + b(kt             )(r


               ..Z4
                       u.
                       t.        .C.. - .4- .
                                 ..
                                                —         4 .4- L .-.             covar.ances ,   an   .4-    4-
                                                                                                       uax raues •


logarithmic transformation of' the dependent variable was made to reduce the
otherwise severe heteroskedasticity. The influence of the combination of assets
owned was limited to the constant term as in (3.16)                                       to redace to manageable
proportions           the number of coefficients to be estimated.

19. For a very small number of assets the likelihood function corresponding to

the Kuhn—Tucker conditions for the investor's programming problem can be

evaluated using approximations to the imiltivar.iate normal distribution (Wales

and Woodland, 1983). But for the number of assets which it is economically

interesting to examine this approach is infeasible.

20.    The theoretical model implies that the function of observable
characteristics             which determines                  whether a household owns an asset is               not the
same as the function which describes demands conditional upon ownership. Hence

we    estimate a probit ownership model and demand system separately rather than a
tobit   model. Because we provide no rigorous justification for the probit speci-

fication, the assumption of joint normality of the errors in the ownership and

conditional demand equations mast be regarded as a maintained hypothesis.
21. The nonlinearity of the tax schedule means that the instrument is a

nonlinear function of the exogenous variables. In this case instrumental

variables estimation is not equivalent to two—stage least squares. For further

discussion of estimation with nonlinear budget constraints see Hausman (1981,

1982).

22. The interest rate was taken to be the mean of the quarterly rates for 1977

published in The Federal Reserve Bulletin, a figure of 5.27 percent per annum.

23. Life cycle aspects of portfolio composition are discussed further in King

and Leape (198k).

214. For the probit model where f( )   is   the standard normal density the hazard

is equal to the inverse of Mills' ratio.

25. We do not present a test statistic for the asset demand system as a whole

because the number of observations used in estimation varied across assets.

26. The population mean value of net worth was estimated using the sample

weights described in fn. 1.

27. Because we are using cross—section data, we are unable to distinguish bet—

veen permanent and transitory shocks to wealth which, in the presence of coriven—

tional transactions costs, would have different effects on asset demands.

Transactions costs are, however, unlikely to be of major importance for wealthy

households such as those in our   sample.
28. The condition that the aggregate wealth elasticity is independent of the

                              =
distribution of wealth is a           = 2j   =   0.   Only in the case of taxable

bonds would this null hypothesis fail to be rejected at the 1 percent level.
                                         —




                                      References


Auerbach, A.J. and M.A. King (1983), "Taxation, Portfolio Choice and Debt—Equity

     Ratios: A General Equilibrium Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics 98,

     587609.
IBlume, M.E. and I. Friend (1975), "The Asset Structure of Individual Portfolios

     and Some Implications for Utility Functions," Journal of Finance 30,

     585-603.

Bodie, Z. (1982),   "investment   Strate in an inflationary Environment," in

     (ed.) B.M. Friedman, The Changing Roles of Debt and Equity in Financing

     U.S. Capital Formation, University of Chicago Press.

Brennan, M.J. (1975), "The Optimal Number of Securities in a Risky Asset

     Portfolio When There are Fixed Costs of Transacting: Theory and Some

     Empirical Results," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 10,

     183_196.

Conniffe, D. (1983), "Small—Sample Properties of Estimators of Regression

     Coefficients Given a Common Pattern of Missing Data," Review of Economic

     Studies 50, 111—120.

Dagenais, M.G. (1973), "The Use of Incomplete Observations in Multiple

     Regression Analysis," Journal of Econometrics 1, 317—318.

Dubin, J.A. and McFadden, D.L. (1981k), "An Econometric Analysis of Residential

     Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption," Econometrica 52, 345.-362.

Feenberg, D.R. and Rosen, H.S. (1983), "Alternative Tax Treatments of the

     Family: Simulation Methodo1o,r and Results," in (ed.) M.S. Feldstein,
                                               _)4 3—




        Behavioral      Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, University of

        Chicago Press.

Feldstein, M.S. (1976), "Personal Taxation and Portfolio Composition: An

        Econometric Analysis," Econometrica             631—650.

_________ and D. Frisch (1977), "Corporate Tax Integration: Estimated Effects
        on Capital Accumulation," National Tax Journal 30, 37—51.

Goldsmith, D. (1976), "Transactions Costs and the Theory of Portfolio

        Selection," Journal of Finance 31, 1127—1139.

Gourieroux, C. and A. Monfort (1981), "On the Problem of Missing Data in Linear

        Models," Review of Economic Studies )43, 4T9—586.

Griliches,      Z.   (l98L), "Data Problems in Econometrics," mimeo.

Hausrnan,     J.A. (1981), "The Effect of Taxes on Labor      Supply," in (eds.) H. Aaron

        and   J. Pechman, How Taxes     Affect Economic Behavior, Brookings Institution,

        Wash ingt on.


__________ (1982), "The Econometrics of Non—Linear Budget Sets," mimeo, MIT.

Heckman, J.J. (1976), "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation,

        Sample Selection and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator

        for Such Models," Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 5, 175492.

_________ (1978), "Dummy Endogenous Variables in a Simultaneous Equation
        System," Econometrica 16,       931—959.

__________ (1979), "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,"
        Econometrica     17, 153—162.

King,    M.A. (198L), "The Structure of Discrete and Continuous Choices: Modelling

     Asset Demands," mimeo.

               and L—D.L. Dicks—Mireaux (1982), "Asset Holdings and the Life Cycle,t'
                                               —1j4—




        Economic   Journal 92, pp. 2.VT—267.

_________ and J.I. Leape (1981k), "Household Portfolio Composition and the
     Life Cycle," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper.

Levy,   H. (1978), "Equilibrium in an Imperfect Market: A Constraint on the
        Number   of   Securities in the Portfolio," American        Economic Review 68,
        63—658.

Mayshar,    J. (1979), "Transactions Costs in          a Model of   Capital Market
        Equilibrium,"    Journal of Political Economy 87, 673—700.

_________ (1981),         "Transactions Costs and the Pricing of Assets," Journal of

        Finance 36, 583—597.

Merton, R.C. (1971), "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous—

        Time Model," Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373_113.

__________ (1973), "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model," Econometrica

        Iii, 867—887.

_________ (1982), "On the Microeconomic Theory of Investment Under
        Uncertainty," in (eds.) K.J. Arrow and M.D. Intriligator, Handbook of

        Mathematical Economics, Vol. 2, North—Holland, Amsterdam.

Projector, D.S. and G.S. Weiss (1966), Survey of Financial Characteristics of

        Consumers, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.

Tobin, J. (1958),        "Liquidity   Preference as Behavior Towards Risk," Review of

        Economic Studies 26, 65—86.

Uhler, R.S. and J.G. Cragg (1971), "The Structure of the Asset Portfolios of

        Households," Review of Economic Studies 38, 31-1_357.

Wales, T.J. and A.D. Woodland (1983), "Estimation of Consumer Demand Systems
                                  — 5—



with   Binding Non—Negativity Constraints," Journal of Ecpnometrics 21,

263—285.
                           Table 1: Asset Classifications


                                         Mean Asset         Percentage of
                                          Holding            Total Wealth
                                        (in dollars)


I. CHECKING ACCOUNTS                     2,1419                1.1

    1. Checking accounts                     2,1419                  1.1

II. LIQUID SAVINGS                      11,236                 5.0

    2. Savings accounts                     10,336                   14.6


    3. Credit union share accounts                 835               0.14


    14.   Money market funds                        65               0.0

III. LESS LIQUID SAVINGS                 8,520                 3.9

    5. Savings certificates                  6,589                   3.0

    6. U.S. Savings Bonds                          913               0.14


   7. Money market instruments               1,018                   0.5

IV. CONTRACTUAL SAVINGS                 114,1459               6.5

    8. Pension or retirement                10,1485                  14.7
       plan account
    9. Single—premium annuities                    811               Q•14
       (excluding IRA's)
   10. Cash value of life insurance          3,163                    i.14


V. EQUITY                               52,102                23.3

   11. Stocks                               149,833              22.3

   12. Stock mutual funds                    2,269                    1.0

VI. TAXABLE BONDS                        5,217                 2.14


   13. Corporate bonds                       3,059                    1.14


   114. Federal government bonds             2,158                    1.0

VII. MUNICIPAL BONDS                    6,860                  3.1

   15. Municipal bonds                       6,860                    3.1

VIII. HOMES                             714,3142              33.3

   16. Value of primary residence           70,293               31.5

   17. Value of secondary residence          14,0149                  1.8
 Table 1, continued

                                         Mean Asset      Percentage of
                                           Holding        Total Wealth
                                        (in dollars)


 IX. OTHER ASSETS                       86,087           38.6

      18. Tax shelters                        1,910              0.9
         and equipment leases
      19. Closely—held stock                19,020               8.5
      20. Convertible securities,             9,452              4.2
         REITS, boats, and planes
      21. Investment real estate            49,982              22.11

      22. Tangibles                          4,022               1.8
         (marketable art, gold, etc.)
      23. Other assets                       i,70i               0.8

X. HOME MORTGAGES                       18,529            8.3
      24. First mortgage                     8,281               3.7
         on primary residence
      25. Second mortgage                          257           0.1
         on primary residence
      26. Mortgage on second home                  869          0.4
      27. Home improvement loan              9,122              11.1

XI.    OTHER LIABILITIES                19,521.1          8.7
      28. Personal loans                     1,813              0.8

   29. Cash value loans                          956            O4
      30. Revolving bank card account              564          0.3

   Liabilities against:

   31. Tax shelters                              456            0.2

   32. Closely—held stock                   1,549               0.7

   33. Convertible securities,                   306            0.1
        REITS, boats and planes
   34. Investment real estate              13,700               6.1

   35. Tangfbles                                   20           0.0

   36. Other   assets                            160            0.1


NET WORTH                                223,188           100.0


Source: Own calculations based on SRI survey.
                                      Table     2:    Portfolios of Sample of 6010 U.S. Households




                                     Less                                                        Owner—                         Other
                                                                                                           Other        Home   Liabili—      Net
                Checking Liquid      Liquid Contractual Corporate Taxable Municipa1 Occupied
                Accounts                         Savings        Equity    Bonds       Bonds      Housing   Assets     Mortgages ties        Worth
                           Savings   Savings


Number
                                                     14596       2915       632         593      5051      2610        33141     31114      6010
Holding           5558      51438     3255
the Asset


Percentage
                                                     16.5        148.5     10.5         9.9      814.0     143.14      55.6      61.8        100.0
of Total          92.5      90.5      514.2
Sample


Mean Asset
                            16.8                      17.1       18.1      12.3        10.5       82.1      140.14     61.1       21.8       100.0
Share*t            14.9               12.9
(percent)


Mean Net
                                                     238,1482   392,030   71414,202   969,9141   258,006   399,7143   200,3149   221,9814   223,188
Worth*           229,339   217,011   2141,083
    Cs)




                on ownership of the asset.
* Conditional
t   Percent of net worth (reported only for households with positive net worth).

Source:      Own calculations based on SRI survey.
                                                   Table 3: Probit Model for Ownership of Assets
                                                     (asymptotic standard errors in parentheses)
                                                            Less
                                    Checking   Liquid      Liquid Contractual Corporate Taxable
 Explanatory Variablea                                                                                 Municipal               Other       Home      Other
                                    Account    Savings     Savings  Savings              Bonds
                                                                               Equity                    Bonds      Homes      Assets    Mortgages Liabilities
Constant                              .866        .885     —1.599    —2.704      —2.266      —3.172     —3.001      —5.635
                                     (.315)                                                                                    —1.315     -4.951     —.718
                                                 (.302)     (.231)    (.246)      (.271)      (.516)     (.477)      (.387)     (.256)     (.294)    (.228)
 In (Net Worth)                       .145       .397        .375       .399      —.119        .169      —.084       1.146      —.058     1.049        .1)2
                                     (.057)     (.051)      (.052)     (.051)     (.063)      (.126)     (.109)      (.105)     (.060)    (.070)      (.045)
 I In   (Net Worth))2 x              —.107      —.283      —.198      —.221        .413        .146       .333       —•453       .347     —.749      —.106
                                     (.049)     (.043)     (.041)     (.043)      (.053)      (.085)     (.075)      (.091)     (.049)    (.053)     (.037)
 Income from Employment x     iU6   —.747      —1.931     —1.046       .034        .975      1.248       1.560       3.109       .093
                                    (.978)      (.760)                                                                                    3.518       .047
                                                           (.645)     (.837)      (.905)     (.719)      (.719)     (1.317)     (.758)    (.833)     (.682)
MargInal Tax Rate                    .544       1.139        .544      .864        .310      —.133        .057      —1.107
                                    (.202)      (.183)      (.129)    (.153)      (.149)
                                                                                                                                 .491      .309       .734
                                                                                             (.165)      (.167)      (.232)     (.137)    (.143)     (.134)
Age x                               —.128       —.562      —.119       .646        .335      —.154        .151        .671       .008      .779
                                    (.124)      (.124)     (.082)                                                                                     .344
                                                                      (.090)      (.090)     (.126)      (.135)      (.111)     (.088)    (.096)     (.088)
(Age)2 x    10                       .149        .568       .173      —.750       —.267       .270       —.048       —.717      —.1)9    —1.074      —.574
                                    (.121)      (.120)     (.080)     (.087)      (.088)     (.1)8)      (.127)      (.011)     (.087)    (.096)     (.087)
Married                              .130        .208       .1)7       .124       —.049      —.1)0       --.308       .641       .062      .408       .244
                                    (.082)      (.oii;     (.055)     (.061)      (.060)     (.076)      (.078)      (.083)     (.059)    (.059)     (.057)
Occupation: Managerial              —.051       —.171      —.076      —.065        .290       .035        .152       —.164       .244
                                    (.074)      (.070J                                                                                     .134       .137
                                                           (.047)     (.055)      (.050)     (.070)      (.071)      (.078)     (.048)    (.050)     (.049)
Occupation:    Professional         —.114       —.063      —.078       .123        .172       .189        .164       —.137
                                    (.086)                                                                                       .257      .137       .014
                                                (.083)     (.054)     (.066)      (.058)     (.075)      (.078)      (.086)     (.056)    (.058)     (.056)
Education: College or Above          .300        .072       .062       .085        .505       .472        .399       —.163       .082      .164       .007
                                    (.067)      (.062)     (.042)     (.048)      (.045)     (.061)      (.062)      (.066)     (.043)    (.045)     (.044)
Employed                             .161        .202       .072       .306      —.181       —.226       —.254        .091     —.073      —.007
                                    (.079)      (.075)                                                                                                .162
                                                           (.054)     (.058)     (.059)      (.078)      (.080)      (.085)    (.058)     (.058)     (.055)
Risk Averse                         —.003      —.067        .067       .223      —.047       —.100        .004        .078
                                    (.068)                                                                                     —.051       .041       .020
                                               (.065)      (.043)     (.051)     (.048)      (.058)      (.060)      (.075)    (.046)     (.048)     (.046)
No. Holding the Asset                5246       5149       3144       4342       2819        621          581       4875       2514       3185        3394
No, Not Holding the Asset             365       462        2467       1269       2792       4990         5030        736       3097       2426        2217
Chi—square (12)                      83.9      195.4      293.7      941.3      1752.5     769.4       784.9       1748.0     1304.8     1678.6      918.6
    Dummy variables take the value unity when the description applies to the household, zero otherwise,              Individual variables refer to
    the head of a household,
Table 4, contInued
                                                        Less
                                                                                                                        Other        Home      Other
                                  Checking    Liquid    Liquid Contractual Corporate Taxable     Municipal
                                                                            Equity    Bonds        Bonds     Homes      Assets     Mortgages Liabilities
Explanatory Variablea             Account     Savings   Savings  Savings
Ownership Dummies:
O1COM3                             —0.131     —0.372
                                   (0.402)    (0.440)
01C0M23                             0.705      0.844
                                   (0.563)    (0.666)
01C0M34                            —0.917     —2.753
                                   (0.221)    (0.246)
01C0M234                           —2.737     —3.206
                                   (0.442)    (0.513)
                                                                            —0.334      0.582       6.882                 3.234
02C0M13
                                                                            (2.631))   (7.937)     (6.540)               (2.171)
                                                                             —0.824     1.570       7.709                 3.299
02C0M134                                                                                                                 (2.151)
                                                                             (2.677)   (8.518)     (6.958)
                                                        —2.177    —3.097                                      —0.623
O3COM1
                                                        (0.738)   (0.703)                                     (0.189)
                                                         2.300    —3.074                                       0.877
O3COM12
                                                        (1.035)   (1.071)                                     (0.345)
                                                        —3.784     0.287                                      —0.757
03C0M14
                                                        (0.536)   (0.388)                                     (0.226)
                                                        —3.437     1.926                                       0.859
03C0M124
                                                        (1.074)   (0.910)                                     (0.323)
                                                                                                                                     —0.035     2.623
04C0M13                                                                                                                              (1.416)   (1.568)
                                                                                                                                      1.074     3.982
04C0M123                                                                                                                             (1.767)   (2.246)
                                                                             —0.780    —3.143       0.227     —0.070     —1.170       0.540    —0.193
MILLS RATIO                          6.931    —2.838    —5.644     2.730
                                                                                       (1.948)     (1.547)    (0.189)    (0.499)     (0.559)   (1.268)
(inverse)                           (2.799)   (1.206)   (4,369)   (0.841)    (0.418)
                                                                              0.106     0.140       0.070      0.625      0.075       0.629     0.205
                                    0.366      0.239     0.223     0.211
R—squared
                                                                              2281      471         438        4724       2106        1637      3230
                                     5086      4852      3026      3506
Degrees of freedom
                                                                                        1.281        1.255     0.485       1.286      0.875      1.602
 Standard error of the equation      1.179      1.279    1.695      1.210     1.471
 a                                                                                                      Individual variables refer to
                                                                      to the household, zero otherwise.
   Dummy variables take the value unity when the description applies
     the head of a household.
                                                                                                                           household's
                                                           value unity if given that it contains an asset In group 1, the
         The dummy variables of the form 01C0M23 take the and
 Note:                                                        zero otFerwlSe.
   ortfolio    also contains assets from groups 2 and 3;
                                                         Table 4: Asset Demand Equations
                                                   (asymptotic standard errors in parentheses)




                                                         Less
                                    Checking   Liquid    LiquId Contractual Corporate   Taxable   Municipal             Other     Home      Other
 Explanatory Variable8              Account    Savings   Savings  Savings    Equity      Bonds      Bonds     Homes

Constant                             —3.177     0.362    10.693    —3.645      3.647    11.780      6,348      4.505     4.012     5.814     1.718
                                     (0.902)   (0.765)   (8.652)   (1.974)    (1.888)   (9.864)    (8.396)    (0.936)   (1.405)   (2.386)   (1.812)
 In (Net Worth)                      —0.525    —0.498    —2.089    —0.577     —1.255    —1.289    —0.916      —0.727    —1.805    —1.245    —2.153
                                     (0.128)   (0.194)   (1.199)   (0.251)    (0.423)   (1.389)   (1.207)     (0.188)   (0.340)   (0.394)   (0.321)
fIn (Net   rth)J2    x   i1           0.052     0.002     0.808     0.046      0.813     0.031      0.555     —0.015     1.082     0.178     1.205
                                     (0.087)   (0.131)   (0.651)   (0.140)    (0.260)   (0.738)    (0.619)    (0.104)   (0,198)   (0.252)   (0.189)
Income from Employment x      i06     1.556     2.482     4.199     0.382      0,721    —2.915    —1,191       1,533    —0.109     2.021     1.331
                                     (1.081)   (1.164)   (2,942)   (1,428)    (0.756)   (2.066)   (1,752)     (0.615)   (0.579)   (0.863)   (1.356)
Marginal Tax Rate                     1.819     0.473    —1.446     0.743     —0.139    —0.260    —0.794      —0.049    —0,585     0.734     0.267
                                     (0.335)   (0.375)   (1,302)   (0.389)    (0.279)   (0,667)   (0.608)     (0.093)   (0,277)   (0.211)   (0,538)
Age x   1O                            0.424     1.215     1.545     0.898     —0.223    —0.033     0.089      —0.001
                                     (0,110)                                                                             0.175    —0.113     0.296
                                               (0.210)   (0.419)   (0.380)    (0.320)   (0.496)   (0.679)     (0.102)   (0.259)   (0.324)   (0.392)
(Age)2 x   io                       —0.401     —1.296    -1.599    -0,541      0.357    —0.126     0.070      -0.085    -0.254    —0.282
                                    (0.210)    (0.239)   (0.580)                                                                            —0.427
                                                                   (0,458)    (0.385)   (0.646)   (0,729)     (0.130)   (0.339)   (0.418)   (0.560)
MarrIed                              0,456      0.130    —0,284    —0,431     —0.154    —0.142    —0.410       0.057    —0,223     0.117
                                    (0.119)                                                                                                  0.214
                                               (0.124)   (0,364)   (0,155)    (0.205)   (0.485)   (0.446)     (0.068)   (0.173)   (0.159)   (0.223)
Occupation: Managorial               0.485       0.321    0.412    —0,287     —0.030    —0.099     0.229      —0.017     0.062      0.229    0.235
                                    (0.075)    (0.082)   (0.239)   (0.122)    (0.133)   (0.259)   (0.297)     (0,047)   (0.118)   (0.090)   (0.136)
Occupation:   Professional           0.307      0.306     0.398     0.155     —0.082    —0,426     0.123       0.051    —0.042
                                    (0,088)    (0.072)                                                                             0.183     0.414
                                                         (0,227)   (0,109)    (0,115)   (0.354)   (0.279)     (0.036)   (0.117)   (0,082)   (0.096)
Education: College   or Above        0.770      0.183    —0.120     0.060      0.285    —1.128     0.213      —0,009    —0.169
                                    (0.188)    (0.077)   (0,222)                                                                   0.191     0.068
                                                                   (0.116)    (0.154)   (0.728)   (0.539)     (0.040)   (0.079)   (0.105)   (0.129)
Employed                             0,218     —0.260    —0.226     0.329     —0.014     0.120    —0.746      —0.041    —0.223    —0.206    —0.287
                                    (0,128)    (0.098)   (0.204)   (0.152)    (0.163)   (0,510)   (0.415)     (0.031)   (0.132)   (0.103)   (0.189)
Risk Averse                         —0.153     —0.041    —0.270     0.303     —0,131     0,575    —0.158      —0.022    —0,247    —0.056
                                    (0.045)    (0.055)                                                                                      —0,339
                                                         (0.187)   (0.083)    (0.078)   (0.208)   (0.131)     (0.021)   (0.067)   (0.055)   (0.076)
                      Table 5:   Marginal   Tax Rates of Clienteles


                                                             Average Marginal Tax
                                                               Rate of Clientele
                                                                   (percent)
                                     Number Holding
Asset                                  the Asset           tinweighted    Weighted



 1. Checking Accounts                       5558              27.8           35.0

 2. Liquid Savings                          5138              28.1           35.1

 3. Less Liquid Savings                     3255              28.1           32.3

 . Contractual    Savings                   L596              29.9           39.8

 5. Corporate Equity                        2915              32.7

 6. Taxable   Bonds                          632              36.1           145.9


 7. Municipal Bonds                          593              31.5           50.5

 8. Owner—Occupied Housing                  5051              28.4           34.8

 9. Other   Assets                          2610              33.6           145.6


10. Home Mortgages                          33141             31.14          33.1
11. Other Liabiities                        37114             30.1           145.1



Total Net Worth                             6010              27'.l          142.7


Note: The weighted average marginal tax rates are weighted by the household's
share of the total holdings of the asset in the sample.

Source: Own calculations based on SRI survey.
  Table 6: Test Statistic for Constant Relative Risk Aversion


                                                     Chi—Square
 Asset                                               Statistic



 1. Checking Account                                  109.00

 2. Liquid Savings                                     83.10

 3. Less Liquid Savings                                35.58
 ..   Contractual   Savings

 5. Equity                                             8.12
 6. Taxable Bonds                                       3.98

 7. Municipal Bonds                                    0.60

 8. Home                                             929.56
 9. Other Assets                                      19.L6
10. Home Mortgages                                   256.22
11. Other Liabiities                                  6.2O

Source: Own   calculations.
          Table 7: Wealth Elasticities for Two Representative Households



                    Predicted Elasticity              Predicted Elasticity
                 Evaluated at the Population        Evaluated at the Sample
                    Mean Wealth of $57,1408          Mean Wealth of $223,188

Asset              Ownership   Demand Total        Ownership   Demand      Total


Checking
Account                .001      .5141    .5142      —.003      .555         .552


Liquid
Savings                .006      .5014    .510       —.007      .5014        .1498


Less Liquid
                       .087    —.063      .025        .0149     .157         .206
Savings

Cractual
                       .0146     .1481    .527        .023      .1493        .516
Savings


                       .323      .778    1.101        .1412     .999       1.1411
Equity

Taxable
Bonds                  .605    —.250      .355        .673     —.2142        .1431


Municipal
Bonds                  .589      .789    1.378        .7146     .939       1.685

Owne r—oc cu—
                                                      .108      .312         .1420
pied Housing           .138      .351     .1489


Other
Assets                 .338      .5140    .908        .1421     .8614      1.285

Home
                       .067     —.019     .0148      —.013      .029       —.0143
Mortgages

Other
Liabilities           —.0114     .377     .363       —.032      .7014        .672




Note: Totals ay not equal sum of components because of rounding errors.

Source: Own calculations.
                     Table 8: Aggregate   Wealth Elasticities



                             Sample                             Population
 Asset           Ownership   Demand    Total        Ownership    Demand        Total
 Checking
 Account           —.002       .570       .568         .000      .5314         •5314

Liquid
 Savings           —.006      .508        .502         .002      .505          .507

Less Liquid
Savings             .263     —.179        .083         .252     —.231          .021

Contractual
Savings             .008      .5014       .512         .023      .1495         .518


Equity              .038     1.5141    1.579           .200     1.120        1.320

Taxable
Bonds               .71.8    —.307        .1411        .7149    —.309          .14141

Municipal
Bonds               .378     1.172    1.550            .558     1.025        1.5814

Owner—occupied
Housing             .067      .252        .320         .118      .255         .373

Other
Assets              .079     1.531    1.610            .21i9     .975        1.21414

Home
Mortgages          —.005      .0014   —.001            .073     —.035         .039
Other
Liabilities       —.070      1.312    1.2141         —.022       .537




Note: Totals may not equal sum of components because of rounding errors.

Source: Own calculations.
                                                 FIGURE           1:   Effect of Wealth   on   Probability of        Ownership



                                                                                                                                      1...   Uquld 8i1ng.
                                       CheckinO Account
         1.u

         0.0

         0.8

                                                                                                       —     0.7
         0.7
z                                                                                                            0.8
0
                                                                                                             0.0
         0.0
                                                                                                       S
•                                                                                                      ..    0.4
.        0.4
U
                                                                                                       S     0.3
         0.3                                                                                           I.
                                                                                                       A.
0.
                                                                                                             0.2
         0.2

                                                                                                             0.1
         0.1

         0.0                                              1               I                                  0.0•
                                                                                                                                       75.0            200.0   550.0   1500.0
                        27.5           75.0             200.0          550.0   1500.0                           10.0       21.5
           10,0
                                                                                                                                              Wecith
                                              Wetith

                                (in thousands     of dollars)                                                                      (in thoueande of dollars)



                                         Uquld Oavtnga                                                                                 Contractual Saving.
          i.e                                                                                                 1.0

          0.9                                                                                                 0.9

          0.8                                                                                                 0.8

          0.7                                                                                           —
                                                                                                              0.7
    I                                                                                                   a
    a0                                                                                                  a     0.6-
    1.                                                                                                  0
    .     0.0

          0.4-                                                                                          ..    0.4-
    o                                                                                                   U
    •     0.3                                                                                                 0.3-
    A.                                                                                                  0.
          0.2                                                                                                 0.2

           0.1

           0.0                                                I
                                                                                                              0.0
                                       75.0             200.0          550.0   1500.0                                                                                  1500.0
                 10.0    27.5                                                                                               21.5       15.0            200.0   550.0
                                                                                                                    10.0
                                               Wealth                                                                                       Wealth
                                 (in   thouaands of dollars)                                                                       (in thousandsof dollars)
                                                                   Figure 1, continued



         1.
                                                                                                                         Uunlclp.l Bond.



 S

 0
 I                                                                                        A
                                                                                          I



 S
 U

 II.
                                                                                         J



                                      Wealth                                                                                                          1500.0
                                                                                                                             Wealth
                            (in thousand. of dollars)
                                                                                                                  (in thousands of dollar.)


                                  Taubi. Bonds
       l.0
                                                                                                                    Owu.r—occupl.dBouslog
       0.0•
                                                                                              0.0
       0.I-
                                                                                              0.U
       O.7
A                                                                                             0.7
       0.e•                                                                          A
                                                                                     I        0.
                                                                                     A
       0.5•                                                                          S
                                                                                              0.5
       0.4
U                                                                                        S
                                                                                     S        0.4
                                                                                     U
k      0.3
0.                                                                                   S        0.3
                                                                                     I.
       0.2                                                                           0.

                                                                                              0.2
       0.1


       0.0

              10.0   27.5      15.0                                                           0.0
                                               200.0    550.0   15C0.0
                                      Wealth                                                        10.0   27.5       75.0            200.0   550.0   I500.0
                            (in thousands of dollars)                                                                       Wealth
                                                                                                                  (in thousands of dollars)
                                                                  Figure 1, continued



                                  Other Aeset,




1%
•1


I
0


I                                                                                                                        Other UabIIitl.,
U                                                                                             1.0

I                                                                                             0..
A.

                                                                                              0.
                                                                                              0.7
                                                                                        I
                                                                                        C

                                       Wealth                                                 D.C
                          (in   thoullnde   of dollare)                                 V
                                                                                        I
                                                                                        •1    0.4
                                                                                         U


                                                                                        II.   0.3
                                 some kortgagee                                         A.
      10                                                                                      0.2

                                                                                              0.1
      0.S
                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                    10.0   21.5         75.0            200.0     550.0   1500.0
      07
                                                                                                                               Wealth
                                                                                                                  (in   thouaande   of dollara)
 C
 I.
A.


      0.4

      0.3
0.


      0.2


      0.1


      0.0
            10.0   27.5         75.0            200.0     550.0   1500.0
                                       Wealth

                          (in thousandsof dollars)
