NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REFLECTIONS ON AMERICANS' VIEWS OF THE EURO EX ANTE
Martin S. Feldstein
Working Paper 14696
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14696
http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/2867

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2009

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
theNational Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2009 by www.VoxEU.org. Reproduced with permission. All rights reserved.

Reflections on Americans' Views of the Euro Ex Ante
Martin S. Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 14696
January 2009
JEL No. F02,F4,F5,F51
ABSTRACT
This paper was prepared for a session of the 2009 American Economic Association meeting devoted
to examining the views of American economists about the euro and the European Economic and Monetary
Union on the tenth anniversary of the euro. I had written an article in 1992 in the Economist and subsequent
articles in the Journal of Economic Perspecties and in Foreign Affairs. I begin by reviewing the arguments
that I offered at that time about the claimed advantages of a single currency and about what I regarded
as the disadvantages. I then discuss my claims that the primary motivation for the creation of the euro
was political, not economic and that the creation of the euro could lead to increased conflict within
Europe and with the United States. I conclude with a discussion of the implications for the EMU of
the current recession and the likely future economic conditions in Europe.

Martin S. Feldstein
President Emeritus
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138-5398
msfeldst@nber.org

Reflections on Americans’ Views of the Euro Ex Ante
Martin Feldstein∗

I am pleased to participate in this session on the 10th anniversary
of the start of the Euro and the European Economic and Monetary
Union.
There is much to celebrate on this occasion. The Economic and
Monetary Union achieved its goal of establishing a viable single
currency for its member nations. The European Central Bank has
focused successfully on its mandated goal of price stability. Although
today’s inflation rate of slightly higher than 3 percent exceeds the
official target rate, the ECB has succeeded in avoiding the high and
volatile inflation of some earlier years.
But these 10 years have not been a particularly challenging time.
With no serious downturn, the ECB has been able to focus on the goal of

∗

Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and president emeritus of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. These remarks were presented at the
American Economic Association meeting, January 2009, at a session devoted to
examining the views of American economists on the euro before the introduction of
the euro ten years earlier.

1

price stability. Not all countries shared equally in these good times but
there was enough prosperity to avoid conflicts over economic policy.
That may be about to change. We are now experiencing a major
global economic downturn and a global economic crisis. These
conditions are worse than any that I have experienced before. The
downturn in the United States is likely to be longer and more damaging
than any since the depression of the 1930s.
Conditions in Europe are also deteriorating very rapidly. More
significantly, there are now substantial differences among the EMU
countries. While Germany has an unemployment rate of 7.5 percent,
the unemployment rate in Spain is 12.8 percent. The contrast is even
greater for the 12‐month change in industrial production – down 3.9
percent in Germany but down 11 percent in Spain. Even in France
industrial production is down 7.2 percent.
There are also very large differences in the trade balances of the
individual countries. Germany had a trade surplus over the past 12
months of $280 billion while Spain has a trade deficit of $154 billion.
Even France has a trade deficit of $83 billion.

2

These differences in economic conditions call for differences in
monetary and fiscal policies. But the single currency implies that there
can be only one monetary policy for the entire eurozone. For fiscal
policy, the rules of the EMU limit the ability of individual countries to
have any significant countercyclical fiscal deficit. At the same time,
there is no mechanism for a common fiscal policy for the entire EMU.
These restrictive conditions – these policy limits – and the fact
that the country with the strongest current performance is also the
largest and most influential member of the eurozone – suggest that
economic performance in the other countries will be worse than they
would otherwise have been and that some of those countries will be
unhappy and frustrated.
My Early Comments on EMU
I owe my place on this panel to three articles that I wrote before
the start of EMU – a short piece in the Economist in 1992 and longer
articles in Foreign Affairs and in the Journal of Economic Perspectives in
1997.
I welcome this opportunity to comment on what I said in those
three articles – and on what I did not say.
3

Let me begin with some things that I did not say there or
anywhere else but that some euroskeptics did say and that some people
have attributed to me as well.
‐ I never said that the Euro would not come into existence.
‐ I never said that the Monetary Union would inevitably collapse.
‐ And I never said that the Euro would lead to war within Europe
or with the United States.
My articles emphasized three points:
‐ First, the economic advantages of a single currency in
promoting trade and competition would be outweighed by a
higher rate of unemployment and by the risk of higher long‐
term inflation.
‐ Second, the primary motivation for the creation of the euro
was political, not economic.
‐ Third, the creation of the euro could lead to increased conflict
within Europe and with the United States.

4

I continue to believe that all three positions are correct. I think the
current economic crisis may demonstrate that more clearly.
I will now look at each of these three statements. I will then
come back to the implications of the current recession and of the
likely future economic conditions in Europe.
My 1992 article in the Economist appeared roughly a year
after the Delors report of the Economic Commission which bore
the title “One Market, One Money.” The Delors report and others
argued that the common market in goods and services that had
been created by the European Union required a single currency to
be effective – thus “one market, one money.”
These proponents of the single currency said that a single
currency was needed to facilitate trade and that a single currency
would promote efficiency by permitting price comparisons.
EMU advocates in Britain argued that these economic gains were
worth the political sacrifices – the loss of sovereignty over
monetary affairs and over other economic policies that would
result from joining the EMU.

5

But Britain already had the free trade advantages of being a
member of the European Union. I argued that there were in effect
no net economic gains – more likely a net economic loss ‐‐ to
compensate Britain for the political costs of joining the Economic
and Monetary Union.
Certainly there is nothing in economic theory or in historic
experience to suggest that international trade requires a single
currency. The argument that one market requires one money was
the kind of political slogan that frankly bothered me as an
economist.
I was also not impressed by the idea that a single currency
would facilitate price competition that would improve market
efficiency. The housewife in Madrid buys her bread locally. So
knowing what bread costs in Berlin or Rome is irrelevant. The
industrial buyer who may already shop for steel or chemicals in
different national markets could easily compare prices stated in
different currencies with the help of a pocket calculator.

6

In contrast, the economic costs of a single currency are very
real. A single currency means a single monetary policy and a
single exchange rate.
A single monetary policy for a group of heterogeneous
countries that experience different shocks cannot be optimal – the
problem is that, when it comes to monetary policy, one size
cannot fit all. If monetary policy has to consider unemployment
as well as inflation, the average cyclical unemployment rate will
be higher with a single currency.
A single currency also means that a country that
experiences an increased trade deficit caused by a reduced
demand for its export products cannot be helped by a natural – i.e.
automatic ‐‐ exchange rate adjustment.
Comparison with the United States
A common reaction to these arguments by the single
currency advocates was that the U.S. is a large continental country
with diverse economic regions. Why, they asked, should a single
currency be good for the U.S. but not for Europe? Here’s the
answer.
7

There are three important differences between the U.S. and
Europe that allow the U.S. to be more nearly an optimal currency
area.
The first is mobility. In the United States, when demand
falls in one region people move out of that area and others do not
move in as readily. When New England lost its shoe industry to
foreign producers, the population in the New England states fell
relative to that in other parts of the country.
In Europe that does not happen to nearly the same extent
for at least three reasons. Language is the most obvious. While
elite executives and academics move among countries, the
average citizen does not have the language skill to make that
move. Cultural traditions also militate against mobility.
Americans are movers with a tradition of immigration to the U.S.
and movement from the east coast to populate the rest of the
country. Europeans are much less likely to move even within their
own country. A third reason is national loyalty. A Frenchman is a
Frenchman and a Spaniard is a Spaniard in ways that do not apply
to someone from Connecticut or Arizona.

8

So the greater mobility in the U.S. helps to stabilize national
unemployment when there are idiosyncratic regional shocks to
demand.
Second, the greater wage flexibility in the United States also
helps to offset local demand shocks. When demand falls in a U.S.
region, wages rise more slowly in that area, inducing movements
in location and in production. European wages are much less
flexible as a result of custom, legal rules, and union power.
The third condition that allows the U.S. to operate
successfully with a single currency is that Washington offsets
about one‐third of any local fall in incomes by reduced collection
of federal taxes and increased unemployment benefits. There is
nothing comparable at the European level where fiscal authorities
are national.
The Political Motivation for EMU
At a certain point after writing my 1992 Economist article I began
to think that European leaders might also understand that the
economic case for EMU was very weak or non‐existent. Perhaps
they made arguments like “one‐market needs one money” and
9

ignored the adverse effects because they wanted the single
currency for another reason.
That brought me to the second idea that I emphasized in my
writing: that the primary motivation for EMU was political – to
create eventually a political union, a federal state with
responsibility for domestic and international affairs. I explored
that idea in the Journal of Economic Perspectives and in Foreign
Affairs.
European political leaders since Jean Monet made it clear
that they wanted a political union. Some of them saw this as a way
of avoiding another intra‐European war like the Franco‐Prussian
war and World Wars one and two. Thus, German Chancellor
Helmut Kohl was very clear when he spoke of “containing a
potentially dangerous Germany within Europe.”
But other political leaders spoke of developing a strong
European entity as a counterbalance to the United States. The
French were particularly fond of making this argument.
Helmut Schlesinger, the long‐time head of the German
Bundesbank, wrote the following in 1994: “the final goal is a
10

political one in which the economic union is an important vehicle
to reach this target. Since 1952, since the beginning of the
European community, the final goal was and is to reach a type of
political union in Europe, a federation of states, an association of
states or even a stronger form of union. The political target has
been guiding Germany since the beginning and will continue to do
so in the future.”
So it couldn’t be clearer. The economic arguments were not
the real reason for the EMU. They were a way of selling the
political union to a public not yet ready for political union as
something very different. But to the political leaders, EMU was a
step toward political union.
If the people throughout Europe carried euros in their
pockets, they would feel more like Europeans and less like
Belgians or Italians. Even the choice of the name for the currency
–the euro ‐ underlined this purpose.
If each national central bank lost power to a European
Central Bank in Frankfurt, people would realize that a powerful
political union was being created.
11

The political leaders had many different reasons to want a
political union. As I already noted, some of the idealists thought it
would prevent a return to war in Europe. That was the view
stressed by Kohl. But was that his real reason – or like the
specious economic arguments of others – just part of selling the
EMU and ultimately political union to the people of Europe?
In my Foreign Affairs article I noted that a political union
with a single currency had not prevented the United States from
having a terrible civil war. That comment led the editors of
Foreign Affairs to put the caption “EMU and War” on the cover of
that issue, attracting attention to my article but also leading many
who didn’t actually read the article to believe that I was saying
that EMU would lead to a European civil war.
But preventing war by (in Helmut Kohl’s words) “containing
a potentially dangerous Germany within Europe” might not be the
only or even the dominant reason why Germany had political
union as its goal. Germany is the largest economy and has the
largest population. It is now the geographic center of Europe.

12

Germany might well expect that it would become the dominant
force within any future political union.
The French had a different view of the way that power
would evolve. As I explained in those articles, the French saw a
political union as a way of achieving equality with Germany – and
perhaps even the leading role in the field of foreign policy. The
Bundesbank had been the dominant force in monetary affairs
before the EMU but with the creation of the EMU the French
would be equal to the Germans at the ECB. If Britain could be
persuaded to join, the Bank of England would no longer be an
independent player in monetary affairs.
The contrast between German expectations of a hegemonic
role and the French expectation of at least equal influence is but
one example of the potential for conflict within the EMU.
Potential Conflicts
Such potential conflicts are the subject of the third theme
that I explored – conflicts between Germany and France, conflicts
between those two dominant countries and the other members of
the EMU, and conflict with the United States.
13

Conflict does not mean war. Rather it can be the failure to
cooperate and the attempt to undermine the goals and influence
of other countries.
We certainly saw this in the behavior of France with respect
to US policy in Iraq and the French attempt to block US actions at
the UN Security Council. We see it now in the coordinated
European policies with respect to Iran – where the European
economic interests cause it to refuse tough sanctions against Iran.
And we see it in the coordinated European policy with respect to
the Palestinians.
In the article in The Journal of Economic Perspectives I put
the potential conflict between a more unified Europe and the
United States into historic perspective by recalling what
happened in 1956 when the United States forced England and
France to abandon their attack on the Suez Canal. Conrad
Adenauer, the German chancellor, was in Paris on that day and
said this to the leaders of the British and French governments:
“France and England will never be powers comparable to the
United States and the Soviet Union. Nor Germany, either. There

14

remains only one way of playing a decisive role in the world, that
is to unite to make Europe. … We have no time to waste: Europe
will be your revenge.”
We as economists may not think about “playing a decisive
role in the world” as a key goal of government actions but the
elected officials who guide long‐run political strategy do.
Current Economic Conditions in Europe
The very negative current economic conditions in Europe
may cause substantial economic policy disagreements among the
EMU countries.
Germany is still resisting any substantial fiscal deficits and
the ECB has a much higher interest rate than the Federal Reserve
or the Bank of Japan. Spain with a 13 percent unemployment rate
and a trade deficit of 10 percent of GDP must want a more
expansive monetary and fiscal policy than Germany. Smaller
countries may now feel that they have lost control over their
economic future.

15

In these circumstances, it is possible that one or more
countries might actually withdraw from the EMU. It is clear why
some national political leaders – or would be leaders ‐‐ might
consider such an option.
Doing so would allow their reinstated national central bank
to choose an easier monetary policy. The national central bank
could also create the currency needed to act as a lender of last
resort to national commercial banks. The country’s fiscal
authority would no longer be bound by the restrictions of the
Stability and Growth Pact and could therefore pursue a large fiscal
stimulus. The international value of the currency could adjust to
make local products more competitive.
A country might threaten to leave the EMU unless policy
became more expansive. If policy did not change, it might face the
difficult choice between leaving the EMU and losing face by
backing down from its threatened action.
If this happens, how would the remaining members of the
EMU respond? The Maastricht Treaty has no provision for a

16

county to leave the EMU, just as the US constitution has no
provision for a state to secede.
Would a country that left the EMU be forced out of the
European Union as well, thereby losing the free trade advantages
of the EU?
The next few years will clearly be an important testing time
for the European Monetary Union and for the Euro.

Cambridge MA
January 2009

17

