NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMICS AND PSYCHOLOGY OF INEQUALITY AND HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
Flavio Cunha
James J. Heckman
Working Paper 14695
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14695

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2009

This paper was presented by Heckman as the Marshall Lecture at the European Economics Association,
Milan, August 29, 2008. Flavio Cunha is Assistant Professor, Department of Economics, the University
of Pennsylvania. James Heckman is Henry Schultz Distinguished Service Professor of Economics
at the University of Chicago, Professor of Science and Society, University College Dublin, Senior
Research Fellow, American Bar Foundation, and Alfred Cowles Distinguished Visiting Professor,
Cowles Foundation, Yale University. We thank the editor and two anonymous referees for very helpful
comments on an earlier draft of this paper. We also thank Vince Crawford, Friedhelm Pfeiffer, Seong
Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Robert Pollak, Brent Roberts, Peter Savelyev, and Burton Singer for
helpful comments and references on various drafts of this paper. This research was supported by the
JB & MK Pritzker Family Foundation; The Susan Thompson Buffett Foundation; NIH R01-HD043411;
and research grants from the American Bar Foundation. The views expressed in this paper are those
of the author and not necessarily those of the funders listed here. A website that posts supplementary
technical and empirical material for this paper is http://jenni.uchicago.edu/Marshall_2008.html. The
display used in the Milan talk is posted at http://jenni.uchicago.edu/Milan_2008/, and contains supplementary
material. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Flavio Cunha and James J. Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Economics and Psychology of Inequality and Human Development
Flavio Cunha and James J. Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 14695
January 2009
JEL No. A12
ABSTRACT
Recent research on the economics of human development deepens understanding of the origins of
inequality and excellence. It draws on and contributes to personality psychology and the psychology
of human development. Inequalities in family environments and investments in children are substantial.
They causally affect the development of capabilities. Both cognitive and noncognitive capabilities
determine success in life but to varying degrees for different outcomes. An empirically determined
technology of capability formation reveals that capabilities are self-productive and cross-fertilizing
and can be enhanced by investment. Investments in capabilities are relatively more productive at some
stages of a child's life cycle than others. Optimal child investment strategies differ depending on target
outcomes of interest and on the nature of adversity in a child's early years. For some configurations
of early disadvantage and for some desired outcomes, it is efficient to invest relatively more in the
later years of childhood than in the early years.

Flavio Cunha
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
160 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia PA 19104
fcunha@sas.upenn.edu
James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jheckman@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

This paper examines the origins of inequality in human capabilities and lessons for the design
of strategies to reduce it. Preferences and skills determined early in life explain a substantial
part of lifetime inequality. For example, recent research shows that in American society
about 50% of lifetime inequality in the present value of earnings is determined by factors
known to agents at age 18.1 These factors originate in the family, and include genes and the
environments that families select and create.
Progress in understanding mechanisms of family influence is facilitated by drawing on
an emerging body of research in psychology. Behavioral economics has enriched mainstream
economics by absorbing the lessons of cognitive psychology about human preferences and
decision making.2 In studying the origins of preferences and abilities and their development,
it is also fruitful to draw on personality psychology and the psychology of human development, fields that often do not communicate with each other or to economists. This paper
presents the fruits of an initial synthesis and a blueprint for future research.
It is fitting that these topics be addressed in a Marshall lecture. Although Marshall is
best known for his work in economic theory, there was another side to him. Throughout his
career, he was deeply concerned about the poor.3 To understand poverty, Marshall analyzed
how markets priced skills and studied the role of human capital in creating earnings capacity
and inequality. He stressed the role of the family, especially that of the mother, in creating
human capabilities:
The most valuable of all capital is that invested in human beings; and of that
capital the most precious part is the result of the care and influence of the mother.
See Cunha and Heckman (2007a). Notice that this is a lower bound estimate. Forces set in motion in
the early years of childhood may play out after age 18 but their consequences may not be fully anticipated
at age 18.
2
See, e.g., Camerer, Loewenstein, and Rabin (2004) and Loewenstein (2007).
3
I have devoted myself for the last twenty-five years to the problem of poverty, and very little of my work
has been devoted to any inquiry which does not bear upon that. — Alfred Marshall (1893)
1

4

— Alfred Marshall (1890)4
Marshall’s conception of human capital was more inclusive than current formulations.
Like other Victorians, he thought it was possible to build “character” and “morals” and
thereby uplift the poor.5,6,7
Since Marshall wrote, we have learned a lot about the pricing of skills in markets and
about the formation of skills, abilities and “character” — what are called “capabilities” in
this paper. Our understanding of the consequences of what mothers do and how families
can be supplemented to improve the outcomes of their children has greatly improved. This
paper presents recent developments.
The paper unfolds in the following way. Section 2 reviews recent evidence from economics
and psychology that documents the importance of multiple abilities in explaining a diverse
array of outcomes. Research on the relationship between psychological measurements and
standard economic preference parameters is summarized. This section also examines a number of popular misconceptions about what achievement tests measure, and the role of genes
and environments in shaping outcomes. Evidence on the early emergence of gaps in abilities
across different socioeconomic groups is reviewed. These gaps are associated with disparities in investments in children across family types. Human and animal evidence on critical
and sensitive periods in the development of capabilities is presented. Experimental evidence
on the effectiveness of early interventions in remediating disadvantage is summarized. A
primary channel through which early interventions operate is enhancement of noncognitive
skills. Later remediations that achieve the same adult outcomes are generally more costly,
especially if the outcomes require high levels of cognition. Evidence on resilience to early
Paragraph VI.IV.11.
The human will, guided by careful thought, can so modify circumstances as largely to modify character;
and thus to bring about new conditions of life still more favourable to character; and therefore to the economic,
as well as the moral, well-being of the masses of the people. — Alfred Marshall (1907) as quoted in Whitaker
(1977, p. 179)
6
A worthwhile question is whether part or all of the Victorian program for creating character should be
adopted in contemporary society. The relevance of the Victorian program for modern society is discussed in
Himmelfarb (1995).
7
Many societies and organizations have focused on developing traits perceived to be desirable in their
children (e.g., ancient Sparta, Communist Russia, and Nazi Germany).
4
5

5

adversity and the possibility of recovery from adversity is presented. Section 3 presents a
framework for interpreting the evidence of Section 2 and for designing policies to reduce
inequality. It draws on and extends recent research by Cunha and Heckman (2007b) and
Heckman (2007). The technology of capability formation rationalizes why early investments
in the lives of disadvantaged children are so productive while later investments are often
less productive and remediation is often more costly than initial investment. The model is a
framework for analyzing resilience and for designing optimal remediation policies. Section 4
summarizes recent empirical evidence on the technology of capability formation and draws
new policy lessons from it. For certain configurations of disadvantage, relatively more investment should be allocated to the later years of childhood compared to the early years. A
framework for policy analysis based on the technology of capability formation is sketched.
Section 5 summarizes and concludes.

2

Genes, Multiple Abilities and Human Development

This section reviews evidence on the importance of multiple abilities in determining socioeconomic success, the relationship between psychological measurements and economic preference parameters, and the emergence of disparities in abilities across socioeconomic groups.
Popular misconceptions about genes and the stability and predictive power of psychological
traits are critically examined.

2.1

Ability matters and is multiple in nature

Numerous studies document that cognitive ability, usually measured by a scholastic achievement test, is a powerful predictor of wages, schooling, participation in crime, health and
success in many other aspects of economic and social life.8 More recently, noncognitive
8
See, e.g., Herrnstein and Murray (1994); Murnane, Willett, and Levy (1995); Auld and Sidhu (2005);
and Kaestner (2008). Neal and Johnson (1996); Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004); Carneiro, Heckman,
and Masterov (2005); and Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006) present estimates of the causal effect of
ability on diverse outcomes correcting for the effect of environments on measures of ability.

6

abilities have been shown to be important predictors of the same outcomes.9 Noncognitive
traits capture Marshall’s concept of “character,” and include perseverance, motivation, selfesteem, self-control, conscientiousness, and forward-looking behavior.10 There is substantial
heterogeneity in cognitive and noncognitive skills.11
An example of the predictive power of noncognitive traits is presented in Figure 1. It
displays the relative strength of cognitive and noncognitive capabilities in determining occupational choice. Moving from the bottom of the distribution to the top in either dimension
of capability substantially increases the probability that a person is a white collar worker.12
The same low-dimensional psychological traits that predict occupational choice are also
strongly predictive of a variety of diverse behaviors, such as smoking, employment, teenage
pregnancy, wages, wages given schooling and many other aspects of economic and social
life.13 Interpreting cognitive and noncognitive traits as generators of, or proxies for, economic preference parameters, this body of evidence is consistent with economic models that
predict that a low-dimensional set of economic parameters such as time preference, risk aversion, leisure preference, social preferences, and altruism, along with prices and endowments,
explain diverse economic choices.
Figure 1 oversimplifies matters by assuming that there is one “cognitive” trait and one
“noncognitive” trait. At least five dimensions (the Big Five) are required to characterize
personality.14 At least two dimensions of cognition have been isolated.15
9
A causal basis for these predictive relationships is established in Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006)
and Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev (2008).
10
Bowles and Gintis (1976); Edwards (1976); Mueser (1979); Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne (2001); Heckman
and Rubinstein (2001); Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006); Borghans et al. (2008) summarize the evidence
to date. Marxist economists (Bowles, Gintis, and Edwards) were the first to establish the importance of
noncognitive traits for predicting a variety of labor market outcomes.
11
See the evidence in Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006).
12
These estimates correct for measurement error and the effect of schooling on measured cognitive and
noncognitive traits, where schooling itself depends on latent cognitive and noncognitive traits. See Heckman,
Stixrud, and Urzua (2006).
13
See Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006) for a full description of the outcomes.
14
The Big Five are summarized by the acronym OCEAN: Openness to Experience; Conscientiousness;
Extraversion; Agreeableness and Neuroticism. Goldberg (1990) defined this concept and Borghans et al.
(2008) review this literature. Including the “facets” of the Big Five, there are over 30 personality traits.
15
McArdle et al. (2002) discuss fluid intelligence (raw problem-solving ability) and crystallized intelligence
(knowledge and wisdom).

7

Figure 20A. Probability Of Being a White Collar Worker by Age 30 - Males
i. By Decile of Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Factor

1

Probability

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
10

9

8

Figure 20B. Probability Of Being a White Collar Worker by Age 30 - Males
7

6

5

4

3

Decile of Cognitive

i. By Decile of Cognitive Factor

1
Probability and
Confidence Interval (2.75-97.5%)

2

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2
2

4

Decile

6

8

10

0

10

Decile of Non-Cognitive

ii. By Decile of Non-Cognitive Factor

1

0.8

0

2

1

6

4

8

2

4

Decile

6

8

10

Notes: The data are simulated from the estimates of the model and our NLSY79 sample. We use the standard convention that higher deciles are associated with
higher values of the variable. The confidence intervals are computed using bootstrapping (50 draws).

Figure 1: Probability of being a white collar worker by age 30 (males). Higher deciles
are associated with higher values of the indicated variable. Figure (i) and Figure (ii) are
marginals derived from the joint distribution by setting the other variable at its mean.
Source: Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006).

8

2.1.1

Controversies Surrounding Psychological Measurements

Some economists dismiss this and other evidence on the predictive power of personality
traits. Following Mischel (1968), they claim that psychological traits and economic preference
parameters are solely situational-specific – that manifest personality traits respond to the
incentives in the situation being examined and are not stable across situations.16
Borghans et al. (2008) review the substantial body of evidence against the situationalspecificity hypothesis.17 They also discuss the need to standardize measurements of cognition
and personality by adjusting for effects of incentives to express traits and effects of the environments in which the measurements are taken. Many measurements reported in psychology
and economics do not adjust for the effects of incentives and environments. This induces
variation in manifest traits across situations.
For example, scores on IQ tests are substantially affected by rewards for correct answers. IQ can be raised by as much as one standard deviation if proper incentives are
provided. The effectiveness of rewards in motivating test performance depends on personality traits.18 Roberts (2007), Wood (2007) and Wood and Roberts (2006) discuss evidence
that the predictive power of personality traits survives after adjustment for the context in
which measurements are taken.19
Different tests measure different attributes. For example, tests of raw problem-solving
ability (“fluid intelligence” as captured by Raven’s progressive matrices tests) measure a
The traits used to produce Figure 1 and related figures in the literature are typically measured much
earlier than the outcomes that they are used to predict. This is one way to protect against the problem
of reverse causality that the outcomes affect the measure of the traits. See Borghans et al. (2008) for a
discussion of this issue and other approaches for solving the problems of reverse causality.
17
Mischel himself has modified his earlier view. See Mischel and Shoda (1995). Shoda, Mischel, and
Peake (1990) present evidence on the “marshmallow test.” The ability of a young child to defer gratification
to obtain greater rewards (more marshmallows) predicts adult schooling attainment and other favorable
outcomes. The stability of preferences manifested in this experiment contradicts the situational-specificity
hypothesis of Mischel (1968). The family backgrounds of the children in the marshmallow study are quite
homogeneous. They were children attending the Stanford University preschool. Most were children of faculty.
18
More conscientious test takers respond only weakly to rewards, presumably because they are already at
their peak performance. See Borghans, Meijers, and ter Weel (2008) and Segal (2008).
19
See also Funder and Ozer (1983); Colvin and Funder (1991); Funder and Colvin (1991); Roberts and
DelVecchio (2000).
16

9

different collection of traits than the bundle of traits measured by achievement tests, although
there is some overlap in their domains. Achievement tests are often interpreted as IQ tests.20
In fact, achievement test scores (such as the SAT or AFQT) capture both cognitive and
personality traits. Borghans, Golsteyn, and Heckman (2008), Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev
(2008), and Segal (2008) show that personality traits are powerful predictors of performance
on many widely used tests of cognition. A major conclusion from this analysis is that
Herrnstein and Murray’s evidence on the power of “IQ” in predicting a large array of social
and economic outcomes is, in truth, also evidence on the power of personality and preferences
in producing test scores.
While personality traits are not solely situational-specific ephemera, neither are they
set in stone. Adjusting for context, both cognitive and noncognitive abilities evolve over
the life cycle and are malleable.21 This malleability creates possibilities for improving the
preferences (“character”) and endowments of disadvantaged persons that are just beginning
to be understood. Recent studies demonstrate that the malleability of personality traits
is greater at later stages of childhood than is the malleability of IQ. This has important
implications for public policy that we discuss below.
While it is analytically convenient to distinguish cognitive from noncognitive traits, doing
so empirically raises serious challenges. Few human activities are devoid of cognition. The
capacity to imagine alternative states, a cognitive task, has effects on manifest personality.22
Thus, an active imagination can cause and reflect personality traits and disorders. Emotional
states affect reason.23 To the extent that personality traits proxy and/or produce emotions,
a separation of cognitive and noncognitive traits becomes difficult. Measures of cognition,
personality and emotion should be standardized for background levels of other traits and
incentives to manifest a behavior.24 Economic preference parameters are a hybrid of cognitive
See, e.g., Herrnstein and Murray (1994).
See Borghans et al. (2008).
22
See Borghans et al. (2008) and the references they cite.
23
See Damasio (1994), LeDoux (1996), and Phelps (2006, 2009).
24
Standardization is discussed in Section 3.1 in the analysis surrounding equation (1).
20
21

10

and noncognitive traits. For example, time preference can be interpreted as arising from the
ability of an agent to foresee the future as well as the agent’s ability to control impulses to
immediately consume.

2.1.2

Relating Psychological Measurements to Economic Preference Parameters

Research on capability formation in economics uses psychological measurements as indicators of stocks of capabilities. Work relating psychological measurements to more standard
economic preference parameters has just begun. Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006) and
Borghans et al. (2008) discuss the relationship between psychological measurements and
standard economic preference parameters. A tight link between the two types of measurement systems remains to be established. Concepts and measurements from one field neither
encompass nor are encompassed by measurements from the other field.
The available evidence is at best suggestive. Benjamin, Brown, and Shapiro (2006) show
that higher SAT scores are positively correlated with patience and negatively correlated with
risk aversion. Since SAT scores are determined by a composite of cognitive and noncognitive
traits, it is difficult to parse out the separate contributions of cognition and personality to
their estimated correlations. Frederick (2005) presents evidence that his measure of cognitive ability is associated with lower time preference, greater risk taking when lotteries involve
gains, and less risk taking when they involve losses. However, Borghans, Golsteyn, and Heckman (2008) show that his measure of “cognition” is substantially influenced by personality
traits and is not a measure of pure cognition as measured by Raven’s progressive matrices.
Dohmen et al. (2007) report that people with higher cognitive ability are more patient and
more willing to take risks. They link time preference and risk aversion with measures of
cognitive and noncognitive traits.
When the evidence is sorted out, this research will enrich economists’ and psychologists’
understanding of human preferences and motivation. Data are abundant that link psy-

11

chological measurements to behavior. If a strong link between psychological and economic
measurements can be established, a treasure chest of new empirical evidence on the effects
of preferences on a variety of behavioral outcomes will become available to economists.

2.2

For both cognitive and noncognitive capabilities, gaps among
individuals and across socioeconomic groups open up at early
ages and persist

Gaps in the capabilities that play important roles in determining diverse adult outcomes open
up early across socioeconomic groups. The gaps originate before formal schooling begins
and persist through childhood. Figure 2 shows the early emergence of gaps in cognitive
ability. It is representative of the evidence from a large literature. Evidence on noncognitive
measurements shows the same pattern.
Schooling after the second grade plays only a minor role in creating or reducing gaps.
Conventional measures of schooling quality (teacher/pupil ratios and teacher salaries) that
receive so much attention in contemporary policy debates have small effects in creating or
eliminating gaps after the first few years of schooling (Carneiro and Heckman, 2003; Cunha
and Heckman, 2007b). In the context of the U.S., this evidence is surprising given substantial
inequality in schooling quality across socioeconomic groups.
Controlling for early family environments using conventional statistical methods substantially narrows the gaps.25 This is consistent with evidence in the Coleman Report (1966)
that family characteristics, and not those of schools, explain the variability in student test
scores across schools.26
Such evidence leaves open the question of which aspects of families are responsible for proCarneiro and Heckman (2003); Cunha et al. (2006); Cunha and Heckman (2007b); and Heckman (2008)
present a variety of figures with similar patterns on the early emergence of gaps in both cognitive and
noncognitive abilities and how gaps are substantially attenuated when adjusted for family background.
26
The Coleman Report claimed that peer effects were important in explaining student outcomes. Subsequent reanalyses reported in Mosteller and Moynihan (1972) showed that this finding was due to a coding
error and that when the error was corrected, family and individual characteristics eliminate any statistical
significance from estimated peer effects on test scores.
25

12

1
0

.5

Mean cognitive score

3

5

College grad

8

18

Age (years)

Some college

HS Grad

Less than HS

Figure 2: Trend in mean cognitive score by maternal education. Each score standardized
within observed sample. Using all observations and assuming data missing at random.
Source: Brooks-Gunn et al. (2006).
ducing these gaps. Is it due to genes? Family environments? Family investment decisions?
The evidence from the intervention studies, reviewed below, suggests an important role for
investments and family environments in determining adult capabilities. Before turning to
this evidence, we first review the evidence on differentials in family investments.

2.3

Gaps by age in the cognitive and noncognitive capabilities
of children have counterpart gaps in family investments and
environments

There are substantial differences in family environments and investments in children across
socioeconomic groups. Moon (2008) demonstrates important differences in the family environments and investments of advantaged and disadvantaged children. Gaps in cognitive
stimulation, affection, punishment, etc., for children from families of different socioeconomic
status open up early. Intact families invest far greater amounts in their children than do single parent families although the exact mechanisms causing this (e.g., differential resources

13

or family preferences) remain to be established. Figure 3(a) and Figure 3(b) show substantial gaps in cognitive stimulation and affection at early ages. They persist throughout
childhood.27,28 Section 4 reviews evidence on the role of family investments in explaining
disparities in test scores and adult achievement.
The evidence on disparities in child-rearing environments and their consequences for
adult outcomes is troubling in light of the greater proportion of children being raised in such
environments. The proportion of American children under the age of 18 with a never-married
mother has grown from less than 2% in 1968 to over 12% in 2006. The fraction of American
children under age 18 with only a single parent has grown from 12% to over 27% during this
period.29
Recent research suggests that parental income is an inadequate measure of the resources
available to a child even though it is the standard basis for measuring child poverty.30 Parenting is more important than cash. High quality parenting can be available to a child even
when the family is in adverse financial circumstances, although higher income facilitates good
parenting.31 This observation accounts in part for the success of children from certain cultural and ethnic groups raised in poverty who nonetheless receive strong encouragement from
devoted parents and succeed. Sowell (1994), Charney (2004), Masten (2004), and Masten,
Burt, and Coatsworth (2006) discuss the factors that promote resilience to adversity.

2.4

Capabilities are not solely determined by genes

Gaps in family environments and investments and the relationship between investment and
child outcomes might simply be a manifestation of genes. Families with good genes might
The patterns are identical for male and female children. Web Appendix A, based on Moon (2008), shows
the disparity in child environments by different measures of family status and the persistence of gaps through
childhood.
28
Ginther and Pollak (2004) show that family adversity may be better measured by the presence or
absence of the biological parents. Blended families – families where one parents is not biologically related to
the children – produce children with more adverse outcomes.
29
See Ellwood and Jencks (2004) and Heckman (2008). Data on child exposure to different types of family
structures is analyzed by Moon (2008).
30
See Mayer (1997).
31
See Costello et al. (2003), Rutter (2006), and Heckman (2008).
27

14

1.5

.8

1

.6

.5

Density

Density
.4

0

.2
0
−2

−1.5

−1

−.5
0
.5
Cognitive Stimulation

Never Married Single Mom

1
Broken

1.5

2

−1

Intact

−.5

0
Emotional Support

Never Married Single Mom

(a) Cognitive stimulation

.5
Broken

1
Intact

(b) Emotional Support

Figure 3: Age 0-2, female white children, by family type. Source: Moon (2008) analysis of
CNLSY data. Cognitive stimulation is measured by how often parents read to children, and
the learning environment in the home. Emotional support is measured by how often child
receives encouragement (e.g., meals with parents).
pick good environments but the main effect of family influence might operate through genes.
Recent evidence in genetics belies this claim. Gene expression is governed by environmental
conditions. The gene expression of identical (monozygotic) twins has been studied. By age
three, and certainly by age 50, the genetic expressions of “identical” twins are very different
(See Fraga et al., 2005).
Recent research by Caspi et al. (2002) suggests that gene expression is triggered in part
by environmental conditions. A variant of the MAOA gene is a known predictor of male
conduct disorder and violence. However, the gene pattern is most strongly expressed when
child rearing environments are adverse. Many other gene-environment interactions have been
documented.32
Virtually every study of “nature” and “nurture” in economics estimates models where
outcomes are linear and separable functions of nature and nurture which ignore geneenvironment interactions. Genes and environments cannot be meaningfully parsed by tradiFor some outcomes, gene-environment interactions have been replicated in most, but not all, studies. The
field of gene-environment interactions is very new and caution is required in using the emerging evidence
uncritically. See Moffitt (2008) and the figures posted on the display website for the Marshall lecture at
http://jenni.uchicago.edu/Milan_2008/.
32

15

tional linear models that assign unique variances to each component.33
Little systematic accounting is available on the relative importance of genes, environments
and their interactions in predicting any complex aspect of human behavior, although numerous estimates from linear models are available. Additive models with their strong identifying
assumptions show that genes explain up to 50% of most behaviors (Rowe, 1994). Even within
this oversimplified framework, genes are not full determinative of life outcomes. Neither are
environments. However, extreme statements about genetic determinism are clearly at odds
with the evidence. The results from the intervention analyses discussed below strengthen
this conclusion.

2.5

Critical and sensitive periods

Different abilities are malleable at different ages. IQ scores become stable by age 10 or so,
suggesting a sensitive period for their formation below age 10 (Schuerger and Witt, 1989).
Noncognitive capabilities are more malleable until later ages. The greater malleability of
noncognitive capabilities is associated with the slowly developing prefrontal cortex, which
controls executive function, a known determinant of personality and emotion.34 In general,
the later cognitive remediation is given to a disadvantaged child, the less effective it is.
Considerable evidence suggests that the economic returns are low for the education of
low-ability adolescents and the returns are higher for the more advantaged high-ability adolescents (Carneiro and Heckman, 2003; Meghir and Palme, 2001; Wößmann, 2008). The
available evidence also suggests that for many human capabilities, some interventions in the
lives of disadvantaged low-ability adolescents have positive effects, but are generally more
costly than early remediation to achieve the same level of adult performance (Cunha and
Heckman, 2007b; Cunha, Heckman, Lochner, and Masterov, 2006; Cunha, Heckman, and
Schennach, 2008).
See, e.g., Collins et al. (2000), Turkheimer et al. (2003), and Tucker-Drob (2008).
The greater malleability of noncognitive capabilities at later ages may be a manifestation of traits that
emerge at later ages and are susceptible to influence at the age at which they emerge. See Borghans et al.
(2008) for a review of the literature on the emergence of personality traits by age.
33
34

16

Knudsen (2004) shows that early experience can modify the biochemistry and architecture
of neural circuits. Periods when the modification is easily accomplished are called sensitive
periods. When the modification can only occur during a limited time frame and it is crucial
for normal development, it is called a critical period. Sensitive and critical periods have been
extensively documented for binocular vision in the cortex of mammals, filial imprinting in the
forebrain of ducks and chickens, and language acquisition in humans. Knudsen et al. (2006)
review the evidence on critical and sensitive periods in animals and humans. Much of the
evidence is at the neuronal circuit level. Missing in the biological and neurological literatures
are measurements of the effectiveness of remediation, and discussion of the possibilities and
costs of compensation for early deficits.35
There is experimental evidence for animals showing that early environments are powerful
determinants of adult behavior. Experiences occurring during an early period of development have long-term effects on gene expression that are stably maintained into adulthood.36
This is not a purely genetic phenomenon because animal environments are experimentally
manipulated in these studies. Social experiences alter the epigenome and thus regulate gene
expression. Neural systems regulating stress responsivity and the risk of psychopathology
can be affected by these epigenetic mechanisms.37
A large literature in developmental epidemiology documents the role of adverse early
environments on adult health.38 Nutritional deficiencies in early life cause lifelong health,
cognitive, and personality problems.39 Danese et al. (2008) show that maltreatment in
childhood has powerful negative effects on adult inflammation, a serious health risk.40
Evidence on critical periods for early development of certain capabilities suggests that remediation
costs for later interventions are high. See Knudsen et al. (2006). Costs of remediation in skill acquisition
programs are presented in Cunha et al. (2006). There do not appear to be studies of costs of remediation
versus prevention for specific medical conditions.
36
See Heijmans et al. (2008).
37
See Suomi (2000), Weaver et al. (2004); Champagne (2008).
38
See Barker (1998); Gluckman and Hanson (2005); Nilsson (2008); van den Berg, Doblhammer-Reiter,
and Christensen (2008).
39
See Knudsen et al. (2006); Georgieff (2007); Engle et al. (2007); Grantham-McGregor et al. (2007); and
Walker et al. (2007).
40
See also the discussion in McEwen (2007).
35

17

However, the early years are far from being fully determinative of adult outcomes. Many
children reared in environments judged severely adverse by conventional measures, succeed
in adult life.41 There is evidence that the effects of adversity on gene expression can be
reversed, at least in part.42 The ability to overcome adversity plays an important role
in shaping adult outcomes. The mechanisms that promote resilience and recovery from
initial disadvantage are just beginning to be understood. The available evidence suggests
that socioemotional support — i.e., good parenting — for a child from whatever source is
a key ingredient.43 Recent research shows that personality traits determined early in life
are especially important determinants of success in lifetime earnings for people born into
disadvantaged environments.44

2.6

The effects of family credit constraints on a child’s adult outcomes depend on the age at which they bind

In advanced Western societies, family income during a child’s college-going years plays only a
minor role in determining socioeconomic differences in college participation once one controls
for achievement test scores, measured at college-going ages.45 Controlling for ability at the
age college-going decisions are made, minorities from low income families are more likely to
go to college than are majority students even though minority family income is generally
lower than majority family income.46 Credit constraints operating in the early years of
childhood have lasting effects on child ability and schooling outcomes.47
Recent research by Belley and Lochner (2007) shows the growing importance of family
See Werner, Bierman, and French (1971). Most of the severely disadvantaged children in their study
live failed lives but some — around 20%–25% — succeed in living normal middle class lives.
42
Meaney and Szyf (2005), Whitelaw and Whitelaw (2006), Szyf (2007) and Champagne (2008).
43
See Masten and Coatsworth (1998), Masten (2004), and Masten, Burt, and Coatsworth (2006).
44
See O’Connell and Sheikh (2008).
45
See Cunha and Heckman (2007b) and the evidence in Cunha et al. (2006).
46
See Cameron and Heckman (2001) and the evidence summarized in Cunha et al. (2006). This evidence is
consistent with the operation of extensive affirmative action programs for promoting the college attendance
of the disadvantaged in American society and may not generalize to other societies.
47
Cunha (2007) presents an analysis of the family determinants of child ability. See also the discussion in
section 4 below.
41

18

income constraints in the college-going decisions of Americans. Nonetheless, their research
demonstrates that the primary factor explaining differentials in college attendance among
socioeconomic groups is cognitive ability and not family income. For less developed countries,
credit market restrictions are likely to be more substantial and relaxing them is likely to be
an important policy lever.

2.7

Enrichments to early family environments can compensate in
part for disadvantage

Experiments that enrich the early environments of disadvantaged children establish causal
effects of early environments on adolescent and adult outcomes. Noncognitive skills and
personality traits are a main cause of the improvement produced from these interventions.
The Perry Preschool Program is the flagship early childhood intervention program. The
Perry preschool program enriched the lives of low income African-American children with
initial IQs of 85 or below. The intervention was targeted to three-year olds and was relatively
modest: 2.5 hours per day of classroom instruction, 5 days per week, and 1 21 hours of weekly
home visits. Children participate for only two years and no further intervention was given.48
The program has been extensively analyzed in Heckman et al. (2008a,c); and Heckman et al.
(2008b).
Perry did not produce lasting gains in the IQs of its male participants and produced at
best modest gains in IQ for females.49 Yet the program has a rate of return of around 10%
per annum for males and females — well above the post-World War II stock market returns
to equity estimated to be 5.5%.50 This evidence defies a strictly genetic interpretation of the
origins of inequality.
Even though their IQs after age 10 are not higher (on average), achievement test scores of
participants are higher. This evidence underscores the difference between achievement test
See Heckman et al. (2008a).
See Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua (2006), Borghans et al. (2008) and Heckman (2008).
50
Heckman et al. (2008c). DeLong and Magin (2008) is the source for the post-war return to equity.
48
49

19

scores and IQ, previously discussed. Achievement tests measure crystallized knowledge not
captured by tests of fluid intelligence. In addition, they are influenced by personality factors.
Heckman et al. (2008a) show that a principle channel of influence of the Perry program is
through its effect on noncognitive skills.
Figure 4, taken from their work, demonstrates this point. Panels (a) and (b) decompose
treatment effects of the program for various statistically significant outcomes into components that can be attributed to cognitive, noncognitive and residual factors. For males,
improvements in measured noncognitive traits are important, but not exclusive, determinants of treatment effects (Figure 4(a)). For females, there were gains attributable to improvements in cognitive and noncognitive traits (Figure 4(b)).51 The importance of different
psychological traits varies across the outcomes measured, reflecting the differential weighting of cognitive, noncognitive and other capabilities in determining performance in different
tasks in social life.
Direct investment in children is only one possible channel for intervening in the lives
of disadvantaged children. Many successful programs also work with mothers and improve
mothering skills. The two inputs — direct investment in the child’s cognition and personality
and investment in the mother and the family environment she creates — are distinct. They
likely complement each other. Improvements in either input improve child outcomes. The
Nurse Family Partnership Act intervenes solely with pregnant teenage mothers and teaches
them mothering and infant care. It has substantial effects on the adult success of the
children of disadvantaged mothers. Olds (2002) documents that perinatal interventions that
reduce fetal exposure to alcohol and nicotine have substantial long-term effects on cognition,
socioemotional skills and health, and have high economic returns.
The evidence from a variety of early intervention programs summarized in Reynolds and
Temple (2009) shows that enriching the early environments of disadvantaged children has
lasting beneficial effects on adolescent and adult outcomes of program participants. This
51

Note that the scales are different for the treatment effects of males and females.

20

Figure 1: Treatment Effects Decomposition for Selected Outcomes by Cognitive, Socio-Emotional,
(a) Males

(b) Femal

-

-

-

-

+

+

-

+

-

Jobless, Age 40

-

Vocational Training, Age 40

+

# of Adult Arrests, Age 27

-

Employed, Age19

+

Highest Grade
Completed, Age 19

+

Special Education, Age 14

70%

250%

60%
200%

50%
150%

40%

30%

Other Factors

100%

Socio-Emotional

1

20%

Cognitive

50%

10%
0%

Tot. Charges of Viol. Crimes
with Vict. Cost, Age 40

Total Charges of
Crimes, Age 40

# of Lifetime Arrests, Age 40

Over 50 Months
Welfare, Age 40

Months Jobless, Age 40

Employed, Age 40

# of Felony Arrests, Age 27

Last Month Income, Age 27

Monthly Income, Age 27

Months Jobless, Age 27

0%

Effects Decomposition for Selected Outcomes by Cognitive, Socio-Emotional, and Other Determinants

(a)and
males
(b)
Females
Source: Heckman, Malofeeva, Pinto,
Savelyev (2008). Notes: Control mean is normalized to 100%. Stanford Binet sco

(a) Males
-

-

-

-

-

cognitive - measures.
PBI
scores
representing
misbehavior
at
ages- 6–9 are used as socio-emotional measures. (+) and (-) de
+
+
+
+
250%

effect. The effects are evaluated at average factor loadings of the treated and the controlled.
200%

150%

Other Factors

100%

Other Factors

Socio-Emotional
Cognitive

Socio-Emotional
Cognitive

50%

Total Charges of Crimes, Age
40

# of Misdemeanor
Arrest, Age 40

# of Lifetime Arrests, Age 40

Total Marriage Dur., Age 40

Jobless, Age 40

Vocational Training, Age 40

# of Adult Arrests, Age 27

Employed, Age19

Highest Grade
Completed, Age 19

Special Education, Age 14

Tot. Charges of Viol. Crimes
with Vict. Cost, Age 40

Total Charges of
Crimes, Age 40

# of Lifetime Arrests, Age 40

Over 50 Months
Welfare, Age 40

Months Jobless, Age 40

0%

(b)Binet
females
to, and Savelyev (2008). Notes: Control mean is normalized to 100%. Stanford
scores at ages 8, 9 and 10 are used as

presenting misbehavior at ages 6–9 are used as socio-emotional measures. (+) and (-) denote the sign of the total treatment

Figure
Decomposition
t average factor loadings
of the 4:
treated
and the controlled. of

treatment effects expressed as a percentage gain over control
outcomes for selected outcomes by cognitive, socioemotional and other determinants, Perry
Preschool Program. Scales differ by gender. Stanford Binet scores at ages 8, 9 and 10 are
used as cognitive measures. Scores representing misbehavior at ages 6-9 are used as socioemotional measures. (+) and (-) denote the sign of the total treatment effect. Results are
reported for statistically significant outcomes. The set of statistically significant outcomes
differs across gender groups. Source: Heckman et al. (2008a).

21

evidence undermines the claims of Harris (1998, 2006) and Rowe (1994) that family environments do not matter in determining child outcomes.52 Programs like the Perry Program
and the Nurse Family Partnership Program supplement family life in the early years and
have substantial lasting effects on participants.

3

Modeling Human Capability Formation

Cunha and Heckman (2007b) and Heckman (2007) develop models of capability formation,
that interpret and crystallize the body of evidence summarized in Section 2. This section
summarizes the main ingredients of their research and relates it to previous work on skill
formation.
An agent at age t is characterized by a vector of capabilities θt = (θtC , θtN , θtH ), where θtC
is a vector of cognitive abilities (e.g., IQ) at age t, θtN is a vector of noncognitive abilities at
age t (e.g., patience, self control, temperament, risk aversion, and neuroticism), and θtH is a
vector of health stocks for mental and physical health at age t. Capabilities are produced by
investment, environments and genes. Capabilities are weighted differently in different tasks in
the labor market and in social life more generally. The principle of comparative advantage
explains why there is specialization in tasks and roles in life. The model has four main
ingredients: (a) outcome functions that show how capabilities, effort and incentives affect
outcomes; (b) dynamic technologies for producing capabilities; (c) parental preferences; and
(d) constraints reflecting access to financial markets. Some ingredients are well researched.
Others are not and offer interesting research challenges.

3.1

Formal models of child outcomes and investment in children

Outcomes in childhood and adulthood are defined generally. They include, among other
things, wages, occupational choices, criminal activity, as well as test scores. One can think
52

For additional evidence against the Harris-Rowe hypothesis, see Collins et al. (2000).

22

of them as behavioral “phenotypes” for a variety of behaviors generated by capability “genotypes.” They are all manifestations of θt in the context in which they are measured. The
outcome from activity k at age t is Ytk , where

Ytk = ψk θtC , θtN , θtH , ekt ,

k ∈ {1, . . . , K}

(1)

where ekt is effort devoted to activity k at time t where the effort supply function depends
on rewards and endowments:
ekt = δk Rtk , At



(2)

where Rtk is the reward per unit effort in activity k and At represents other determinants of
effort which might include some or all of the components of θt . It is likely that the effort
supply function is increasing in Rtk .
An active body of research investigates the role of capabilities in producing outcomes.
(See, e.g., Bowles, Gintis, and Osborne, 2001; Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua, 2006; and
Dohmen et al., 2007.) Different outcomes are affected more strongly by some components
of θt than others. Schooling attainment at age t depends more strongly on θtC than does
earnings at age t. Conscientiousness, a component of θtN , promotes health.53 Because the
mapping of traits to outputs differs among capabilities, there is comparative advantage in
activities. Recall the evidence previously cited on the effects of cognitive and noncognitive
factors in determining occupational choice and other activities.
The outcome functions instruct us that there may be many ways to achieve a level of
performance on a given task. For example, both cognitive and personality traits determine
earnings. One can compensate for a shortfall in one dimension by having greater strength in
the other. To get better grades or test scores from students at a point in time, one can pay
them to perform well (increase Rtk ), build capabilities such as motivation and cognition or
one can give students incentives to acquire capabilities. Approaches that build capabilities
Hampson et al. (2007) show how health outcomes are affected by noncognitive traits. See Hampson and
Friedman (2008).
53

23

are more likely to have lasting effects on student achievement.54 People paid to do well on
one task often do not repeat their performance in subsequent assessments of the task for
which they are not compensated.55
The capability formation process is governed by a multistage technology. Each stage
corresponds to a period in the life cycle of a child. Previous research on the family (e.g.,
Becker and Tomes, 1986; Benabou, 2002) treats childhood as a single period. That approach
does not capture the notion of critical and sensitive periods in childhood and the essential
early-late distinction that is a central feature of the recent literature on child development.
The technology of capability formation Cunha and Heckman, 2007b; Heckman, 2007 captures essential features of human and animal development. It expresses the stock of period
t + 1 capabilities (θt+1 ) in terms of period t capabilities, (θt ), investments, (It ), and parental
environments (θtP ):
θt+1 = ft (θt , It , θtP ).

(3)

θ0 is the vector of initial endowments determined at birth or at conception. The technology
is assumed to be increasing in each argument, twice differentiable, and concave in It .
A crucial feature of the technology that helps to explain many findings in the literature
on skill formation is complementarity of capabilities with investment:
∂ 2 ft (θt , It , θtP )
≥ 0.
∂θt ∂It0

(4)

Technology (3) is characterized by static complementarity between period t capabilities and
period t investment. For example, people who are more open to experience, more motivated
The-pay-for grades movement is built on an implicit “learning by doing” assumption — that effort in
studying to get good grades in period t raises the stock of skills in future periods. An alternative model is
an “on the job training” model in which the effort devoted to getting good grades competes with, rather
than fosters, the effort required to produce future capabilities, i.e. grade grubbing is a different activity than
learning. See Heckman, Lochner, and Cossa (2003) for one discussion of learning by doing vs. on the job
training models.
55
See Deci and Ryan (1985); Ryan, Koestner, and Deci (1999); Gneezy (2004); and Deci, Koestner, and
Ryan (2001). There is some evidence that participants do worse than baseline—no payment performance
after payment is withdrawn. For an extensive discussion of the failure of payment for performance systems
in education, see Kohn (1999).
54

24

or healthier acquire more capability (θt+1 ) from the same investment input.56
There is also dynamic complementarity because technology (3) determines period t + 1
capabilities (θt+1 ). This generates complementarity between investment in period t and
investment in period s, s > t. Higher investment in period t raises θt+1 because technology
(3) is increasing in It . This in turn raises θs because the technology is increasing in θτ ,
for τ between t and s. This, in turn, raises

∂fs (·)
∂Is

because θs and Is are complements, as a

consequence of (4). Dynamic complementarity explains the evidence that early nurturing
environments affect the ability of animals and humans to learn.57 It explains why investments
in disadvantaged young children are so productive. They enhance the productivity of later
investments. Dynamic complementarity also explains why investment in low ability adults
often has such low returns—because the stock of θt is low.
Using dynamic complementarity, one can define critical and sensitive periods for investment. If

∂ft (·)
∂It

= 0 for t 6= t∗ , t∗ is a critical period for that investment. If

∂ft (·)
∂It

>

∂ft0 (·)
∂It0

for

all t 6= t∗ , t is a sensitive period.58 The technology is consistent with the body of evidence
on critical and sensitive periods summarized in section 2.5.
Adult choices and outcomes are shaped by sequences of investments over the life cycle of
the child. The importance of the early years on later life outcomes depends on how easy it
is to reverse adverse early effects with later investment. The cumulation of investments over
the life cycle of the child determines adult outcomes and the choices people will make when
they become adults.
The technology can be used to formally model what resilience theorists in developmental
psychology discuss when they analyze the effectiveness of later investments to remediate
early adversity. This framework guides precise thinking about the costs of remediation vs.
the costs of initial investment to achieve a given level of performance on adult outcomes. The
technology allows analysts to discuss developmental “cascades” — how events (investments)
See Currie (2008) for evidence on health.
See the evidence in Knudsen et al. (2006).
58
These ideas are stated formally in Web Appendix B, where two related, but conceptually distinct,
definitions of sensitive periods are presented.
56
57

25

propagate through life.59
Special cases of (3) are the bases for entire subfields of social science. For example, influential models in criminology by Nagin (2005) and Nagin and Tremblay (1999) represent the
lifecycle evolution of criminal propensities as a special case of (3) that excludes investment:
ft (θt , It , θtP ) = ft (θ0 , θ0P ), for all t ≥ 0. Initial conditions fully determine adult criminality.
Their manifestation differs by age. These studies ignore investment and the phenomenon
of resilience.60 McArdle et al. (2002) model fluid and crystallized intelligence and their life
cycle evolution as a special case of this model where ft (θt , It , θtP ) = ft (θ0 ), and θt = θtC , a
vector. There is no role in their framework for investment or parental environmental factors.
Ability is determined by initial conditions.
A third ingredient of any model of capability formation is preferences. Agents have
preferences over child outcomes. The investing agent may be a parent or the child itself.
Very little is known about what dimensions of child outcomes parents care about. Even less
is known about parental preferences V P (·) over these outcomes (see, e.g., Bergstrom, 1997).
Parents may only value specific arguments of child preference functions rather than child
utilities—the theme of many novels on parent-child conflict. Very little is known about how
marriage and divorce affect V P (·) (see, e.g., Weiss and Willis, 1985, Pollak, 1988, Becker,
1991, Behrman, Pollak, and Taubman, 1995 and Bergstrom, 1997 for discussions of family
preferences toward children).61
The mechanisms through which child preferences are formed are not well understood.
Becker and Mulligan (1997) and the papers cited in Borghans et al. (2008) discuss these
issues. To the extent that θt can be linked to preferences as measured by psychological
traits, the analyses of Cunha and Heckman (2007b, 2008) model preference formation, where
preference is one of the capabilities formed through parental investment.
A fourth ingredient of any model of capability formation is family resources and market
See Masten and Coatsworth (1998), Masten (2004), and Masten, Burt, and Coatsworth (2006).
Sampson and Laub (2003) dispute the Nagin and Tremblay (1999) specification, essentially introducing
investment as a determinant of “desistence,” i.e., recovery from adverse initial conditions.
61
This issue is distinct from the effect of marriage and divorce on the level of resources spent on children.
59
60

26

constraints. It is analytically useful to distinguish three types of market constraints: (i) the
inability of parents to borrow against their own future income; (ii) the inability of parents to
borrow against their child’s future income, and (iii) the inability of the child to buy a good
parent (or insure against a bad parent). Constraint (iii) is universally binding. The strength
of the other constraints depends on the level of development of financial institutions in the
society in which the family resides.
Cunha and Heckman (2007b) develop an intergenerational model with all four ingredients
building on the model of Laitner (1992). We exposit their work in Web Appendix D.62

3.2

A Specific Technology of Capability Formation

The technology of capability formation is a central concept in the recent literature. Preferences, endowments, expectations and market structures together determine levels of inputs.
The technology defines what is possible from inputs, irrespective of the investment levels
chosen. It limits the possibilities for development and remediation. Cunha, Heckman, and
Schennach (2008) estimate a flexible econometric framework that allows for l different developmental stages in the life of the child: l ∈ {1, . . . , L}. Developmental stages may be defined
over specific ranges of ages, t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, so L ≤ T . Assume that θtC , θtN , θtH , It and θtP
are scalars. Let Itj be investment in capability j at time t. The technology for producing
capability j at stage l is

j
θt+1


=

j
γC,l

j
1 ≥ φjl , γk,l
≥ 0,

φj
θtC l
X

+

j
γN,l

 φj
θtN l

+

j
γH,l

 φj
θtH l

+

j
γI,l

φj
Itj l

+

j
γP,l

 φj
θtP l

 1j
φ

l

,

(5)

j
γk,l
= 1 for all j ∈ {C, N, H} , l ∈ {1, . . . , L}, and t ∈ {1, . . . , T }.

k

This technology imposes the assumption of equal elasticity of substitution among all of the
inputs for each capability at each stage, but allows for different substitutability of inputs for
Cunha et al. (2006) and Cunha and Heckman (2007b) survey the evidence on family credit constraints.
See also Belley and Lochner (2007).
62

27

either different capabilities at the same stage or the same capability at different stages.63 The
ability to substitute may change over childhood, reflecting the basic biological determinants
of development. Technology (5) imposes the assumption of direct complementarity among
all inputs. Higher levels of parental environmental capital or stocks of capabilities raise
the productivity of investment at stage l. Ceteris paribus, higher values of the parameters
j
, j ∈ {C, N, H} at earlier stages imply that early investment is more productive at
γI,l

those stages. Knowledge of the parameters of (5) is informative about the productivity of
investment and remediation at different ages and stages of the life cycle. Children with high
levels of parental environmental variables (θtP ) may be resilient to adversity even though
they receive low levels of Itj . For a child born into a family with low levels of parenting skills,
supplementary investment programs may only partially alleviate disadvantage.64
The substitution parameters φjl , j ∈ {C, N, H}, l ∈ {1, . . . , L}, are important for understanding the impact of early disadvantage and the effectiveness of later remediation. At
j
any age t associated with stage l, and for fixed {γk,l
}, k ∈ {C, N, H, I, P }, φjl is informative

on the substitutability of Itj for stocks of skills at age t, i.e. it informs us how easy it is to
remedy early disadvantage as embodied in θtP (parental environment) or θtj , j ∈ {C, N, H}.
Higher values of φjl make it less easy to remediate. A main finding of Cunha, Heckman,
and Schennach (2008) is that φC
l decreases with l. This is consistent with the evidence on
the declining malleability of IQ with age, i.e., that cognitive deficits are easier to remedy at
early ages than at later ages. They also find that φN
l increases with l. This implies that
remediation in the adolescent years through noncognitive investments may be effective even
if remediation through cognitive investments is not, a point we illustrate below.65
j
j
N
C
H
H
N
0
More precisely, φC
l 6= φl , φl 6= φl , φl 6= φl and φl 6= φl0 , l 6= l, j ∈ {C, N, H}. Complementarity at
j
stage l for capability j requires that φl < 1.
64
This is a manifestation of credit constraint (iii) discussed in Section 3.1.
65
It is also broadly consistent with the emergence of certain noncognitive traits at later ages, as discussed
in Borghans et al. (2008).
63

28

3.3

An Informative Special Case

To fix ideas, consider a special case of the technology where we ignore health and parental
inputs:
h
φC i φ1C
φC
 φC
C
C
C
C
ItC l l ,
θtN l + γI,l
θtC l + γN,l
= γC,l
θt+1

(6)

and
N
θt+1

=

h

N
γC,l

 φN
θtC l

+

N
γN,l

φN
θtN l

+

N
γI,l

φN
ItN l

i

1
φN
l

t ∈ {1, . . . , T }.

,

(7)

To complete this example, assume that the adult outcome is a scalar. It is a CES
function of the two capabilities accumulated through period T , the end of childhood. The
adult outcome for period T + 1 is
h

YT +1 = α

φY
θTC+1

+ (1 − α)

φY
θTN+1

i

1
φY

,

(8)

where α ∈ [0, 1], and φY ∈ (−∞, 1].66 In this parameterization, 1/(1 − φY ) is the elasticity
of substitution across different skills in the production of the adult outcome. α measures the
share of the cognitive factor in explaining adult outcomes.
N
Y
For the special case where φC
l = φl = φ = φ for all l ∈ {1, ..., L}, childhood lasts two

periods (T = 2), there is one period of adult life and there are no period “0” investments,
and there is a single investment ItC = ItN , one can write the adult outcome Y3 in terms of
investments, initial endowments, and parental characteristics as:
h
φ i φ1
φ
,
Y3 = τ1 I1φ + τ2 I2φ + τ3 θ1C + τ4 θ1N

(9)

where the τi are defined in terms of the parameters of the technology and outcome equations.67 Cunha and Heckman (2007b) analyze the optimal timing of investment using a
special version of the technology embodied in (9). Adapting their analysis, the ratio of early
We abstract from effort and the payment per unit effort in this formulation of the outcome equation.
See Web Appendix B for a derivation and for the precise relationship between τi and the parameters of
(6), (7), and (8).
66
67

29

to late investments varies as a function of φ, τ1 and τ2 . τ1 is a multiplier that reveals how
much first-period investment affects adult outcomes through its direct effect on the stock of
capabilities and its effect on raising second-period investment.
Assume that parents maximize Y3 . Parents decide how much to invest in each period
and how much to transfer in risk-free assets, given total parental resources. For an interior
solution, assuming that the price of investment is the same in both periods and the interest
rate is r,

log

I1
I2




=

1
1−φ

  

τ1
log
− log (1 + r) .
τ2

(10)

Figure 5 plots the ratio of early to late investment as a function of τ1 /τ2 for different values
of φ.
If τ1 /τ2 > (1 + r), the greater the CES complementarity, (i.e., the lower φ), the lower
the ratio of I1 /I2 . In the limit, if investments complement each other strongly (φ → −∞)
optimality implies that they should be equal in both periods. The higher is τ1 relative to
τ2 , the higher the first-period investments should be relative to second-period investments.
The parameters τ1 and τ2 are affected by the productivity of investments in producing skills,
j
which is governed by the parameters γk,l
, for l ∈ {1, 2}, j ∈ {C, N } and k ∈ {C, N, I}, as

well as the relative importance of cognitive skills, α, versus noncognitive skills, 1 − α, to
produce the adult reward Y3 .
To see how these parameters affect the ratio of early to late investments, suppose that
N
early investments only produce cognitive skills, so that γI,1
= 0, and late investments only
C
produce noncognitive skills, so that γI,2
= 0. In this case, the ratio τ1 /τ2 is

 C
C
N
αγC,1
+ (1 − α) γC,1
γI,1
τ1
=
.
N
τ2
(1 − α)
γI,2
C
N
For a given value of α, I1 /I2 should be higher the greater is the ratio γI,1
/γI,2
. To investigate

the role that α plays in determining the distribution of investment between early and late
C
N
periods, assume that γC,1
≥ γC,1
, that is, that stocks of cognitive skills, θ1C , are at least as

30

4

Figure 1: Ratio of early to late investment in human capital
as a function of the ratio of first period to second period investment productivity
for different values of the complementarity parameter

3.5

3

Perfect Substitutes
Leontief
φ = -0.5
CobbDouglas
φ = 0.5

Perfect
Substitutes

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0
0.1

Perfect
Complements
(Leontief)
0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Skill Multiplier (γ)
Note: Assumes r = 0.
Source: Cunha and Heckman (2007).

τ1 /τ2

Figure 5: Ratio of early to late investment in human capital (I1 /I2 ) as a function τ1 /τ2
for different values of complementarity (φ). Assumes r = 0. Source: Cunha and Heckman
(2007b).
effective in producing next-period cognitive skills, θ2C , as in producing next-period noncognitive skills, θ2N . Under these assumptions, the higher α, that is, the more important are
cognitive skills in producing Y3 , the higher the equilibrium ratio I1 /I2 . If, on the other hand,
Y3 is intensive in noncognitive skills, then relatively more investment should be directed to
later periods.

3.4

Relationship of this Research to Previous Work on Child Skill
Formation

In a seminal paper, Becker and Tomes (1986) analyze the intergenerational transmission of
earnings, assets, and consumption. As part of their analysis, they consider parental investments in child skills. They analyze a one-period model of childhood and do not make the
31

early-late distinction that is a crucial feature of child development. They assume that θt
is one-dimensional, corresponding to general human capital, and do not distinguish among
personality, cognition and health, which are essential and separate components of the human development process. They assume that child human capital endowments (the initial
conditions of childhood) are not affected by parental investment, and are exogenous to their
analysis. They assume a model of pure parental altruism under different assumptions about
the ability of parents to borrow against future income. The empirically appropriate models
for parental preferences and the credit markets that parents and children face are actively
debated.
Leibowitz (1974) is a pioneering study of the role of family investment in generating child
outcomes. She applies a variant of the Ben-Porath (1967) model of human capital accumulation to explain investments in children. Her empirical analysis uses maternal endowments
(θtP ) as proxies for investments (Itj ). As discussed in Web Appendix C to this paper, the
Ben-Porath technology is a special case of technologies (3) and (5), which analyzes a scalar
θt . It excludes stage-specific technologies, and the possibility that qualitatively different investments are used at different stages. Such features are required to rationalize the evidence
on human and animal development.68 Ben-Porath’s model features the opportunity cost of
time as an essential ingredient. For the analysis of parental investment in young children
in advanced societies where child labor is atypical, the opportunity costs of a child’s time
are irrelevant. Ben-Porath assumes a Cobb-Douglas production function, which imposes a
unitary elasticity of substitution among inputs which, as we show next, is inconsistent with
the evidence from recent studies.
Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2008) show that the single stage, one skill, Ben Porath model is not
consistent with their evidence on child development.
68

32

4

Estimating the Technology of Capability Formation

It would be nice to be able to report parameter estimates and policy implications of a full
dynastic model of family investment, complete with convincing evidence on the structure
of parental and child preferences and an investigation of the impact of alternative credit
market arrangements on child outcomes. Unfortunately, all of the ingredients of the model
of Section 3 are not yet empirically determined. Borghans et al. (2008) summarize a body of
empirical work on outcome equation (1) relating adult outcomes to personality and cognition. This paper reports on the progress that has been made in determining the technology
of capability formation (3). The technology is the building block for a wide class of models irrespective of parental preferences and constraints. It defines what is technologically
possible.
Cunha and Heckman (2008) estimate linear approximations to the technologies of skill
formation (3).69 Such approximations are easy to compute and analyze. However, linearity
assumes perfect substitution among the inputs.70 Models that impose specific substitution
assumptions onto the data are not reliable guides for addressing the effectiveness of policies
related to substitution, compensation and remediation. We discuss the implications from
nonlinear models that identify substitution relationships after discussing the evidence from
linear models.
Cunha and Heckman (2008) estimate the model

θt+1 = At θt + Bt It + ηt ,

(11)

69
One can interpret their estimates as log-linear approximations to the true technology if the components
of θt , It and θtP are expressed in logs.
70
Since different scales (transformations) can be used for input measures, strict linearity in the original
measurements is not required. Thus a Cobb-Douglas production function assumes perfect substitutability
among the logs of inputs.

33

where ηt is an unobserved shock.71,72 The main problem that arises in estimating the technology is that vector (θt , It ) is not directly observed. Cunha and Heckman (2008) treat (θt , It )
as a vector of unobserved factors and use a variety of measurements of the latent constructs
to proxy these factors. There is a substantial body of econometric work on linear factor
models (see, e.g., Aigner et al., 1984). These models account for measurement errors in the
proxies which Cunha and Heckman (2008) find to be quantitatively large. If they are not
accounted for, estimates of technology parameters are substantially biased.
In addition to the problem of measurement error, there is the problem of setting the
scale of the factors and the further problem that elements of (θt , It ) are likely correlated
with the shock ηt . These problems are addressed by Cunha and Heckman (2008) using rich
sources of panel data which provide multiple measurements on (θt , It ). They use a dynamic
state-space version of a “MIMIC” model.73 In the linear setting, it is assumed that multiple
measurements on inputs and outputs can be represented by a linear factor setup:

k
k k
Yj,t
= µkj,t + αj,t
θt + εkj,t , for j ∈ {1, . . . , Mtk }, k ∈ {C, N, H, I},

(12)

where Mtk is the number of measurements on latent factor k, and θtI is latent investment at
age t. They anchor the scales of the components of θt using outcome equations (1).
This approach generalizes to a nonlinear semiparametric framework. Equations (1) and
(3) can be interpreted as general nonlinear factor models defined in terms of θt and It .74
Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2008) generalize this framework to a nonlinear setup to
identify technology (5). They present original results on identification of dynamic factor
models in nonlinear frameworks.
Pfeiffer and Reuß (2008) report estimates of a related age-dependent technology of cognitive skill formation.
72
Todd and Wolpin (2005, 2007) estimate linear models of ability (achievement test) formation but do not
separate out cognitive from noncognitive components.
73
See Jöreskog and Goldberger (1975). MIMIC stands for Multiple Indicators and Multiple Causes. Harvey
(1989) and Durbin et al. (2004) are standard references for dynamic state space models, which generalize
MIMIC models to a dynamic setting.
74
Nonlinear factor models are generated by economic choice models where risk aversion, time preference,
and leisure preferences are low-dimensional factors that explain a variety of consumer choices.
71

34

4.1

Model Identification

As is standard in factor analysis, Cunha and Heckman (2008) use covariance restrictions to
identify technology (11). Low dimensional (θt , It ) (associated with preferences, abilities and
investment) are proxied by numerous measurements for each component.
Treating each of a large number of measurements on inputs as separate inputs creates a
problem for instrumental variables analyses of production functions. It is easy to run out
of instruments for each input. Such an approach likely also creates collinearity problems
among the inputs.
Cunha and Heckman avoid these problems by assuming that clusters of measurements
proxy the same set of latent variables. Measurements of a common set of factors can be used
as instruments for other measurements on the same common set of factors. Methods based
on covariance restrictions and cross-equation restrictions provide identification and account
for omitted inputs that are correlated with included inputs.75 These methods provide an
econometrically justified way to aggregate inputs into low-dimensional indices.

4.2

Empirical Estimates from the Linear Model

Cunha and Heckman (2008) estimate technology (11) using a sample of white males from
the Children of the NLSY data (CNLSY).76 These data provide multiple measurements on
investments and cognitive and noncognitive skills at different stages of the life cycle of the
child. Table 1, extracted from their paper, reports estimates of technology (11). The scales
of the factors in θt are anchored in log earnings.77 They account for endogeneity of parental
investment. Doing so substantially affects their estimates.
Their estimates show strong self-productivity effects (lagged coefficients of own variables)
and strong cross-productivity of effects of noncognitive skills on cognitive skills (personality
See Web Appendix E for an intuitive introduction to the identification strategy used in this work. See
Abbring and Heckman (2007) for a comprehensive discussion of this approach.
76
See Center for Human Resource Research (2006).
77
See Cunha and Heckman (2008) for a discussion of alternative anchors for θt and It .
75

35

Table 1: Anchor: Log Earnings of the Child Between Ages 23-28, Correcting for Classical
Measurement Error, White Males, CNLSY/79∗ .
Independent Variable
Lagged Noncognitive
Skill, (θtN )
Lagged Cognitive
Skill, (θtC )
Parental Investment,
(θtI )
Maternal Education, S
Maternal Cognitive Skill, A

Noncognitive Skill
Stage 1 Stage 2
0.9849
0.9383
(0.014) (0.015)
0.1442 -0.1259
(0.120) (0.115)
0.0075
0.0149
(0.002) (0.003)
0.0005 -0.0004
(0.001) (0.001)
0.0001 -0.0011
(0.000) (0.000)

N
(θt+1
)
Stage 3
0.7570
(0.010)
0.1171
(0.115)
0.0064
(0.003)
0.0019
(0.001)
-0.0019
(0.000)

C
Cognitive Skill (θt+1
)
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3
0.0216
0.0076
0.0005
(0.004) (0.003) (0.003)
0.9197
0.8845
0.9099
(0.023) (0.021) (0.019)
0.0056
0.0018
0.0019
(0.002) (0.001) (0.001)
-0.0003 0.0007
0.0001
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
0.0025
0.0002
0.0010
(0.001) (0.000) (0.000)

∗

Standard errors in parentheses. Cognitive skills are proxied by math PIAT and reading
PIAT. Noncognitive skills are proxied by the components of the behavioral problem index.
Investments are proxied by components of the home score. Stage 1 is age 6-7 to 8-9; Stage
2 is 8-9 to 10-11; Stage 3 is 10-11 to 12-13.
Source: Cunha and Heckman (2008, Table 11).
factors promote learning; those open to experience learn from it). The estimated crossproductivity effects of cognitive skills on noncognitive skills are weak. Contrary to models
in criminology and psychology that assign no role to investment in explaining the life cycle
evolution of capabilities, Cunha and Heckman (2008) find strong investment effects. Remediation and resilience are possible. Capabilities evolve and are affected by parental investment.
Investment affects cognitive skills more at earlier ages than at later ages. Investment affects
noncognitive skills more in middle childhood. This evidence is consistent with the literature
in neuroscience on the slow maturation of the prefrontal cortex which governs personality development and expression, and the emergence of more nuanced manifestations of personality
with age.
One way to interpret these estimates is to examine the impacts of investment at each
age on high school graduation and adult earnings.78 These outcomes depend differently on
cognition and personality. Schooling attainment is more cognitively weighted than earnings.
The estimated effects of a ten percent increase in investment are reported in Table 2(a), for
78

Results for high school graduation as an anchor are reported in Cunha and Heckman (2008).

36

Table 2: Percentage Impact of an Exogenous Increase by Ten Percent in Investments of
Different Periods for Two Different Anchors, White Males, CNLSY/79.∗
(a) On Log Earnings at Age 23

Total
Impact on
Log
Earnings
0.25
(0.03)
0.31
(0.03)
0.21
(0.023)
∗

Impact on
Log
Earnings
Exclusively
through
Cognitive
Skills
Period 1
0.12
(0.015)
Period 2
0.04
(0.005)
Period 3
0.054
(0.006)

(b) On the Probability of
Graduating from Secondary
School

Impact on
Log
Earnings
Exclusively
through
Noncognitive
Skills

Total
Impact

0.12
(0.015)

0.64
(0.08)

0.26
(0.03)

0.40
(0.047)

0.16
(0.017)

0.36
(0.04)

Impact
through
Cognitive
Skills
Period 1
0.55
(0.07)
Period 2
0.20
(0.02)
Period 3
0.24
(0.03)

Impact
Exclusively
through
Noncognitive
Skills
0.096
(0.012)
0.20
(0.024)
0.12
(0.013)

Standard errors in parentheses. Source: Cunha and Heckman (2008), Table 11.

earnings, and Table 2(b), for high school graduation. Increasing investment in the first stage
by 10% increases adult earnings by 0.25%. The increase operates equally through cognitive
and noncognitive skills. Ten percent investment increments in the second stage have a larger
effect (.3%) but mainly operate through improving noncognitive skills. Investment in the
third stage has weaker effects and operates primarily through its effect on noncognitive skills.
For high school graduation (Table 2(b)), the effects are more substantial and operate
relatively more strongly through cognitive skills rather than through noncognitive skills. The
sensitive stage for the production of earnings is stage 2. The sensitive stage for producing
secondary school graduation is stage 1. This reflects the differential dependence of the
outcomes on the two capabilities and the greater productivity of investment in noncognitive
skills in the second period compared to other periods. This evidence is consistent with other
evidence that shows the greater malleability of noncognitive skills at later ages.79
79

See Cunha et al. (2006), Cunha and Heckman (2007b) and Heckman (2008) for a discussion of this

37

4.3

Measurement Error

Accounting for measurement error substantially affects estimates of the technology of skill
formation. This evidence sounds a note of caution for the burgeoning literature that regresses
wages on psychological measurements. The share of error variance for proxies of cognition,
personality and investment ranges from 30%–70%. Not accounting for measurement error
produces downward-biased estimates of self-productivity effects and perverse estimates of
investment effects.80

4.4

Estimates from Nonlinear Technologies

Linear technologies assume perfect substitutability among inputs in the scale in which investment is measured. Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2008) estimate nonlinear technologies
to identify key substitution parameters.81 The ability to substitute critically affects the
design of strategies for remediation and early intervention.
Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2008) estimate a version of technology (5) for general
φjl , j ∈ {C, N }, l ∈ {1, . . . , L} using the same sample as used by Cunha and Heckman
P
(2008).82 They distinguish two types of maternal skills — cognitive and noncognitive (θCP , θN
)

— and introduce both as arguments of the production function.83 They estimate a two-stage
model of childhood (L = 2). Stage 1 is birth through age 4. Stage 2 corresponds to age 5
through 14.
The major findings from their analysis are: (a) Self-productivity becomes stronger as
children become older, for both cognitive and noncognitive capability formation. (b) Complementarity between cognitive skills and investment becomes stronger as children become
older. The elasticity of substitution for cognitive inputs is smaller in second stage producevidence.
80
See Cunha and Heckman (2008), Table 14.
81
They also account for measurement error and endogeneity of family inputs.
82
They lack data on health.
83
They establish semiparametric identification of their model, including measurement equations.

38

tion.84 It is more difficult to compensate for the effects of adverse environments on cognitive
endowments at later ages than it is at earlier ages. This finding helps to explain the evidence
on ineffective cognitive remediation strategies for disadvantaged adolescents. (c) Complementarity between noncognitive skills and investments becomes weaker as children become
older. It is easier at later stages of childhood to remediate early disadvantage using investments in noncognitive skills.85
Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2008) report that 34% of the variation in educational
attainment in their sample is explained by the measures of cognitive and noncognitive capabilities that they use.86 Sixteen percent is due to adolescent cognitive capabilities. Twelve
percent is due to adolescent noncognitive capabilities.87 Measured parental investments account for 15% of the variation in educational attainment. These estimates suggest that
the measures of cognitive and noncognitive capabilities that they use are powerful, but not
exclusive, determinants of educational attainment and that other factors, besides the measures of family investment that they use, are at work in explaining variation in educational
attainment.
To examine the implications of their estimates, we draw on their analysis and consider two
social planning problems that can be solved from knowledge of the technology of capability
formation and without knowledge of parental preferences and parental access to lending
markets.88 The first problem we consider determines the cost of investment required to
produce high school attainment for children with different initial endowments of their own
and parental capabilities. For the same distribution of endowments, the second problem
determines optimal allocations of investments from a fixed budget to maximize aggregate
schooling for a cohort of children. We also consider a version of this social planning problem
It is 1.5 in the first stage and .56 in the second stage. The estimates are precisely determined.
The elasticity of substitution is .54 in the first stage and .77 in the second stage. The estimates are
precisely determined.
86
These are the same measures as used in Cunha and Heckman (2008), which we previously discussed.
87
The skills are correlated so the marginal contributions of each skill do not add up to 34%.
88
As previously discussed, all of the parameters required to gauge parental responses to government policy
are not yet reliably determined.
84
85

39

that minimizes aggregate crime.

C
N
Suppose that there are H children indexed by h ∈ {1, . . . , H}. Let θ1,h
, θ1,h
denote
the initial cognitive and noncognitive skills of child h. She has parents with cognitive and

P
P
. Let πh denote additional unobserved determinants
, θN,h
noncognitive skills denoted by θC,h

P
P
N
C
, πh and let G (θ1,h ) be its distribution. We
, θN,h
, θC,h
, θ1,h
of outcomes. Define θ1,h = θ1,h
draw H people from the initial distribution G (θ1,h ) that is estimated by Cunha, Heckman,
and Schennach (2008). The price of investment is assumed to be the same in each period,
and is set at unity.
The criterion adopted for the first problem assumes that the goal of society is to get the
schooling of every child to a twelfth grade level. The required investments measure the power
of initial endowments in determining inequality and the compensation through investment
required to eliminate their influence. Let v(θ1,h ) be the minimum cost of attaining 12 years of
schooling for a child with endowment θ1,h . Assuming a zero discount rate, v(θ1,h ) is formally
defined by
v (θ1,h ) = min [I1,h + I2,h ]
C
N
subject to a schooling constraint S θ3,h
, θ3,h
, πh



= 12 where S maps end of childhood

capabilities and other relevant factors (πh ) into schooling attainment, and also subject to
the technology of capability formation constraint


k
C
N
P
P
θt+1,h
= fk,t θt,h
, θt,h
, θC,h
, θN,h
, It,h , πh for k ∈ {C, N } and t ∈ {1, 2},

and the initial endowments of the child and her parents. Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach
(2008) estimate all of the ingredients needed to perform this calculation. We summarize
some of their findings here.
Figure 6 plots the percentage increase in investment over that required for a child with
mean parental and personal endowments to attain high school graduation. In analyzing the
investment required for child endowments, we set parental endowments at mean values. 80%

40

100

50

0

-50
-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Standard Deviations from the Mean of the
Initial Distribution of Child Cognitive Capability

0.8

1

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8

-1

Standard Deviations from the Mean of the
Initial Distribution of Child Noncognitive Capability

Figure 6: Percentage increase in total investments as a function of child initial conditions of
cognitive and noncognitive capabilities. Lighter shading corresponds to larger values.
more investment is required for children with the most disadvantaged personal endowments.
The negative percentages shown in Figure 6 for children with high initial endowments is a
measure of their advantage.89 The empirical analysis of Moon (2008) shows that investments
received as a function of a child’s endowments are typically in reverse order from what is
required to attain the goal of universal high school graduation. Children born with advantageous endowments typically receive more parental investment than children from less
advantaged environments.
A more standard social planner’s problem maximizes aggregate human capital subject to
a budget constraint B. We draw H children from the initial distribution G (θ1,h ), and solve
the problem of how to allocate finite resources B to maximize the average education of the
cohort. Formally, the social planner maximizes aggregate schooling

max S̄ =

H

1 X
C
N
S θ3,h
, θ3,h
, πh
H h=1

The corresponding figure for children with the most disadvantaged parental endowments is 95%. See
Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach, 2008.
89

41

subject to the aggregate budget constraint,
H
X

(I1,h + I2,h ) = B,

h=1

the technology constraint,


P
P
N
C
k
, πh for k ∈ {C, N } and t ∈ {1, 2},
, θN,h
, θC,h
, θt,h
= fk,t θt,h
θt+1,h

and the initial conditions of the child. Solving this problem, we obtain optimal early and
late investments, I1,h and I2,h , respectively, for each child h. An analogous social planning
problem is used to allocate investments to minimize crime.
Figure 7 shows the profile of early (left-hand side graph) and late (right-hand side graph)
investment as a function of endowments. For the most disadvantaged, the optimal policy
is to invest a lot in the early years. The decline in investment by level of initial advantage
is substantial for early investment. Second-period investment profiles are much flatter and
slightly favor more advantaged children. This is a manifestation of the dynamic complementarity that produces an equity-efficiency tradeoff for later stage investment but not for early
investment. It is socially optimal to invest more in the second period of the lives of advantaged children than in disadvantaged children. A similar profile emerges for investments to
reduce aggregate crime.90
The optimal ratio of early-to-late investment depends on the desired outcome, the endowments of children and budget B. Figure 8 plots the density of the ratio of early-to-late
investment for education and crime derived by Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2008).91
Crime is more intensive in noncognitive skill than educational attainment, which depends
much more strongly on cognitive skills. Because compensation for adversity in noncognitive
90
See Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2008). They report investment profiles similar to those displayed
in Figure 7 when they plot optimal investment against parental endowments.
91
The optimal policy is not identical for each h and depends on θ1,h , which varies in the population. The
densities reflect this variation.

42

1.2

1.2

1.15

1.15

1.1

1.1

1.05

1.05

1

1

0.95

0.95

-1

0.9
-1

-0.5
-0.5

0

0

Child Initial
Noncognitive Capability

0.5

Child Initial
0.5
Cognitive Capability

-1

0.9
-1

-0.5
-0.5

Child Initial
0.5
Cognitive Capability

1 1

0
Child Initial
Noncognitive Capability

0
0.5
1 1

Figure 7: Optimal early (left) and late (right) investments by child initial conditions of
cognitive and noncognitive capabilities maximizing aggregate education. Lighter shading
corresponds to larger values.

5

Education
Crime

4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

Ratio Early to Late Investment

Figure 8: Densities of ratio of early to late investments maximizing aggregate education
versus minimizing aggregate crime

43

skills is less costly in the second period than in the first period, while the opposite is true
for cognitive skills, it is optimal to weight first-period and second-period investments in the
directions indicated in the figure.
These simulations suggest that the timing and level of optimal interventions for disadvantaged children depend on the conditions of disadvantage and the nature of desired
outcomes.92 Targeted strategies are likely to be effective, especially so if different targets
weight cognitive and noncognitive traits differently.

4.5

Policy Analysis

Structural models based on latent capabilities facilitate comparisons across diverse intervention programs and diverse outputs of these programs.93 They offer a scientifically valid
alternative to crude metanalyses that force “treatment effects” from diverse programs and
diverse populations into a common metric. Outcomes of various treatments can be placed
on a common footing using versions of outcome equations (1). For example, Heckman et al.
(2008a) decompose outcomes and treatment effects for the Perry Preschool Program in terms
of their effects on the capabilities (θt ) that determine outcomes. In this section we provide
our vision for counterfactual policy analysis based on the technology of capability formation.
Different programs indexed by q, q ∈ {1, . . . , Q} provide different packages of investment
C
N
H
at stage t, Iq,t = (Iq,t
, Iq,t
, Iq,t
) at cost Cq,t . Discounted costs of program q are Cq . The

programs affect output θt+1 through production at stage t by technology (3). Using estimated
structural models, analysts can compare different programs both in terms of their investment
content and in terms of their output. Thus they can determine how different programs
affect cognition, personality and health, and can extrapolate out of the sample of programs
previously tried to predict the consequences of new programs never previously implemented.
Consider choice among a set of mutually exclusive programs that seek to boost outcomes
at the first stage of adulthood, T + 1. The goal is to achieve target objective ȲTk+1 , k ∈
92
93

See Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2008) for an extensive discussion of these and other simulations.
This analysis is an application of Heckman and Vytlacil (2007, Appendix A).

44

{1, . . . , K}, at T + 1 by a choice of program q. The problem can be formulated for objective
k as
min
q∈{1,...,Q}

Cq

(13a)

subject to technology constraints, initial endowments and the output constraint

YTk+1 (θT +1 , ekT +1 ) ≥ ȲTk+1 .

(13b)

A version of this problem is used to generate the cost-minimizing simulations for high school
attainment reported in Section 4.4. Observe that some programs may fail to achieve the
constraint in (13b). They may have high returns but lack the ability to scale adequately to
achieve desired targets.
For programs in place, one may evaluate the costs and benefits of alternatives without
determining technology (3) or outcomes (1), as in the traditional approach to program evaluation. However, if only some outcomes of a program are measured, but the investment
content of other programs is known, we can construct the missing counterfactual outcomes
using the estimated technology (3) and activity outcomes (1) determined on data from the
other programs or from observational data like the CNLSY. We can also compare and evaluate a variety of programs never experienced. Characterizing outcomes by their capability
content and diverse programs by their investment effect on capabilities, makes it possible
to compare diverse outcomes and programs. This framework can be used to compare the
effectiveness of historically experienced programs and proposed programs, never previously
implemented. This approach can be extended to consider the choice of a portfolio of social
programs.
As an application of this approach, consider the goal of reducing aggregate crime. It can
be achieved by improving human capabilities or by changing incentives to commit crime.
Carneiro and Heckman (2003) compare these strategies and find that for reducing crime,
investing in capabilities is cheaper than reducing incentives of potential criminals to commit

45

crime by hiring more police.94 Our analysis suggests that programs that promote noncognitive skills and that concentrate relatively more investment in the later stages of childhood
will be the most effective ones for fighting crime.

5

Summary and Conclusion

This paper reviews the evidence from recent research that addresses the origins of inequality
and the evolution of the capabilities that partly determine inequality. Both cognitive and
noncognitive capabilities are important in producing a variety of outcomes.95 Noncognitive
measurements capture aspects of what Marshall meant by “character.” An emerging literature relates psychological measurements of personality and cognition to economic preference
parameters and extends conventional preference specifications in economics.
Comparative advantage is an empirically important feature of economic and social life.
The same bundle of personal traits has different productivity in different tasks. Recent
empirical work on the technology of capability formation provides an operational empirical framework. Capabilities are not invariant traits and are causally affected by parental
investment. Genes and environments interact to determine outcomes. The technology of
capability formation rationalizes a large body of evidence in economics, psychology, and
neuroscience. Capabilities are self-productive and cross-productive. Dynamic complementarity explains why it is productive to invest in the cognitive skills of disadvantaged young
children but why the payoffs are so low for cognitive investments in disadvantaged older
children and are even lower for disadvantaged adults. There is no equity-efficiency trade-off
for investment in the capabilities of young disadvantaged children. There is a substantial
equity-efficiency trade-off for investment in the cognitive skills of disadvantaged adolescents
and adults. The tradeoff is much less dramatic for investment in the noncognitive skills of
Cunha and Heckman (2006) offer a crude prototype for a structural analysis of the Perry Preschool
Program.
95
Ongoing research suggests that health is an important determinant as well. Health is being integrated
into these models. See Conti, Heckman, and Urzua (2009).
94

46

adolescents. Parental environments and investments affect the outcomes of children. There
are substantial costs to uninhibited libertarianism in one generation if the preferences and
well-being of the next generation are ignored.96
Does recent research suggest an economic justification for the Victorian program that
Marshall endorsed? The evidence supports a move in that direction. The preferences,
motivations, and skill endowments of adults that are created in part in their childhoods play
important roles in creating inequality. They can be influenced, in part, by policy. But, as
Marshall argued, incentives matter too. Society can reduce crime and promote well-being
by operating at both incentive and investment margins, corresponding, respectively, to the
effort allocation function (2), which depends on Rtk , and the endowment (θt ) in outcome
equation (1).
The right mix of intervention to reduce inequality and promote productivity remains to
be determined. The optimal timing of investment depends on the outcome being targeted.
The optimal intervention strategies depend on the stage of the life cycle and endowments at
each stage. For severely disadvantaged adults with low levels of capabilities, subsidizing work
and welfare may be a better response for alleviating poverty than investment in their skills.97
The substantial heterogeneity in endowments and effects of interventions at different ages
suggests that a universal policy to combat the adverse effects of early disadvantage is not
appropriate. Optimal investment should be tailored to the specifics that create adversity and
to the productivity of investment for different configurations of disadvantage. As research on
the economics of capability formation matures, economists will have a greater understanding
of how to foster successful people.

96
97

See Moynihan (2006).
See Heckman and Masterov (2007).

47

References
Abbring, Jaap H. and Heckman, James J. (2007). “Econometric Evaluation of Social Programs, Part III: Distributional Treatment Effects, Dynamic Treatment Effects, Dynamic
Discrete Choice, and General Equilibrium Policy Evaluation.” In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 6B, edited by J. Heckman and E. Leamer. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 5145–5303.
Aigner, Dennis J., Hsiao, Cheng, Kapteyn, Arie, and Wansbeek, Tom (1984). “Latent Variable Models in Econometrics.” In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 2, edited by Z. Griliches
and M. D. Intriligator, chap. 23. Elsevier, 1321–1393.
Auld, M. Christopher and Sidhu, Nirmal (2005). “Schooling, Cognitive Ability and Health.”
Health Economics, 14(10), 1019–1034.
Barker, David J. P. (1998). Mothers, Babies and Health in Later Life. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 2nd edn.
Becker, Gary S. (1991). A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, enlarged edn.
Becker, Gary S. and Mulligan, Casey B. (1997). “The Endogenous Determination of Time
Preference.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3), 729–58.
Becker, Gary S. and Tomes, Nigel (1986). “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families.”
Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3, Part 2), S1–S39.
Behrman, Jere R., Pollak, Robert A., and Taubman, Paul (1995). From Parent to Child:
Intrahousehold Allocations and Intergenerational Relations in the United States. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Belley, Philippe and Lochner, Lance (2007). “The Changing Role of Family Income and
Ability in Determining Educational Achievement.” Journal of Human Capital, 1(1), 37–
89.
48

Ben-Porath, Yoram (1967). “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings.” Journal of Political Economy, 75(4, Part 1), 352–365.
Benabou, Roland (2002). “Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous Agent Economy:
What Levels of Redistribution Maximize Growth and Efficiency?” Econometrica, 70(2),
481–517.
Benjamin, Daniel J., Brown, Sebastian A., and Shapiro, Jesse M. (2006). “Who is ‘Behavioral’ ? Cognitive Ability and Anomalous Preferences.” Unpublished manuscript, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY.
Bergstrom, T. C. (1997). “A Survey of the Theories of the Family.” In Handbook of Population and Family Economics, vol. 1A, edited by M.R. Rosenzweig and O. Stark. Amsterdam:
North Holland, 21–80.
Borghans, Lex, Duckworth, Angela L., Heckman, James J., and ter Weel, Bas (2008). “The
Economics and Psychology of Personality Traits.” Journal of Human Resources, 43(4),
972–1059.
Borghans, Lex, Golsteyn, Bart H. H., and Heckman, James J. (2008). “IQ, Achievement,
and Personality.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Maastricht and University of
Chicago.
Borghans, Lex, Meijers, Huub, and ter Weel, Bas (2008). “The Role of Noncognitive Skills
in Explaining Cognitive Test Scores.” Economic Inquiry, 46(1), 2–12.
Bowles, Samuel and Gintis, Herbert (1976). Schooling in Capitalist America: Educational
Reform and the Contradictions of Economic Life. New York: Basic Books.
Bowles, Samuel, Gintis, Herbert, and Osborne, Melissa (2001). “The Determinants of Earnings: A Behavioral Approach.” Journal of Economic Literature, 39(4), 1137–1176.

49

Brooks-Gunn, Jeanne, Cunha, Flavio, Duncan, Greg, Heckman, James J., and Sojourner,
Aaron (2006). “A Reanalysis of the IHDP Program.” Unpublished manuscript, Infant
Health and Development Program, Northwestern University.
Camerer, Colin, Loewenstein, George, and Rabin, Matthew (2004). Advances in Behavioral
Economics. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Cameron, Stephen V. and Heckman, James J. (2001). “The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for Black, Hispanic, and White Males.” Journal of Political Economy, 109(3),
455–99.
Carneiro, Pedro and Heckman, James J. (2003). “Human Capital Policy.” In Inequality in
America: What Role for Human Capital Policies?, edited by James J. Heckman, Alan B.
Krueger, and Benjamin M. Friedman. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 77–239.
Carneiro, Pedro, Heckman, James J., and Masterov, Dimitriy V. (2005). “Labor Market
Discrimination and Racial Differences in Pre-Market Factors.” Journal of Law and Economics, 48(1), 1–39.
Caspi, Avshalom, McClay, Joseph, Moffitt, Terrie E., Mill, Jonathan, Martin, Judy, Craig,
Ian W., Taylor, Alan, and Poulton, Richie (2002). “Role of Genotype in the Cycle of
Violence in Maltreated Children.” Science, 297(5582), 851–854.
Center for Human Resource Research (2006). NLSY79 Child and Young Adult Data Users
Guide: A Guide to the 1986-2004 Child Data and 1994-2004 Youth Data. Columbus,
OH: Center for Human Resource Research. URL ftp://www.nlsinfo.org/pub/usersvc/
Child-Young-Adult/2004ChildYA-DataUsersGuide.pdf.
Champagne, Frances A. (2008). “Epigenetics and the Long-Term Effects of Early Experience.” Presented at the NIA Workshop on Genetic Mechanisms and Life Course Development, Bethesda, MD, February 11-12, 2008.

50

Charney, Dennis S. (2004). “Psychobiological Mechanisms of Resilience and Vulnerability:
Implications for Successful Adaptation to Extreme Stress.” American Journal of Psychiatry, 161(2), 195–216.
Coleman, James S. (1966). Equality of Educational Opportunity. Washington, DC: U.S.
Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of Education.
Collins, W. Andrew, Maccoby, Eleanor E., Steinberg, Laurence, Hetherington, E. Mavis, and
Bornstein, Marc H. (2000). “Contemporary Research on Parenting: The Case for Nature
and Nurture.” American Psychologist, 55(2), 218–232.
Colvin, C. Randall and Funder, David C. (1991). “Predicting Personality and Behavior: A
Boundary on the Acquaintanceship Effect.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
60(6), 884–894.
Conti, Gabriella, Heckman, James J., and Urzua, Sergio (2009). “The Effects of Early
Endowments on Labor Market Outcomes, Health, and Social Behavior.” Unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Costello, E. Jane, Compton, Scott N., Keeler, Gordon, and Angold, Adrian (2003). “Relationships between Poverty and Psychopathology: A Natural Experiment.” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 290(15), 2023–2029.
Cunha, Flavio (2007). “An Essay on Skill Formation.” Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago.
Cunha, Flavio and Heckman, James J. (2006). “Investing in our Young People.” Unpublished
manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Cunha, Flavio and Heckman, James J. (2007a). “The Evolution of Uncertainty in Labor
Earnings in the U.S. Economy.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago. Under
revision.

51

Cunha, Flavio and Heckman, James J. (2007b). “The Technology of Skill Formation.”
American Economic Review, 97(2), 31–47.
Cunha, Flavio and Heckman, James J. (2008). “Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the
Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.” Journal of Human Resources,
43(4), 738–782.
Cunha, Flavio, Heckman, James J., Lochner, Lance J., and Masterov, Dimitriy V. (2006).
“Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation.” In Handbook of the Economics
of Education, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Frank Welch, chap. 12. Amsterdam: NorthHolland, 697–812.
Cunha, Flavio, Heckman, James J., and Schennach, Susanne M. (2008). “Estimating the
Technology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation.” Unpublished manuscript,
University of Chicago, Department of Economics. Presented at the Yale Conference on
Macro and Labor Economics, May 5–7, 2006. Under revision, Econometrica.
Currie, Janet (2008). “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise: Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in
Childhood, and Human Capital Development.” Working Paper 13987, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Damasio, Antonio R. (1994). Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain.
New York: Putnam.
Danese, Andrea, Moffitt, Terrie E., Pariante, Carmine M., Ambler, Antony, Poulton, Richie,
and Caspi, Avshalom (2008). “Elevated Inflammation Levels in Depressed Adults With a
History of Childhood Maltreatment.” Archives of General Psychiatry, 65(4), 409–415.
Deci, Edward L., Koestner, Richard, and Ryan, Richard M. (2001). “Extrinsic Rewards
and Intrinsic Motivation in Education: Reconsidered Once Again.” Review of Educational
Research, 71(1), 1–27.

52

Deci, Edward L. and Ryan, Richard M. (1985). Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Determination
in Human Behavior. New York: Plenum Press.
DeLong, J. Bradford and Magin, Konstantin (2008). “The U.S. Equity Return Premium:
Past, Present and Future.” Unpublished manuscript, University of California at Berkeley.
Forthcoming, Journal of Economic Perspectives.
Dohmen, Thomas, Falk, Armin, Huffman, David, and Sunde, Uwe (2007). “Are Risk Aversion and Impatience Related to Cognitive Ability?” Discussion Paper 2735, IZA, Bonn,
Germany.
Durbin, J., Harvey, A. C., Koopman, S. J., and Shephard, Neil (2004). State Space and
Unobserved Component Models: Theory and Applications: Proceedings of a Conference in
Honour of James Durbin. New York NY: Cambridge University Press.
Edwards, Richard C. (1976). “Individual Traits and Organizational Incentives: What Makes
a ‘Good’ Worker?” Journal of Human Resources, 11(1), 51–68.
Ellwood, David and Jencks, Christopher (2004). “The Uneven Spread of Single-Parent
Families: What Do We Know? Where Do We Look for Answers?” In Social Inequality,
edited by Kathryn M. Neckerman, chap. 1. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 3–78.
Engle, Patrice L., Black, Maureen M., Behrman, Jere R., Cabral de Mello, Meena, Gertler,
Paul J., Kapiriri, Lydia, Martorell, Reynaldo, Eming Young, Mary, and The International
Child Development Steering Group (2007). “Strategies to Avoid the Loss of Developmental
Potential in More than 200 Million Children in the Developing World.” The Lancet, 369,
229–242.
Fraga, Mario F., Ballestar, Esteban, Paz, Maria F., Ropero, Santiago, Setien, Fernando,
Ballestar, Maria L., Heine-Suer, Damia, Cigudosa, Juan C., Urioste, Miguel, Benitez,
Javier, Boix-Chornet, Manuel, Sanchez-Aguilera, Abel, Ling, Charlotte, Carlsson, Emma,

53

Poulsen, Pernille, Vaag, Allan, Stephan, Zarko, Spector, Tim D., Wu, Yue-Zhong, Plass,
Christoph, and Esteller, Manel (2005). “Epigenetic Differences Arise During the Lifetime
of Monozygotic Twins.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 102(30), 10604–10609.
Frederick, Shane (2005). “Cognitive Reflection and Decision Making.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 19(4), 25–42.
Funder, David C. and Colvin, C. Randall (1991). “Explorations in Behavioral Consistency:
Properties of Persons, Situations, and Behaviors.” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 60(5), 773–794.
Funder, David C. and Ozer, Daniel J. (1983). “Behavior as a Function of the Situation.”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44(1), 107–112.
Georgieff, Michael K. (2007). “Nutrition and the Developing Brain: Nutrient Priorities and
Measurement.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 85(2), 614S–620S.
Ginther, Donna K. and Pollak, Robert A. (2004). “Family Structure and Children’s Educational Outcomes: Blended Families, Stylized Facts, and Descriptive Regressions.” Demography, 41(4), 671–696.
Gluckman, Peter D. and Hanson, Mark (2005). The Fetal Matrix: Evolution, Development,
and Disease. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Gneezy, Uri (2004). “The ‘W’ Effect of Incentives.” Unpublished manuscript. University of
Chicago, Graduate School of Business.
Goldberg, Lewis R. (1990). “An Alternative ‘Description of Personality’: The Big-Five
Factor Structure.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(6), 1216–1229.
Grantham-McGregor, Sally, Cheung, Yin Bun, Cueto, Santiago, Glewwe, Paul, Richter,
Linda, Strupp, Barbara, and The International Child Development Steering Group (2007).
54

“Developmental Potential in the First 5 Years for Children in Developing Countries.” The
Lancet, 369, 60–70. Series, Child development in developing countries.
Hampson, Sarah E. and Friedman, Henry S. (2008). “Personality and Health: A Lifespan
Perspective.” In The Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research, edited by O. P.
John, R. Robins, and L. Pervin. New York: Guilford, third edn., 770–794.
Hampson, Sarah E., Goldberg, Lewis R., Vogt, Thomas M., and Dubanoski, Joan P. (2007).
“Mechanisms by Which Childhood Personality Traits Influence Adult Health Status: Educational Attainment and Healthy Behaviors.” Health Psychology, 26(1), 121–125.
Hansen, Karsten T., Heckman, James J., and Mullen, Kathleen J. (2004). “The Effect of
Schooling and Ability on Achievement Test Scores.” Journal of Econometrics, 121(1-2),
39–98.
Harris, Judith Rich (1998). The Nurture Assumption: Why Children Turn Out the Way
They Do. New York: Free Press.
Harris, Judith Rich (2006). No Two Alike: Human Nature and Human Individuality. New
York: W.W. Norton and Company.
Harvey, Andrew C. (1989). Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and the Kalman
Filter. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Heckman, James J. (2007). “The Economics, Technology and Neuroscience of Human Capability Formation.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(3), 13250–13255.
Heckman, James J. (2008). “Schools, Skills and Synapses.” Economic Inquiry, 46(3), 289–
324.
Heckman, James J., Lochner, Lance J., and Cossa, Ricardo (2003). “Learning-by-Doing
versus On-the-Job training: Using Variation Induced by the EITC to Distinguish Detween Models of Skill Formation.” In Designing Social Inclusion: Tools to Raise Low-End
55

Pay and Employment in Private Enterprise, edited by Edmund S. Phelps. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Heckman, James J., Malofeeva, Lena, Pinto, Rodrigo, and Savelyev, Peter A. (2008a). “The
Effect of the Perry Preschool Program on the Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills of its
Participants.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Heckman, James J. and Masterov, Dimitriy V. (2007). “The Productivity Argument for
Investing in Young Children.” Review of Agricultural Economics, 29(3), 446–493.
Heckman, James J., Moon, Seong Hyeok, Pinto, Rodrigo, Savelyev, Peter A., and Yavitz,
Adam Q. (2008b). “A Reanalysis of the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of Economics. First draft, September, 2006.
Heckman, James J., Moon, Seong Hyeok, Pinto, Rodrigo, and Yavitz, Adam Q. (2008c). “The
Rate of Return to the Perry Preschool Program.” Unpublished manuscript, University of
Chicago, Department of Economics.
Heckman, James J., Pinto, Rodrigo, and Savelyev, Peter A. (2008). “Why Early Education
Works: Exploring the Role of Noncognitive Skills in Determining Adult Outcomes in
the Perry Experiment.” Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, Department of
Economics.
Heckman, James J. and Rubinstein, Yona (2001). “The Importance of Noncognitive Skills:
Lessons from the GED Testing Program.” American Economic Review, 91(2), 145–149.
Heckman, James J., Stixrud, Jora, and Urzua, Sergio (2006). “The Effects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of Labor
Economics, 24(3), 411–482.

56

Heckman, James J. and Vytlacil, Edward J. (2007). “Econometric Evaluation of Social
Programs, Part I: Causal Models, Structural Models and Econometric Policy Evaluation.”
In Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 6B, edited by J. Heckman and E. Leamer. Amsterdam:
Elsevier, 4779–4874.
Heijmans, Bastiaan T., Tobi, Elmar W., Stein, Aryeh D., Putter, Hein, Blauw, Gerard J.,
Susser, Ezra S., Slagboom, P. Eline, and Lumey, L. H. (2008). “Persistent epigenetic
differences associated with prenatal exposure to famine in humans.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 105(44), 17046–17049.
Herrnstein, Richard J. and Murray, Charles A. (1994). The Bell Curve: Intelligence and
Class Structure in American Life. New York: Free Press.
Himmelfarb, Gertrude (1995). The De-moralization Of Society: From Victorian Virtues to
Modern Values. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Jöreskog, Karl G. and Goldberger, Arthur S. (1975). “Estimation of a Model with Multiple
Indicators and Multiple Causes of a Single Latent Variable.” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 70(351), 631–639.
Kaestner, Robert (2008). “Adolescent Cognitive and Non-cognitive Correlates of Adult
Health.” Unpublished manuscript, Institute of Government and Public Affairs, University
of Illinois at Chicago, Department of Economics.
Knudsen, Eric I. (2004). “Sensitive Periods in the Development of the Brain and Behavior.”
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(1), 1412–1425.
Knudsen, Eric I., Heckman, James J., Cameron, Judy, and Shonkoff, Jack P. (2006). “Economic, Neurobiological, and Behavioral Perspectives on Building America’s Future Workforce.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(27), 10155–10162.

57

Kohn, Alfie (1999). Punished by Rewards: The Trouble with Gold Stars, Incentive Plans,
A’s, Praise, and Other Bribes. Boston MA: Houghton Mifflin Company.
Laitner, John (1992). “Random Earnings Differences, Lifetime Liquidity Constraints, and
Altruistic Intergenerational Transfers.” Journal of Economic Theory, 58(2), 135–170.
LeDoux, Joseph E. (1996). The Emotional Brain: The Mysterious Underpinnings of Emotional Life. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Leibowitz, Arleen (1974). “Home Investments in Children.” Journal of Political Economy,
82(2), S111–S131.
Loewenstein, George (2007). Exotic Preferences: Behavioural Economics and Human Motivation. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Marshall, Alfred (1890). Principles of Economics. New York: Macmillan and Company.
Marshall, Alfred (1926). “Preliminary Statement and Evidence before the Royal Commission on the Aged Poor.” In Official Papers, edited by John Maynard Keynes. London:
Macmillan and Co., Ltd. Report originally given in 1893.
Masten, Ann S. (2004). “Regulatory processes, risk and resilience in adolescent development.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1021, 310–319.
Masten, Ann S., Burt, Keith B., and Coatsworth, J. Douglas (2006). “Competence and
Psychopathology in Development.” In Developmental Psychopathology: Risk, Disorder,
and Adaptation, vol. 3, edited by Dante Cicchetti and Donald J. Cohen. Hoboken: John
Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2 edn., 696–738.
Masten, Ann S. and Coatsworth, J. Douglas (1998). “The Development of Competence in Favorable and Unfavorable Environments: Lessons From Research on Successful Children.”
American Psychologist, 53(2), 205–220.

58

Mayer, Susan E. (1997). What Money Can’t Buy: Family Income and Children’s Life
Chances. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McArdle, John J., Ferrer-Caja, Emilio, Hamagami, Fumiaki, and Woodcock, Richard W.
(2002). “Comparative Longitudinal Structural Analyses of the Growth and Decline of
Multiple Intellectual Abilities Over the Life Span.” Developmental Psychology, 38(1),
115–142.
McEwen, Bruce S. (2007). “Physiology and Neurobiology of Stress and Adaptation: Central
Role of the Brain.” Physiological Review, 87(3), 873–904.
Meaney, Michael J. and Szyf, Moshe (2005). “Maternal Care as a Model for ExperienceDependent Chromatin Plasticity?” Trends in Neurosciences, 28(9), 456–463.
Meghir, Costas and Palme, Mårten (2001). “The Effect of a Social Experiment in Education.”
Tech. Rep. W01/11, Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Mischel, Walter (1968). Personality and Assessment. New York: Wiley.
Mischel, Walter and Shoda, Yuichi (1995). “A Cognitive-Affective System Theory of personality: Reconceptualizing Situations, Dispositions, Dynamics, and Invariance in Personality
Structure.” Psychological Review, 102(2), 246–268.
Moffitt, Terrie E. (2008). “Gene-Environment Interaction in Problematic and Successful
Aging.” Tech. rep.
Moon, Seong Hyeok (2008). “Skill Formation Technology and Multi-Dimensional Parental
Investment.” Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago, Department of Economics.
Mosteller, Frederick and Moynihan, Daniel P., editors (1972). On Equality of Educational
Opportunity: Papers Deriving from the Harvard University Faculty Seminar on the Coleman Report. New York: Random House.

59

Moynihan, Daniel P. (2006). The Future of the Family. New York: Russell Sage Foundation
Publications.
Mueser, Peter R. (1979). “The Effects of Noncognitive Traits.” In Who Gets Ahead? The Determinants of Economic Success in America, edited by Christopher Jencks, Susan Bartlett,
Mary Corcoran, James Crouse, David Eaglesfield, Gregory Jackson, Kent McClelland, Peter Mueser, Michael Olneck, Joseph Schwartz, Sherry Ward, and Jill Williams. New York,
NY: Basic Books, 122–158.
Murnane, Richard J., Willett, John B., and Levy, Frank (1995). “The Growing Importance
of Cognitive Skills in Wage Determination.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 77(2),
251–266.
Nagin, Daniel S. (2005). Group-Based Modeling of Development. Boston: Harvard University
Press.
Nagin, Daniel S. and Tremblay, Richard E. (1999). “Trajectories of Boys’ Physical Aggression, Opposition, and Hyperactivity on the Path to Physically Violent and Nonviolent
Juvenile Delinquency.” Child Development, 70(5), 1181–1196.
Neal, Derek A. and Johnson, William R. (1996). “The Role of Premarket Factors in BlackWhite Wage Differences.” Journal of Political Economy, 104(5), 869–895.
Nilsson, J. Peter (2008). “Does a Pint a Day Affect Your Child’s Pay? The Effect of Prenatal
Alcohol Exposure on Adult Outcomes.” Working Paper Series 2008:4, Institute for Labour
Market Policy Evaluation.
O’Connell, Michael and Sheikh, Hammad (2008). “Achievement-Related Attitudes and the
Fate of ‘At-Risk’ Groups in Society.” Journal of Economic Psychology, 29(4), 508–521.
Olds, David L. (2002). “Prenatal and Infancy Home Visiting by Nurses: From Randomized
Trials to Community Replication.” Prevention Science, 3(2), 153–172.
60

Pfeiffer, Friedhelm and Reuß, Karsten (2008). “Age-Dependent Skill Formation and Returns
to Education.” Labour Economics, 15(4), 631–646.
Phelps, Elizabeth A. (2006). “Emotion and Cognition: Insights from Studies of the Human
Amygdala.” Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 27–53.
Phelps, Elizabeth A. (2009). “The Study of Emotion in Neuroeconomics.” In Neuroeconomics: Decision Making and the Brain, edited by Paul W. Glimcher, Colin F. Camerer,
Ernst Fehr, and Russell A. Poldrack. London, UK: Academic Press, 233–250.
Pollak, Robert A. (1988). “Tied Transfers and Paternalistic Preferences.” American Economic Review, 78(2), 240–44.
Reynolds, Arthur J. and Temple, Judy A. (2009). “Economic Returns of Investments in
Preschool.” In A Vision For Universal Prekindergarten, edited by E. Zigler W. Gilliam
and S. Jones. Cambridge University Press. In press.
Roberts, Brent W. (2007). “Contextualizing Personality Psychology.” Journal of Personality,
75(6), 1071–82.
Roberts, Brent W. and DelVecchio, Wendy F. (2000). “The Rank-Order Consistency of
Personality Traits from Childhood to Old Age: A Quantitative Review of Longitudinal
Studies.” Psychological Bulletin, 126(1), 3–25.
Rowe, David C. (1994). The Limits of Family Influence: Genes, Experience, and Behavior.
New York NY: Guilford Press.
Rutter, Michael (2006). Genes and Behavior: Nature–Nurture Interplay Explained. Oxford,
UK: Blackwell Publishers.
Ryan, Richard M., Koestner, Richard, and Deci, Edward L. (1999). “A Meta-Analytic Review of Experiments Examining the Effects of Extrinsic Rewards on Intrinsic Motivation.”
Psychological Bulletin, 125(6), 627–668.
61

Sampson, Robert J. and Laub, John H. (2003). “Life-Course Desisters? Trajectories of
Crime among Delinquent Boys Followed to Age 70.” Criminology, 41(3), 319–339.
Schuerger, James M. and Witt, Anita C. (1989). “The Temporal Stability of Individually
Tested Intelligence.” Journal of Clinical Psychology, 45(2), 294–302.
Segal, Carmit (2008). “Motivation, Test Scores, and Economic Success.” Economics working
papers, Department of Economics and Business, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona,
Spain.
Shoda, Yuichi, Mischel, Walter, and Peake, Philip K. (1990). “Predicting Adolescent Cognitive and Self-Regulatory Competencies from Preschool Delay of Gratification: Identifying
Diagnostic Conditions.” Developmental Psychology, 26(6), 978–986.
Sowell, Thomas (1994). Race and Culture: A World View. New York: Basic Books.
Suomi, Stephen J. (2000). “A Biobehavioral Perspective on Developmental Psychopathology:
Excessive Aggression and Serotonergic Dysfunction in Monkeys.” In Handbook of Developmental Psychopathology, edited by Arnold J. Sameroff, Michael Lewis, and Suzanne M
Miller, chap. 13. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum, 237–256.
Szyf, Moshe (2007). “The Dynamic Epigenome and its Implications in Toxicology.” Toxicological Sciences, 100(1), 7–23.
Todd, Petra E. and Wolpin, Kenneth I. (2005). “The Production of Cognitive Achievement
in Children: Home, School and Racial Test Score Gaps.” Working paper, Penn Institute
for Economic Research, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.
Todd, Petra E. and Wolpin, Kenneth I. (2007). “The Production of Cognitive Achievement
in Children: Home, School, and Racial Test Score Gaps.” Journal of Human Capital, 1(1),
91–136.

62

Tucker-Drob, Elliot M. (2008). “Differentiation of Cognitive Abilities across the Lifespan.”
Unpublished manuscript, University of Virginia, Department of Psychology.
Turkheimer, Eric, Haley, Andreana, Waldron, Mary, D’Onofrio, Brian, and Gottesman,
Irving I. (2003). “Socioeconomic Status Modifies Heritability of IQ in Young Children.”
Psychological Science, 14(6), 623–628.
van den Berg, Gerard J., Doblhammer-Reiter, Gabriele, and Christensen, Kaare (2008).
“Being Born Under Adverse Economic Conditions Leads to a Higher Cardiovascular Mortality Rate Later in Life: Evidence Based on Individuals Born at Different Stages of the
Business Cycle.” Tech. Rep. 3635, Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn, Germany.
Walker, Susan P., Wachs, Theodore D., Gardner, Julie Meeks, Lozoff, Betsy, Wasserman,
Gail A, Pollitt, Ernesto, Carter, Julie A., and The International Child Development Steering Group (2007). “Child Development: Risk Factors for Adverse Outcomes in Developing
Countries.” The Lancet, 369, 145–157.
Weaver, Ian C. G., Cervoni, Nadia, Champagne, Frances A., DAlessio, Ana C., Sharma,
Shakti, Seckl, Jonathan R., Dymov, Sergiy, Szyf, Moshe, and Meaney, Michael J. (2004).
“Epigenetic Programming by Maternal Behavior.” Nature Neuroscience, 7(8), 847–854.
Weiss, Yoram and Willis, Robert J. (1985). “Children as Collective Goods and Divorce
Settlements.” Journal of Labor Economics, 3(3), 268–292.
Werner, Emmy E., Bierman, Jessie M., and French, Fern E. (1971). The Children of Kauai:
A Longitudinal Study from the Prenatal Period to Age Ten. Honolulu, HI: University of
Hawaii Press.
Whitaker, John K. (1977). “Some Neglected Aspects of Alfred Marshall’s Economic and
Social Thought.” History of Political Economy, 9(2), 161–197.

63

Whitelaw, Nadia C. and Whitelaw, Emma (2006). “How Lifetimes Shape Epigenotype
Within and Across Generations.” Human Molecular Genetics, 15(2), 131–137.
Wood, Dustin (2007). “Using the PRISM to Compare the Explanatory Value of General
and Role-Contextualized Trait Ratings.” Journal of Personality, 75(6), 1103–1126.
Wood, Dustin and Roberts, Brent W. (2006). “Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Tests of
the Personality and Role Identity Structural Model (PRISM).” Journal of Personality,
74(3), 779–809.
Wößmann, Ludger (2008). “Efficiency and Equity of European Education and Training
Policies.” International Tax and Public Finance, 15(2), 199–230.

64

