NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL FINANCE AND GROWTH IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?
Maurice Obstfeld
Working Paper 14691
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14691

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2009

This research was sponsored by the Commission on Growth and Development. I am grateful for assistance
from Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, José Antonio Rodríguez-Lopez, Lorenz Küng, and Mary Yang. The
current draft has benefited from discussions with Sara Guerschanik Calvo, Julian di Giovanni, Barry
Eichengreen, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Peter Blair Henry, Ayhan Kose, Alan M. Taylor, Roberto
Zagha, and an anonymous referee, as well as from comments at the April 9, 2007 conference in New
York City organized by the Commission. I thank Sebastian Edwards for supplying the updated Edwards
(2007) data on capital controls. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Maurice Obstfeld. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

International Finance and Growth in Developing Countries: What Have We Learned?
Maurice Obstfeld
NBER Working Paper No. 14691
January 2009
JEL No. F36,F43,G15,O24
ABSTRACT
Despite an abundance of cross-section, panel, and event studies, there is strikingly little convincing
documentation of direct positive impacts of financial opening on the economic welfare levels or growth
rates of developing countries. The econometric difficulties are similar to those that bedevil the literature
on trade openness and growth, though if anything, they are more severe in the context of finance. There
is also little systematic evidence that financial opening raises welfare indirectly by promoting collateral
reforms of economic institutions or policies. At the same time, opening the financial account does
appear to raise the frequency and severity of economic crises. Nonetheless, developing countries have
moved over time in the direction of further financial openness. A plausible explanation is that financial
development is a concomitant of economic growth, and a growing financial sector in an economy
open to trade cannot long be insulated from cross-border financial flows. This survey discusses the
policy framework in which financial globalization is most likely to prove beneficial. The reforms developing
countries need to institute to make their economies safe for international asset trade are the same ones
they need so as to curtail the power of entrenched economic interests and liberate the economy’s productive
potential.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu

The years after 2002 produced a surge in net capital flows from richer countries to the
developing world. In 2008, the World Bank estimated 2007 net private capital flows into
developing countries at nearly $1 trillion, up around 30 percent from only a year earlier.1 In
the early and mid-1990s, a prior surge of private capital to developing countries preceded a
period of extreme financial turbulence, starting in Asia but spreading out to Russia and Latin
America. Until mid-2007 the recent experience had been more tranquil, playing out against a
seemingly benign backdrop of strong economic growth, low world interest rates and inflation,
and strong terms of trade.
The subprime crisis that originated in the United States in August 2007 has, however,
upset these favorable conditions. The expansionary monetary response by major central
banks, coupled with sharply escalating prices for energy and foodstuffs, initially unleashed
inflationary pressures as well as social unrest in poorer countries. As industrial countries
plunged more deeply into recession over the course of 2008, however, commodity prices
collapsed, inflationary fears gave way to the threat of deflation, and several countries turned
to the International Monetary Fund (and other sources) for official financial support. Is the
developing world as a whole about to enter an era of renewed crisis?
After the Asian debacle of 1997–98, prominent critics of financial globalization
argued that its benefits were intangible and undocumented, whereas its risks were enormous
and real. The years since the late 1990s, however, saw attempts, both at the national and
supranational levels, to make the international financial environment more stable.
Furthermore, the trend of financial evolution and opening in developing countries generally
1

See World Bank (2008, p. 2). The capital inflow figure I cite refers to “net external financing,” or the
net resources foreign investors provide in order to finance a country’s current-account deficit, its net

1

continued. Accompanying the latter trend were seemingly successful bids in many developing
countries to achieve greater stability in prices and, to a degree, in the public finances. Once
again, however, these achievements arguably were facilitated by a generally benign global
macroeconomy, but now appear to be at risk as global growth falters and commodity prices
fluctuate wildly.
This paper reviews the potential benefits and costs to developing countries of
embracing financial globalization. Both theory and evidence are covered, with emphasis on
the supporting institutional and policy reforms that seem most likely to result in net gains. I
will argue that despite the meager direct evidence that developing countries gain from
financial globalization, they should nonetheless proceed—albeit cautiously, in an incremental
and sequenced manner. There is evidence that domestic financial development spurs growth
under the right conditions, and these conditions—plus domestic financial development itself –
are likely to make capital inflows from abroad more productive. Furthermore, over the longer
term, an internationally open financial system is likely to be more competitive, transparent,
and efficient than a closed one. Finally, extensive domestic financial development makes it
much harder to police and enforce binding financial-account restrictions, especially as
international trade in goods and services expands.
The current instability in the industrial world’s financial markets testifies, however, to
the inherent fragility even of purely domestic finance in the presence of informational
asymmetries and distorted incentives. That fragility becomes even more acute when finance is
embedded in a globalized context, as I discuss below. Developing countries that suffer from
relatively severe structural shortcomings must therefore be especially cautious in their
international reserve accumulation, and its residents’ own net purchases of assets located abroad. The measure

2

approach to financial globalization. In addition, whereas fixed exchange rates have proved
dangerous in a context of open capital markets, a regime of freely floating rates raises
problems of exchange-rate volatility that are particularly severe for emerging economies
pending further evolution in their financial markets.
I begin by describing the trend of financial opening as well as recent capital flows to
developing countries, comparing the circumstances of the recent surge with those of the one
that ended a decade ago following the onset of the Asian crisis.

I. Trends in Financial Integration and Recent Inflows to Developing Countries

Researchers have devised both de jure and de facto quantitative measures of a country’s
integration with global capital markets.2 The former types of measures often are based on
information from the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
Restrictions (AREAER), which in 1996 began to publish a highly disaggregated description
of national restrictions on financial-account transactions. The measure recently proposed by
Edwards (2007) is shown in Figure 1 for the period ending in 2004.3 These data indicate a
trend of de jure financial opening in developing economies beginning in the late 1980s,
although all developing regions remain on average more closed than the high-income
countries have become. On these numbers, sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia are less open
than other developing regions, which appear to be at or (in the case of the Western

includes errors and omissions.
2
Stulz (2005) discusses some of the measures described below, as well as others.
3
Edwards (2007) constructs his index by augmenting earlier work of Quinn (2003) and Mody and
Murshid (2005) with information from national sources.

3

Hemisphere) above the average financial openness level of the high income countries around
1970.
There are well-known problems with the de jure measures, however; see Kose and
others (2006), for example, for a thorough discussion. Aggregative de jure measures are
highly subjective in some respects. Moreover, capital controls that appear strict based on their
statutory descriptions can, in reality, be quite porous. Countries typically apply different
regulations to inflows as against outflows, or to resident as against nonresident transactions,
making the impact of a single de jure openness number virtually impossible to interpret
without further information. These limitations of the de jure measures motivate the
consideration of various de facto measures of international financial integration. Although de
facto measures may furnish more accurate descriptions of ex post financial openness than de
jure ones, they likewise fail directly to gauge the incidence and severity of the actual
regulations that limit various financial trades by various parties. In short, none of the available
measures is even close to ideal for empirical work aiming to assess the linkage between
financial openness and growth.
In deciding the weight to place on a given empirical study, the reader should always
keep in mind how well the financial openness measure employed by the researcher applies to
the question at hand.
One widely used de facto measure is based on the data on total foreign assets and
liabilities assembled by Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007); see Figure 2. The data shown are
disaggregated as characterizing four country groupings: high-income, industrialized countries;
middle-income emerging markets; generally poorer developing countries; and Gulf oil
exporters. In all country groups (other than the Gulf group, which is a special case), the trend

4

of de facto financial integration since the early 1990s is upward, most sharply in the highincome group, followed by the emerging markets.
Recent years have seen a surge of net financial flows from richer countries into the
developing world. Table 1 documents some characteristics, along with comparative data for
the 1990s surge that preceded the Asian crisis.4 Three contrasts stand out. In the recent period
the developing world is in substantial current account surplus, whereas in the 1990s poorer
countries borrowed from the rich. Second, in the recent period the rate of net external
financing by richer countries has been nearly three times what it was then. Finally, one
counterpart of the current account surplus cum financial inflow is a massive
rate of average annual reserve accumulation in the last six years, as compared with the more
moderate pace seen during 1992–97. As discussed below, this development may be viewed as
an important, stabilizing adjunct of financial opening. Of course, there has also been an
accelerated rate of acquisition of claims on the industrial countries by developing-country
private residents.5
Recent data are dominated, however, by the substantial Chinese presence in
international financial markets and by the commodity-price driven surpluses of Russia and the
Middle East. Stripping out those regions, we see that the average rate of financial inflow in
recent years is still double the rate of the 1990s. The developing world, excluding China,
Russia, and the Middle East, ran a current account deficit for 2003–08, but a much smaller
one than in 1992–97. Furthermore, even outside of China and the oil surplus regions, reserve

4

“Net external financing” is defined in footnote 1 above.
If errors and omissions are neglected, developing-country private residents’ net acquisition of claims
on industrial countries equals net external financing less reserve accumulation plus the current account surplus.
Thus, on average over 2003–08, private residents of developing countries added a net sum of about $600 billion
every year to their assets held abroad..
5

5

accumulation has been much more rapid recently than in the 1990s—more than five times the
earlier rate. There are two implications for financial stability. First, countries running current
account surpluses or small deficits do not have a big external borrowing need that might
suddenly be denied by a capital-market reversal. Second, a high reserve level provides a
cushion of ready liquidity in a crisis.
We may examine two other indicators of financial fragility. For developing countries,
short-term debt as a share of total external debt rose prior to both the 1980s debt crisis and the
Asian crisis according to World Bank data. In the aftermath of both crises, borrowing
maturities lengthened temporarily (see Figure 3). Since the early 2000s, however, the share of
short-term foreign borrowing has risen once again, most dramatically for the lower middle
income countries. Taken alone, this development reduces financial stability by raising the
burden of a potential capital-flow reversal. Second, the overall average share of non-debtcreating inflows in net external financing (mostly portfolio equity plus FDI) is little changed
compared to the 1990s inflow experience, 62 percent in 2003–08 as against 61 percent in
1992–97. The nondebt share was only about 10 percent at the start of the 1980s, but since
1993 it has fluctuated between 56 and 94 percent. Although the secular rise in equity-like
foreign finance adds to overall financial stability by reducing potential sudden repayment
demands, the rising portfolio component also creates a conduit for foreign investor sentiment
to buffet stock-market prices and, through them, the domestic economy.
In both cases of capital inflow surge, low global interest rates have been an initial
driving force. However, the level of nominal dollar interest rates (and real dollar rates) has
generally been lower in the 2000s than in the 1990s, for reasons that remain under

6

debate. Figure 4 shows average nominal dollar borrowing costs for different income classes
within the developing world. Since the 1980s, sudden elevations in borrowing costs following
a surge of lending have at times presaged emerging-market crises (see Calvo, Leiderman, and
Reinhart, 1996). Borrowing costs were on the rise prior to the emergence of the 2007
subprime crisis, and it remains to be seen how they evolve as the crisis unfolds and as
countries deal with the economic pressures that emerged in 2008.

II. Fear of Financial Opening

Most economists would agree, despite some caveats, that protective measures discouraging
trade in goods will ultimately harm the growth performance of developing
countries. The case for financial openness is much more controversial. Jagdish Bhagwati’s
much-cited 1998 article on “The Capital Myth” in Foreign Affairs demonstrated that even
those committed to free international trade in goods need not support unfettered international
trade in assets, given that some dimensions of economic globalization hold potentially
devastating perils. The analogy between trade in “widgets” and in “dollars” is specious,
according to Bhagwati.6 At the time Bhagwati wrote, the recent Asian financial disaster,
surely exacerbated by the crisis countries’ access to global capital, provided an immediate

6

Earlier this point was emphasized by Díaz Alejandro (1985), whose account of the early-1980s Chilean
crisis put at center stage the folly of believing “that financial markets, domestic and international, were no
different from the markets for apples or meat” (p. 9). One is tempted to observe, however, that in many countries
food production processes are heavily regulated by government due to the possibility of disease transmission
through the supply chain. In the United States, Upton Sinclair’s indictment of laissez-faire in the meatprocessing industry, The Jungle (1906), led to a partial “sudden stop” in U.S. meat exports—as has happened
more recently to several countries in response to outbreaks of mad cow disease. Quickly the United States passed
the legislation setting up the Food and Drug Administration. Issuers of subprime-related financial products in the
United States during the mid-2000s certainly were not subject to oversight comparably stringent to that applied
to American meat products.

7

example of the risks inherent in financial trade. As discussed below, moreover, concrete
evidence of gains from financial globalization––at least gains of the type traditionally claimed
on the basis of simple economic theory—have proven hard to document in any definitive way.
On these grounds, critics of financial globalization such as Bhagwati (1998), Rodrik (1998),
Cooper (1999), Stiglitz (2003), and Rodrik and Subramanian (2008) have all made cases
against broad, willy-nilly financial opening.7
Not only capital-account skeptics, but also writers of a more conservative bent who
generally favor financial opening have supported “market-based” deviations from laissezfaire. Feldstein (1999), for example, endorses Chilean-style deposit requirements designed to
discourage short-term inflows. Just prior to the Asian crisis, the IMF was considering an
amendment of its Articles of Agreement that would have updated the Article VIII focus on
current-account convertibility to comprise the financial account (see Fischer 1998). The Asian
crisis derailed that ill-timed initiative; and by 2002 the IMF’s director of research was arguing
that, “These days, everyone agrees that a more eclectic approach to capital account
liberalization is required” (Rogoff, 2002, p. 55).8

7

Even the hypothesis that openness to trade promotes growth is supported by quite limited statistical
evidence. Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare (2007) survey the econometric literature on trade and growth and
conclude, contrary to the positive reading of Fischer (2003, p. 14), that “the empirical work on this question is
surprisingly mixed.” The interpretive obstacles that Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare identify are exactly the same
as those that bedevil studies of the effects of financial openness on growth. Although the obstacles are
qualitatively the same, however, their resolution often seems even more problematic in the financial sphere. One
problem, already mentioned, is the absence of reliable measures of the height of barriers to financial trade. In the
sphere of merchandise trade one can turn to data on statutory tariff rates and quotas and even shipping costs, but
financial barriers are likely to be more exotic and difficult to quantify. To the extent that capital-flow barriers
involve unobservable informational asymmetries that are less severe in non-financial markets, for example, they
will be much harder to measure than are trade barriers. I discuss other problems of empirical interpretation
below.
8
Of course, this rather mild indictment of capital-account fundamentalism in not inconsistent with
Rogoff’s (2007) more recent comment that “Too many policymakers still believe that externally imposed
opening to international capital flows was the main culprit behind the financial crises of the 1990s—a view that
unfortunately is lent some intellectual respectability by a small number of left-leaning academics….Pushing for
greater capital market liberalization after the debacle of the 1990's will be controversial. But the core of the idea

8

International trade, whether in widgets or in dollars, inevitably carries side effects that
can reduce the theoretical mutual gains. The difference between trade in goods and assets is
one of degree—in general a large difference in degree—though at the individual level the loss
of a job due to import penetration can be as devastating as the loss of a job due to a financial
meltdown. Theory teaches us that whereas in principle trade is Pareto-improving, in practice it
carries distributional effects that create losers as well as winners. To realize the potential
Pareto improvement entailed by a move to freer trade, income must be redistributed
domestically.
In practice, however, the lump-sum redistributions that would be necessary are never
made. And it is easy to see why. In a dynamic market economy, change, and with it, shifts in
economic fortunes, is constant. Government cannot possibly eliminate all the ex post losses—
and if it did, the resulting adverse economic incentives would seriously impair economic
efficiency and growth. Europe and the United States, for example, find themselves on
different portions of the equity-efficiency spectrum as result of Europe’s greater propensity to
provide social insurance in various ways. Regarding trade: outside of a laboratory setting, it is
difficult (indeed impossible) to isolate empirically the income redistributions attributable to
international trade per se—and therefore impossible to calculate the appropriate
compensation. The fact that trade patterns are in large part an endogenous product of deeper
economic factors makes the task even more daunting. Witness the difficulty economists have
had in determining the role of trade versus technological change on the U.S. wage structure.
And if we cannot somehow isolate the effects of trade, we are back, in effect, to a regime of
continually making transfers to offset all kinds of market-induced redistributions.
was right then, and it is right now.” An interesting discussion of the IMF staff’s shifting attitudes toward capital-

9

Furthermore, in the real world of market rigidities and distortions, the dislocations
caused by shifts in the international trading environment can of course go beyond pure
redistributive effects. But to attribute these dislocations, like shifts in income shares, to trade,
economists would need to know the counterfactual: how would economic history have played
out under autarky?
So even international trade in goods is a two-edged sword. That is not to deny that the
rapid and widespread devastation associated with financial crises overshadows the more
gradual effects of changes that originate in the trade accounts. The potential destructive power
of financial meltdown is also present, however, in a purely domestic context—that is, even in
an economy completely closed to trade and capital movements.
Financial collapse can propagate more quickly and destructively, even in autarky, than
more run-of-the-mill shocks to goods markets that do not impact the financial system
significantly. The interesting question is how these intrinsic problems of financial markets are
exacerbated (if indeed they are) once those markets are opened to the outside world. An
answer to this question, in turn, requires an explanation of precisely how dollar markets in
general differ from widget markets.
The basic differences relate to the intertemporal nature of financial trades and to the
potential for asymmetric information to eliminate trade gains. Asset trade inherently involves
commitment—the commitment to pay on a later date. Payment in reality is therefore always
contingent, and the circumstances of contingency can depend on information known to only
one party to the deal. Thus, financial transactions inherently must allow for the asymmetricinformation distortions that we call moral hazard and adverse selection. These distortions
account restrictions in the context of actual country advice is in Independent Evaluation Office (2005).

10

reduce the gains from asset trade that would otherwise be available—even with an efficient
and impartial judicial enforcement system. As is well appreciated, government guarantees
aimed at mitigating the redistributive effects of financial crises can, in fact, worsen moral
hazard and raise the probability of eventual crises. Domestic financial systems evolve—and
are regulated by governments—so as to contain the effects of these distortions.
Again, the difference compared to goods markets is a matter of degree. A consumer
durable yields returns over time, it may be known to the seller to be a “lemon,” yet an
unconditional service contract may leave the owner with insufficient incentives to operate the
durable good appropriately. But there is no doubt that commitment and informational
problems are by far most severe, and have the widest systemic ramifications, in the financial
market setting.
Every country faces the challenge of coping with the potential distortions in financial
markets, and they do so through some combination of insurance, prudential policy,
transparency requirements, and market discipline. Even leaving aside the international aspects
of financial transactions, the ramifications of home-grown crises can be severe in terms of
forgone GDP, and they can be so even for richer countries—witness the S&L crisis in the
United States, the Nordic banking problems of 1987–91 following deregulation there, the
drawn-out post-bubble sclerosis of Japan’s banks, and the most recent credit event, the
subprime crisis. Given the extent of financial globalization among industrial countries today,
the days of purely domestic crises may well be over.9
Often financial crises have arisen in the aftermath of deregulation—typically the
removal of financial-sector restrictions inherited from the Great Depression and World War

11

II, or, in developing countries, a move from the centralized allocation of savings to a more
market-oriented system. In many cases, the particular mode of deregulation, driven in general
by political imperatives rather than by a sound vision of financial sector optimality, induced
additional moral hazards and abuses. Rapid financial innovation has also led to problems.
There has clearly been a learning process in coping with changing financial structures and
products, yet new versions of the misuse of other people’s money (e.g., Enron or subprime
products) emerge, and most likely always will. Most countries reckon that the advantage of a
market-oriented system, even when subject to some political pressures, outweighs the
inefficiency and blatant abuses that characterized centralized systems of credit allocation. The
hope is that the safeguards to the system can gradually be enhanced as result of experience,
while avoiding systemic meltdowns. In general, in most of the industrial countries, this
approach did tolerably well for decades—though there were clearly recent areas of financial
excess, such as the home equity and mortgage market in the United States in the 2000s, the
background for the subprime crisis.10
So domestically, at least, financial markets raise perennial problems. Economists agree
that to safeguard its own domestic health, every individual economy should do its best to
make its own financial system immune to systemic crisis within a market framework. Of
course, this approach might well entail allowing individual investors to lose and individual
institutions to fail. But whereas modification of the financial regulatory framework is a
perennial issue, there is little sentiment (as there was after the disruptions of the early 1930s)
for an all-out assault on domestic finance. The money-lenders have returned to the Temple.

9

Fiscal cost estimates for past banking crises are tabulated by Ergungor and Thomson (2005). Fiscal
costs are naturally far below total economic costs, including repercussions on the broader economy.
10
For a recent general survey of financial stability issues, see Schinasi (2006).

12

What do international financial flows add to the mix? Here we see the second-best
analysis of Lancaster and Lipsey (1956) in action. If the domestic financial system is
distortion-ridden, then eliminating restrictions on foreign asset trade need not improve
matters, and may well make them worse. This indeed was the case in Chile in the early 1980s,
in Mexico in the mid-1990s, and in Asia later on in the same decade. There is no doubt that,
given the existing distortions within the crisis countries’ financial sectors, the mode in which
financial opening played out—driven in many cases by internal politics and vested interests—
only enhanced vulnerability.
There are at least five basic ways in which the international margin raises potential
new problems:
1. Sovereignty. The potential involvement of two (or more) governments as implicit
parties to international contracts (Tirole, 2002).
2. Regulatory end-run. International transactions can sometimes be used to evade
domestic supervision.
3. Competitive forbearance. Domestic financial institutions can lobby politicians to
loosen prudential restrictions that might reduce profitability compared to foreign
institutions.
4. Currency mismatch. The potential for unbalanced currency positions—for
example, dollar liabilities versus domestic-currency assets—creates a significant
additional systemic risk.
5. Contagion. With international trade in assets, financial fears can be spread
throughout a wider range of national financial systems, leading to aggravated
multiplier effects on real economic activity.

13

The realization of potential net gains from international financial trade relies on
containing the risks posed by these five factors. If the domestic financial system is not fairly
sound on a stand-alone basis, the further channels for malfeasance and transmission provided
by financial-account opening can magnify the potential for instability. And these channels, if
not mitigated by international regulatory cooperation and other measures (such as sufficient
exchange-rate flexibility), may pose new risks even for a sector that would be quite stable
otherwise. Empirically, many crises have been provoked by the opening of unsound systems
to capital flows—with the resulting levering-up of preexisting risks—although there are
certainly cases (Japan is one example) where financial problems have had little or no
connection to international financial flows.11

III. Some Crisis Mechanisms

The literature has identified numerous mechanisms that can lead to currency and financial
crisis. For emerging markets in particular, there is a potentially explosive multidirectional
interaction among the currency market, the government finances, the banking sector, and the
corporate sector—one that goes beyond, but is closely related to, the threat of “twin” (banking
plus currency) crises documented by Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999). Figure 5 provides a
schematic.
Shaky government finances—some give the example of Argentina, 2001—can

11

Some studies suggest that in many cases it is domestic financial liberalization that has been the main
driver of lending booms and subsequent crises, with capital inflows playing a secondary supporting role. This
perspective suggests a primary policy focus on the oversight and stress-testing of domestic financial
intermediation. See, for example, Gourinchas, Valdés, and Landerretche (2001).

14

lead to a widening of government borrowing spreads to an extent that default becomes
inevitable. In that case, with central-bank reserves drawn down through capital flight, the
previously fixed currency is inevitably allowed to depreciate. Banks and corporates with
foreign currency liabilities then are squeezed—and banks are squeezed even if they have lent
foreign currency to domestic corporates that are themselves forced into default due to
mismatched assets and liabilities. At the same time, government finances may be strained
further by explicit or implicit bailout promises, and by the ultimate need to restructure the
financial system. When the financial system is at an early stage of development and firm
borrowing is heavily constrained by balance sheet considerations, currency depreciation can
cause investment to crash, The problem can, at some level, begin anywhere in the chain, with
for example, devaluation fears sparking bank withdrawals and financial distress as part of the
stampede into the safety of foreign currency.
These mechanisms are distinct from the unique-equilibrium story proposed by
Krugman (1979), where an unsustainable fiscal deficit leads to reserve loss, currentaccount deficit, real appreciation, and inevitable collapse, as in the Southern Cone experiences
of the 1970s. Yet even those episodes contained some of the financial elements that have been
the hallmarks of the so-called “21st century crises.”12
Regardless of the mechanism, crises have been very costly. In a study focused on
emerging markets from the mid-1970s through 1997, Hutchison and Noy (2005) find that a
typical currency crisis reduces output by a cumulative 5 to 8 percent, whereas a typical
banking crisis reduces output by a cumulative 10 to 13 percent. Their analysis also suggests
12

IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus characterized the 1994 Mexican crisis as “the first
financial crisis of the twenty-first century.” Boughton (2001) has suggested that the 1956 Suez crisis may really

15

that the cost of a twin crisis—banking plus currency—is additive in the costs of its
components. Even so, these are big losses.13
An alternative view, however, is that crisis-prone countries have, on average and
including crisis periods, grown faster than countries in which credit growth is smoother due to
an absence of crises (Tornell and Westermann, 2005). The argument, essentially, is based on a
model incorporating a strong risk-return tradeoff, where the risks are due to various financial
market imperfections, including structural currency mismatch.
This discussion highlights that, whereas crises may sometimes be driven by
expectations, their possibility presupposes some weakness in various “fundamentals” of the
economy. These may be institutional fundamentals, such as the quality of bank supervision,
the quality and transparency of corporate governance, the state of domestic financial
development, and the reliability of enforcement of domestic property rights. Or they may be
more traditional macro fundamentals, such as a competitive real exchange rate and a
sustainable trajectory for public debt, the level of liquid international reserves, and the term
and currency composition of external debt. In principle, addressing these weaknesses can
improve the economy’s risk-return tradeoff, allowing a combination of higher growth and
lower volatility.
At a global level there has been an explosion in gross foreign asset positions in recent
years. The averages, which are evident in the well-known data of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti
(2007), conceal the fact that for some countries—smaller countries and major financial
be the first twenty-first century crisis. On different grounds one might well identify the 1890 Baring Crisis as the
first twenty-first century crisis.
13
Joyce and Nabar (2008) argue on empirical grounds that sudden stops affect investment only when
they coincide with banking-system crises, and that openness to capital flows accentuates the negative investment
effect of banking crises. Edwards (2007) finds no evidence that countries with higher capital mobility face an

16

centers—gross foreign assets and liabilities now stand at three or four times GDP. The rapid
expansion of gross asset positions, far beyond the minimum asset trade that would be needed
to settle current account imbalances, is certainly driven in part by enhanced risk sharing
between countries. But it certainly also reflects transactions that, while they do not create
additional trade in underlying economic risks, do raise the risk of counterparty failure. Since
leveraged international portfolios generally are not balanced in currency terms—for example,
the United States borrows overwhelmingly in dollars, but balances its foreign assets more
evenly among dollars and other currencies—exchange rate changes have the potential to
redistribute large sums internationally in seconds.
Even among richer countries that have addressed some of the most serious domestic
financial-sector problems and have flexible exchange rates, private financial flows have led to
instability. As always, the precise source of the next crisis is usually not evident except with
hindsight. One ongoing cause for current concern has been the proliferation in international
financial markets of unregulated nonbank actors managing huge portfolios. The turbulence
surrounding the Long-Term Capital Management rescue late in 1998 is one example; a more
recent one is the contagious spread of U.S. subprime mortgage lending concerns starting in
the summer of 2007. The policy response has been to seek ways of addressing specific
financial-market distortions (such as the difficulty in pricing certain derivatives), rather than
to shut down or tax cross-border financial flows. Notwithstanding recent events, most
observers conclude from industrial-country experience that there is at least the potential for
creating an environment within which trade in financial assets can yield net welfare gains.

increased risk or incidence of crisis, but concludes that crises tend to reduce economic growth more in countries
that are more open financially.

17

Outside of a few exceptional cases, these generalizations do not yet apply, however, to a
majority of developing countries, which have suffered quite harshly in financial crises.
External financial deepening does not yet extend to most of the developing world,
with a few emerging exceptions, of which Chile is one of the most notable. Chile has,
however, learned from its troubled past, and both institutional reform and a flexible exchange
rate regime have contributed to its apparent ability to engage relatively safely in world capital
markets (Cowan and De Gregorio, 2007). Other of the poorer countries have not yet reached
this stage, and still face difficulties in finding a comfortable reconciliation of open capital
markets with the exchange rate regime, as is discussed further below.
Institutional weakness not only can lead to crises in developing countries; even short
of crises, such weakness may severely limit the gains from international asset trade. Stulz
(2005) presents a clear account of one set of mechanisms, based on imperfect protection of
equity investors, coupled with the possibility that the state expropriates firm profits. If
corporate insiders can secretly appropriate benefits from running a firm, benefits that naturally
reduce the dividends of outside shareholders, then insiders will have to put up a substantial
equity stake in the firm to align their incentive to receive dividends with those of the
outsiders. The result will be a concentration of firm ownership that limits the beneficial
effects on the firm of financial globalization, and simultaneously limits the economy’s ability
to benefit from international risk-sharing opportunities. For example, even if financial
globalization brings a fall in the cost of capital, the agency problem may limit the firm’s
investment response.
Stulz argues that if government predation is also a problem, fewer firms will be
created and the concentration of ownership will be magnified. Because insiders have a greater

18

incentive to adopt opaque practices and entrench themselves, they can appropriate private
rents more easily, and will have to co-invest more in equilibrium. Firm managers may take on
excessive short-term debt, hoping that government fear of financial crisis will deter overzealous predation or other interference. Foreign shareholders may be especially vulnerable to
expropriation by the government. So it is not surprising that a weak rule of law and unreliable
protection of property rights can limit the gains from financial opening. Of course, some of
the mechanisms discussed here—for example, any propensity to take on additional leverage,
especially of short maturity—also accentuate the risk of crises.

IV. Empirical Evidence on the Effects of Financial Opening

What do the data tell us about the gains developing countries might reap from financial
globalization? There is an extensive literature trying to assess the gains from financial
globalization, both at the macro level and at the level of firms. Several comprehensive
studies—among them Eichengreen (2001), Prasad and others (2003), Collins (2004), Obstfeld
and Taylor (2004), Bosworth (2005), Kose and others (2006), Henry (2007), and Prasad and
Rajan (2008)—survey the empirical gains to emerging markets from financial liberalization.
Theoretically, there are some major direct channels through which financial opening could
benefit countries that pursue it.
One theoretical channel of gain is improved risk sharing. In principle, countries can
use equity or derivatives markets to trade the risks of income fluctuations with foreigners.
This risk-sharing process, in principle, could reduce the level of consumption relative to
output volatility.

19

There is no reliable evidence that such volatility reductions have occurred in
developing countries as a result of external financial liberalization. Prasad and others (2003)
examine the trends in income and consumption volatility for groups of industrial, more
financially integrated (MFI), and less financially integrated (LFI) economies. For each group,
they focus on median volatility. They find that between the 1980s and 1990s, when much
liberalization occurred, consumption-growth volatility fell in the industrial and LFI
economies, but actually rose in the MFI countries. Income-growth volatility fell in all three
groups, though less noticeably for the MFI group. An implication is that for the MFI
countries, consumption relative to income volatility rose—and it did so sharply. This outcome
seems to flatly contradict the prediction that external financial opening should allow countries
better to smooth consumption across states of nature. The end of the 1990s is responsible for
higher consumption as well as income volatility for the MFI countries, suggesting that the
crises of that period—as well as the consumption booms sometimes preceding them—play a
role in explaining the findings.
A more formal econometric approach to assessing how liberalization affects volatility
is taken by Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2006). Theirs is an exhaustive multi-country
panel study of the effects of equity market liberalization and more general capital-account
opening on aggregate volatility, especially the volatility of consumption growth. In a very
detailed paper, the authors link consumption-growth volatility over five-year windows to
official liberalization indicators, a measure of liberalization intensity based on the ratio of
investable to total equity market capitalization, and measures of capital-account openness.
The pervasive sense from the empirical estimates is that in a 90-country sample including
industrial countries that were already liberalized throughout the entire 1980–2000 sample,

20

equity-market liberalization has a significantly negative relationship to volatility. In the
restricted sample of 40 (mostly) developing countries that liberalized within the sample
period, the apparent volatility-reduction effect of equity-market liberalization, while often
present, tends to be much smaller and statistically insignificant. The results generally are
weaker for more general capital-account opening measures. The authors’ estimating equations
incorporate traditional control variables of the type typically included in the cross-country
economic growth literature (such as human capital measures), as well as measures of macropolicy quality and institutional quality (which often themselves are estimated to reduce
consumption growth volatility, or to enhance the beneficial effect of liberalization).
An obvious suspicion is that the results are driven by one basic empirical fact:
consumption-growth volatility was much lower in the richer countries that have been mostly
financially open over the entire sample period. Further, it is doubtful that the chosen
regressors fully explain macro volatility. Thus, when one restricts the cross-sectional coverage
to a sample of developing countries, the liberalization effect, which may simply reflect the
lower volatility in richer countries, disappears. Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2006) try to
address this critique by adding fixed effects to their specification, but it is unclear that this
dispels the concerns about identification of the volatility-reducing role of liberalization.14 On
the other hand, the study finds no evidence to support the contention that financial opening,
on average, raises volatility, even for the emerging-market sample.
A further difficulty in this work is the seeming use of consumption data that are not
adjusted to reflect deviations from purchasing power parity. Because there have been huge
14

Consistent with these concerns is the finding of Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2007) that emerging
markets have not benefited much from enhanced opportunities to share consumption risks. Also consistent is the

21

real exchange rate fluctuations, particularly in crisis situations, the welfare significance of the
results is open to question. However, the consumption-smoothing channel is only one of the
theoretical mechanisms through which international asset trade could benefit developing
countries.
A second major channel proposed for understanding developing countries’ benefits
from capital inflow is the alleviation of capital scarcity. This effect may work by lowering the
cost of capital and, perhaps transitionally, adding to the rate of economic growth. More
generally, there could be other reasons for financial opening to enhance economic growth, and
there is a substantial literature that searches for such effects.
One strand of empirical literature on trade gains is the study by Gourinchas and Jeanne
(2006), who show that the gains to developing countries from borrowing abroad to attain their
steady-state capital stocks are very low. The basic problem is that the polities of the poorer
countries generally offer such low protection of property rights that steady-state capital stocks
are themselves low. There is no great incentive to invest, and thus no great incentive for
capital inflow from richer lenders. Caselli and Feyrer (2007) claim that once one accounts for
factors besides capital and labor, as well as for the generally higher prices of capital goods in
terms of consumption goods in poorer countries, marginal returns on physical investment do
not diverge greatly as between rich and poor countries. They argue that the Lucas (1990)
“paradox” of small capital flows to poor countries, notwithstanding apparently big differences
in marginal products of capital, arises from goods-market rather than from financial-market
frictions. If so, further financial opening would have little impact on investment in poorer
countries. Intriguingly, Estevadeordal and Taylor (2008) tie growth-enhancing effects of postcross-sectional finding of Klein and Olivei (2008) that any positive effect of financial openness on financial

22

1970 trade liberalizations primarily to reductions in tariffs on imported capital goods. An
interesting question is whether these tariff reductions have affected growth in part by
attracting capital from abroad.15
Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian (2006) emphasize that over the 2000s, capital has
tended to flow from poor to rich countries, rather than from rich to poor as theory might lead
one to expect. This compounds the Lucas (1990) puzzle. Only FDI seems to follow the
conventional pattern of traveling from rich to poor countries (and there is more FDI these
days from richer to poorer within the developing country group). Prasad, Rajan, and
Subramanian show further that growth is significantly positively correlated with the net
capital outflow (current account surplus) for nonindustrial countries, whereas the opposite
correlation prevails for industrial countries – only for the richer group does greater net use of
foreign capital appear to be associated with higher growth. Aizenman, Pinto, and Radziwill
(2007) reach similar conclusions. Prasad, Rajan, and Subramanian (2007) argue that foreign
capital inflows can lead to growth-reducing overvaluations, as well as to financial instability
when an underdeveloped financial sector lacks the ability to safely funnel foreign capital to
productive domestic uses. They put their basic finding as follows (Prasad, Rajan, and
Subramanian 2007, p. 205):

Our analysis makes it clear that nonindustrial countries that have relied on
foreign capital have not grown faster than those that have not. Indeed, taken at

depth and growth applies mainly to longstanding OECD countries.
15
In evaluating cross-country differences in returns to capital, more work at the micro level, such as
Minhas’ (1963) study, would be illuminating.

23

face value, there is a growth premium associated with these countries not
relying on foreign finance.

Indeed, in a recent study, Gourinchas and Jeanne (2007) point out that such capital as
does flow to developing countries tends, on net, to flow perversely, to the relatively lowproductivity locales. The general problem is that greater beneficial effects of inflows
presuppose a level of domestic reform that, if it exists at all, is too recent to be reflected
strongly in the historical record to date. Even in a framework like that of Gourinchas and
Jeanne (2006), capital inflows will yield sizable benefits if preceded by reforms that raise the
desired level of investment and capital (Obstfeld and Taylor, 2004). But financial opening,
introduced without the requisite reforms, can be damaging, as we have seen.
Even though developing countries as a group have been in substantial current account
surplus in recent years, it is still possible that there are gains from the swapping of different
assets on a gross basis. For example, the benefits of inward FDI may spur growth through
various spillovers, while the current account surplus allows the luxury of rapid reserve
accumulation and the resulting liquidity insurance. But an evaluation of such possibilities
requires a more formal, statistical approach to the data on developing-country performance.
What is the econometric evidence on financial opening, growth, and investment?
Researchers have pursued a variety of empirical approaches.
One of the most popular has been the cross-sectional approach, which builds directly
on the copious growth-regression literature. Typically studies investigate empirical
regressions of long-period average growth on theoretical determinants, including variables
measuring the extent of capital-account openness. From the many studies that have been

24

conducted, one gleans the conclusion that there is no robust cross-sectional relationship
between liberalization and growth; see Prasad and others (2003, table 3.2) for a summary of
extant research. A fairly typical cross-section study finding no effects is the widely cited one
by Edisonand others (2002).
A problem in interpreting the findings of this literature, however, is the absence of a
clearly specified theoretical framework within which openness will affect growth. In a recent
survey, Henry (2007) presents a persuasive critique of the cross-section approach. To take an
example from his paper, assume a standard Solow growth model in which long-term growth is
determined by an exogenous rate of total factor productivity (TFP) growth, whereas in the
transition to a steady state, growth will also reflect capital deepening. Assume also that rich
countries have fully open capital accounts over the sample period, while poorer countries
have initially closed capital accounts but open up at some point in the period. One frequently
used measure of financial openness is the variable SHARE, measuring the fraction of years in
the period for which the capital account is open according to some dichotomization of the
IMF’s AREAER measure. The assumptions in Henry’s example mean that SHARE < 1 for
poor countries, SHARE = 1 for rich countries.
If all countries are initially in steady state, then the financial opening that the poorer
countries carry out in the sample period induces a capital movement from rich to poor.
Transitionally, this shift in capital will reduce growth in rich countries and raise it in poor
countries. But notice the implication: cross-sectionally, growth is negatively correlated with
SHARE. This negative correlation is found despite the fact that, in the model, capital moves
from rich to poor countries as a result of the poor countries’ opening, raising per capita output
growth in the poor countries just as the neoclassical paradigm predicts. Examples such as this

25

one call into question the usefulness of the cross-sectional approach to testing the growth
effects of financial opening. It would make more sense to look econometrically for an effect
of the change in SHARE on the change in per capita output growth.16 It is worth noting that
Henry’s (2007) critique applies beyond the Solow model to at least some endogenous growth
models, such as the one used in Obstfeld (1999) to analyze the growth effects of a foreign
resource inflow.
Alternatively, once could reasonably investigate the effect of the level of financial
openness on the level of per capita GDP, in line with the approach recommended by Hall and
Jones (1999). The implied relationship between the change in per capita GDP and the change
in financial openness—equivalently, between growth and the change in financial openness—
would remove unobservable country fixed effects from the specification.
A different approach exploits more fully the temporal dimension in the data, linking
financial opening to subsequent economic changes. Such approaches allow one to address the
point made by both Hall and Jones (1999) and Henry (2007) that the growth effects of policy
changes may be temporary. Henry has extensively explored the event-study approach to
financial liberalization. In a series of papers, he finds that equity-market liberalization leads to
substantial equity-market appreciation and an implied fall in the cost of capital (Henry,
2000a), to a large increase in the growth rate of private investment (Henry, 2000b), and to an
increase in the growth rate of the capital stock (Henry, 2003). Other researchers have found
similar effects, although there have also been challenges and refinements.
16

For a discussion of similar issues in cross-sectional tests of the trade-growth link, and a proposed
alternative approach, see Estevadeordal and Taylor (2008). The interpretation of pure cross-section tests
becomes even murkier if the underlying growth regression specification includes the investment rate as a
regressor, as often is the case, although Henry’s basic point still holds true. By controlling for the investment
rate, the econometrician forecloses an estimated effect of financial opening on growth through the capitaldeepening channel.

26

Regarding output growth per se, Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005) estimate
(using a 1980–97 data panel) that, post equity-market opening, the growth rate of real per
capita output rises by 1 percent per year on average in the following five years. Once again,
their methodology is to add liberalization indicators to a dynamic but otherwise standard
growth-regression specification, though they perform substantial further robustness exercises.
Importantly, Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad also find that the positive effect on growth is
largest when the quality of institutions and the level of financial development are high.
However, their benchmark country sample is a broad one, including industrial countries.
When analysis is restricted to a sample of 40 (mostly) emerging markets, the effect of equitymarket liberalization on growth proves robust, but the effect of Quinn’s (2003) measure of
capital-account openness, which is positive and significant in a broad sample of countries,
becomes insignificant. An interesting question, returned to below, is the nature of the forces
that might generate such a large estimated increment to GDP growth following equity-market
liberalization.
These results are striking, but there are a number of pitfalls in interpreting them. One
is simply that the methodology often requires a precise stand on the date of liberalization.
That decision may be tricky, in part due to the distinction between de facto and de jure
situations. A second major issue is endogeneity. Countries may liberalize when growth
prospects turn favorable, or when future macro volatility is expected to be low. In addition,
liberalization may be spurred by political factors that simultaneously spur additional reforms,
be they of policies or institutions. Thus, Henry (2007) suggests that the extremely large
growth effect found by Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005) cannot be accounted for
quantitatively unless equity-market opening is accompanied by an increase in TFP growth.

27

Various controls can be introduced in an attempt to correct for some of the policy reforms that
might accompany opening, and in some instances these somewhat reduce the measured
liberalization effect. However, it is always questionable whether the control variables
adequately capture the nature of the economic reforms, so the endogeneity issue remains. This
endogeneity critique is perhaps the major reason for being skeptical of all the econometric
work suggesting that financial opening, in and of itself, spurs more rapid aggregate economic
growth (or reduces macroeconomic volatility).
In some cases, microeconomic, firm-level data may be useful in circumventing some
of the endogeneity problems that plague the more aggregative studies.17 For example, suppose
the reforms that accompany liberalization affect all firms in a sample similarly, yet
liberalization’s effects are concentrated in a subset of the firms. In that case, a comparison of
firm performance across the treatment and control groups allows identification of the effect of
liberalization. Of course, this conceptual identification framework is valid in theory, but the
strong maintained assumptions it requires may make it difficult to implement in practice.
Henry (2007) and Kose and others (2006) survey the recent micro-level literature, but
a discussion of two selected studies illustrates the flavor of the results that have been
obtained.
Mitton (2006) draws on a sample of 1,141 firms from 28 countries to examine the
effect of equity liberalization. The major innovation is to use firm-specific dates on which
individual firms’ shares become eligible for purchase by foreign investors. This approach
largely eliminates the concern that liberalization is jointly determined with aggregate
economic reforms or with expectations of good aggregate economic performance—although

28

the concern that expectations of strong future firm performance determines the firm-specific
liberalization date remains. Mitton attempts to control for this problem in various ways. Even
after doing so, he concludes that equity liberalization has a positive and large effect on firm
performance across five dimensions: real sales growth, investment, profitability, efficiency
(ratio of real sales to work force), and leverage.
Chari and Henry (2004) study a data sample of 430 firms from eight countries, finding
an average 15 percent firm-level equity appreciation (in real dollar terms) following
liberalization. They are able to tie about a third of this appreciation to a factor suggested by
the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), the covariance of firm-level equity returns with those
on a broader market portfolio. Before liberalization, a firm’s equity price depends on the
covariance of its return with the local stock market. After, it depends on the lower covariance
with the world stock market. Thus, it is possible to identify a firm-specific effect of equitymarket liberalization on the cost of capital.

V. The Key Importance of the Structural Setting

I noted above the finding of Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2005) that the positive effect of
liberalization on growth is largest when the quality of institutions and the level of financial
development are high. In another study, Alfaro and others (2004) find that FDI has a stronger
growth-promoting effect when the local financial sector is better developed. The literature
examining such hypotheses more generally is somewhat fragmentary, but it suggests the
importance of certain structural preconditions in order that financial inflows have the maximal
17

Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare (2007) call for further micro studies to resolve questions about the

29

beneficial effect on an emerging market economy.18 This conclusion seems plausible in light
of the anecdotal evidence on emerging-market crises and the literature on institutions and
growth. Indeed, there is some evidence that the institutional and regulatory setting is
important even for reaping the benefits of opening to merchandise trade (Bolaky and Freund,
2004).19
Mishkin (2006) has provided an accessible overview and interpretation of recent
emerging-market crises that places at center-stage the way in which faulty institutional
underpinnings have distorted the effects of capital inflows from abroad and led to economic
instability.20 (Of course, some of these factors were present in much earlier crises, and were
noted at the time by perceptive commentators such as Díaz Alejandro and McKinnon. The
events of the 1990s should not have come as a surprise.)
In the Republic of Korea prior to its 1997–98 crises, the fundamental institutional
distortion was the political power of financially shaky chaebols, which effectively
manipulated the financial system to obtain access to cheap foreign funding. Moral hazard—a
government bailout mentality—was pervasive. The financial fragility was compounded by the
government’s decision, earlier in the 1990s, to open the economy to short-term but not longterm foreign borrowing.
In Argentina prior to its 2001–02 crisis, the structural economic problems included an
inflexible labor market; fiscal imbalance (in part due to the spending autonomy of provincial

effects of trade openness on growth.
18
Klein’s (2008) results, which show a positive impact of liberalization on growth only after a critical
initial income threshold has been passed (but not for high-income capital-rich countries), could be interpreted as
pointing in this direction. See also Arteta, Eichengreen, and Wyplosz (2003) and Klein and Olivei (2008).
19
A finding in the theoretical literature is that open economies might be most susceptible to financial
instability at intermediate levels of financial development. See, for example, Aghion, Bacchetta, and Banerjee
(2004).
20
See also the case studies included in Ishii and others (2002), as well as Mishkin (2008).

30

governments); a regulatory structure for the banks that did not adequately account for the
losses they would incur in the event that the peso’s fixed dollar exchange rate collapsed; and,
eventually, changes in bank regulations designed to induce banks to hold more government
debt. The Argentine “convertibility” scheme for anchoring the peso to parity with the dollar
threw up an eventually damaging paradox: How can a government require institutions to
avoid currency mismatches when it adheres to the position that its currency and the dollar are
irrevocably linked as a matter of law? The refusal to think about the unthinkable eventually
had severe consequences.
Kose and others (2006) usefully delineate four sets of structural features of an
economy that can affect the level of benefits countries reap from financial inflows: financialsector development and regulation, general institutional quality, the macro policy setting, and
the degree of openness to trade. They present a detailed discussion of the empirical evidence
on each of these structural factors, both econometric and anecdotal.
We have already seen how distortions in the financial system have historically helped
give rise to financial crises. Lax supervision of financial markets may allow currency, term, or
risk-category mismatches that can render banks and other actors insolvent in the event of a
crisis. Moreover, in an international environment, regulators should conduct a comprehensive
“value at risk” analysis for all the economy’s interlinked sectors, as stressed by Dornbusch
(2002). Consider an emerging-market bank that notionally has matched currency positions on
its books, because its dollar liabilities are matched by dollar lending to domestic corporates. If
those corporates, however, have revenue streams denominated in won and that currency falls
sharply against the dollar, the corporates’ loans from the banks may go into default, throwing
the banks themselves into crisis. In this case, the currency risk taken on by the corporates—

31

perhaps so they can enjoy lower dollar interest rates—is passed back to the banks in the form
of credit risk. The regulatory framework must take a comprehensive view of the risks and
ensure that moral hazard due to an expected bailout by the government does not give banks
the wrong incentives when making loans.
Financial-sector development matters in other ways. Resources borrowed from abroad
may not be channeled to efficient uses if financial institutions are weak, and in this case the
likelihood of eventual default will be higher. Illiquid domestic financial markets will also be
less able to provide interim funding for investment projects that would be profitable long-term
if credit were available. In principle, equity inflows to an emerging market are less likely to
be destabilizing than debt inflows, because required payments to foreign shareholders are
contingent on firm outcomes. The share of equity in total inflows, however, is likely to be
higher if the degree of shareholder protection—which also encourages domestic equity
holding—is high.
Various institutions also matter for the effects of financial inflows. These include
institutions that guarantee protection of property rights, political stability, judicial
effectiveness and impartiality, low corruption, and high corporate governance standards. A
number of empirical studies indicate that better institutions lead to a higher proportion of
equity investment relative to debt in financial inflows (especially of FDI, which may entail
positive spillovers to the economy through technology transfer and learning-by-doing effects).
Weak institutions also reduce the overall level of private financial inflows to an economy.
The framework for macroeconomic policy is also important, and I return to it later on.
The case of Argentina indicates how fiscal imprudence can generate unstable government
debt dynamics, in which government borrowing rates rise to reflect higher default

32

probabilities, inducing further borrowing, further rate rises, and eventual crisis. Institutions to
limit fiscal excess, including strictly circumscribed bailout promises, restrictions on
subnational governments, and legislated fiscal limits and transparency (as in Brazil’s 2000
fiscal transparency law; see Singh and others 2005) can all contribute to the stability of capital
flows.
The exchange-rate regime is a key aspect of the policy environment. Most emergingmarket financial crises have occurred in setting of fixed, or inflexibly managed, exchange
rates. A key tenet of macroeconomic policymaking, the open-economy trilemma, holds that
no country can simultaneously enjoy all three of the following: free capital mobility, a fixed
exchange rate, and a monetary policy directed toward domestic goals (such as an inflation
target). Countries that have attempted to maintain a rigidly fixed currency, such as Argentina
in its 1991–2001 decade of legislated convertibility, have faced harsh tradeoffs in sacrificing a
monetary policy that might help combat unemployment, external imbalances, and real
appreciation of the currency due to internal inflationary pressures. Even China, which
maintains capital controls, faces such a situation now. Moreover, market participants may pay
inadequate attention to the risks of an exchange-rate collapse, relying on the government
either to provide forward cover (as the Thai central bank did, at considerable fiscal cost, in
1997) or to mount a defense of the parity long enough that short-term funds can be withdrawn
or repaid. Adjustment of a current account deficit is always more problematic under a fixed
rate. For these reasons, it seems likely that a flexible exchange rate rather than a fixed one is
more likely to enhance the benefits from financial globalization. Exchange-rate volatility in
itself could conceivably be costly to growth, but Aghion and others (2006) find that this effect
seems to operate only for countries at low levels of financial development, which tend to have

33

closed capital accounts. For more financially advanced developing countries, there is little
obvious association between the flexibility of the exchange rate regime and growth (or
standard measures of financial development), but exchange rate pegging does seem to raise
the probability of a crisis; see, for example, Husain, Mody, and Rogoff (2004). Once the
capital account is open and the exchange rate is flexible, though, countries face the problem of
possibly unwelcome currency appreciations, and the associated external deficits and
compression of exports. The real exchange rate movements pose less of a crisis threat than
under a pegged nominal exchange rate, but, at the same time, may develop much more
quickly. Ad hoc capital inflow controls, although possibly useful for prudential purposes if
appropriately structured, may not help much in mitigating such currency pressures when they
arise. A fiscal-policy response can be more effective, albeit more cumbersome to enact in the
short run.
Central bank independence may contribute to financial stability. Prohibitions on
central bank financing of fiscal deficits can help to anchor inflation expectations. Moreover, a
history of inflationary instability is a prime contributor to the dollarization of liabilities, a
factor that makes it more difficult to operate a floating exchange rate, even a managed float.
Thus, institutional changes that help stabilize inflation expectations (central bank
independence, but also fiscal controls) can help make exchange rate flexibility feasible.
Policies that affect the maturity of external debt, if feasible and effective, can
potentially reduce financial instability. With longer maturity borrowing, of course, repayment
of principal is deferred, hopefully until after a crisis passes. A famous instance of a policy
working in this direction was Chile’s encaje, the two-year unremunerated reserve requirement
on financial inflows, which acted as a tax falling most heavily on short-term inflows. Its long-

34

term efficacy has, however, been debated. It is certainly true that policies that promote short
maturities (recall the South Korean example) can be disastrous.
The extent of rigidity in markets, especially in the labor market, can also be critical.
An excessively high regulatory burden can hamper the movement of factors between sectors
of the economy, in turn impeding the allocation of capital to its most productive uses. An
inflexible labor market, in particular in the presence of a rigid nominal exchange rate, can
make the economy especially vulnerable to volatile bidirectional capital flows.
Finally, consider trade openness. This structural feature of an economy may facilitate
financial stability through diverse channels. For example, greater openness to trade might
foster competition in product markets, reducing the political power of entrenched interests
that were previously able to lobby successfully for policies favorable to themselves, but
otherwise harmful to the economy. Greater openness also reduces the vulnerability to a
“sudden stop” in foreign lending (Calvo, 1998), in the sense that the required real exchange
rate adjustment will be smaller, as will be the knock-on financial effects of that relative price
change on balance sheets and the income distribution. Frankel and Cavallo (2004) provide
some empirical support. Martin and Rey (2006) provide a model in which, for given costs of
international asset trade, higher barriers to merchandise trade make a financial-market crash
more likely.
To the extent that trade openness itself promotes economic growth, a host of
adjustment issues that might alarm the financial markets can be mitigated. Any necessary
resource movement between sectors of the economy becomes less painful when growth is
more rapid, because there is less need for absolute employment reductions in relatively
shrinking sectors.

35

Often the four structural categories identified by Kose and others (2006) intersect. For
example, bailout guarantees, while promoting moral hazard, also can reduce the credibility of
commitments to maintain a prudent fiscal stance.
Of course, inferring causality from the empirical associations is perilous. For example,
fiscal rectitude, labor market flexibility, and trade openness typically reflect endogenous
government policies, which can be driven by “deeper” political factors that, in themselves,
make the economy better able to live productively with an open financial account. It is hard to
believe, however, that a favorable configuration of conventional fundamentals will not make
an independent contribution to financial stability.

VI. Endogeneity of Institutions

Must external financial opening therefore await thoroughgoing structural reform? Kose and
others (2006) present a detailed case that the answer is no, on the grounds that liberalization
itself will promote a structural evolution that enhances the beneficial effects of liberalization
while reducing the likelihood of negative effects. In their view, financial opening can lead to
improvements in financial sector development, the quality of institutions, and in macro
policies. These “collateral benefits,” at least over the longer term, enhance the net benefits
that even an emerging country wins from financial opening. They will also, in and of
themselves, promote investment and growth. The IMF’s Independent Evaluation Office
(2005) seems also to lean toward this view.
The hard empirical evidence is, however, sketchy. Kose and others document a simple
positive correlation between measures of financial development, measures of institutional

36

quality, inflation control, and de facto financial openness. Unfortunately, as the authors
acknowledge, these correlations leave open the possibility that it is high levels of structural
quality that encourage de facto openness.
Attempts at structural estimation are, for the moment, few. One study is that of Chinn
and Ito (2005), who present a panel analysis, 1980–2000, for 108 countries. They find that,
once a critical threshold of “legal and institutional development” (measures taken from the
International Country Risk Guide and other sources) has been reached, further progress in that
dimension directly fosters the development of equity markets, and also interacts positively
with financial openness to promote equity-market growth. Development of the banking sector,
they find, is a precondition for equity-market development. In another study, Tytell and Wei
(2004) find a disciplining effect of financial openness on monetary policy (but not on fiscal
policy). There is some supportive anecdotal evidence as well, Brazil’s experience under
President Lula da Silva being a case in point.
Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2008) look directly at the correlation between financial
openness and the TFP growth rate using 1966–2005 data on a large panel of countries.
Breaking the data up into nonoverlapping 10-year averages and using lagged regressors as
instruments to address potential endogeneity concerns, they find that, even when the sample is
restricted to nonindustrial countries, de jure financial openness has an economically and
statistically significant positive impact on the growth rate of TFP. They also find a tendency
for external FDI and portfolio equity liabilities to raise TFP growth, but for external debt
liabilities to lower it. The authors’ regression specifications relate TFP growth linearly to
country fixed effects, initial TFP, trade openness, the terms of trade change, population

37

growth, private sector credit growth, a measure of institutional quality, and de jure and de
facto indicators of financial openness.
Because what Hall and Jones (1999) refer to as “social infrastructure” appears closely
related to TFP, one could interpret these findings as indirect support for the theory that
financial openness enhances the institutional environment. However, the results of the KosePrasad-Terrones study raise a number of questions. Why is the estimated positive effect of
capital-account openness on TFP growth apparently so strong when a positive effect on output
growth has been found to be so elusive? What happens when some of the standard
determinants of output growth such as human capital are added to the regression
specifications? Why is the measured effect of de jure financial openness found to be so much
larger (two to three times as big) in instrumental variable compared to OLS estimates? Aside
from a convergence term, why does nothing but capital-account openness seem to matter
consistently for TFP growth in developing countries? Finally, through what channels is TFP
affected by financial openness? The estimates are intriguing but, as Kose, Prasad, and
Terrones (2008) observe, they raise a host of further research questions.
Even if direct empirical support for an effect of financial openness on institutions is
scant, there are some plausible and even persuasive theoretical arguments. For example, the
analysis of Rajan and Zingales (2003) suggests that financial opening may promote
competition and thereby weaken the power of obstructive incumbents to block reforms that
are counter to their interests. Emerging-market firms that list on industrial-country stock
exchanges may be forced to import higher governance standards. Once a country or firm
becomes dependent on international investors, it may be more amenable to their demands for
better governance and transparency. Foreign financial actors (such as foreign banks) may,

38

through a competitive effect, promote the spread of more efficient and prudent practices; see
the studies surveyed by Mishkin (2008) and by Prasad and Rajan (2008). Governments that
see themselves as dependent on foreign finance may hesitate before embarking on excessively
expansionary or populist policies (at least when the next election is sufficiently distant).
Stulz (2005) suggests that the fall in the cost of capital and the expanded financial
opportunities attendant upon financial opening make it more attractive for entrepreneurs to
lobby the government for measures that increase shareholder protection. These measures, if
implemented, can make it easier for firms to reap the gains from financial trade. He further
argues that financial opening can restrain the predation of the state and hasten institutional
reforms, because crises will be more probable otherwise:

[F]inancial globalization reduces the ability of those in control of the state to
extract rents. If they attempt to do so, resident investors can put their money
elsewhere, foreign investors can go home, and local firms will become
uncompetitive. From this perspective, it is not surprising that financial crises
will sometimes occur in those countries in which investor protection is weak
and respect for property rights suspect.

Rather than viewing financial crises as the downside of financial
globalization, this view suggests that the possibility of such crises is intrinsic
to the benefits from financial globalization. Free capital flows make it harder
for the state to expropriate investors because it gives investors an exit. (Stulz
2005, p. 1633)

39

Some potentially contrary evidence is beginning to emerge, however. For example,
Gozzi, Levine, and Schmukler (2008) use a large multi-country, multi-firm, time-series data
set to study the behavior of Tobin’s q before, during, and after years in which emerging
market firms first “internationalize” by drawing on foreign equity. They find that on average,
q rises in the year before and the year of internationalization, but returns to its prior level the
year after as corporate assets and debt rise. The authors interpret the absence of a permanent
increase in q as evidence that firms do not “bond” themselves to a higher level of corporate
governance simply by internationalizing. This result, they argue, is in line with other recent
evidence throwing doubt on the “bonding” hypothesis.
In light of the meager empirical evidence, one must hesitate to jump to the tempting
policy conclusion that, if only the capital account is opened, all will eventually work out for
the best. Some sequencing clearly is called for (as indicated by a classic literature), with
greater trade-account openness, a reliably good degree of macro stability, an effective
regulatory framework, and a viable and robust exchange-rate arrangement (to be discussed in
the next section) as minimal prerequisites for successful financial opening. For countries not
already open, a phased approach is prudent. First the economy is opened to FDI. The
available evidence suggests that FDI flows have the biggest positive effect on domestic
investment and growth (for example, Borensztein, De Gregorio, and Lee, 1998; and Bosworth
and Collins, 1999). Next come portfolio equity flows consistent with the development of local
financial markets, and only later, longer-term debt-creating flows. The liberalization of shortmaturity flows comes last. Steps that might promote the development of a market in localcurrency bonds (also to be discussed in the next section) should be taken in preparation for the

40

later stages of opening. These precepts are generally consistent with the approach described
by Ishii and others (2002) .

VII. The Macro-Monetary Framework

I have alluded at a couple of points above to the importance of the exchange rate system.
Indeed, a distinct argument in favor of capital controls is a pure “macro” argument not
directly motivated by issues of financial stability. Through capital controls, a country can
simultaneously attain exchange rate and domestic monetary policy targets. Thus, controls
offer one way to address the open-economy monetary policy trilemma.
Clearly the revealed preference of the main industrial regions has been to embrace
open capital markets along with whatever gains they bring, and to trade away exchange rate
stability in favor of a monetary policy oriented toward domestic objectives. It is not clear that
the alternative of capital controls would even be feasible for the industrial countries, given the
extent of domestic financial development and the growth of world trade—even in the early
1970s industrial-country capital controls were all but impossible to enforce. Interestingly, the
preceding pattern seems to hold also in emerging markets—greater exchange rate flexibility,
financial sector reform, fiscal and monetary frameworks conducive to moderate and stable
inflation—but as Fischer (2003) observes, no generalized retreat from open capital markets
(and this in the absence of the type of foreign pressures for financial opening seen in the
1990s). Some countries, such as Korea, have further liberalized their capital accounts since
the Asian crisis, while also working hard to improve domestic financial stability (Noland
2007).

41

The pattern is not universal, of course. As its convertibility plan was unraveling in
December 2001, Argentina imposed temporary capital outflow controls (Dominguez and
Tesar, 2007). In December 2006 Thailand imposed an unremunerated reserve requirement on
capital inflows in order to limit baht appreciation. (The idea was similar to one that Chile had
used earlier, as is discussed below.) The stock market immediately fell by 15 percent, and
next day the government removed the reserve requirement as it applied to equity investments.
Indonesia, Korea, and Malaysia, all previous users of controls, saw their own equity markets
fall along with Bangkok’s, and chose publicly to rule out the use of restrictions similar to
Thailand’s.21 The baht continued to appreciate against the U.S. dollar through early 2008. In
May 2007 Colombia imposed a 40 percent, six-month, unremunerated reserve requirement on
portfolio investment inflows. The effect, if any, in limiting the peso’s appreciation is unclear.
Recent inflow controls such as those attempted by Thailand and Colombia do not reflect so
much a retreat from financial integration or even an adjunct to prudential financial
supervision, as an attempt to counteract capital-account driven short-term exchange-rate
pressures that reduce competitiveness and therefore could slow growth. I return to this real
appreciation problem in the penultimate section below.
For a number of countries, we also see increasing self-insurance through the
acquisition of sizable foreign reserves. Feldstein (1999) recommended this measure in his
“self-help” primer, and it has been implemented avidly. One benchmark frequently cited is the
so-called “Guidotti-Greenspan” rule, according to which a country’s liquid foreign exchange
reserves should at all times cover its foreign-currency debt repayable within one year. Many
emerging markets, however, hold reserves far in excess of this benchmark; see Jeanne (2007).
21

See “Thailand Scraps Capital Controls after Stocks Plummet,” International Herald Tribune,

42

Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2008) show empirically that the level of financial
development, as measured by the broad money supply M2, is a strong and robust correlate of
reserve demand. They suggest that countries are trying to self-insure against the possibility of
simultaneous banking and currency crises, in which domestic deposit withdrawals finance
currency flight.
Emerging markets’ reactions to the subprime crisis that broke out in the U.S. in 2007
may be a stress test of the role of a healthy reserve cushion and a relatively strong current
account position (outside of Eastern Europe, Turkey, and some other countries) in preventing
contagious market panic. If so, emerging markets appeared to do reasonably well until the
eruption of worldwide panic in September 2008. Figure 6 shows that as of August 2008 (one
year into the. subprime crisis), the EMBI+ spreads for key emerging areas had suffered a
tremorbut not a complete meltdown. Of course, commodity prices were elevated until mid2008 and the crisis caused policy interest rates in the rich countries to be lower than they
otherwise would have been.
Reform and restructuring efforts are driven in part by a belief among emerging-market
policymakers that integration with the world economy, in finance as well as in trade, is
eventually a necessary concomitant of graduation to higher income status. Many researchers
believe that domestic financial development is a prerequisite of economic growth—see, for
example, Levine (2005) and the studies collected by Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine (2001).
Levine (2005, p. 921) summarizes his view of the evidence as follows:

December 19, 2006. http://www.iht.com/articles/2006/12/19/business/baht.php

43

A growing body of empirical analyses, including firm-level studies, industrylevel studies, individual country-studies, time-series studies, panel
investigations, and broad cross-country comparisons, demonstrate a strong
positive link between the functioning of the financial system and long-run
economic growth. While subject to ample qualifications and countervailing
views noted throughout this article, the preponderance of evidence suggests
that both financial intermediaries and markets matter for growth even when
controlling for potential simultaneity bias.
A sophisticated, deep financial system is, however, hard to insulate from the rest of the
world, especially given the reality of growing merchandise trade. Furthermore, opening a
closed financial system can, at least in principle, improve its performance. Improvements can
come from importation of foreign best practice, from efficiency-enhancing competitive
effects, from expanded diversification opportunities, and through undermining domestic
vested interests (enhanced competition in the political arena).
One major ambiguity in the finance-growth literature is the question whether financial
development causes or is caused by growth. Much of the literature, as noted by Levine
(2005), for example, points toward a causal role for finance. Even if growth primarily leads
finance, however, the implication is that countries that succeed in raising their per capita
incomes will find it difficult to remain financially closed.
Apart from the useful precaution of reserve accumulation, what monetary framework
is most suitable in a setting of substantial financial development and openness? The available
choices are delimited by the trilemma. Given a degree of capital-account openness, monetary

44

policy can be deployed to set the exchange rate or to reach a domestic policy objective (such
as inflation control), but not both. In order credibly to fix the exchange rate in a world of
highly fluid capital, however, it is not enough to renounce domestically oriented monetary
policy using words alone. The authorities’ hands must effectively be tied through far reaching
institutional change. This is why the longevity of conventional “fixed” exchange rates has
been so limited (Obstfeld and Rogoff, 1995). Even Argentina’s radical convertibility plan
collapsed after a decade as the political pressures undermining it became irresistible. If the
institutional scaffolding is weak, as in Argentina, then credibly fixed exchange rates will
require forgoing a national currency altogether, as in dollarization or through joining a
currency union such as the euro zone. Evidence seems to support the hypothesis of evolution
toward a bipolar world in which governments eschew adjustable or heavily managed pegs
(see Figure 7).
Adoption of even a fully credible exchange rate peg entails some disadvantages,
especially for larger economies, notably, the sacrifice of the shock absorption capacity of
exchange rate flexibility when nominal prices and wages are sticky. This capacity of a flexible
rate can be an aid in inflation control, in moderating unemployment, and in the adjustment of
incipiently large external imbalances.
Developing countries, often characterized by an inability to borrow externally in their
own currencies as well as extensive domestic liability dollarization, cannot weather large
exchange rate movements as easily as industrial countries can. The reason is familiar from
recent crises. A large depreciation of the domestic currency causes the value of debts relative
to assets to balloon. If external liabilities are in foreign currency, the net wealth of the country
can fall precipitously, and external debtors go bankrupt. But the potential problems are even

45

more severe. If there are unmatched foreign-currency liabilities in intranational positions, for
example, dollar bank deposits held by domestic residents, debtor balance sheets deteriorate
sharply when the home currency falls, possibly throwing many actors within the economy –
and their creditors—into bankruptcy. Furthermore, the need to borrow abroad in foreign
currencies imparts a structural disadvantage to their foreign exchange markets, making
exchange rates more volatile. (Obstfeld, 2004, discusses one mechanism arising entirely from
asset-market dynamics, while the next section describes a complementary mechanism that
operates through goods-market channels.) A result is the Calvo and Reinhart (2002) “fear of
floating” and with it, reduced monetary autonomy: the apparent tendency of emerging market
floaters to be guided more heavily by exchange-market developments than are industrial
countries. But fixed exchange rates seem not to be an option—they have certainly contributed
in several ways to the harsh character of emerging-market crises. And there is no doubt that a
regime with at least some day-to-day exchange-rate uncertainty is a useful preventive measure
against currency mismatch and crises.
An attractive conceptual framework for monetary policy is that of “managed floating
plus,” proposed by Goldstein (2002). The framework combines substantial exchange rate
flexibility, a credible inflation targeting regime (preferably buttressed by genuine central bank
instrument independence), and, crucially, measures to limit currency mismatch, both within
the economy and with respect to the external investment position. Goldstein and Turner
(2004) propose practical measures for monitoring and limiting currency mismatch.
The limitation on currency mismatch is intended to reduce the balance sheet
repercussions of exchange rate fluctuations, freeing the monetary authority to tolerate
exchange rate movements that are a byproduct of inflation-oriented policies (and thereby

46

reducing the fear of floating). It might be added that a healthy financial system is also a
prerequisite, and for a similar reason: central-bank credibility requires the ability to make
significant and possibly abrupt interest-rate changes in the face of an inflation scare.
Useful in implementing such a program is the development of a local-currency bond
market. Such markets not only mitigate the problem of currency mismatch, they facilitate the
conduct of monetary policy and enhance the economy’s ability efficiently to channel
resources to investors. Not coincidentally, a major development of recent years has been the
growth of local-currency bond markets in a number of emerging markets. There has also been
increasing external placement of local-currency bonds in some cases. The World Bank (2008,
p. 66) reports that East Asian bond markets grew from $400 billion in 1997 to $1.6 trillion by
end-September 2005. This growth was partly a result of governments issuing local-currency
bonds in connection with financial and corporate restructuring after the Asian crisis. With the
major exceptions of China and India, these bond markets are much more open than in 1997.
This development has been supported by innovations in contingent contracting, notably, the
increasing use of credit default swaps and nondeliverable forward transactions. In November
2007 the World Bank launched a Global Emerging Markets Local Currency Bond
(GEMLOC) program to cultivate local-currency bond markets and raise their attractiveness to
foreign investors.
Latin American countries and Russia have been able to issue some local-currency
bonds in world markets. This is not unprecedented: Argentina was able to borrow in pesos
abroad during 1996–2001, under its convertibility plan. More recently, though, Brazil,
Colombia, and Uruguay have tapped the international sovereign borrowing market with localcurrency debt, payable in dollars, and, in Uruguay’s case, indexed to domestic inflation. Is

47

this the wave of the future? This seems unlikely. International issuance of local-currency debt
is second best to a more vigorous development of a domestic bond market open to foreign
lenders. Tovar (2005, p. 117) judiciously concludes, “[T]here is no guarantee that the recent
increase in this sort of issuance by sovereigns in the region reflects a permanent trend. History
provides many examples of rapidly shifting preferences on the part of international investors.”
In general, Latin America has lagged in terms of domestic financial development (de la Torre
and Schmukler, 2007).
The domestic bond market evolution that has occurred in emerging markets has been
promoted by measures ranging from pension reform to initiatives by international
organizations (and, of course, by a lowering of formal inflow barriers). It is important to ask,
however, whether institutional reforms of the type that are likely to enhance the benefits from
financial inflows might play a catalytic role. According to the notion of “original sin”
advanced by Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999), there might be little that developing
countries themselves can do to gain access to domestic-currency loans from abroad.
Using a 2001 dataset on domestic and foreign-currency bonds outstanding in the
markets of 49 industrial and developing countries, however, Burger and Warnock (2006)
conclude that the size of the bond market, and the currency composition of borrowing, are
endogenous. The most robust positive predictor of both bond market size and the share of
local-currency borrowing is a history of low inflation variance (consistent with the theoretical
prediction of Jeanne, 2005). There thus may be a virtuous circle, in which low inflation
promotes development of local-currency bond markets, which in turn allow a more credible
pursuit of low inflation by the authorities. For government bonds, Claessens, Klingebiel, and

48

Schmukler (2003) find that greater exchange-rate flexibility is associated with a bigger localcurrency bond market.
Burger and Warnock (2006) also find that a high rating on a “rule of law” measure
promotes the size of the local bond market relative to GDP, whereas strong creditor rights
promote a high share of local currency bonds. Claessens and others likewise find a role for
institutional variables. Further corroboration comes from two studies of emerging bond
markets by Eichengreen and Luengnaruemitchai (2004, 2008), who focus on Asia’s relative
success. They find that bond-market capitalization (2004) and foreign participation in the
domestic bond market (2008) both depend positively on aspects of institutional quality and
domestic financial development. Burger and Warnock (2007) study the determinants of U.S.
investor participation in local-currency bond markets and argue that foreign investors avoid
high variance and negative skewness, even in diversifiable idiosyncratic returns. If so,
enhanced macroeconomic stability (including a lower frequency of maxi-devaluations) could
spur foreign demand for local-currency bonds.
These results are intriguing, but they must be interpreted with caution. There is the
possibility of bidirectional causation, of course, which Burger and Warnock (2006) try to
address through the timing of regressors and various instruments. At the conceptual level,
however, the findings raise puzzles. Why should creditor rights influence local-currency
borrowing, but not the total extent of bond market development, as Burger and Warnock
(2006) find? To what extent do the results simply capture that the industrial countries, being
richer, have deeper bond markets and a more rigorous rule of law? The regressions show a
strong negative effect of economic growth on bond market development, which surely
captures the fact that Asian countries grew more rapidly than the industrial world over the

49

1990s, yet still had more limited bond markets in 2001. Hopefully future work will throw
further light on policies and reforms that promote local bond market development and the
escape from original sin, both of which can greatly ease the implementation of a macro
framework that includes extensive exchange rate flexibility and an open financial account.22
A full managed float may be impractical at the early stages of financial opening and
market liberalization, when capital controls still are in place and somewhat effective. China,
for example, is in this position now, as is India. As a transitional measure, some system such
as the “basket, band, and crawl” (BBC) suggested by Williamson (2001) can be very helpful.
Roughly speaking, the basket peg helps maintain multilateral competitiveness, the crawl
offsets differential inflationary trends, while the bands place limits on excessive volatility or
misalignment. The bands, of course, would not be viable for long absent capital controls. But
in the transition to fuller financial openness, such a system may effectively limit the
overvaluations that have often helped generate crises.
Chile’s case shows, once again, that progress is possible.23 Chile had a disastrous early
experience of financial opening culminating in a 1982 crisis involving a huge output loss,
steep currency depreciation, and nationalization of much privately contracted financial-sector
external debt (Díaz Alejandro, 1985). This sobering history provides the background for the
successful reforms undertaken there since the mid-1980s.
On the currency side, from the mid-1980s the Chilean peso’s U.S. dollar exchange rate
was kept within a crawling band, the central parity of which was adjusted daily to reflect the
inflation difference between Chile and its main trading partners. The goal of the crawl was to
maintain competitiveness—though there is a danger in any such system that expectations feed
22

An interesting discussion of the Australian experience is in McCauley (2006).

50

into inflation, resulting in accommodation of the pervasive expectations via the exchange rate.
Partly for this reason, no doubt, as well as due to indexation, inflation remained relatively
high in Chile for a decade, dropping below double digits only in the mid-1990s. (In 1998
lagged domestic inflation was replaced by an inflation target in the definition of the crawl, a
key reform in bringing inflation down further.) Although the top end of the band (weak peso)
was tested frequently prior to 1991, 1991–97 was a period similar to the recent past in China,
with the peso near the strong edge of the band and attempts by the authorities to resist capital
inflows and to sterilize. (Estimates of the quasi-fiscal costs of sterilization run about 0.5
percent of GDP per year, a huge number. Net international reserves peaked at 25 percent of
GDP.)
In 1992 Chile moved to a BBC when it redefined its central peso rate in terms of a
basket including the DM and yen as well as the U.S. dollar. Variations in currency
composition were made opportunistically. Starting in September 1998, in the wake of capital
outflows associated with Asian-crisis spillovers, the currency-band width was set at ±4
percent and widened continuously until December 1999, when free floating of the peso was
declared.
On the financial account, prior to liberalization, Chile channeled transactions through
a formal foreign exchange market consisting of the central bank, commercial banks, and
specially authorized exchange trading houses. An informal (but fully legal) informal foreign
exchange market existed for non-financial transactions; it had a floating exchange rate.
Initially, exporters and importers of capital were obliged to sell foreign exchange proceeds in
the formal market. The non-financial private sector was allowed to acquire foreign exchange
23

Some of the following material draws on Obstfeld (2007).

51

informally. The strength of enforcement sometimes reflected balance of payments pressures.
Only by the mid-1990s had the discrepancy between formal and informal exchange rates
essentially disappeared. Chile still maintained, for some years afterward, its encaje or
unremunerated reserve requirement on foreign capital inflows, but this was scrapped in the
late 1990s. Prior to full financial liberalization and, shortly afterward, free floating, Chile
restructured its domestic financial system and imposed extensive regulation and supervision,
with special attention to currency mismatches on balance sheets. There was also a substantial
development of domestic forward exchange trading after 1995, allowing a better allocation of
exchange rate related risks.
China and India, even though their economies have generated high economic growth
rates in the presence of capital controls, show gradual movements toward external
liberalization. China’s plans of the latter 1990s were slowed by the Asian crisis. More
recently, external liberalization has been mostly of outflows, driven by the need to relieve the
pressure of reserve inflows on the money supply and the price level (Obstfeld, 2007). The
weak state of China’s banking system makes a thoroughgoing financial opening impracticable
at the present time.
India’s public discussion has been much more deliberate than China’s. In 1997,
India’s Committee on Capital Account Convertibility, chaired by S. S. Tarapore, sketched out
preconditions for attaining complete convertibility over a three-year period (Tarapore, 1998).
This thinking was derailed by the Asian crisis, but the preconditions that the report envisioned
for safely opening the capital account are similar in many respects to those spelled out above.
These include strengthening of the financial system (especially reducing the banking system’s
burden of nonperforming loans), along with an array of complementary macro-stabilization

52

measures: fiscal consolidation, inflation control, limits on the current account deficit, and
monitoring the real exchange rate for overvaluation. The report also suggests a healthy
reserve cushion, managed from the Guidotti-Greenspan perspective of partially covering
short-term foreign debts. Tarapore himself favored a tax on short-term capital inflows as a
way of limiting the economy’s maturity mismatch.
The issue has been revisited in the Report of the Committee on Fuller Capital Account
Convertibility, again chaired by Tarapore (Tarapore and others, 2006). The course
recommended by the committee is quite incremental, and the broad supporting preconditions
from the earlier capital-account convertibility report are reasserted. In a dissenting note,
Bhalla (2006) endorses the committee’s emphasis on limiting both rupee overvaluation and
excessive short-term foreign debt. But he faults the report on its timidity in liberalization and
on its recommendation of an explicit and relatively narrow real exchange rate band for the
rupee. The latter, he argues, would simply be a target for speculators, even with many capital
controls retained.

VIII. Capital Inflows, Real Appreciation, and Volatility

If a more flexible exchange rate is necessary for safely managing an open capital account, one
collateral cost is that shifts in the world demand for domestic assets (as well as other shocks)
can very rapidly translate into substantial real currency appreciation. In the presence of
nominal price stickiness, the currency may overshoot. Particularly if credit markets are
imperfect, the resulting relative price configuration can send faulty price signals that damage
international competitiveness, inducing costly intersectoral resource reallocations and

53

unemployment. With an open capital account, the possibility of undesired real currency
appreciation—and indeed, depreciation—is inherent in the trilemma. Because appreciations
are associated with distress in the manufacturing sector and with current account deficits,
however, it is these rather than depreciations that generally worry policymakers the most
outside of crisis periods.
The real appreciation problem drew professional attention roughly three decades ago
in the dual contexts of disinflation and the so-called “Dutch disease.” In Argentina, Uruguay,
and Chile, the adoption of exchange-rate based stabilization programs in the late 1970s led to
capital inflows, consumption booms, and real appreciation. All three Southern Cone
stabilization programs ended in tears, for reasons that have been extensively analyzed.
Liviatan (1980) suggested that under a floating exchange rate, a capital import tax might be
useful in limiting the sharp real appreciation that would otherwise occur at the outset of a
dramatic disinflation. The tax might prevent a collapse in exports and thereby deter the
manufacturing sector from becoming a powerful lobby against the stabilization program.
If an emerging market facing an increase in asset or output demand prevents its
currency from appreciating in nominal terms, its intervention operations will lead in the first
instance to a rise in international reserves and the money supply. Higher inflation will result,
bringing the economy, eventually, to the same long-run equilibrium position that would have
been reached more quickly under a floating exchange rate. Under an open capital account,
attempts to sterilize the resulting money-supply increase through central bank domestic-asset
sales will only draw in offsetting capital flows and raise foreign reserves further (while at the
same time raising the government’s quasi-fiscal expenses). In the hope of keeping inflation
expectations anchored despite a positive demand shock (for assets or goods), many countries

54

have responded to real exchange rate movements by a mixture of intervention and nominal
appreciation. As noted above, some have also resorted to short-term capital-inflow controls of
various kinds, typically coupled with sterilization. The ultimate success of such measures in
limiting real exchange rate variability is unclear. Interventions in asset markets may be more
successful when shocks to the exchange rate originate in the asset markets themselves rather
than in output markets.
The underlying problem is likely to be much more severe for economies that cannot
borrow in domestic currency, and that feature extensive domestic liability dollarization. Such
currency mismatches create a transmission mechanism that endogenously makes the real
exchange rate more variable with respect to underlying shocks than they would otherwise be.
The transmission mechanism operates through wealth effects.
A very simple small-country flexible-price model illustrates the basic channels
involved. Denote by p the relative price of nontradable goods in terms of tradable goods, and
assume that the prices of tradable goods are equal to their prices in world markets, which are
exogenously given. If α is the share of nontradables in consumption (generally in the ballpark
of α = 0.75), then pα can be identified with the real exchange rate as well as with the consumer
price index (CPI), a rise in this price being a real currency appreciation.
The supply function for nontradables is y(p), with y´(p) > 0. Let WC be the real wealth
of domestic creditors (in terms of the CPI ), WD the real wealth of domestic debtors (in terms
of the CPI), and z a demand shock. The demand for nontradables is the sum of the demands of
domestic creditors and domestic debtors, written as eC(p,WC) + eD(p,WD) + z. The shock z
could reflect, for example, a positive demand impulse due to an influx of foreign loans. When
p rises, the partial effects on the demands of creditors and debtors alike are negative.

55

Total domestic real wealth is WC + WD = K − p−αF, where K is the aggregate capital
stock (assumed to be indexed to the CPI) and F represents the net foreign debt (assumed to be
denominated in tradables, in accordance with the “original sin” model).
Even though the capital stock is (for simplicity) assumed to be invariant with respect
to the CPI, there is domestic liability dollarization, meaning that in general, entrepreneurs
who operate capital have financed its acquisition through borrowing that is indexed to
tradables. As a result, real appreciation transfers wealth from creditors to debtors within the
economy, whereas real depreciation does the reverse. In the absence of a net foreign debt (that
is, when F = 0), these two effects would be exactly offsetting. But if, as I assume instead, F >
0, then a real appreciation will raise aggregate real wealth and a real depreciation will lower
it. These assumptions are captured by the inequalities:

∂ (W C + W D )
∂W C
∂W D
< 0,
> 0,
= α p −α −1 F > 0.
∂p
∂p
∂p
A second empirically relevant assumption is that wealth redistributions within the
country are not neutral in their effects on aggregate demand. It is debtors who have the higher
marginal propensity to consume out of their current wealth—an effect exacerbated by various
financial market imperfections, including agency constraints through which higher wealth
allows more borrowing by the debtor class.24 In symbols, the assumption regarding marginal
consumption propensities is that:

24

The emphases on both the balance-sheet effects of currency movements and the differing marginal
consumption propensities of different economic groups are salient in the classic literature on contractionary
devaluations. For lucid discussions, see Díaz Alejandro (1963; and 1965, p. 31).

56

∂e D
∂eC
−
> 0.
∂W D ∂W C

One can now calculate how movements in the forcing variable z will affect the real
exchange rate under the conditions of the model. Differentiation of the goods-market
equilibrium condition y(p) = eC(p,WC) + eD(p,WD) + z shows that:
dp
=
dz

1

C
D
∂eC ∂e D  ∂eC
∂e D  dW C ∂e D d (W + W )
−
−
−
−
y′( p ) −

∂p
∂p  ∂W C ∂W D  dp
∂W D
dp

.

(I assume this derivative is positive.) In the absence of any wealth effects due to a change in
the real exchange rate, the denominator above would be simply y′( p ) −

∂eC ∂e D
−
> 0. As a
∂p
∂p

result of the wealth effects, however, this positive number is reduced in the denominator by
C
D
 ∂eC
∂e D  dW C ∂e D d (W + W )
. The first summand here
−
+
the positive quantity 

C
∂W D  dp
∂W D
dp
 ∂W

captures the redistribution of wealth from creditors to higher-consuming debtors when p rises;
the second, the positive demand effect of the accompanying rise in aggregate wealth given a
net foreign debt. Intuitively, through these two distinct wealth effects, real appreciation raises
demand for nontradables, partially offsetting the primary partial price effects on supply and
demand. Thus, in equilibrium, a given demand impulse z has a magnified effect on the real
exchange rate. Of course, the implication is the same for negative demand shocks, which will
cause disproportionate real depreciations in this model. The latter could be asymmetrically
large if additional financial constraints begin to bind as the currency falls. In summary, with

57

original sin and domestic liability dollarization, we should expect real exchange rate volatility
to be sharply higher than it otherwise would be.
The analysis points to an important reason why developing economies find it hard to
find a comfortable resolution of the trilemma, and often exhibit “fear of floating” as
documented by Calvo and Reinhart (2002). An obvious way forward is to promote reforms
that reduce dollarization, as discussed above, but this is easier said than done. Fiscal responses
to real appreciation might also be appropriate, but run into the obvious obstacle that as a
political matter, fiscal retrenchment is always more problematic than expansion.
Macroprudential regulation of financial institutions, with the stringency of oversight tied to
the strength of capital inflows, might also prove a useful device for deterring lending booms
and the associated real appreciation (see Ocampo and Chiappe, 2003, for one proposal).
Analogous regulatory regimes are currently under consideration for the industrial economies’
financial markets. Fixed exchange rates and capital mobility have proved to be an explosive
mixture, but for the moment, significant market-driven changes in floating exchange rates will
remain problematic for developing countries that embrace financial globalization.

58

IX. Conclusion

Particularly at the macro level, it is hard to find unambiguous evidence that financial opening
yields a net improvement in economic performance for emerging countries. Major problems
in empirical evaluation include the bundling of financial opening with a potential host of other
growth-friendly reforms, and the endogeneity of the liberalization decision itself.
Microeconomic data may provide less ambiguous evidence, but even in the micro context
identification problems can remain. Managing flexible exchange rates in the context of an
open capital account has been an especially thorny issue for developing economies.
Nonetheless, policymakers in emerging markets have displayed a remarkable revealed
preference for financial openness, and the trend is likely to continue (perhaps with occasional
seizures when global economic conditions sour). Why? Domestic financial development is
attractive from several perspectives—it promotes growth, can enhance welfare more
generally, allows easier government borrowing, and eases the conduct of a domestically
oriented monetary policy. Such domestic financial deepening, along with merchandise trade
expansion, makes capital controls ever costlier to enforce. Furthermore, financial opening is
likely to promote, through several channels, a more competitive and resilient domestic
financial system.
Domestic financial development itself is likely to make external financial
liberalization easier to live with. But there are other institutional reforms that ultimately are
also helpful—relating to the rule of law, corruption, contract enforcement, corporate
governance, reductions in liability dollarization, and the like. These reforms cannot be
accomplished overnight, and in the process, a phased and cautious piecemeal approach to

59

liberalization is in order. It is important, though, that the piecemeal nature of the approach not
exacerbate existing distortions or create new ones—for example, by liberalizing short-term
debt flows ahead of long-term flows.
Distortions in industrial-country financial markets—distortions of which we are
acutely aware these days—are not irrelevant to the fate of developing economies that embark
upon financial integration with richer countries (Dobson and Hufbauer, 2001). In the
necessary process of international financial coordination, the emerging markets must
increasingly become equal partners with their industrial counterparts, just as in the sphere of
international trade.
Regarding the appropriate macro-monetary framework, we have learned much from
the vicissitudes of the post debt-crisis years. The World Bank (2006, p. 140) puts it as
follows:

As developing countries become more open to international financial markets,
designing and building a sound regime of external financial policy making and
regulation presents an urgent challenge. A consensus has formed around the
three core components of such a regime – membership in a credible currency
union, such as the [euro zone], or an exchange rate that reflects market forces;
gradual opening of the capital account; and a monetary policy framework that
favors price stability.
Conversely, a stable and sound macro-monetary framework seems likely to promote
complementary structural developments in the economy—structural developments that are

60

essential to reduce the negative impacts of exchange-rate volatility for countries that retain
national currencies. One instance is the possibility, suggested by some evidence, that inflation
stability promotes domestic-currency bond markets. In general, financial liberalization itself
can yield “collateral” institutional benefits for the economy, benefits that both spur growth
and make an open financial account less crisis-prone (Kose and others, 2006). Determining
the extent to which this has been reliably true in practice is an urgent item on the research
agenda for growth and development economists.
The conclusion that financial integration is inevitable, and eventually even helpful, is
in line with a classic insight from the trade policy literature: the efficient way to correct a
distortion is to attack it at to its source. In the present setting, domestic financial market
imperfection and institutional weakness, not financial openness, is the primary problem. The
ideal response would be a correction of domestic imperfections plus intervention to address
the specific additional issues raised by the international margin. Only if this approach is
unworkable might a closed financial account be the answer. Unfortunately, as Rodrik and
Subramanian (2008) point out, the political resources that can be devoted to reform efforts are
limited, so not all distortions can be attacked within a short horizon. Until economists have a
better handle on precisely which repairs are most critical for safe financial opening, the
process of liberalization should be especially gradual and cautious.
A hopeful aspect in this picture is that the financial and institutional reforms
developing countries need to carry out to make their economies safe for international asset
trade are at the same time reforms they need to carry out anyway so as to curtail the power of
entrenched economic interests and liberate the economy’s productive potential. Taken all
alone, financial openness is not a panacea—and it could be poison. The empirical record

61

suggests that its benefits are most likely to be realized when implemented in a phased manner,
when external balances and reserve positions are strong, and when complementing a range of
domestic policies and reforms to enhance stability and growth.

62

REFERENCES

Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, and Abhijit Banerjee, 2004, “Financial Development
and the Instability of Open Economies.” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 51
(September), pp. 1077–106.
Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, Romain Rancière, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2006,
“Exchange Rate Volatility and Productivity Growth: The Role of Financial
Development, NBER Working Paper No. 12117 (Cambridge, Massachusetts, National
Bureau of Economic Research).
Aizenman, Joshua, Brian Pinto, and Artur Radziwill, 2007, “Sources for Financing Domestic
Capital – Is Foreign Saving a Viable Option for Developing Countries?” Journal of
International Money and Finance, Vol. 26 (September), pp. 682–702.
Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek, 2004, “FDI and
Economic Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets,” Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 64 (October), pp. 89–112.
Arteta, Carlos, Barry Eichengreen, and Charles Wyplosz, 2003, “When Does Capital Account
Liberalization Help More than It Hurts?” in Economic Policy in the International
Economy: Essays in Honor of Assaf Razin, ed. by Elhanan Helpman and Efraim Sadka
(Cambridge, United Kingdom, Cambridge University Press).
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2005, “Does Financial
Liberalization Spur Growth?” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 77 (July) , pp. 355.
———, 2006, “Growth Volatility and Financial Liberalization.” Journal of International
Money and Finance, Vol. 25 (April) , pp. 370–403.

63

Bhagwati, Jagdish, 1998, “The Capital Myth: The Difference between Trade in Widgets and
Dollars.” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 77 (May/June), pp. 7–12.
Bhalla, Surjit S., 2006, “Dissent Note on the Report on Fuller Capital Account
Convertibility,” in Report of the Committee on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility,
ed. by Savak S. Tarapore and others (Mumbai, Reserve Bank of India).
Bolaky, Bineswaree, and Caroline L. Freund, 2004, “Trade, Regulations, and Growth,” World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3255 (Washington, World Bank).
Borensztein, Eduardo, José De Gregorio, and Jong-Wha Lee, 1998, “How Does Foreign
Direct Investment Affect Economic Growth?” Journal of International Economics,
Vol. 45 (June), pp. 115–35.
Bosworth, Barry P., 2005, “Managing Capital Flows: What We Have Learned” (unpublished;
Washington, Brookings Institution).
———, and Susan M. Collins, 1999, “Capital Flows to Developing Economies: Implications
for Saving and Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (Washington,
Brookings Institution), pp. 143–80.
Boughton, James R., 2001, “Was Suez in 1956 the First Financial Crisis of the Twenty-First
Century?” Finance & Development, Vol. 38 (September) (Washington, International
Monetary Fund). Available via the Internet:
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2001/09/boughton.htm.
Burger, John D., and Francis E. Warnock, 2006, “Local Currency Bond Markets,” IMF Staff
Papers 53 (Special Issue) (Washington, International Monetary Fund), pp. 133–46
———, 2007, “Foreign Participation in Local Currency Bond Markets,” Review of Financial
Economics, Vol. 16, No. 3 , pp. 291–304.

64

Calvo, Guillermo A., 1998, “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple
Economics of Sudden Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics, Vol. 1 (November) , pp.
35–54.
———, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1996, “Inflows of Capital to
Developing Countries in the 1990s,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 10
(Spring), pp. 123–39.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart, 2002, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. 117 (May), pp. 379–408.
Caselli, Francesco, and James Feyrer, 2007, “The Marginal Product of Capital,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 122 (May), pp. 535–68.
Chari, Anusha, and Peter Blair Henry, 2004, “Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence from a
Natural Experiment,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 59 (June), pp. 1295–324.
Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito, 2005, “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital
Controls, Institutions, and Interactions,” NBER Working Paper No. 11370
(Cambridge, Massachusetts, National Bureau of Economic Research).
Claessens, Stijn, Daniela Klingebiel, and Sergio Schmukler, 2003, “Government Bonds in
Domestic and Foreign Currency,” Policy Research Working Paper 2986 (Washington,
World Bank Development Research Group).
Collins, Susan M., 2004, “International Financial Integration and Growth in Developing
Countries: Issues and Implications for Africa,” Journal of African Economies, Vol. 13,
No. 2, pp. ii55–ii94.
Cooper, Richard N., 1999, “Should Capital Controls Be Banished?” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1 (Washington, Brookings Institution), pp. 89–141.

65

Cowan, Kevin, and José De Gregorio, 2007, “International Borrowing, Capital Controls and
the Exchange Rate: Lessons from Chile,” in Capital Controls and Capital Flows in
Emerging Economies: Policies, Practice, and Consequences, ed. by Sebastian
Edwards (Chicago, University of Chicago Press).
de la Torre, Augusto, and Sergio L. Schmukler, 2007, Emerging Markets and Globalization:
The Latin American Experience (Palo Alto, California and Washington, D.C., Stanford
University Press and World Bank).
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Ross Levine, eds., 2001, Financial Structure and Economic
Growth (Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press).
Díaz Alejandro, Carlos. F., 1963, “A Note on the Impact of Devaluation and the
Redistributive Effect,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 71 (December), pp. 577–
80.
———, 1965, Exchange-Rate Devaluation in a Semi-Industrialized Country: The Experience
of Argentina, 1955-1961 (Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press).
———, 1985, “Good-Bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial Crash,” Journal of
Development Economics, Vol. 19 (September-October), pp. 1–24.
Dobson, Wendy, and Gary Clyde Hufbauer, 2001, World Capital Markets: Challenge to the
G-10 (Washington, Institute for International Economics).
Dominguez, Kathryn M.E., and Linda L. Tesar, 2007, “International Borrowing and
Macroeconomic Performance in Argentina,” in Capital Controls and Capital Flows in
Emerging Economies: Policies, Practice, and Consequences, Ed. by Sebastian
Edwards (Chicago, University of Chicago Press).

66

Dornbusch, Rudi, 2002, “A Primer on Emerging-Market Crises,” in Preventing Currency
Crises in Emerging Markets, ed. by Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey A. Frankel
(Chicago, University of Chicago Press).
Edison, Hali, Ross Levine, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sløk, 2002, “International Financial
Integration and Economic Growth,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol.
21 (November), pp. 749–76.
Edwards, Sebastian, 2007, “Capital Controls, Sudden Stops, and Current Account Reversals,”
in Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practice,
and Consequences, ed. by Sebastian Edwards (Chicago, University of Chicago Press).
Eichengreen, Barry, 2001, “Capital Account Liberalization: What Do Cross-Country Studies
Tell Us?” World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 15 (March), pp. 341–65.
———, and Ricardo Hausmann, 1999, “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility,” in New
Challenges for Monetary Policy (Kansas City, Missouri, Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City).
Eichengreen, Barry, and Pipat Luengnaruemitchai, 2004, “Why Doesn’t Asia Have Bigger
Bond Markets?” NBER Working Paper No. 10576 (Cambridge, Massachusetts,
National Bureau of Economic Research).
———, 2008, “Bond Markets as Conduits for Capital Flows: How Does Asia Compare?” in
International Financial Issues in the Pacific Rim, ed. by Takatoshi Ito and Andrew K.
Rose (Chicago, University of Chicago Press).
Ergungor, O. Emre, and James B. Thomson, 2005, “Systemic Banking Crises,” Policy
Discussion Paper 9 (February), Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.

67

Estevadeordal, Antoni, and Alan M. Taylor, 2008, “Is the Washington Consensus Dead?
Growth, Openness, and the Great Liberalization, 1970s-2000s” (unpublished; InterAmerican Development Bank and University of California, Davis), August.
Feldstein, Martin, 1999, “A Self-Help Guide for Emerging Markets,” Foreign Affairs, Vol.
78 (March/April), pp. 93–109.
Fischer, Stanley, 1998, “Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF,” in Should
the IMF Pursue Capital Account Convertibility? Princeton Essays in International
Finance 207, by Stanley Fischer and others (Princeton, New Jersey, Princeton
University).
———, 2003, “Globalization and Its Challenges,” American Economic Review, Vol. 93
(May), pp. 1–30.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Eduardo A. Cavallo, 2004, “Does Openness to Trade Make Countries
More Vulnerable to Sudden Stops, or Less? Using Gravity to Establish Causality,”
NBER Working Paper No. 10957 (Cambridge, Massachusetts, National Bureau of
Economic Research).
Goldstein, Morris, 2002, Managed Floating Plus (Washington, Institute for International
Economics).
———, and Philip Turner, 2004, Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging Markets
(Washington, Institute for International Economics).
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Rodrigo Valdés, and Oscar Landerretche, 2001, “Lending Booms:
Latin America and the World,” Economía, Vol. 1 (Spring), pp. 47–99.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne, 2006, “The Elusive Gains from International
Financial Integration,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 73, No. 3, pp. 715–41.

68

———, 2007, “Capital Flows to Developing Countries: The Allocation Puzzle,” NBER
Working Paper No. 13602 (Cambridge, Massachusetts, National Bureau of Economic
Research).
Gozzi, Juan Carlos, Ross Levine, and Sergio L. Schmukler, 2008, “Internationalization and
the Evolution of Corporate Valuation,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 88
(June), pp. 607–32.
Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones, 1999, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much
More Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114
(February), pp. 83–116.
Harrison, Ann, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, 2007, “Trade, Foreign Investment, and
Industrial Policy” (unpublished; University of California, Berkeley, and Pennsylvania
State University), September.
Henry, Peter Blair, 2000a, “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging
Market Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 55 (April), pp. 529–64.
———, 2000b, “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?” Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 58, Nos. 1–2, pp. 301–34.
———, 2003, “Capital Account Liberalization, the Cost of Capital, and Economic Growth,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 93 (May), pp. 91–96.
———, 2007, “Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and Speculation,” Journal
of Economic Literature, Vol. 45 (December), pp. 887–935.
Husain, Aasim, Ashoka Mody, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2004, “Exchange Rate Regime
Durability and Performance in Developing versus Advanced Economies,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, Vol. 52 (January), pp. 35–64.

69

Hutchison, Michael M., and Ilan Noy, 2005, “How Bad Are the Twins? Output Costs of
Currency and Banking Crises,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol.
37(August), pp. 725–52.
Independent Evaluation Office, 2005, The IMF’s Approach to Capital Account Liberalization
(Washington, International Monetary Fund).
Ishii, Shogo, Karl Habermeier, Jorge Iván Canales-Kriljenko, Bernard Laurens, John
Leimone, and Judit Vadasz, 2002, Capital Account Liberalization and Financial
Sector Stability, IMF Occasional Paper 211 (Washington, International Monetary
Fund).
Jeanne, Olivier, 2005, “Why Do Emerging Economies Borrow in Foreign Currency?” in
Other People’s Money, ed. by Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann (Chicago,
University of Chicago Press).
———, 2007, “International Reserves in Emerging Market Countries: Too Much of a Good
Thing?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1 (Washington, Brookings
Institution), pp. 1–79.
Joyce, Joseph P., and Malhar Nabar, 2008, “Sudden Stops, Banking Crises and Investment
Collapses in Emerging Markets” (unpublished; Wellesley College).
Kaminsky, Graciela L., and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1999, “The Twin Crises: The Causes of
Banking and Balance of Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89
(June), pp. 473–500.
Klein, Michael W., 2008, “Capital Account Liberalization and the Varieties of Growth
Experience” (unpublished; Tufts University), April.

70

———, and Giovanni P. Olivei, 2008, “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth, and
Economic Growth,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 27 (October),
pp. 861–75.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, Kenneth Rogoff, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2006, “Financial
Globalization: A Reappraisal,” NBER Working Paper No. 12484 (Cambridge,
Massachusetts, National Bureau of Economic Research).
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Marco E. Terrones, 2007, “How Does Financial
Globalization Affect Risk Sharing? Patterns and Channels” (unpublished;
International Monetary Fund and Cornell University), June.
———, 2008, “Does Openness to International Financial Flows Contribute to Productivity
Growth?” (unpublished; International Monetary Fund and Cornell University), July.
Krugman, Paul R., 1979, “A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises,” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, Vol. 11 (August), pp. 311–25.
Lancaster, Kelvin, and Richard G. Lipsey, 1956, “The General Theory of Second Best,”
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 24 (December), pp. 11–32.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2007, “The External Wealth of Nations Mark
II: Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004,”
Journal of International Economics, Vol. 73 (November), pp. 223–50.
Levine, Ross, 2005, “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence” in Handbook of Economic
Growth, ed. by Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf (Amsterdam, Elsevier).
Liviatan, Nissan, 1980, “Ant-Inflationary Monetary Policy and the Capital Import Tax,”
Warwick Economic Research Paper Series 171.

71

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., 1990, “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?”
American Economic Review, Vol. 80 (May), pp. 92–96.
Martin, Philippe, and Hélène Rey, 2006, “Globalization and Emerging Markets: With or
without Crash?” American Economic Review, Vol. 96 (December), pp. 1631–51.
McCauley, Robert, 2006, “Internationalising a Currency: The Case of the Australian Dollar,”
BIS Quarterly Review (December), pp. 41–54.
Minhas, Bagicha Singh, 1963, An International Comparison of Factor Costs and Factor Use
(Amsterdam, North-Holland).
Mishkin , Frederic S., 2006, The Next Great Globalization (Princeton, Princeton University
Press).
———, 2008, “Why We Shouldn’t Turn Our Backs on Financial Globalization”
(unpublished; Washington, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System).
Mitton, Todd, 2006, “Stock Market Liberalization and Operating Performance at the Firm
Level,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 81 (September), pp. 625–47.
Mody, Ashoka, and Antu Panini Murshid, 2005, “Growing up with Capital Flows,” Journal of
International Economics, Vol. 65 (January), pp. 249–66.
Noland, Marcus, 2007, “South Korea’s Experience with International Capital Flows,” in
Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practice, and
Consequences, ed. by Sebastian Edwards (Chicago, University of Chicago Press).
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1999, “Foreign Resource Inflows, Saving, and Growth,” in The Economics
of Saving and Growth: Theory, Evidence, and Implications for Policy, ed. by Klaus
Schmidt-Hebbel and Luis Servén (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).

72

———, 2004, “Globalization, Macroeconomic Performance, and the Exchange Rates of
Emerging Economies,” Monetary and Economic Studies, Vol. 22, No. S-1, pp. 29–55.
———, 2007, “The Renminbi’s Dollar Peg at the Crossroads,” Monetary and Economic
Studies, Vol. 25, No. S-1, pp. 29–55.
———, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1995, “The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 9 (Fall), pp. 73–96.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor, 2008, “Financial Stability, the
Trilemma, and International Reserves,” NBER Working Paper 14217 (Cambridge,
Massachusetts, National Bureau of Economic Research).
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor, 2004, Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis,
and Growth (Cambridge, United Kingdom, Cambridge University Press).
Ocampo, José Antonio, and Maria Luisa Chiappe, 2003, Counter-Cyclical Prudential and
Capital Account Regulations in Developing Countries (Stockholm, Almqvist &
Wiksell International).
Prasad, Eswar, and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2008, “A Pragmatic Approach to Capital Account
Liberalization” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 22 (Summer), pp. 149–72.
Prasad, Eswar, Raghuram G. Rajan, and Arvind Subramanian, 2006, “Patterns of International
Capital Flows and Their Implications for Economic Development,” in The New
Economic Geography: Effects and Policy Implications (Kansas City, Missouri,
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City).

73

———, 2007, “Foreign Capital and Economic Growth,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity 1 (Washington, Brookings Institution), pp. 153–230.
Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose, 2003, Effects of
Financial Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence, IMF
Occasional Paper 220 (Washington, International Monetary Fund).
Quinn, Dennis P., 2003, “Capital Account Liberalization and Financial Globalization, 18901999: A Synoptic View,” International Journal of Finance and Economics, Vol. 8
(July), pp. 189–204.
Rajan, Raghuram G., and Luigi Zingales, 2003, “The Great Reversals: The Politics of
Financial Development in the 20th Century,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 69
(July), pp. 5–50.
Rodrik, Dani, 1998, “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?” in Should the IMF Pursue
Capital Account Convertibility? Princeton Essays in International Finance 207, by
Stanley Fischer and others (Princeton, New Jersey, Princeton University).
———, and Arvind Subramanian, 2008, “Why Did Financial Globalization Disappoint?”
(unpublished; Harvard University and Peterson Institute for International Economics).
Rogoff, Kenneth, 2002, “Rethinking Capital Controls: When Should We Keep an Open
Mind?” Finance & Development, Vol. 39 (December) Washington, International
Monetary Fund). Available via the Internet:
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2002/12/rogoff.htm.
———, 2007, “The Way Forward for Global Financial Policy,” Project Syndicate (April 13).
Available via the Internet: http://www.brookings.edu/views/oped/rogoff20070413.htm.

74

Schinasi, Garry J., 2006, Safeguarding Financial Stability: Theory and Practice (Washington,
International Monetary Fund).
Sinclair, Upton, 1906, The Jungle (New York, Doubleday, Page and Company).
Singh, Anoop, Agnes Belaisch, Charles Collyns, Paula De Masi, Reva Krieger, Guy
Meredith, and Robert Rennhack, 2005, Stabilization and Reform in Latin America: A
Macroeconomic Perspective on the Experience Since the Early 1990s, IMF
Occasional Paper 238 (Washington, International Monetary Fund).
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 2003, Globalization and Its Discontents (New York, Norton).
Stulz, René M., 2005, “The Limits of Financial Globalization,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 60
(August), pp. 1595–638.
Tarapore, Savak S., 1998, “An Indian Approach to Capital-Account Convertibility,” in Should
the IMF Pursue Capital Account Convertibility? Princeton Essays in International
Finance 207, by Stanley Fischer and others (Princeton New Jersey, Princeton
University).
———, and others, 2006, Report of the Committee on Fuller Capital Account Convertibility
(Mumbai, Reserve Bank of India), July 31.
Tirole, Jean, 2002, International Crises, Liquidity, and the International Monetary System
(Princeton, New Jersey, Princeton University Press).
Tornell, Aaron, and Frank Westermann, 2005, Boom-Bust Cycles and Financial
Liberalization (Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press).
Tovar, Camilo E., 2005, “International Government Debt Denominated in Local Currency:
Recent Developments in Latin America.” BIS Quarterly Review (December), pp. 109–
18.

75

Tytell, Irina, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2004, “Does Financial Globalization Induce Better
Macroeconomic Policies?” IMF Working Paper 04/84 (Washington, International
Monetary Fund).
Williamson, John, 2001, “The Case for a Basket, Band and Crawl (BBC) Regime for East
Asia,” in Future Directions for Monetary Policies in East Asia, ed. by David Gruen
and John Simon (Sydney, Reserve Bank of Australia).
World Bank, 2006, Global Development Finance: The Development Potential of Surging
Capital Flows (Washington, World Bank).
World Bank, 2008, Global Development Finance: The Role of International Banking
(Washington, World Bank).

76

Table 1. Two Surges in Financial Inflows to Developing Countries
(In billions of U.S. dollars)

Current account balance
(All developing
countries)
Net external financing
(All developing
countries)
Increase in reserves
(All developing
countries)
Current account balance
(Excluding China,
Russia, Middle East)
Net external financing
(Excluding China,
Russia, Middle East)
Increase in reserves
(Excluding China,
Russia, Middle East)

1992–97 average

2003–08 average

−86.5

460.7

289.5

837.9

64.3

689.4

−96.7

−38.9

225.6

470.0

39.7

218.6

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook database (as of August 2008).
Note: Figures for 2008 are IMF projections.

77

Figure 1. Edwards' (2007) De Jure Measure of Capital Account Openness
High-Income

East Asia

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

0
1970

Latin America and Caribbean
1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

1980

1990

2000

0
1970

Eastern Europe
1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

1980

1990

2000

0
1970

1980

1980

Sub-Saharan Africa
1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

1980

1990

1990

2000

1990

2000

South Asia

1

0
1970

2000

Former Soviet Union

1

0
1970

1990

Middle East and North Africa

1

0
1970

1980

2000

0
1970

1980

1990

2000

Figure 2. Assets Plus Liabilities, 1970-2004 (Ratio to Group
GDP)
3.50

3.00

2.50

2.00

1.50

1.00

0.50

19
70
19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04

0.00

High-income
Low-income developing

Middle-income developing
Gulf oil exporters

79

Figure 3. Short-Term Debt as a Fraction of Total External Debt, by Income Class
0.35

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

19
70
19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04
20
06

0

Low-income

Lower-middle-income

80

Middle-income

Upper-middle-income

Figure 4. Average Borrowing Cost by Income Class
(In percent)

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2

Low income

Lower middle income

81

Middle income

20
06

20
04

20
02

20
00

19
98

19
96

19
94

19
92

19
90

19
88

19
86

19
84

19
82

19
80

19
78

19
76

19
74

19
72

19
70

0

Upper middle icome

Figure 5. Channels of Crisis

Currency

Corporates

Banks

Government

Latin America
Africa

83
Asia
Europe

04/10/2008

11/02/2007

06/01/2007

12/27/2006

07/25/2006

02/21/2006

09/14/2005

04/13/2005

11/05/2004

06/04/2004

12/31/2003

07/28/2003

02/24/2003

09/17/2002

04/16/2002

11/07/2001

06/01/2001

12/27/2000

07/25/2000

02/22/2000

09/16/1999

04/15/1999

11/06/1998

06/05/1998

12/31/1997

Figure 6. EMBI+ Spreads

1800

1600

1400

1200

1000

800

600

400

200

0

Overall index

Source: Cbonds Website: http://www.cbonds.info/all/eng/index/index_detail/group_id/1/.

Figure 7. Changes in Exchange Rate Flexibility, 1991-–2004

Number of countries

Sources: IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions; and
World Bank staff estimates. Figure taken from World Bank (2006).

84

