SAVINGS CONSTRAINTS AND MICROENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT:
      EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT IN KENYA

                    Pascaline Dupas
                   Jonathan Robinson

                WORKING PAPER 14693
                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          SAVINGS CONSTRAINTS AND MICROENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT:
                EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT IN KENYA

                                            Pascaline Dupas
                                           Jonathan Robinson

                                         Working Paper 14693
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14693


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2009




For helpful discussions and suggestions, we are grateful to Orazio Attanasio, Jean-Marie Baland, Leo
Feler, Fred Finan, Sarah Green, Seema Jayachandran, Dean Karlan, Ethan Ligon, Craig McIntosh,
David McKenzie, John Strauss, Dean Yang, Chris Woodruff, two anonymous referees, and participants
at numerous seminars and conferences. We thank Jack Adika and Anthony Oure for their dedication
and care in supervising the data collection, and Nathaniel Wamkoya for outstanding data entry. We
thank Eva Kaplan, Katherine Conn, Sefira Fialkoff, and Willa Friedman for excellent field research
assistance, and thank Innovations for Poverty Action for administrative support. We are grateful to
Aleke Dondo of the K-Rep Development Agency for hosting this project in Kenya, and to Gerald Abele
for his help in the early stages of the project. Dupas gratefully acknowledges the support of a Rockefeller
Center faculty research grant from Dartmouth College and Robinson gratefully acknowledges the
support of an NSF dissertation improvement grant (SES-551273), a dissertation grant from the Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston, and support from the Princeton University Industrial Relations Section. We
also gratefully acknowledge the support of the World Bank. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Pascaline Dupas and Jonathan Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment
in Kenya
Pascaline Dupas and Jonathan Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 14693
January 2009, Revised March 2012
JEL No. G21,L26,O12

                                              ABSTRACT

Does limited access to formal savings services impede business growth in poor countries? To shed
light on this question, we randomized access to non-interest-bearing bank accounts among two types
of self-employed individuals in rural Kenya: market vendors (who are mostly women) and men working
as bicycle-taxi drivers. Despite large withdrawal fees, a substantial share of market women used the
accounts, were able to save more, and increased their productive investment and private expenditures.
We see no impact for bicycle-taxi drivers. These results imply significant barriers to savings and investment
for market women in our study context. Further work is needed to understand what those barriers are,
and to test whether the results generalize to other types of businesses or individuals.


Pascaline Dupas
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pdupas@stanford.edu

Jonathan Robinson
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
457 Engineering 2
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
jmrtwo@ucsc.edu
1       Introduction
Hundreds of millions of people in developing countries earn their living through small-scale
business (World Bank, 2004; de Soto, 1989). Many of these entrepreneurs do not have access
to even the most basic of financial services, such as a simple bank account in which they
can save money.1 Given that many entrepreneurs need to save up daily profits for lumpy
investments or set aside some money to use for unexpected shocks, is it possible that not
having a place to save securely impedes business success?
    In this paper, we test this directly by expanding access to bank accounts for a randomly
selected sample of small informal business owners in one town of rural Western Kenya. The
sample is composed primarily of market vendors (the great majority of whom are women)
and bicycle-taxi drivers (all of whom are men), and includes 250 individuals in total. We use
two main data sources to measure impacts: administrative data from the bank on account
usage, and a rich dataset constructed from daily logbooks which were kept by respondents.
The logbooks include detailed information on many outcomes, including formal and informal
savings, business investment, and expenditures.2
    There are three main findings. First, market women in the treatment group used the bank
accounts quite actively, and increased their total savings on average. Treated bicycle-taxi
drivers (all of whom were men) used the accounts much less and did not increase their total
savings. The high account usage rate among market women is especially noteworthy because
the account did not pay out any interest and included substantial withdrawal fees, so that
the de facto interest rate on deposits was negative (even before accounting for inflation).3
Clearly, if female vendors did not have trouble saving on their own, they should not have
paid the bank for the right to save. That they voluntarily did so suggests that they face
negative private returns on the money they save informally.
    Second, market women in the treatment group substantially increased their investment
in their business relative to the control group. Our most conservative estimate of the effect
is equivalent to a 38-56% increase in average daily investment for market women after 4-6
months. While this point estimate is very large, the standard errors are also quite large
and the confidence interval includes both reasonable and less reasonable effect sizes. Our
focus is thus on the fact that we see a substantial positive impact, rather than on its exact

    1
       Though there is little evidence for entrepreneurs specifically, several studies show extremely low levels
of financial access for the broader population in developing countries (Chaia et al., 2009; Kendall et al.,
2010). With regards to Africa more specifically, Aggarwal et al. (2011) use the Gallup World Poll to show
that only 15% of people in Sub-Saharan Africa have a bank account.
     2
       The logbooks are similar to the financial diaries used in Collins et al. (2009).
     3
       Inflation in Kenya was between 10 and 14% between 2006 and 2009, the time period of this study (IMF,
2010).


                                                       1
magnitude.4
     Third, market women in the treatment group had significantly higher expenditures than
market women in the control group. After four to six months, daily private expenditures
were about 37% higher for market women in the treatment group.
     This study is the first randomized field experiment estimating the effect of expanding
access to basic savings accounts. There have, however, been a number of recent randomized
controlled trials which look at the effects of increased access to credit. Our findings con-
trast with those studies in two ways. First, studies exploiting the randomized expansion of
microcredit have observed relatively low take-up: 27% of households in urban India (Baner-
jee et al., 2009) and 16% of households in Morocco (Crépon et al, 2011) took out a loan
when barriers to access were lowered. In rural Kenya, less than 3% of individuals initiate
a loan application even after receiving assistance with the collateral requirement (Dupas et
al., 2012). In contrast, 87% of people took up the savings account we offered, and 41% made
at least two transactions within the first six months of getting the offer.5
     Second, while we find evidence that savings access helps increase business investment,
evidence on the impact of credit on microentrepreneurs so far has been quite mixed. Karlan
and Zinman (2010a, b) exploit randomized access to credit in an urban area in the Philip-
pines, and see no effect of microcredit access on business investment; rather, they find some
evidence that the size and scope of businesses shrink when their owner gets a loan.6 In con-
trast, Banerjee et al. (2009) find positive (though still quite small in absolute magnitude)
impacts on business creation and purchase of business durables by business owners. Finally,
Kaboski and Townsend (2011) evaluate a natural experiment which increased credit access in
rural Thailand. They find large consumption impacts, but no change in overall investment.
The only randomized controlled trial to find large, positive impacts thus far is Attanasio et
al. (2012) in Mongolia.
     There have also been a few non-experimental studies estimating the impact of provid-
ing comprehensive financial services (i.e., both savings and credit) on income (Burgess and
Pande, 2005, in India; Bruhn and Love, 2009, and Aportela, 1999, in Mexico; and Kaboski
and Townsend, 2005, in Thailand). Our paper adds to this literature by providing exper-
    4
      Note however that qualitative debriefing interviews with women who saw large increases in business
size supported the quantitative estimates.
    5
      This higher demand for saving than credit supports the results of earlier observational studies, such
as Johnston and Morduch (2008), who show that 90% of Bank Rakyat Indonesia clients save but do not
borrow; or Bauer, Chytilová, and Morduch (2010), who argue that some women in India take up microcredit
schemes as a way of forcing themselves to save through required installment payments (rather than to access
credit for use in a business).
    6
      The authors explain this negative impact as follows: increased access to credit reduced the need for favor-
trading within family or community networks and thereby enabled business owners to shed unproductive
workers.


                                                       2
imental evidence that providing basic saving services alone might be an important tool in
poverty alleviation.
    Our findings raise a number of issues that remain to be explored. First, what are the
key savings barriers that bank accounts help overcome? Do people have difficulty saving
because they have present-biased preferences and over-consume cash on hand, as has been
shown to be the case for at least 10% of women in the Philippines (Ashraf, Karlan, and
Yin, 2006)? Or do they have difficulty protecting their savings from demands from others
(Platteau, 2000)?
    Second, and relatedly, while the private return on savings at home appears to be negative,
the social return could be zero: every dollar given out to a relative or social contact who asks
for it is ultimately spent. Savings accounts only improve welfare if they make it more likely
that money is spent where it has the highest return (for example, if it allows a relatively
high-return entrepreneur to increase investment) or if it reduces money spent on consumption
that people later regret (temptation goods, for example). This implies that the welfare
implications of increasing access to formal saving services to a subset of the population are
ultimately unclear – while market women in the treatment group were clearly better off, the
impact on other members of their social network is uncertain. They could benefit in the long
run from the higher resources generated by women through their expanded businesses, but
they may suffer in the short run from receiving lower transfers.
    Third, how generalizable are these results? Within our own sample, we find important
heterogeneity by occupation, with no effect for bicycle taxi drivers and large effects for
female market vendors (we lack precision to estimate the importance and impact of saving
constraints for male vendors). How would other segments of the population (for example,
farmers) be affected by access to savings services? We leave more thorough investigation of
these issues to future work.
    The remainder of the paper is as follows. We first describe the experiment and the data
in Section 2, before presenting the main results in Section 3. Section 4 presents the panel
data evidence on risk-coping. Section 5 discusses potential mechanisms and open questions,
and Section 6 concludes.


2     Experimental Design and Data Collection
2.1    Study Location and Study Population
The study took place in and around Bumala Town in Busia district, Kenya. Bumala Town
is a rural market center located along the main highway connecting Nairobi, Kenya, to


                                               3
Kampala, Uganda, and it has a population of around 3,500, making it the fifth largest town
in Busia district and the 189th largest town in Kenya.7
    As this project was focused on non-farm microenterprises rather than on a more gen-
eral population, our sample consisted solely of daily income earners. We decided to focus
in particular on vendors and on bicycle taxi drivers, which are two popular types of own
enterprises in Bumala Town. Though there are many other types of businesses in the area,
we focused on these two types because the production function is similar across businesses
within each type.
    The scale of operations for individuals in our sample is quite small. For those involved in
vending, the mean number of items traded is just below 2, and the median is 1 (the majority
of vendors sell just one item, such as charcoal or a food item like dried fish or maize). Mean
daily investment is just US $6 per day. For bicycle-taxi drivers, mean investment is limited
to bicycle repairs, which amount to only US $1 per day on average. Most of the individuals
in our sample own a small plot of land and are involved in subsistence farming in addition
to their business. The main staple crop cultivated is maize.


2.2     Background on formal and informal savings in Western Kenya
Most self-employed individuals in rural Kenya do not have a formal bank account. At the
onset of this study, only 2.2% of individuals we surveyed had a savings account with a
commercial bank. The main reasons given for not having an account were that formal banks
typically have high opening fees and have minimum balance requirements (often as high as
500 Ksh, or around US $7). Savings accounts are also offered by savings cooperatives, but
the cooperatives are usually urban and employment based, and therefore rarely available for
rural self-employed individuals.
   Instead, individuals typically save in the form of animals or durable goods, in cash at
their homes, or through Rotating Savings and Credit Associations (ROSCAs), which are
commonly referred to as merry-go-rounds.8 Most ROSCAs have periodic meetings, at which
members make contributions to the shared saving pool, called the “pot”. The pot money is
given to one member every period, in rotation until everyone has received the pot. ROSCA
participation is high in Kenya, especially among women, and many people participate in
multiple ROSCAs (Gugerty, 2007).
   In our sample, 87% of respondents report that “it is hard to save money at home”, and
ROSCA participation) is widespread, especially among women (Table 1).

   7
     See http://kenya.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/profiles/Busia_Dec2011%2020.pdf
   8
     It is very common for people around the developing world to use these types of mechanisms as primary
savings mechanisms (Rutherford, 2000).


                                                   4
2.3     The Village Bank
We worked in collaboration with a village bank (also called a Financial Services Association,
or FSA) in Bumala Town. The Bumala FSA is a community-owned and operated entity
that receives support (in the form of initial physical assets and ongoing audit and training
services) from the Kenya Rural Enterprise Development Agency, an affiliate of the Kenyan
microfinance organization KREP. The FSA is the only financial institution present in the
study area. Commercial bank branches are available in the next town (Busia), located about
25 kilometers away.
    At the time of the study, opening an account at the village bank cost 450 Ksh (US $6.40).
The village bank did not pay any interest on the savings account. However, the bank charged
a withdrawal fee (of US $0.50 for withdrawals less than US $8, $0.80 for withdrawals between
$8 and $15, and $1.50 for larger withdrawals), thus generating a de facto negative interest
rate on savings. The bank was open from Monday to Friday from 9am to 3pm, and did not
provide ATM cards or any opportunity to deposit or withdraw money at any time outside
these working hours, making bank savings somewhat illiquid – savings could not be accessed
for emergencies which occurred on the weekend or after 3pm.
    The village bank opened in Bumala Town in October 2004. By the time this study began
in early 2006, only 0.5% of the daily income earners that we surveyed around Bumala Town
had opened an account at the village bank. The main reasons given by respondents for why
they did not already have an account were inability to pay the account opening fee, and lack
of information about the village bank and its services.9
    Note that access to credit is also extremely limited in the study area. At the time of the
study, there was no microcredit agency lending to people in our sample. Only those with a
bank account at the Village Bank could potentially be eligible for a loan, but the eligibility
criteria were extremely stringent. Consequently, very few people in our study received credit
during the sample period.


2.4     Sampling
The sampling was done in three waves, in 2006, 2007 and 2008, respectively. Given that
we had only a limited budget for data collection, in each wave we sampled people up to
the point that we had enough staff to oversee the daily logbook data collection exercise
(the logbooks, as we discuss below, were costly to administer because they required a high

   9
     Cole, Sampson and Zia (2011) combine experimental and survey evidence from India and Indonesia to
argue that the demand for bank savings accounts is not constrained by lack of financial literacy, but rather
by high prices.


                                                     5
ratio of well-trained enumerators to respondents). To draw the sample, enumerators were
assigned specific areas in and around Bumala town, and asked to identify market vendors
and bicycle-taxi drivers operating there. They administered a background survey to these
individuals upon identifying them.10 Those that already had a savings account (either at the
village bank itself or some other formal bank) were excluded from the sample. This criterion
excluded very few individuals: as mentioned above, only 2.2% of individuals had accounts
in a commercial bank and 0.5% had accounts in the FSA. After excluding these individuals,
our final sample frame consisted of 392 individuals: 262 female vendors, 92 male bicycle
taxi drivers, and 34 male vendors (see Appendix Table A1). This represents only a small
share of the total population in Bumala Town, and a small share of vendors and bicycle taxi
drivers.11


2.5     Experimental Design and Timeline
Individuals in the sample frame were randomly divided into treatment and control groups,
stratified by gender and occupation (gender and occupation are very highly correlated in
the sample, since all women in the sample are market vendors and 89% of market vendors
in the sample are female). Those sampled for treatment were offered the option to open an
account at the village bank at no cost to themselves – we paid the account opening fee and
provided each individual with the minimum balance of 100 Ksh (US $1.43), which they were
not allowed to withdraw. Individuals still had to pay the withdrawal fees, however. Those
individuals that were sampled for the control group did not receive any assistance in opening
a savings account (though they were not barred from opening one on their own).12
    The timing was as follows. In Wave 1, the background survey was administered in Febru-
ary and March 2006, and accounts were opened for consenting individuals in the treatment
group in May 2006. In Wave 2, the background survey was administered in April and
May 2007 and accounts were opened in June 2007. In Wave 3, the background survey was
administered in July and August 2008 and accounts were opened in June 2009.13




  10
      We did not keep track of the number of individuals that were approached but refused to be surveyed,
but reports from enumerators suggest that refusals were very rare at the enrollment stage.
   11
      In a census of ROSCA participants around Bumala Town that we conducted for a separate study (Dupas
and Robinson, 2012), we identified over 800 female vendors. Records kept by Bumala’s Boda association
indicate that over 300 bodas were registered in 2007.
   12
      Within the study period, three individuals in the control group opened accounts in the village bank on
their own.
   13
      After the data had been collected, control individuals in each wave were given the option to open a
savings account free of charge as compensation for participating in the study, but this was not anticipated.


                                                     6
2.6     Data
We use four sources of data. First, our background survey includes information on the
baseline characteristics of participants, such as marital status, household composition, assets,
and health. Second, we have administrative data from the village bank on every deposit and
withdrawal made in all of the treatment accounts.14
    Third, we elicited time and risk preferences from respondents, as well as cognitive ability
measures.15 The time preference questions asked respondents to decide between 40 Ksh now
(US $0.57) and a larger amount a month later. To measure time consistency, we also asked
respondents to choose between 40 Ksh in 1 month and a larger amount in 2 months. The
risk preference questions were similar to Charness and Genicot (2009) and asked respondents
how much of 100 Ksh ($1.43) they would like to invest in an asset that paid off four times the
amount invested with probability 0.5 and that paid off 0 with probability 0.5.16 To measure
cognitive ability, we asked respondents to complete a “Raven’s Matrix” in which they had
to recognize patterns in a series of images.
    Fourth, and most importantly, we collected detailed data on respondents through daily,
self-reported logbooks. These logbooks included detailed income, expenditure, and business
modules, as well as information on labor supply and on all transfers given and received
(including between spouses).
    Because the logbooks were long and complicated to keep, trained enumerators met with
the respondents twice per week to verify that the logbooks were being filled correctly. One
significant challenge was that many respondents could neither read nor write (33% of women
and 9% of men who agreed to keep the logbooks could not read nor write Swahili). To keep
these individuals in the sample, enumerators visited illiterate respondents every day to help
them fill the logbook.
    To keep data as comparable as possible, respondents kept logbooks during the same time
period in each wave, from mid-September to mid-December. Logbooks were kept in 2006 for
Wave 1, 2007 for Wave 2, and 2009 for Wave 3. To encourage participation, the logbooks
were collected every four weeks, and respondents were paid 50 Ksh ($0.71) for each week the
logbook was properly filled (as determined by the enumerator).17 Though respondents were

  14
      We obtained consent from respondents to collect these records from the bank.
  15
      This type of data was collected from all study participants in 2008. This means that, for respondents in
Waves 1 and 2, the data was collected after the treatment had been implemented, whereas for respondents
in Wave 3 it was collected at baseline. Since the treatment (getting a bank account) might have affected risk
and time preferences among subjects, we do not make any strong conclusions regarding the heterogeneity of
the treatment effect by these measures, but instead consider them as purely suggestive.
   16
      To encourage truth-telling, one of the risk and time preference questions was randomly selected for
actual payment.
   17
      This figure is equivalent to about one-third of daily total expenditures for respondents in this sample.


                                                      7
asked to fill the logbooks for up to 3 months, some were only willing to keep the logbooks
for a shorter period, and so we do not have 3 full months’ worth of data for all respondents.
     The logbook data makes up the bulk of the analysis. For each respondent, we compute the
average daily business and household expenditures across all the days that the respondent
filled the logbook, and then compare these averages between the treatment and control
groups.
     The logbooks included a module designed to estimate respondents’ investment, hours
worked and sales. From this, we planned to back out profits. However, the imputed profits
are ultimately unusable. This is because the quality of the data on revenues from the
business (mostly retail sales) is very poor. Many respondents did not keep good records of
their sales during the day, in part because they did not have time to record each small retail
transaction that they had. In contrast, the data on business investments (mostly wholesale
purchases) is relatively reliable, albeit somewhat noisy. As a result, total business revenues
are systematically smaller than total investment, and so total profits are on average very
negative in the sample. What is problematic for us is that under-reporting of revenues
appears to increase with the size of the business (the more sales, the higher the share of
unrecorded sales). Given this, we estimate impacts on investment and revenues separately.18


2.7      Attrition
There were two main sources of attrition. The first is that some respondents could not be
found and asked to keep the logbooks (because they had moved or could not otherwise be
traced). The second is that, as might be imagined from the length of the logbooks and the
relatively small compensation given to participants, some people refused to fill the logbooks.
Of those who could be traced and offered logbooks, 17% refused to fill them (7% of women
and 21% of men).
    We document attrition in Appendix Table A1. Among female vendors, we had more
difficulty tracing those in the treatment group, but acceptance to fill the logbook was not
differential (conditional on being traced). But bodas, who were much more likely to attrit
than market women, attrited differentially: bodas in the treatment group were both more
likely to be found, and more likely to accept the logbooks if found, than those in the control
group. Male vendors were more likely to attrit from the treatment group. As we show in
the next section, the post-attrition treatment and control groups that make it into the final
   18
     While it is unfortunate that we do not have reliable profit measures, we note that it is notoriously difficult
to measure profits for such small-scale entrepreneurs, especially since most do not keep records (Liedholm,
1991; Daniels, 2001). We did not ask respondents to report their profit directly, which, in hindsight, appears
to have been a mistake: de Mel et al. (2009a) show that asking respondents to report profits is more reliable
than trying to back out profits from business transaction details.


                                                        8
analysis do not differ along most observable characteristics, but the differential attrition
patterns make it impossible to rule out unobservable differences between treatment and
control groups among bodas, who represent 80% of the men in our sample. While this
attrition limits confidence in the results, it is unlikely that bodas could have benefited from
the accounts since the amounts they deposited on their accounts were very modest(according
to the bank administrative records, which do not suffer from an attrition problem. See Figure
2.)


2.8     Final Sample Characteristics and Balance Check
Table 1 presents baseline characteristics of men and women that filled the logbooks by
treatment status, and the p-values of tests that the differences between treatment and control
are equal to zero.19 We have 250 logbooks in total, 170 of which were filled by market women
and 80 of which were filled by men (55 bicycle-taxi drivers and 25 market men).20 The
background variables are mostly self-explanatory, but we describe briefly the time preference
measures. We define as “somewhat patient” any respondent who preferred 55 Ksh, or $0.79,
(or less) in 1 month to 40 Ksh ($0.57) today. For measures of time consistency, we assign
people to one of four categories: (1) “present-biased” respondents who are less patient in the
present than in the future; (2) respondents who exhibit maximum possible discount rates
in both the present and future (these individuals preferred 40 Ksh to 500 Ksh ($7.14) in
1 month, and 40 Ksh in 1 month to 500 Ksh in 2 months); (3) respondents who are more
patient in the present than in the future; and (4) “time-consistent” individuals who have the
same discount rate in the present and the future.
    As can be seen in Table 1, around 21% of women and 5% of men were actually more
patient in the present than in the future. Though this seems counter-intuitive, previous
studies have found similar results: about 10% of respondents in Bauer, Chytilová, and
Morduch (2010) and 15% of respondents in Ashraf, Karlan and Yin (2006) had preferences
of this type in studies in India and the Philippines, respectively.21
    For both market women and men, the treatment and control groups are balanced along

   19
      Standard errors of the differences are clustered at the individual level to account for the fact that Wave
1 control individuals appear twice (as controls in 2006 and treatment in 2007).
   20
      We have fewer observations for the time preference, risk preference, and cognitive ability module. In
total, we have 220 observations for these variables.
   21
      At the same time, many respondents in our Kenya sample were extremely impatient compared to the
samples in those two studies. This does not appear to be solely because people did not understand the
questions they were asked, or because they did not trust that payouts in the future would be delivered (if
chosen): in general, respondents showed similar levels of impatience in the future as in the present, even
though all payouts for the future questions would be delivered later (in 1 or 2 months, depending on the
answer to the question).


                                                       9
most background characteristics. For women, the p-value of the difference between treatment
and control is above 0.10 for all 24 baseline characteristics presented in Table 1. These
figures suggest that attrition during the logbook exercise was not differential along observable
characteristics for market women, and performing the analysis on the restricted sample for
which we have data will not bias our estimates of the treatment effect.22
    There is more reason for concern among men. Four background characteristics have
statistically significant differences between treatment and control men (education, ROSCA
contributions, extreme impatience in both present and future, and an indicator for Wave 3),
and we know from Table A1 that there was differential attrition among bodas (which explains
the imbalance between groups in terms of occupation, see row 4). This differential attrition
means that there may well be unobservable differences between treatment and control bodas,
and thus our estimates of the treatment effects on bodas may suffer from selection bias. On
the other hand, our estimates of the treatment on male vendors suffer from a tiny sample
size.
    All in all, the sample of men for whom we have data has much lower validity (both
internally and externally) than our sample of market women. To deal with this issue, we
perform all our analyses with interaction terms between experimental treatment and type,
and we focus our attention on the results for market women.
    Finally, a natural question is how representative these individuals are of the general
population in the area. Appendix Table A2 explores this, using data collected from a rep-
resentative sample of unbanked households in a nearby area for Dupas et al. (2012), as
well as representative samples of unbanked households in rural Uganda and rural Malawi
collected for ongoing projects. In column 1, we reproduce the summary statistics shown in
Table 1 for our study sample, combining women and men. In columns 2-4, we show the
summary statistics for the three other samples. Our respondents are somewhat younger,
more likely to be literate, more likely to participate in ROSCAs, and somewhat poorer in
terms of durable assets. They are indistinguishable in terms of risk preferences and access
to formal credit. Overall, while we acknowledge that our sample is selected, our respondents
seem to be relatively comparable to the average rural unbanked adult in East Africa.




   22
     One potentially important difference is income (which is higher in treatment than control), particularly
since several of our key outcomes are proxies for post-treatment income. Note, however, that the standard
deviations of the baseline means are extremely large, and the difference is nowhere close to significant. We
do not control for this variable in most specifications because the variable is missing for several respondents.
Including it as a control does not change the results, though we lose power due to the reduced sample size.
Results with alternative control choices are available upon request.


                                                      10
3         Results
3.1         Take-up
A total of 156 respondents had the opportunity to open a savings account through this
program. Twenty-one of them (13%) refused to open the account, while another 40% opened
an account but never made a single deposit. Figure 1 shows the histogram of the number of
transactions made by treatment individuals at the village bank within the first 6 months of
being offered the account. As can be seen, many individuals never used the account or only
used it rarely, though others used it regularly.
    Figure 2 plots the cumulative distribution functions of the total amount deposited in the
account in the first 6 months, separately by gender. For readability, Panel A plots the CDFs
below the 75th percentile while Panel B plots the CDFs above the 75th percentile. The
distribution for men is clearly dominated by the distribution for women, especially at the
upper end of the distribution. While median deposits are actually 0 Ksh for both genders,
the 75th and 90th percentiles of total deposits are 350 Ksh ($5.00) and 1,200 Ksh ($17.14)
for men, but 725 Ksh ($10.35) and 5,650 Ksh ($80.71) for women.23 Mean deposits are more
than twice as high for women: they are 1,290 Ksh ($18.42) for men and 2,840 Ksh ($40.57)
for women.


3.2         Impact: Estimation Strategy
This section estimates the effect of the savings account on average daily savings, business
investment, and expenditures. For each outcome, there are two level effects of interest: the
intent-to-treat effect (ITT), the average effect of being assigned to the treatment group; and
the average effect for those that actively used the account (the Treatment on the Treated or
ToT effect).
    We first estimate the overall average effect of being assigned to the treatment group (the
intent-to-treat effect) on a given outcome Y using the following specification:

                               0
                                             (θ1 yearitk + ϑ1 Mi × yearitk + λ1 Mi × Bi × yearitk ) + ε1it
                                        X
    Yit = α1 + β1 Tit + Xi φ1 +
                                      k=07,09


where Tit is an indicator which is equal to 1 if individual i had been assigned to the treatment
group (sampled for an account) in year t, Xi is a vector of baseline characteristics (including
gender and occupation), and yearitk is a dummy equal to 1 if the logbook data was collected
in year k (2006, 2007 or 2009 in our data). Since the randomization was done after stratifying

    23
         Formally, a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test of the equality of the two distributions returns a p-value of 0.12.


                                                        11
by occupation, gender and wave/year, we follow Bruhn and McKenzie (2009) and include
the strata dummies yearitk , Mi × yearitk , and Mi × Bi × yearitk , where Mi is an indicator equal
to 1 for men and Bi is an indicator equal to 1 for bicycle-taxis (bodas).
    We then add in interaction terms between the treatment and the occupation/gender cells:

                                                                       0
            Yit = α2 + β2 Tit + γ2 Tit × Vi + δ2 Tit × Bi + Xi φ2
                                (θ2 yearitk + ϑ2 Mi × yearitk + λ2 Mi × Bi × yearitk ) + ε2it
                           X
                      +
                          k=07,09


where Vi is an indicator equal to 1 if the respondent is a male market vendor and, as above,
Bi is an indicator equal to 1 if the respondent is a boda (all of whom are males).
    In this specification, the coefficient β2 measures the average effect of being assigned to the
treatment group for women; the sum β2 + γ2 measures the average effect of being assigned
to the treatment group for male vendors, and the sum β2 + δ2 measures the average effect
of being assigned to the treatment group for male bicycle-taxi drivers. Given the random
assignment to treatment, E(ε2it |Tit ) = 0, and OLS estimates of β2 , γ2 , and δ2 will be unbiased
as long as attrition is not differential. As discussed earlier, since attrition was differential for
bodas, our estimates of δ2 may be biased.
    Finally, we estimate the average effect of actively using the account using an instrumen-
tal variable approach. Specifically, we instrument “actively using the account” with being
assigned to the treatment group:

                                                                   0
            Ait = a + bTit + cTit × Vi + dTit × Bi + Xi φ3 + ωit
                                                                           0
            Yit = α3 + β3 Ait + γ3 Ait × Vi + δ3 Ait × Bi + Xi φ3
                                    (θ3 yearitk + ϑ3 Mi × yearitk + λ3 Mi × Bi × yearitk ) + ε3it
                            X
                      +
                          k=07,09


where Ait is an indicator of whether individual i actively used the account in year t, which
we define as having made at least 2 deposits within 6 months. The very strong first stage
for the IV estimation is presented in the first two columns of Table 2.24 Overall, 41% of the
treatment group actively used the account.
    In all the tables that follow, Panel A presents the ITT estimates, Panel B presents the
ToT estimates, and Panel C presents the means and standard deviations of the dependent
variables. For both the ITT and ToT estimates, and for each type of individuals in our
  24
     In a previous version of this paper, we used a weaker definition for actively using the account (making
at least one deposit). We adopt a stronger approach here because it would be hard to benefit from using
the account only once, unless simply having an account affected an individual’s ability to refuse requests for
money (e.g., by pretending the money is in the bank and inaccessible, even if is not). In any case, IV results
look very similar with the weaker definition of actively using the account (results available upon request).


                                                       12
sample, the p-value for the test that the treatment effect is zero is provided at the bottom of
the panel. All regressions include the following baseline covariates: marital status, number
of children, age, literacy status, ROSCA contributions in the last year, the stratification cells
(gender/ occupation /wave), and the share of days the log was filled in correctly.25
    As might be expected, the data from the logbooks is relatively noisy. While most of our
main outcomes are not particularly sensitive to extreme values, business outcomes are. For
this reason, we present investment outcomes with and without trimming of the top 5% of
values.26
    Finally, all the effects for male vendors are very imprecisely estimated due to the very
limited size of that subgroup. The confidence intervals for male vendors include both zero
and very large effects, and to avoid putting unwarranted weight on these figures, we do not
show the coefficient estimates for the interaction between treatment and male vendor (γ2
and γ3 ).


3.3     Impact on Savings
Table 2 presents the effects of the account on savings. Columns 1-2 show the “first stage”:
the impact of the treatment on being an “active” account user, where we define active as
having made at least two deposits onto the account within the first 6 months of account
opening. Unsurprisingly, we find very large first stage effects of the treatment assignment.
    We then turn to total amounts saved. Columns 3-4 show results for savings in a bank
(as measured from the logbook), and the remaining columns measure whether bank savings
crowded out other types of savings (animals in Columns 5-6 and ROSCA contributions in
Columns 7-8).27
    Reported average daily bank savings are significantly higher in the treatment group
(column 3), but the treatment effect is heterogeneous (column 4): there is an increase for
market women, but not for bodas. Market women who accessed an account did not decrease
their savings in animals or ROSCAs (if anything, they increased their animal stock), therefore
their total savings appear to have increased significantly thanks to the treatment.




  25
      The mean of this variable is 95.0%, with a standard deviation of 8.8%. Reassuringly, this variable does
not differ between the treatment and the control groups.
   26
      Noise in measures of business outcomes is a common issue in studies of small firms. See, for example,
de Mel et al., 2009a, 2009b and McKenzie and Woodruff, 2008.
   27
      Animal savings are measured as animal purchases less sales, and ROSCA contributions are measured
as contributions less payouts.


                                                     13
3.4       Impact on Business Outcomes
Table 3 presents estimates of the effect of the accounts on labor supply and business out-
comes. Business investment for vendors is mostly in the form of inventory, but also includes
transportation costs associated with traveling to various market centers or shipping goods.
Investment for bicycle taxi drivers includes small improvements and repairs to their bicy-
cles.28
    We find no effect of the account on labor supply, measured as the average number of
hours worked per day. However, we find a large effect of the account on the average daily
amount invested in the business, significant at the 10% level. We find that treated respon-
dents increase investment by 180 Ksh, on a base of just 300 Ksh, While the overall point
estimate is only of marginal significance, it is extremely large (equivalent to a 60% increase
in investment). Given that many people in the treatment group did not use the account, the
IV estimate of the effect on active users is even larger (425 Ksh, or over a 100% increase). As
with the effect on overall savings, this effect is concentrated among market women, though
the treatment effect is not statistically significant at conventional levels for them alone (due
to the smaller sample size in that group).
    Columns 5 and 6 show the results when the business investment data is trimmed. Trim-
ming of course lowers the mean of the dependent variable. It also attenuates the treatment
effect, suggesting that most of the very large values are in the treatment group (as would be
expected). Even this conservative estimate shows a very large effect for market women: the
average daily investment of female vendors in the treatment group is 90 Ksh ($1.28) higher
than that of female vendors in the control group (with a p-value of 0.14). Given the baseline
average of 240 Ksh ($3.43) in the control group, this effect is equivalent to a 37.5% increase
in investment. Again, the IV estimate is extremely large.
    Overall, these results suggest that the treatment had a substantial effect on market
women’s ability to invest in their business. This is especially noteworthy given that only a
minority of women used the accounts – the effect for those that actually used the accounts
is extremely large. Thus, while it is important to further investigate these results in future
work with bigger samples and more precise estimates, our results suggest potentially very
large effects on business outcomes.
    Interestingly, this increase in investment for women does not appear to come from a
change in business type: we see no change in the category of items traded by women in the
treatment group. We also did not observe a change in the scale (retail vs. wholesale) of
businesses among women in the treatment group. This means that the market women who

  28
       All bodas in our sample already owned their bike at baseline.


                                                      14
benefited from the account simply purchased more from the wholesaler.
   We also find an increase in revenues among market women (columns 7-10), but as dis-
cussed above, the amounts reported as revenues are typically smaller than the amounts
reported for investments, and all in all taking the difference between the treatment impacts
on revenues and investments would suggest that the treatment reduced profits for market
women. We do not consider this as likely. Rather, it seems that revenues were systematically
under-reported and this under-reporting was magnified in the treatment group.


3.5     Impact on Expenditures and Transfers
Table 4 presents estimates of the impact on the average expenditures reported in the log-
books. The first six columns present total, food, and private expenditures (private expendi-
tures include meals in restaurants, sodas, alcohol, cigarettes, own clothing, hairstyling, and
entertainment expenses).
    We find a positive overall treatment effect. The point estimate for total expenditures is
positive, though the p-value is only 0.13. More disaggregated expenditure categories reveal
large increases for some items. Across the whole sample, food expenditures increased by 13%
while private expenditures increased by 38%. These imply even larger effects for account
users (of 32% and 93%, respectively).29 As in the previous tables, these effects are driven by
market women.
    The last four columns of Table 4 look at the impacts on transfers to and from others.
Transfers include both cash and in-kind transfers of goods and services (as valued by the
respondent). We look at net transfers to individuals outside the household and net transfers
to the spouse (for married/cohabiting respondents). The point estimates suggest a decrease
in net transfers outside the household and no effect on inter-spousal transfers, but the results
are very imprecise, with large standard errors, and even for inter-household transfers we
cannot reject the null of zero effect.


3.6     Robustness Checks
There are several possible threats to the internal validity of this study. In the Appendix, we
consider two potentially important concerns: (1) that the results might be driven by people
who were anticipating a later loan from the village bank, and (2) that the results might be
driven by people making large deposits (who presumably do not have a problem saving in

  29
     The returns to capital would have to be implausibly large for this increase in expenditure to be entirely
due to an increase in business income. Given this, the increase in expenditure likely comes from both an
increase in income and an increase in the ability to shield income from others.


                                                     15
the first place since they deposit so much at any one time). We find no evidence for either
of these alternatives, and so we feel confident that our main results reflect the impact of
savings services alone for people who otherwise find it hard to save as much as they would
like.


4        Discussion of Potential Mechanisms
Overall, our results show that the informal savings mechanisms available in rural Kenya are
ineffective in allowing a sizeable fraction of market women to save (and subsequently invest)
as much as they would like. These results raise two questions: First, why do market women
need a savings account when it seems like they could instead simply reinvest immediately in
their business – why do they put money into the savings account at all? Second, why is the
private return to informal savings so highly negative for a large fraction of the market women
in our sample? Since our data does not enable us to conclusively answer these questions, we
instead use this section to make some conjectures as to possible answers and areas to further
investigate.
    With regards to the first question, we see three possible reasons why business owners
may have to save at home or in a bank account, even if the returns are negative, rather
than continuously reinvest in their business. The first is that investment may be lumpy, so
that entrepreneurs cannot reinvest in their business until they have saved up for the next
discrete unit. Instead, they must save outside of the business for some time before they
can reinvest.30 The second is that business profits may be variable, but at least partially
foreseeable by entrepreneurs, so that there are periods in which it is optimal to save money
outside the business. The third is that it might not be possible to quickly and costlessly
liquidate working capital if a shock were to occur. If people face credit constraints, the
liquidity costs of holding capital uniquely in the business might make it necessary for people
to save against unanticipated shocks (such as illness) outside the business.
    With regards to the second question, we see two broad explanations for why market
women in our sample could not save enough without formal savings devices. First, these
women may have present-biased preferences, and thus may be tempted to spend any cash
money that they hold (Laibson, 1997; Gul and Pesendorfer, 2001; Gul and Pesendorfer,
2004). Second, these women may face regular demands on their income from relatives or

    30
     For this channel to be at play, deposits have to be smaller than the investment “lump”. To check this,
Figure 3 plots a CDF of average deposits, withdrawals, and investment (excluding zeros) for market women
in our sample. Average deposits are clearly dominated by investment (and investment is dominated by
withdrawals). This suggests that market women in our sample saved up relatively small amounts to deposit,
and then withdrew in bigger sums.


                                                    16
neighbors (Platteau, 2000), or from their husbands (Ashraf, 2009). In either case, keeping
money at the bank where it is not immediately accessible might increase total savings.
    Both phenomena have been shown to be at play in our study area. Duflo, Kremer
and Robinson (2011) show that time-inconsistent preferences limit profitable investments
in fertilizer by farmers in Western Kenya. Also in Western Kenya, Dupas and Robinson
(2012) show that money demands from others form an important barrier to preventative
health investments. However, the effectiveness of a savings product in overcoming these two
barriers depends on the type of commitment or earmarking it provides. In Dupas and Robin-
son (2012), we show that, while pressure to share with others can be somewhat overcome
with a simple savings technology such as a box with a lock and key, overcoming time-
inconsistent preferences requires a savings technology with a strong commitment feature,
such as a ROSCA.
    Which of these two barriers mattered in our sample? The way accounts were used provide
some insights. The frequency of transactions was relatively low, and the median deposit size
was relatively large (the average deposit size for the median woman who actively used the
account was equivalent to about 1.6 days of average expenditures.) This, combined with the
fact that the bank closed at 3pm (well before work ends for most market vendors), makes it
clear that market women did not build up savings balances by depositing small amounts of
money every night after work, but instead saved up for some time and then deposited larger
sums. This suggests that the basic savings accounts provided in the study were not likely
to be useful to solve a hyperbolic discounting problem. Rather, market women may have
been using the accounts to protect their income from demands from friends and family. For
instance, women may get asked for money by extended family and may feel socially obligated
to give something if the money is readily accessible, but these requests might be relatively
infrequent (every few weeks, for example). If so, and if it is costly (in terms of time and
effort) to go to the bank, it may be rational to only go to the bank every few weeks, rather
than every day.31
    To provide further evidence on potential mechanisms, Table 5 looks at determinants of
account usage. We restrict the sample to those ever offered an account, and regress the log
   31
     In qualitative surveys, people report that it is easier to say “no” to friends and relatives asking for money
when the money is saved in a bank than when money is saved in the house. This suggests that generosity
towards friends and relatives might often be “involuntary” – people give money to avoid having to lie about
money availability (to avoid a feeling of guilt) but if the money is truly not available at home, people do
not feel guilty saying they have no money available. This is consistent with lab experiments showing that,
in dictator games, dictators are willing to sacrifice part of the total prize to opt out of the game, provided
that the decision is not revealed to recipients (Dana, Cain and Dawes, 2006). This opting-out behavior is
particularly common among dictators who appear “generous” when the silent opt-out option is not available
(Broberg, Ellingsen, and Johannesson, 2007), suggesting that guilt or shame, rather than altruism, is at the
source of the high generosity levels typically observed in dictator games.


                                                       17
of the sum of total deposits in the first six months on baseline characteristics. To include
those who made no deposits, we add one to the sum of total deposits, such that for those
who made zero deposit the dependent variable is zero. The coefficients on female vendor
is large and significant (relative to the omitted category – bodas),32 but its magnitude (and
even sign) change as covariates are added, suggesting that the female vendor effect can
be explained by observable characteristics. In particular, usage is very strongly positively
correlated with ROSCA participation, which is higher among female vendors.33 Account
usage is also very strongly correlated with wealth (measured in the value of animals and
durable goods owned), suggesting that the accounts were mostly useful for people somewhat
further above subsistence.
    We include controls for risk and time preferences in Column 3 of Table 5.34 Risk aversion
is correlated with usage: less risk-averse individuals were less likely to use the accounts,
pointing to a possible consumption smoothing rationale for usage. More patient people ap-
pear more likely to save, although the effect is insignificant. In terms of the time consistency
measures, we find that respondents who exhibit present-biased preferences were not more
likely to deposit money than the omitted time-consistent group. This is not surprising since
the savings account we subsidized offered a commitment device to avoid spending money
once it had been deposited, but was not accompanied by a commitment to make regular
deposits. Present-biased individuals might have had a difficult time committing themselves
to making regular trips to the bank.




  32
      Note that a dummy for male vendor is included in this regression but the coefficient is not shown.
  33
      Given the correlation between ROSCA participation and active use of the account, the fact that ROSCA
contributions among market women were not crowded out by the accounts (Table 2) could be surprising,
especially since savings are more quickly and reliably accessible when placed in a formal account than with
a ROSCA. We can think of various possible explanations for why this is the case, however. First of all,
ROSCA cycles can be long (up to 18 months), so our data might be too medium-run to capture changes in
participation. Secondly, ROSCAs typically offer more than just savings to their participants. In particular,
many ROSCAs offer loans (in addition to the regular pot) to their participants, and often also provide some
emergency insurance. A census of ROSCAs we conducted in the area of study suggests that 64% of ROSCAs
offer loans to their members, and 54% offer insurance in case of a funeral or other catastrophic events (Dupas
and Robinson, 2012). Finally, while bank savings are made individually, ROSCA contributions are made
in a group. The social aspect of ROSCAs may provide some form of commitment, either through social
pressure to keep contributing (Gugerty, 2007) or from the regular schedule of payments. For these reasons,
a formal savings account might only be an imperfect substitute for ROSCA participation.
   34
      As discussed earlier, note that these measures should be taken with some caution as they were measured
ex-post for a large part of the sample.


                                                     18
5     Conclusion
The experiment described in this paper provides strong evidence that a sizeable fraction of
micro-entrepreneurs in rural Kenya face major savings constraints. These constraints are so
strong that around 40% of market women decided to take up savings accounts which offered
a negative real interest rate. This result suggests that the alternative savings opportunities
that market women face offer an expected return even more negative.
    Market women use these accounts to save up to increase the size of their business and
increase their private expenditures. However, the accounts had minimal effects for the other
group of daily income earners in our sample (bicycle-taxi drivers), who did not use the
accounts at all. One interpretation of this finding is that these men were able to save at
home more securely, and so did not need accounts with such low returns. However, we prefer
not to draw any conclusions regarding that subgroup, because there was differential attrition
between the treatment and control arms among them, and we cannot rule out that there
were differences in unobservable characteristics between the two arms.
    Given the large impacts we estimate for at least a third of the market women in our
sample, a natural question is why market women did not open up accounts on their own,
prior to our study. This seems to be because the bank we worked with (the only bank
in town) was relatively new and poorly known at baseline. This is consistent with recent
evidence that levels of familiarity with and trust in financial institutions are relatively low in
rural Kenya, due to a long history of financial scandals of various sorts, as well as unreliable
service provision (Dupas et al., 2012). The bank we partnered with was reliable, however,
and therefore take-up of accounts should have increased over time. Indeed, the number of
account holders at the bank increased by 200% between 2007 and 2011, from around 1,300
to 4,000.
    Overall, our findings suggest that extending basic banking services could have large effects
at relatively small cost, especially relative to credit alone. However, there are several major
caveats to this result. The most important is that our sample is relatively small and composed
entirely of two specific types of income earners, so more work needs to be done to examine
whether the results generalize to other individuals in other settings.
    Another important caveat is that while we document savings constraints at the individual
level, the general equilibrium effects of extending savings to the entire unbanked population
remain unclear. It is possible that the market women in our treatment group grew their
business at the expense of neighboring businesses. Even beyond this, the accounts could
have changed the nature of informal insurance networks. For example, if informal insurance
is constrained by a limited commitment constraint, the accounts could have changed par-


                                               19
ticipation in informal insurance by affecting the value of autarky for treatment individuals
(Ligon, Thomas, and Worrall, 2000). To estimate such general equilibrium effects, one would
have to randomize access to financial services at the village level (rather than the individual
level), or to exploit gradual expansion of formal saving services across villages (which is
difficult since bank expansion typically brings both saving and credit services at the same
time, as in Burgess and Pande, 2005, or Bruhn and Love, 2009). This is outside the scope of
this study, which aimed to first establish the extent to which saving constraints are binding
at the individual level, but we believe that studying the importance of savings constraints
at a more aggregate level is an important issue for future work.
    Our findings also raise a number of issues about the pathways through which formal bank
accounts helped market women in our sample. First, are the savings constraints implied by
our results due primarily to social pressure to share resources, or to self-control problems?
Second, to what extent do intra-household (inter-spousal) conflicts in preferences explain
our results?
    Finally, a particularly important question is why more than half of the individuals in the
treatment group did not actively take up these accounts. Is it because they do not have
savings problems, or is it because this particular saving device was not well suited to their
needs, for example because it did not offer a strong commitment feature? One clue is that
92% of those that were offered accounts but who did not actively use them report that “it
is hard to save at home,” which suggests that they, too, face barriers to savings. Given
the dearth of savings and credit opportunities currently available in sub-Saharan Africa,
more work is needed to understand which saving services or devices are best suited to these
individuals.




                                              20
References
 [1] Aggarwal, Shilpa, Leora Klapper and Dorothe Singer (2011). “Financing Businesses in
       Africa: The Role of Microfinance.” Working paper, World Bank.
 [2] Aportela, Fernando (1999): “Effects of Financial Access on Savings by Low-Income
       People.” mimeo, Banco de México.
 [3] Ashraf, Nava (2009): “Spousal Control and Intra-Household Decision Making: An Ex-
        perimental Study in the Philippines.” American Economic Review 99(4): 1245-1277.
 [4] Ashraf, Nava, Dean S. Karlan and Wesley Yin (2006): “Tying Odysseus to the Mast:
        Evidence from a Commitment Savings Product in the Philippines.” Quarterly Jour-
        nal of Economics, 121(2): 635-672.
 [5] Attanasio, Orazio, Britta Augsburg, Ralph De Haas, Emla Fitzsimons and Heike Har-
        mgart (2012). “Group Lending versus Individual Lending in Mongolia.” Working
        paper.
 [6] Banerjee, Abhijit, Duflo, Esther, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan (2009): “The
        Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.” mimeo, MIT.
 [7] Bauer, Michal, Julie Chytilová, and Jonathan Morduch (2010): “Behavioral Founda-
        tions of Microcredit: Experimental and Survey Evidence.” IZA Discussion Paper No.
        4901.
 [8] Broberg, T., T. Ellingsen, and M. Johannesson (2007): “Is Generosity Involuntary?”
        Economic Letters, 94, 32–37.
 [9] Bruhn, Miriam, and David McKenzie (2009): “In the Pursuit of Balance: Randomiza-
        tion in Practice in Development Field Experiments”. American Economic Journal:
        Applied Economics 1(4): 200–232.
[10] Bruhn, Miriam, and Inessa Love (2009): “The economic impact of banking the un-
        banked: evidence from Mexico”. World Bank Policy Research working paper no.
        4981.
[11] Burgess, Robin and Rohini Pande (2005): “Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the
        Indian Social Banking Experiment.” American Economic Review 95 (3): 780-795.
[12] Chaia, Alberto, Aparna Dalal, Tony Goland, Maria Jose Gonzalez, Jonathan Morduch,
       and Robert Schi (2009). “Half the World is Unbanked.” Financial Access Initiative
       Framing Note.
[13] Charness, Gary and Garance Genicot (2009): “Informal Risk Sharing in an Infinite-
       Horizon Experiment.” Economic Journal 119 (537): 796-825.

                                           21
[14] Cole, Shawn A., Thomas Sampson, and Bilal Zia (2011). “Prices or Knowledge? What
        Drives Demand for Financial Services in Emerging Markets?” Journal of Finance 66
        (6): 1933 - 1967.
[15] Collins, Darryl, Jonathan Morduch, Stuart Rutherford, and Orlando Ruthven (2009).
        Portfolios of the Poor: How the World’s Poor Live on Two Dollars a Day. Princeton
        University Press.
[16] Crépon, Bruno, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo and William Parienté (2011). “Impact
        of Microcredit in Rural Areas of Morocco: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation.”
        Mimeo, MIT.
[17] Dana, J., D. M. Cain, and R. M. Dawes (2006): “What You Don’t Know Won’t Hurt Me:
       Costly (But Quiet) Exit in Dictator Games,” Organizational Behavior and Human
       Decision Processes, 100, 193–201.
[18] Daniels, Lisa (2001): “Testing Alternative Measures of Microenterprise Profits and Net
       Worth.” Journal of International Development 13: 599-614.
[19] de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruff (2008): “Returns to Cap-
        ital in Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 123(4): 1329-1372.
[20] de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie and Christopher Woodruff (2009a): “Measuring Mi-
        croenterprise Profits: Must We Ask How the Sausage Is Made?” Journal of Devel-
        opment Economics 88(1): 19-31.
[21] de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff (2009b): “Are Women
        More Credit Constrained? Experimental Evidence on Gender and Microenterprise
        Returns” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(3): 1-32.
[22] de Soto, Hernando (1989). The Other Path: The Invisible Revolution in the Third World,
        New York, NY: Harper and Row.
[23] Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer and Jonathan Robinson (2011). “Nudging Farmers to
        Use Fertilizer: Theory and Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” American Economic
        Review 101 (6): 2350-2390.
[24] Dupas, Pascaline, and Jonathan Robinson (2012).“Why don’t the Poor Save More?
       Evidence from Health Savings Experiments in Kenya”. Mimeo, UCLA.
[25] Dupas, Pascaline, Sarah Green, Anthony Keats, and Jonathan Robinson (2012). “Sup-
       ply and Demand Challenges in Banking the Rural Poor: Evidence from Kenya.”
       Forthcoming, NBER Africa Project Conference Volume.


                                            22
[26] Gugerty, Mary Kay (2007): “You can’t save alone: Commitment in Rotating Savings
       and Credit Associations in Kenya”, Economic Development and Cultural Change 55:
       251-282.
[27] Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2001), “Temptation and Self-Control”, Econo-
        metrica 69(6): 1403-1435.
[28] Gul, Faruk and Wolfgang Pesendorfer (2004): “Self-Control and the Theory of Con-
        sumption,” Econometrica 72(1): 119-158.
[29] International Monetary Fund (2010): World Economic Outlook Database. Available
         online at http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2010/01/weodata/index.aspx.
[30] Johnston, Don Jr. and Jonathan Morduch (2008): “The Unbanked: Evidence from
        Indonesia,” World Bank Economic Review 22 (3): 517-537.
[31] Kaboski, Joseph and Robert Townsend (2005): “Policies and Impact: An Analysis of
       Village-Level Microfinance Institutions,” Journal of the European Economic Associ-
       ation 3(1): 1-50.
[32] Kaboski, Joseph and Robert Townsend (2011): “A Structural Evaluation of a Large-
       Scale Quasi-Experimental Microfinance Initiative.” Econometrica 79 (5): 1357-1406.
[33] Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Zinman (2010a): “Expanding Credit Access: Using Ran-
        domized Supply Decisions To Estimate the Impacts” Review of Financial Studies
        23(1): 433-46.
[34] Karlan, Dean and Jonathan Zinman (2010b): “Expanding Microenterprise Credit Ac-
        cess: Using Randomized Supply Decisions to Estimate the Impacts in Manila.”
        mimeo, Dartmouth and Yale.
[35] Kendall, Jake, Nataliya Mylenko and Alejandro Ponce (2010). “Measuring Financial
       Access around the World.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5253.
[36] Laibson, David (1997): “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting,” Quarterly Journal
        of Economics 112(2): 443-477.
[37] Liedholm, Carl (1991): “Data Collection Strategies for Small-scale Industry Surveys”,
        GEMINI Working Paper No. 11, Bethesda, MD: Development Alternatives, Inc.
[38] Ligon, Ethan, Jonathan P. Thomas, and Tim Worrall (2000): “Mutual Insurance, In-
        dividual Savings, and Limited Commitment,” Review of Economic Dynamics 3 (2):
        216-246.
[39] McKenzie, David and Christopher Woodruff (2008): “Experimental Evidence on Re-
       turns to Capital and Access to Finance in Mexico.” World Bank Economic Review

                                           23
       22(3): 457-482.
[40] Platteau, Jean-Philippe (2000): “Egalitarian Norms and Economic Growth.” In
        Institutions, Social Norms and Economic Development. Amsterdam, Harwood Aca-
        demic Publishers.
[41] Rutherford, Stuart (2000): The Poor and Their Money. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
        Press.
[42] Thaler, Richard H. and Shlomo Benartzi (2004): “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behav-
       ioral Economics to Increase Employee Saving,” Journal of Political Economy 112(1):
       S164-187.
[43] Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas (1995): “Human Resources: Empirical Modeling of
        Household and Family Decisions”, in J. Behrman & T.N. Srinivasan (ed.), Handbook
        of Development Economics, volume 3A, chapter 34, 1883-2023. Amsterdam: North-
        Holland Press.
[44] World Bank (2004): World Bank Development Report 2005: A Better Investment Cli-
       mate – for Everyone, New York, NY: World Bank and Oxford University Press.




                                           24
                                      Figure 1. Number of transactions at village bank in first 6 months




                                      .5
                                      .4
                             Fraction
                                   .3 .2
                                      .1
                                      0




                                                 0           5              10             15            20   25
                                                                  # of Transactions in the First 6 Months



                                            Figure 2. CDFs of Total Amount Deposited in First 6 Months


                                            Panel A: CDF of Deposits in First 6 Months, Below 75th Percentile
                                .8
                                .6
                        % at or below
                              .4.2
                                0




                                            0        250         500              1000               1,500         2,000


                                            Panel B: CDF of Deposits in First 6 Months, Above 75th Percentile
                                1     .95
                        % at or below
                         .85     .9
                                .8
                                .75




                                            0      10,000        30,000       50,000
                                                5,000     20,000        40,000                                100,000
                                                                   Deposits in First 6 Months (Ksh)


                                                                  CDF for Men            CDF for Women



Notes: Data from 156 individuals offered an account. Those who refused to open an account are coded as having 0
transactions (Figure 1) and 0 deposits (Figure 2). The sample mean of the total deposited in the first six months is 2,500 Ksh.
The mean among those with a non-zero total is 5,000 Ksh (median: 700 Ksh).

                                                                                      25
               Figure 3. CDFs of Deposits, Withdrawals, and Investment (in Ksh) for Female Vendors


                                             C D F of A ve r ag e D ep o s its , W ith d ra w als a n d Inv es tm e nts




                             1      .8
                 % a t o r b e lo w
                  .4       .6.2
                             0




                                         0      2000                         40 00            6000                  8000

                                                        D e p o s its                  In ve s tm e n ts
                                                        W ith d r a w a ls




Notes: Figure shows average deposits, withdrawals, and investments for female vendors in the treatment group.




                                                                              26
Table 1. Sample Characteristics and Balance Check
                                                              (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)        (5)         (6)
                                                                      Female Vendors                       Males (Vendors and Bodas )
                                                                                         p-val                                  p-val
                                                            Control     Treatment                       Control Treatment
                                                                                        Treat =                                Treat =
                                                            Group        Group                          Group      Group
                                                                                        Control                                Control
Stratfication Variables
Wave 1                                                        0.17          0.14          0.57            0.36        0.51          0.17
Wave 2                                                        0.31          0.32          0.87            0.54        0.49          0.66
Wave 3                                                        0.52          0.54          0.80            0.10        0.00         0.04**
Occupation: Boda                                              0.00          0.00            -             0.62        0.76          0.18
Demographics
Age                                                           34.40        36.43          0.22             30.10       30.63        0.79
                                                            (11.43)       (10.14)                         (8.45)      (8.96)
Married                                                       0.65          0.68          0.69              0.80        0.83        0.70
Number of Children                                            3.57          3.53          0.89              2.69        2.90        0.68
                                                             (2.18)        (2.20)                         (2.19)      (2.34)
Education                                                     5.95          5.77          0.74              6.56        8.07      0.01***
                                                             (3.02)        (3.73)                         (2.57)      (2.44)
Literate (Swahili)                                            0.70          0.61          0.23              0.90        0.95       0.37
Participates in ROSCA                                         0.88          0.89          0.73              0.41        0.46       0.64
ROSCA Contributions in Last Year (in Ksh)                     4216          5244          0.25             1172        2524        0.07*
                                                             (4424)       (6674)                          (2196)      (4123)
Value of Animals Owned (in Ksh)                               4556          4791          0.87             4149        6265         0.35
                                                             (9241)       (8864)                          (5660)     (12685)
Value of Durable Goods Owned (in Ksh)                         4100          3355          0.61             8415        6788         0.55
                                                            (12065)       (6385)                         (11931)     (11750)
Total Income in Week Prior to Survey (in Ksh)                 1116          1233          0.73              564         670         0.42
                                                             (1285)       (1563)                           (464)       (634)
Received Loan from Bank in Past Year                          0.04          0.06          0.76              0.03        0.03        0.93
Received Loan from Friend in Past Year                        0.39          0.44          0.66              0.34        0.41        0.56
Self-Reported Health Status1                                  3.37          3.29          0.70              3.54        3.56        0.93
                                                             (0.88)        (0.84)                         (0.82)      (0.90)
Agrees with statement: "It is hard to save at home"           0.88          0.90          0.75              0.89        0.77        0.23
                               2
Risk and Time Preferences
Amount invested (out of 100 Ksh) in Risky Asset              64.40         63.57          0.81            60.65       66.13         0.32
                                                            (21.20)       (21.74)                        (24.21)     (18.56)
Somewhat Patient                                             0.10           0.09          0.78             0.16       0.19         0.75
Time-consistent                                              0.20           0.20          0.97             0.30       0.36         0.66
Present-biased                                               0.23           0.21          0.88             0.27       0.39         0.32
More Patient in Future than in Present                       0.18           0.26          0.25             0.03       0.07         0.58
Maximal Discount Rate in Present and in Future               0.39           0.33          0.40             0.40       0.19         0.08*
Cognitive Skills
Raven's matrix score (percent correct)                        0.47          0.48          0.82            0.52        0.49          0.68

Observations                                                     96            74            170              39          41          80
Notes: Sample restricted to respondents for whom we have logbook data. Columns 1, 2, 4 and 5 report means, with standard deviations in
parentheses. Columns 3 and 6 report p-values obtained when testing the hypothesis that the difference between the treatment and the
control means is equal to 0. P-values under 0.1, 0.05, 0.01 are highlighted with *,**,*** respectively. Exchange rate was roughly 70 Ksh to
US $1 during the study period.
1
  Health Status is coded as: 1-very poor, 2-poor, 3-just OK, 4-good, 5-very good.
2
  The risky asset paid off 4 times the amount invested with probability 0.5, and 0 with probability 0.5. "Somewhat Patient" is a dummy equal
to 1 if the respondent prefers 55 Ksh (or less) in a month to 40 Ksh now. "Time Consistent" is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent
exhibits the same discount rate between today and 1 month from today. "Present-Biased" is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent exhibits
a higher discount rate between today and one month from today than between 1 month from today and two months from today, "More
Patient in Future than in Present" is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent is more patient in 1 month than she is today, and "Maximum
Discount Rate in the Present and in the Future" is a dummy equal to 1 if a respondent prefers 40 Ksh today to 500 Ksh in 1 month and 40
Ksh in 1 month to 500 Ksh in 2 months.                                 27
Table 2. Impacts on Savings
                                                           (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)        (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                                                            Active Bank
                                                                                                                                       Rosca Contributions
                                                           Account Usage           Bank Savings (Ksh)       Animal Savings (Ksh)
                                                                                                                                             (Ksh)
                                                           ("First-Stage")

Panel A. Intention-to-Treat Estimates (ITT)
Sampled for Savings Account                                0.41         0.40          9.36       11.39        16.79         23.26         7.81        12.57
                                                        (0.05)***    (0.06)***     (3.43)***    (4.42)**     (10.05)*     (14.03)*       (7.02)      (10.08)
Sampled for Savings Account * Boda                                      0.06                     -12.43                    -20.00                    -12.56
                                                                       (0.11)                   (6.06)**                   (17.85)                   (14.10)
Observations                                               250          250          250          250          250           250          250          250

p -value for overall effect = 0                          0.01***                   0.01***                     0.1*                      0.27
p -value for effect for female vendors = 0                            0.01***                    0.01**                     0.1*                      0.21
p -value for effect for bodas = 0                                     0.01***                     0.82                      0.75                      1.00

Panel B. Instrumental Variable Estimates (ToT)
Account is Active                                                                    22.82        28.77       40.91         58.37        19.03        31.42
                                                                                   (8.51)***    (11.41)**    (24.41)*     (35.09)*      (17.08)      (25.11)
Account is Active * Boda                                                                          -29.35                   -49.40                    -30.57
                                                                                                (13.88)**                  (40.88)                   (31.87)
Observations                                                                         250           250         250           250          250          250

p -value for overall effect = 0                                                    0.01***                     0.1*                      0.27
p -value for effect for female vendors = 0                                                       0.01**                     0.1*                      0.21
p -value for effect for bodas = 0                                                                 0.95                      0.67                      0.96

Panel C. Mean and Std. Dev. of Dependent Variable in Control Group
Entire Sample: Mean                                                                 -1.95                      3.81                     26.30
                   Std. Dev.                                                        30.29                      9.16                     35.46
Female Vendors: Mean                                                                             -2.33                     3.58                        33.27
                   Std. Dev.                                                                     33.78                     9.13                        38.76
Bodas :            Mean                                                                           3.96                     3.66                         5.07
                   Std. Dev.                                                                     16.61                     9.01                         7.25
Notes: Dependent variables are daily averages. Dependent variables expressed in Kenyan shillings. Controls include occupation, ROSCA contributions in
year before baseline, marital status, number of children, age, literacy, the number of weeks in the diary data, and the wave / type stratification cells. Even-
numbered colums also include an interaction term between "Sampled for Savings Account" and "Male Vendor". The first-stage for the IV estimations in
Panel B are presented in Panel A, columns 1-2.
Exchange rate was roughly 70 Ksh to US $1 during the study period.
Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                           28
Table 3. Impacts on Business Outcomes
                                                   (1)        (2)       (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)      (7)         (8)        (9)         (10)
                                                                      Business Investment    Business Investment    Business Revenues      Business Revenues
                                                 Total Hours Worked
                                                                        (No Trimming)         (Top 5% trimmed)       (No Trimming)        (Top 5% Trimmed)

Panel A. Intention-to-Treat Estimates (ITT)
Sampled for Savings Account                        0.15       0.31     179.71      203.23     87.37       90.43      129.32     116.46     58.59      37.59
                                                  (0.37)     (0.44)   (105.17)*   (147.63)   (46.91)*    (61.38)    (100.32)   (133.34)   (34.83)*   (43.62)
Sampled for Savings Account * Boda                           -0.58                 -97.03                -30.08                  -3.28                27.70
                                                             (0.88)               (222.92)               (84.45)               (203.17)              (76.40)
Observations                                       249        249       244         244        244         244        241         241       241        241

p -value for overall effect = 0                   0.69                 0.09*                  0.06*                  0.20                  0.09*
p -value for effect for female vendors = 0                   0.49                  0.17                   0.14                  0.38                  0.39
p -value for effect for bodas = 0                            0.72                  0.50                   0.34                  0.46                  0.30

Panel B. Instrumental Variable Estimates (ToT)
Account is Active                                  0.36       0.77     425.20      503.85     206.72      224.49     304.44     289.71     137.93      94.20
                                                  (0.91)     (1.12)   (248.32)*   (365.57)   (112.18)*   (154.02)   (236.81)   (331.59)   (83.02)*   (109.20)
Account is Active * Boda                                     -1.31                -258.45                 -86.73                -41.68                 47.25
                                                             (1.94)               (490.29)               (187.01)              (438.13)              (162.00)
Observations                                       249        249       244         244        244         244        241        241        241         241

p -value for overall effect = 0                   0.69                 0.09*                  0.07*                  0.20                  0.10
p -value for effect for female vendors = 0                   0.49                  0.17                   0.15                  0.38                  0.39
p -value for effect for bodas = 0                            0.74                  0.44                   0.28                  0.41                  0.25

Panel C. Mean and Std. Dev. of Dependent Variable in Control Group
Entire Sample: Mean                              6.09                  296.83                 191.08                343.89                197.26
                  Std. Dev.                      2.96                  487.83                 224.20                518.63                186.23
Female Vendors: Mean                                         5.78                 363.84                 239.80                403.43                226.40
                  Std. Dev.                                  3.02                 471.69                 222.03                560.85                205.26
Bodas :           Mean                                       7.25                  11.30                  11.30                 96.68                 96.68
                  Std. Dev.                                  2.68                  8.81                   8.81                  48.04                 48.04
Notes: see Table 2 notes.




                                                                           29
Table 4. Impacts on Expenditures
                                                     (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)         (8)        (9)         (10)
                                                                                                     Daily Private       Net Transfers Outside
                                                 Daily Total Expenditure Daily Food Expenditure                                                Net Transfers to Spouse
                                                                                                      Expenditure           the Household

Panel A. Intention-to-Treat Estimates (ITT)
Sampled for Savings Account                         23.93      31.17       10.67       14.46        8.94        7.77      -12.85      -18.84       3.45        4.16
                                                   (15.81)    (19.59)     (6.41)*     (8.47)*     (3.75)**    (3.98)*     (14.40)     (20.86)     (5.23)      (7.06)
Sampled for Savings Account * Boda                             -9.70                   -7.78                   5.18                    17.81                   4.01
                                                              (44.42)                 (15.61)                 (11.63)                 (22.65)                 (9.71)
Observations                                        250         250         250         250         250         250        249          249        202         202

p -value for overall effect = 0                     0.13                    0.1*                  0.02**                   0.37                   0.51
p -value for effect for female vendors = 0                     0.11                    0.09*                   0.05*                   0.37                   0.56
p -value for effect for bodas = 0                              0.58                    0.60                    0.24                    0.86                   0.20

Panel B. Instrumental Variable Estimates (ToT)
Account is Active                                   58.33      77.97       26.00        36.20      21.79        19.61     -31.37      -47.32      9.07        11.50
                                                   (38.50)    (48.81)     (15.46)*    (21.02)*    (9.40)**    (10.18)*    (35.40)     (53.01)    (13.59)     (19.48)
Account is Active * Boda                                      -30.73                   -21.09                   8.62                   43.53                  4.69
                                                              (96.51)                  (33.92)                 (26.12)                (54.54)                (23.65)
Observations                                        250         250         250          250        250          250       249          249        202         202

p -value for overall effect = 0                     0.13                   0.09*                  0.02**                   0.38                   0.51
p -value for effect for female vendors = 0                     0.11                    0.09*                   0.06*                   0.37                   0.56
p -value for effect for bodas = 0                              0.56                    0.57                    0.25                    0.75                   0.22

Panel C. Mean and Std. Dev. of Dependent Variable in Control Group
Entire Sample: Mean                             163.12                     82.04                   23.33                   6.96                   -9.02
                  Std. Dev.                     119.69                     53.87                   23.39                  192.44                  42.83
Female Vendors: Mean                                        169.14                     86.96                   21.08                   12.03                 -26.44
                  Std. Dev.                                 117.77                     54.96                   23.44                  228.14                 35.68
Bodas :           Mean                                      131.21                     59.24                   25.12                   -0.23                 21.50
                  Std. Dev.                                 106.84                     31.43                   23.77                  10.53                  18.96
Notes: see Table 2 notes.




                                                                              30
Table 5. Determinants of Account Usage within 6 months of Account Opening


                                                          Log (1+ Total Deposited in Ksh)
                                                    (1)                 (2)                   (3)
Background Characteristics
Female Vendor                                      1.828                -0.805              -0.190
                                                 (0.788)**             (2.027)             (2.042)
Years of Education                                                      -0.033              -0.082
                                                                       (0.121)             (0.124)
Literate (Can read and write Swahili)                                   -0.889              -0.728
                                                                       (0.865)             (0.868)
Age                                                                      0.000              -0.016
                                                                       (0.034)             (0.034)
Married                                                                 -1.870              -0.802
                                                                       (2.010)             (2.033)
Female Vendor * Married                                                  1.675               0.694
                                                                       (2.133)             (2.159)
Value of ROSCA Contributions in Year Prior to Baseline                   0.140               0.162
   (in 1,000 Ksh)                                                    (0.051)***          (0.053)***
Value of Animals Owned (in 1,000 Ksh)                                    0.077               0.063
                                                                      (0.031)**           (0.032)**
Value of Durable Goods Owned (in 1,000 Ksh)                              0.103               0.130
                                                                      (0.046)**          (0.047)***
Risk Aversion
Amount invested (out of 100 Ksh) in Risky Asset                                             -1.788
                                                                                            (1.463)
Patience (current period)
Somewhat patient                                                                             1.028
                                                                                            (1.129)
Time-Inconsistency
Present-Biased                                                                              -0.137
                                                                                            (1.073)

Observations                                         156                  149                    149
R-squared                                            0.08                 0.25                  0.31
Mean of Dep. Var.                                   3.090                3.156                 3.156
Notes: The dependent variable is the log of the sum (in Kenyan shillings) of all deposits made within six
months of account opening plus one (to include those who did not make any deposits). Sample
restricted to respondents sampled for an account, and for whom we have logbook data. The risk
aversion and time discounting questions are missing for 33 respondents, so we include them by
assigning them a value of 0 and including a dummy for missing that question. See the notes to Table 1
for definitions of risk and time preferences variables. The excluded time consistency category is "Time
Consistent". The regression includes dummies (not shown) for other time consistency categories. See
Figure 1 for a histogram of total transactions. Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                   31
Table A1. Sampling Frame
                                                                                  (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)
                                                                                              Bicycle Taxi
                                                                              Female                              Male
                                                                                                Drivers                            Total
                                                                              Vendors                            Vendors
                                                                                               ("Bodas ")
Panel A. Sample Frame: Total number of people interviewed at baseline
TOTAL                                                                            262               96               34             392
  Assigned to Control                                                            132               48               17             197
  Assigned to Treatment                                                          130               48               17             195

Wave 1                                                                           46                64                0              110
   Assigned to Control                                                           23                32                               55
   Assigned to Treatment                                                         23                32                               55
Wave 2                                                                            65               32               23              120
   Assigned to Control                                                           33                16               12              61
   Assigned to Treatment                                                         32                16               11              59
Wave 3                                                                           151                0               11              162
   Assigned to Control                                                           76                                  5              81
   Assigned to Treatment                                                         75                                  6              81

Panel B. Number of people still in the sample at the time the Logbooks were introduced
TOTAL                                                                            200               74               27             301
  Control                                                                        111               34               17             162
  Treatment                                                                       89               40               10             139

Wave 1                                                                            32               43                0               75
   Control                                                                       16                18                               34
   Treatment                                                                     16                25                               41
Wave 2                                                                            65               31               22              118
   Control                                                                       33                16               12              61
   Treatment                                                                     32                15               10              57
Wave 3                                                                           103                0                5              108
   Control                                                                       62                                 5               67
   Treatment                                                                     41                                 0               41

Panel C. Study Sample: Total number of people that completed Logbooks
TOTAL                                                                            170               55               25             250
  Control                                                                        96                24               15             135
  Treatment                                                                      74                31               10             115

Wave 1                                                                            26               35                0              61
   Control                                                                        16               14                               30
   Treatment                                                                      10               21                               31
Wave 2                                                                            54               20               21              95
   Control                                                                        30               10               11              51
   Treatment                                                                      24               10               10              44
Wave 3                                                                            90                0                4              94
   Control                                                                        50                                 4              54
   Treatment                                                                      40                                 0              40

Panel D. Compliance with Treatment among those assigned to Treatment Group
Total that could not be traced for account offer                 26                                 8                5               39
Total offered account                                           104                                40               12              156
Total that refused account offer                                15                                  4                2               21
Total that opened account                                       89                                 36               10              135
Notes: Attrition from the sample between the baseline and the introduction of the logbook (the drop from Panel A to Panel B) was due to
relocation of respondents outside of the study area. This type of attrition was higher for wave 3 and wave 1 than wave 2, because the gap
                                                                         32 on average for wave 3 and 9 months for wave 1) compared to
between baseline and the rollout of the logbook was much longer (14 months
wave 2 (5 months). Attrition in the Logbook sample (the drops from Panel B to Panel C) was due to refusals.
Table A2. Comparison between study sample and representative samples of unbanked households in rural East Africa
                                                     (1)                  (2)                  (3)                                       (4)
                                                                              Western Kenya:
                                                          Our Study         Census of unbanked
                                                                                                  Central Uganda:        Southern Malawi:
                                                           Sample             households in 3
                                                                                               Unbanked Households in Unbanked Households in
                                                                                 villages
                                                                                                    19 Parishes             72 villages
                                                          2006-2008             Fall 2009a           Fall 2010b            Spring 2011b
Demographics
Age                                                          33.71                  40.15                   36.29                       39.55
                                                            (10.48)                (16.72)                  (12.00)                    (19.07)
Married                                                       0.71                   0.70                    0.71                        0.73
Number of Children                                            3.31                   3.35                    5.05                        2.67
                                                             (2.23)                 (2.34)                   (3.04)                     (1.74)
Education                                                     6.34                   5.95                    5.50                        5.60
                                                             (3.19)                 (3.38)                   (2.97)                     (2.91)
Literate                                                      0.74                   0.51                    0.76                        0.61
Participates in ROSCA                                         0.74                   0.40                    0.23                        0.06
ROSCA Contributions in Last Year (in USD)                    53.83                  60.07                    36.65                      33.15
                                                            (72.88)               (102.22)                  (58.36)                    (49.48)
Value of Animals Owned (in USD)                              69.01                  69.99                   122.88                      61.52
                                                           (132.62)               (171.45)                 (612.20)                   (120.35)
Value of Durable Goods Owned (in USD)                        71.13                126.30                   269.57                      123.48
                                                           (152.96)               (131.36)                (1054.84)                   (362.68)
Received Loan from Bank in Past Yearc                         0.04                   0.05                     0.06                       0.06

Risk Preferences
Percent invested in Risky Assetd                             0.64                   0.59                     0.63                       0.72

Cognitive Skills
Raven's matrix score (percent correct)                       0.49                     -                        -                        0.44

Observations                                                   250                    2390                   2160                        2252
a
  Data from (Dupas et al., 2012). b Data from ongoing projects by authors. cIn Uganda, this is coded as whether the respondent ever applied for a loan.
d
  Size of risky asset varied across surveys: Kenya - $1.25; Uganda - $0.44; Malawi - $0.80. The amount invested in the risky asset was multipled by 4
with probability 0.5 and was lost with probability 0.5.




                                                                          33
Appendix: Robustness Checks
Excluding those who might have anticipated receiving a loan
Like many microfinance institutions, the village bank we worked with offers both savings
and credit products. Once people have an account with the bank, they can become eligible
for a loan. To qualify for a loan, an individual must first purchase a share in the bank. Three
months after purchasing a share, an individual is eligible to apply for a loan (the maximum
amount is a multiple of the amount of share capital owned). Clearly, if many treatment
individuals had gotten loans during the study period, this would likely bias our estimated
impacts of expanding access to savings alone. Since only a small number of individuals in
our sample actually got loans (only 1.6% of respondents got loans within a year), this is not
a major concern.
    That said, it remains theoretically possible that some individuals in our treatment group
expected such loans in the future, and were able to borrow working capital from friends
and relatives in the short run, in anticipation of a bank loan (and presumably, higher future
profits) later. This is probably very unlikely in this case, since it is difficult for people to
access credit informally even if they have physical assets as collateral, and possible future
access to credit was not at all guaranteed by getting access to an account. Nevertheless, we
formally explore the impact of these individuals on our estimated impacts in Appendix Table
A3. In this Table, we replicate the analysis presented in Tables 3 and 4, after excluding from
the sample those who received a loan from the bank within a year after account opening (note
that this is overly strong, since the logbooks were collected 4-6 months after opening). This
reduces the sample size and increases the size of the standard errors, but all the coefficients
have the same magnitude and sign as they do in Tables 3 and 4, suggesting that the effects
observed on investment and expenditures are not driven by loans or the anticipation of loans.


Size of Deposits
As can be inferred from Figure 1, even those individuals who actively used the account did
not make many transactions. For instance, the median number of deposits made in the first
6 months among respondents who actively used the account was just 4.6. This means that
the average deposit size was large: the median among active women was about 300 Ksh (US
$4.30), which is equivalent to about 1.6 days of mean expenditures for women in the sample.
For some women, the average deposit size was much larger than this.
   By definition, those who make very large deposits must be able to save up at home, and
therefore should not particularly benefit from the accounts. To check this, we run our main


                                              34
regressions while excluding those whose average deposit size was larger than the median
deposit in the sample. The results are presented in Appendix Table A4. Although removing
half of the treatment group considerably reduces statistical power, we obtain coefficients on
the treatment effects of similar magnitude in this specification as in Tables 3 and 4.




                                             35
Table A3. Excluding Those Individuals that Were Planning for a Loan
                                                        (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)          (9)

                                                        Amount invested in Business       Total Expenditures    Food Expenditures    Private Expenditures

Trimming                                               None          None     Top 5%      None        None      None        None      None        None
Panel A. Intention-to-Treat Estimates (ITT)
Sampled for Savings Account                           188.19       219.53      86.50      20.30        24.82     9.45       12.50      8.33        6.58
                                                     (106.09)*    (150.66)    (62.54)    (15.46)      (18.74)   (6.14)      (7.91)   (3.72)**     (3.90)*
Sampled for Savings Account * Boda                                -128.51     -25.56                   -0.01                -5.43                  7.25
                                                                  (229.88)    (86.20)                 (43.11)              (14.74)                (11.53)
Observations                                            240         240         240        246          246      246         246       246          246

p -value for overall effect = 0                        0.077*                            0.191                  0.125                0.026**
p -value for effect for women = 0                                    0.146     0.168                  0.187                0.115                  0.093*
p -value for effect for bodas = 0                                    0.567     0.337                  0.517                0.570                  0.207

Panel B. Mean and Std. Dev. of Dependent Variable in Control Group
Female Vendors: Mean                                   352.01                  240.84     167.13                 84.42                21.22
                  Std. Dev.                           (460.03)                (224.20)   (115.77)               (48.19)              (23.66)
Bodas :           Mean                                  11.30                   11.30     131.21                 59.24                25.12
                  Std. Dev.                            (8.81)                  (8.81)    (106.84)               (31.43)              (23.77)
Notes: See Table 2 notes.




                                                                              36
Table A4. Excluding Those Making Large Deposits
                                                       (1)            (2)       (3)        (4)          (5)       (6)        (7)       (8)          (9)

                                                        Amount invested in Business       Total Expenditures    Food Expenditures    Private Expenditures

Trimming                                              None           None     Top 5%      None        None      None        None      None        None
Panel A. Intention-to-Treat Estimates (ITT)
Sampled for Savings Account                           161.17      249.18       91.77      28.19        34.37     11.26      14.08     10.56        9.12
                                                     (133.64)    (207.54)     (77.90)    (17.33)      (21.40)   (6.44)*    (8.47)*   (4.48)**     (4.71)*
Sampled for Savings Account * Boda                               -306.72      -93.71                    7.63                 1.47                  9.56
                                                                 (242.83)     (75.11)                 (48.23)              (16.38)                (13.19)
Observations                                           211         211          211        217          217      217         217       217          217

p -value for overall effect = 0                       0.229                              0.105                  0.082*               0.019**
p -value for effect for women = 0                                    0.231     0.240                  0.110                0.098*                 0.054*
p -value for effect for bodas = 0                                    0.398     0.921                  0.318                0.254                  0.132

Panel B. Mean and Std. Dev. of Dependent Variable in Control Group
Female Vendors: Mean                                   363.84                  239.80     169.14                 86.96                21.08
                  Std. Dev.                           (471.69)                (222.03)   (117.77)               (54.96)              (23.44)
Bodas :           Mean                                  11.30                   11.30     131.21                 59.24                25.12
                  Std. Dev.                            (8.81)                  (8.81)    (106.84)               (31.43)              (23.77)
Notes: See Table 2 notes.




                                                                              37
