                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE TERM STRUCTURES OF EQUITY AND INTEREST RATES

                                            Martin Lettau
                                         Jessica A. Wachter

                                        Working Paper 14698
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14698


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     January 2009




We thank John Campbell, Michael Gallmeyer, Nikolai Roussanov, Kenneth Singleton, seminar participants
at BGI, Emory University, Fordham University, Society of Quantitative Analysis, Stanford University,
University of California at Berkeley, University of Maryland, University of Pennsylvania, University
of Southern California, Washington University, Yale University, the 2007 UBC Summer Finance Conference,
the 2007 UCLA Conference on the Interaction between the Bond Markets and the Macro-economy,
the 2007 NBER Fall Asset Pricing Meeting and an anonymous referee for helpful comments. Aaditya
Muthukumaran provided valuable research assistance. Lettau thanks the Scott Schoen Fellowship
at Yale SOM and Wachter thanks the Aronson+Johnson+Ortiz fellowship through the Rodney L. White
Center for support during the completion of this project. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Martin Lettau and Jessica A. Wachter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Term Structures of Equity and Interest Rates
Martin Lettau and Jessica A. Wachter
NBER Working Paper No. 14698
January 2009, Revised September 2009
JEL No. G12,G13

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper proposes a dynamic risk-based model capable of jointly explaining the term structure of
interest rates, returns on the aggregate market and the risk and return characteristics of value and growth
stocks. Both the term structure of interest rates and returns on value and growth stocks convey information
about how the representative investor values cash flows of different maturities. We model how the
representative investor perceives risks of these cash flows by specifying a parsimonious stochastic
discount factor for the economy. Shocks to dividend growth, the real interest rate, and expected inflation
are priced, but shocks to the price of risk are not. Given reasonable assumptions for dividends and
inflation, we show that the model can simultaneously account for the behavior of aggregate stock returns,
an upward-sloping yield curve, the failure of the expectations hypothesis and the poor performance
of the capital asset pricing model.


Martin Lettau
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Bldg. #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
lettau@haas.berkeley.edu

Jessica A. Wachter
Department of Finance
2300 SH-DH
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
jwachter@wharton.upenn.edu
1         Introduction
Empirical studies of asset pricing have uncovered a rich set of properties of the time series of
aggregate stock market returns, of the term structure of interest rates and of the cross-section
of stock returns. Average returns on the aggregate stock market are high relative to short-term
interest rates. Relative to dividends, aggregate stock returns are highly volatile. They are also
predictable; the return on the aggregate market in excess of the short-term interest rate is pre-
dictably high when the price-dividend ratio is low and predictably low when the price-dividend
ratio is high. The term structure of interest rates on U.S. government bonds is upward sloping,
and excess bond returns are predictable by yield spreads and by linear combinations of forward
rates. In the cross-section, stocks with low ratios of price to fundamentals (value stocks) have
higher returns than stocks with high ratios of price to fundamentals (growth stocks), despite the
fact that they have lower covariance with aggregate stock returns. These facts together are in-
consistent with popular benchmark models and therefore represent an important challenge for
theoretical modeling of asset prices.1
        One approach to explaining these properties of asset prices is to propose a fully specified model
of investor preferences, endowments and cash flows on the assets of interest. Under this approach,
the returns investors demand for bearing risks (the prices of risk) are endogenously determined by
the form of preferences and the process for aggregate consumption. These prices of risk in turn
determine risk premia, volatility, and covariances on the assets in equilibrium. Models that follow
this approach typically have a small number of free parameters and generate tight implications
for asset prices. We refer to this as the equilibrium approach.
        A second approach is to directly specify the stochastic discount factor (SDF) for the economy.
Foundational work by Harrison and Kreps (1979) demonstrates that, in the absence of arbitrage,
there exists a process (known as a stochastic discount factor) that determines current prices on the
basis of future cash flows. Given that such a process exists, this second approach specifies the SDF
process directly, without reference to preferences or endowments. The exogenously specified SDF
implies processes for the prices of risk which determine asset pricing properties. Models based on
the SDF typically have a large number of degrees of freedom and therefore allow for substantial
    1
        See Campbell (2003) and Cochrane (1999) for recent surveys of the empirical literature and discussion of these
benchmark models.


                                                            1
flexibility in matching asset prices. Indeed, the parameters of the SDF and of cash flows are often
backed out from asset prices. We refer to this as the SDF approach.
   In this paper, we seek to explain the aggregate market, cross-sectional, and term structure
facts within a single model. To do so, we combine elements of both approaches described above.
We assume that only risk arising from aggregate cash flows is priced directly, thus maintaining
the strict discipline about the number and nature of priced factors imposed by the equilibrium
approach. We determine the parameters of the cash flow processes based on data from the cash
flows themselves. This modeling approach maintains the parsimony that is typical of equilibrium
models. However, rather than specifying underlying preferences, we directly specify the stochastic
discount factor as in the SDF approach. Our goal is to introduce a small but crucial amount of
flexibility in order to explain the facts listed in the first paragraph.
   Our model’s ability to match the data stems in part from properties of the time-varying price of
risk, which results in time-varying risk premia on stocks and bonds. As in Brennan, Wang, and Xia
(2004) and Lettau and Wachter (2007), we assume first-order autoregressive (AR(1)) processes for
both the price of risk and the real interest rate. To model the nominal term structure of interest
rates, we introduce an exogenous process for the price level (Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1985),
Boudoukh (1993)) such that expected inflation follows an AR(1). Realized inflation can therefore
be characterized as an ARMA(1,1). Following Bansal and Yaron (2004) and Campbell (2003), we
assume an AR(1) process for the expected growth rate of aggregate cash flows.
   We calibrate the dividend, inflation, and riskfree rate processes to their counterparts in U.S
data. The price of risk is then calibrated to match aggregate asset pricing properties. Several
properties of these processes key to the model’s ability to fit the data. First, a volatile price
of risk is necessary to capture the empirically demonstrated property that risk premia on stocks
and bonds are time-varying. This time-varying price of risk also allows the model to match the
volatility of stock and bond returns given low volatility of dividends, real interest rates, and
inflation. Second, the real riskfree rate is negatively correlated with fundamentals. This implies
a slightly upward-sloping real yield curve. Expected inflation is also negatively correlated with
fundamentals, implying a yield curve for nominal bonds that is more upward-sloping than the real
yield curve.
   Our model illustrates a tension between the upward slope of the yield curve and the value


                                                   2
premium. The value premium implies that value stocks, which are short-horizon equity (because
their cash flows are weighted more toward the present), have greater expected returns than growth
stocks, which are long-horizon equity (because their cash flows are weighted more toward the
future). Therefore the “term structure of equities” slopes downward, not upward. However,
the very mechanism that implies an upward-sloping term structure of interest rates, namely a
negative correlation between shocks to fundamentals and shocks to the real interest rate, also
implies a growth premium. We show that correlation properties of shocks to the price of risk are
key to resolving this tension. Namely, when the price of risk is independent of fundamentals, the
model can simultaneously account for the downward-sloping term structure of equities and the
upward-sloping term structure of interest rates.
   To summarize, our model generates quantitatively accurate means and volatilities for the
aggregate market and for Treasury bonds, while allowing for low volatilities in fundamentals. The
model can replicate the predictability in excess returns on the aggregate market, the negative
coefficients in Campbell and Shiller (1991) bond yield regressions and the tent-shaped coefficients
on forward rates found by Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005). Finally, besides capturing the relative
means of value and growth portfolios, our model also captures the striking fact that value stocks
have relatively low risk according to conventional measures like standard deviation and covariance
with the market. Therefore our model replicates the well-known outperformance of value, and
underperformance of growth relative to the capital asset pricing model.
   Our paper builds on studies that examining the implications of the term structure of inter-
est rates for the stochastic discount factor. Dai and Singleton (2002, 2003) and Duffee (2002))
demonstrate the importance of a time-varying price of risk for explaining the predictability of
excess bond returns. Like these papers, we also construct a latent factor model in which bond
yields are linear. Ang and Piazzesi (2003), Bikbov and Chernov (2008) and Duffee (2006) intro-
duce macroeconomic time series into the SDF as factors; in our work macroeconomic time series
also are used to determine the SDF. Unlike our work, these papers focus exclusively on the term
structure.
   We also build on a literature that seeks to simultaneously explain prices in bond and the
aggregate stock market (see Bakshi and Chen (1996), Bansal and Shaliastovich (2007), Bekaert,
Engstrom, and Grenadier (2006), Buraschi and Jiltsov (2007), Gabaix (2008), Lustig, Van Nieuwer-


                                                   3
burgh and Verdelhan (2008) and Wachter (2006)). We extend these studies by exploring the con-
sequences of our pricing kernel for a cross-section of equities defined by cash flows. In particular,
we show that the model can reproduce the high premium on value stocks relative to growth stocks
and the fact that value stocks have a low variance and low covariance with the aggregate market.
    Our paper also builds on work that seeks to simultaneously explain the aggregate market and
returns on value and growth stocks. Several studies link observed returns on value and growth
stocks to new sources of risk (Campbell and Vuolteenaho (2004), Campbell, Polk, and Vuolteenaho
(2009), Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh (2005), Piazzesi, Schneider, and Tuzel (2007), Santos and
Veronesi (2006b) and Yogo (2006)). Others more closely relate to the present study in that they
model value and growth stocks based on their underlying cash flows (Berk, Green, and Naik
(1999), Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2004), Gomes, Kogan, and Zhang (2003), Hansen,
Heaton, and Li (2008), Kiku (2006), Lettau and Wachter (2007), Santos and Veronesi (2006a)
and Zhang (2005)). Unlike these studies, our study also seeks to explain the upward slope of the
nominal yield curve and time-variation in bond risk premia. As we show, jointly considering the
term structure of interest rates and behavior of value and growth portfolios has strong implications
for the stochastic discount factor.



2     The model
In this section we introduce a model in which prices are driven by four state variables: expected
dividend growth, expected inflation, the short-term real interest rate and the price of risk. Ap-
pendix A solves a more general model in which prices are driven by an arbitrary number of
(potentially latent) factors.


2.1    Dividend growth, inflation, and the stochastic discount factor

The model specified in this section has six shocks, namely, a shock to dividend growth, to inflation,
to expected dividend growth, to expected inflation, to the real riskfree rate and to the price of
risk. Let t+1 denote a 6 × 1 vector of independent standard normal shocks that are independent
of variables observed at or before time t. We use bold font to denote matrices and vectors.
    Let Dt denote the level of the aggregate real dividend at time t and dt = log Dt . We assume

                                                 4
that the log growth rate of the aggregate dividend is conditionally normally distributed with a
time-varying mean zt that follows a first-order autoregressive process:

                                     ∆dt+1 = zt + σd t+1                                          (1)

                                        zt+1 = (1 − φz )g + φz zt + σz t+1 ,                      (2)

where σd and σz are 1 × 6 vectors of loadings on the shocks , and φz is the autocorrelation. The
                                                         p
conditional standard deviation of dividend growth is σd = σd σd0 . In what follows we will use the
               p
notation σi = σi σi0 to refer to the conditional standard deviation of i and σij = σi σj0 to refer
to the covariance between shocks to i and to j. For the purpose of discussion, we assume that
the autocorrelation of z and of the remaining three state variables are between 0 and 1; thus each
variable is stationary and positively autocorrelated.2 The parameter g can therefore be interpreted
as the unconditional mean of dividend growth.
      Because we are interested in pricing nominal bonds, we also specify a process for inflation. Let
Πt denote the price level and πt = log Πt . Inflation follows the process

                                      ∆πt+1 = qt + σπ t+1 ,                                       (3)

                                        qt+1 = (1 − φq )q̄ + φq qt + σq t+1 ,                     (4)

where σπ and σq are 6 × 1 vectors of loadings on the shocks, q̄ is the unconditional mean of
inflation and φq is the autocorrelation. In what follows, all quantities will be expressed in real
terms unless it is stated otherwise; multiplying by Πt converts a quantity from real to nominal
terms.
                                                                                             f
      Discount rates are determined by the real riskfree rate and by the price of risk. Let rt+1 denote
                                                                                  f
the continuously-compounded riskfree return between times t and t + 1. Note that rt+1 is known
at time t. We assume that
                                        f
                                       rt+1 = (1 − φr )r̄f + φr rtf + σr t ,                      (5)

where σr is a 6 × 1 vector of loadings on the shocks, r̄f is the unconditional mean of rtf and φr is
the autocorrelation. The variable that determines the price of risk, and therefore risk premia in
this homoscedastic model, is denoted xt . We assume

                                      xt+1 = (1 − φx )x̄ + φx xt + σx t+1 ,                       (6)
  2
      However, realized dividend growth may be (and in fact will be) negatively autocorrelated.


                                                         5
where σx is a 6 × 1 vector of loadings on the shocks, x̄ is the unconditional mean of xt and φx is
the autocorrelation.
   To maintain a parsimonious model, we assume that only fundamental dividend risk is priced
directly. This assumption implies that the price of risk is proportional to the vector σd (the
formulas in Appendix A allow for a more general price of risk). Other risks are priced insofar
as they covary with aggregate cash flows. Besides reducing the degrees of freedom in the model,
this specification allows for easier comparison to models based on preferences, such as those of
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004). The stochastic discount
factor (SDF) is thus given by
                                                                    
                                             f    1 2 2
                            Mt+1     = exp −rt+1 − σd xt − xt σd t+1 .
                                                  2
Because the SDF is a quadratic function of xt , the model is in the essentially affine class (Dai and
Singleton (2002), Duffee (2002)). Asset prices are determined by the Euler equation

                                           Et [Mt+1 Rt+1 ] = 1,                                  (7)

where Rt+1 denotes the real return on a traded asset. Given the lognormal specification the
maximal Sharpe ratio is given by
                                      f
                           Et Rt+1 − Rt+1           (Vart [Mt+1 ])1/2 p x2 σ2
           SRt = max                  f
                                                  =                  = e t d − 1 ≈ |xt |σd .
                       (Vart [Rt+1 − Rt+1 ])1/2        Et [Mt+1 ]
(see Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Lettau and Uhlig (2002), Lettau and Wachter (2007)).


2.2    Prices and returns on bonds and equities

Real bonds

     r                                                                 r
Let Pnt denote the price of an n-period real bond at time t. That is, Pnt denotes the time-t price
of an asset with a fixed payoff of 1 at time t + n. Because this asset has no intermediate payoffs,
its return between t and t + 1 equals
                                                       r
                                            r
                                                      Pn−1,t+1
                                           Rn,t+1 =      r
                                                               .                                 (8)
                                                        Pnt
The prices of real bonds can be determined recursively from the Euler equation (7). Substituting
in (8) for the return implies that
                                                 r            r
                                                        
                                        Et Mt+1 Pn−1,t+1   = Pnt ,                               (9)

                                                      6
while the fact that the bond pays a single unit at maturity implies that P0tr = 1. Appendix C
verifies that (9) is satisfied by

                              r                    f
                             Pnt = exp{Arn + Brn
                                              r
                                                 (rt+1 − r̄f ) + Bxn
                                                                  r
                                                                     (xt − x̄)}.                   (10)

The coefficient on the riskfree rate is given by

                                              r       1 − φnr
                                             Brn   =−         .                                    (11)
                                                      1 − φr

The coefficient on the price of risk is given by the recursion

                                 r     r           r            r
                                Bxn = Bx,n−1 φx − Br,n−1 σdr − Bx,n−1 σdx ,                        (12)

                         r
with boundary condition Bx0 = 0. The constant term Arn is defined by (A.19). The yield to
maturity on a real bond is defined as

                     r       1     r      1 r    r    f       f     r
                                                                                 
                    ynt   = − log Pnt = −   An + Brn (rt+1 − r̄ ) + Bxn (xt − x̄)                  (13)
                             n            n

and is linear in the state variables.
   Equation (10) shows that prices of real bonds are driven by the riskfree rate and by the price
of risk. Expected dividend growth and expected inflation do not directly influence the prices of
                                                                                           f
real bonds (though they might influence these prices indirectly through correlations with rt+1 and
with xt ). As (11) shows, an increase in the riskfree rate lowers the bond price. Moreover, the
                                                f
magnitude of the price response to a change in rt+1 is increasing in maturity. This is the duration
effect, and it is driven by the persistence φr . Because the riskfree rate is persistent, a higher value
today suggests that future values will also be high. Because of compounding, the further out the
cash flow, the larger the effect a change in the riskfree rate has on the price. As (12) shows, the
sign of the effect of the price of risk variable depends on the correlations σdr and σdx . The sign
and magnitude of the effect of an increase in the price of risk is best understood by examining the
formula for risk premia, as we now explain.
        r         r
   Let rnt = log Rnt be the continuously compounded return on the real zero-coupon bond of
                                                                   r
maturity n. Because real bond prices are lognormally distributed, rnt is conditionally normally
distributed. We derive risk premia by taking the logs of both sides of the Euler equation (7) and
use the properties of the lognormal distribution to evaluate the expectation. It follows that the

                                                      7
risk premia on real zero-coupon bonds satisfy

                          r        f      1       r                r
                     Et [rn,t+1 − rt+1 ] + Vart (rn,t+1 ) = Covt (rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 )xt .            (14)
                                          2

Note that the second term on the left hand side of (14) is an adjustment for Jensen’s inequality.
Equations (10) and (11) imply that

                                 r                  r            r
                          Covt (rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 ) = Br,n−1 σdr + Bx,n−1 σdx .                      (15)

Risk premia on real bonds are time-varying and proportional to xt . Given a value for xt , the level
of risk premia is determined by the correlations σdr and σdx . Comparing (12) and (15), it is clear
                                                                           r
that the same variables that drive risk premia influence the coefficients Bxn with a negative sign.
                            r
This is not surprising, as Bxn represents the effects of the price of risk variable on the price of the
                                                   r
real bond. When bonds carry positive risk premia, Bxn < 0, which implies that an increase in xt
lowers the price of real bonds. Moreover, if risk premia are increasing in maturity, the greater the
maturity, the greater the effect of an increase in xt on the price.


Equity

     d
Let Pnt denote the time-t price of the asset that pays the aggregate dividend at time t + n. We
                                                                                                     d
will refer to this asset as zero-coupon equity. In solving for the price, it is convenient to scale Pnt
by the aggregate dividend at time t to eliminate the need to consider Dt as a state variable. The
return on this zero-coupon equity claim is equal to
                                          d          d
                               d
                                         Pn−1,t+1   Pn−1,t+1 /Dt+1 Dt+1
                              Rn,t+1 =      d
                                                  =      d
                                                                        .                         (16)
                                           Pnt         Pnt /Dt      Dt
     d          d
Let rn,t = log Rn,t denote the continuously compounded return. Substituting (16) into the Euler
                           d
equation (7) implies that Pnt satisfies the recursion
                                     "                    #
                                                   d
                                            Dt+1 Pn−1,t+1    Pd
                                 Et Mt+1                    = nt ,                                (17)
                                             Dt Dt+1         Dt

with boundary condition P0td /Dt = 1. Appendix C verifies that (17) is solved by a function of the
form
                    d
                   Pnt                                  f
                       = exp{Adn + Bzn
                                    d              d
                                       (zt − g) + Brn (rt+1 − r̄f ) + Bxn
                                                                       d
                                                                          (xt − x̄)}.             (18)
                   Dt

                                                    8
The coefficients on expected dividend growth and the riskfree rate are given by

                                    d      1 − φnz     d        1 − φnr
                                   Bzn =              Brn =−            .                          (19)
                                           1 − φz               1 − φr

The coefficient on the price of risk satisfies the recursion

                     d     d
                    Bxn = Bx,n−1 φx − σd2 − Bz,n−1
                                             d            d
                                                   σdz − Br,n−1        d
                                                                σdr − Bx,n−1 σdx ,                 (20)

                         d
with boundary condition Bx0 = 0. The constant term Adn is defined by (A.25). Following logic
similar to that used to compute risk premia on zero-coupon bonds, we find that risk premia on
zero-coupon equity claims are given by

                           d        f      1       d                d
                      Et [rn,t+1 − rt+1 ] + Vart (rn,t+1 ) = Covt (rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 )xt ,            (21)
                                           2

where (18) and (19) imply that

                          d
                   Covt (rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 ) = σd2 + Bz,n−1
                                                   d            d
                                                         σdz + Br,n−1        d
                                                                      σdr + Bx,n−1 σdx .           (22)

   Equation (18) shows that price-dividend ratios are driven by expected dividend growth, by the
real interest rate and by the price of risk. Expected inflation does not directly influence equity
valuations. As (19) shows, an increase in expected dividend growth increases prices. Because
expected dividend growth is persistent, and because Dt+n cumulates shocks between t and t + n,
the greater is the maturity n, the greater is the effect of changes in zt on the price. An increase in
the real interest rate lowers the equity price, and this effect is greater, the greater is the maturity.
The intuition is the same as that for real bonds.
   As in the case of real bonds, the effect of a change in the price of risk on equities is more
subtle and depends on risk premia. Comparing (20) and (22) indicates that the variables that
                                                                d
influence risk premia on equities also govern the evolution of Bxn . Risk premia on zero-coupon
equity are determined by the variance of cash flows, and the covariance of cash flows with shocks
to expected dividend growth, to the riskfree rate and to the price of risk. For the model to account
for the value premium, risk premia on equities will need to be decreasing in maturity rather than
                              d
increasing. For this reason, Bxn will be a non-monotonic function of n. We will discuss risk premia
on zero-coupon equities more fully later in the paper.



                                                     9
   In our model, the aggregate market portfolio is the claim to all future dividends. Therefore its
price-dividend ratio is given by
                  ∞            ∞
          Ptm X Pnt d   X      n
                                 d    d              d    f       f     d
                                                                                    o
             =        =     exp An + Bzn (zt − g) + Brn (rt+1 − r̄ ) + Bxn (xt − x̄) .         (23)
          Dt   n=1
                   Dt   n=1

Appendix B describes sufficient conditions on the parameters such that (23) converges for all
values of the state variables. The return on the aggregate market equals
                                         m            m
                               m       Pt+1 + Dt   (Pt+1 /Dt+1 ) + 1 Dt+1
                              Rt+1 =        m
                                                 =                        .                    (24)
                                          Pt            Ptm /Dt       Dt
Note that the price-dividend ratio is not an affine function of the state variables.


Nominal bonds

     π
Let Pnt denote the real price of a zero-coupon nominal bond maturing in n periods. The real
return on this bond equals
                                            π          π
                                 π
                                           Pn−1,t+1   Pn−1,t+1 Πt+1 Πt
                                Rn,t+1 =      π
                                                    =      π
                                                                        .                      (25)
                                             Pnt         Pnt Πt    Πt+1
     π            π
Let rn,t+1 = log Rn,t denote the continuously compounded return on this bond. This asset is
directly analogous to the dividend claim above: the “dividend” is the reciprocal of the price level,
                                                                   π
and the “price-dividend ratio” on this asset is its nominal price Pnt Πt .
   The Euler equation holds for the real return on this bond; therefore the price satisfies
                                                       
                                        Πt π                  π
                             Et Mt+1        P      Πt+1 = Pnt   Πt ,                           (26)
                                      Πt+1 n−1,t+1
with boundary condition P0tπ Πt = 1. Appendix C shows that the recursion (26) can be solved by
a function of the form

                  π                                       f
                 Pnt Πt = exp{Aπn + Bqn
                                     π               π
                                        (qt − q̄) + Brn (rt+1 − r̄f ) + Bxn
                                                                         π
                                                                            (xt − x̄)}.        (27)

The coefficients on expected inflation and the riskfree rate are given by

                                    π
                                            1 − φnq     π       1 − φnr
                                   Bqn   =−            Brn =−           .                      (28)
                                            1 − φq              1 − φr
The coefficient on the price of risk satisfies the recursion

                       π     π                 π            π            π
                      Bxn = Bx,n−1 φx + σdπ − Bq,n−1 σdq − Br,n−1 σdr − Bx,n−1 σdx ,           (29)

                                                      10
                         π
with boundary condition Bx0 = 0. The constant term Aπn is defined by (A.31). Following logic
similar to that used to compute risk premia on real bonds, risk premia on nominal bonds are equal
to
                            π        f      1       π                π
                       Et [rn,t+1 − rt+1 ] + Vart (rn,t+1 ) = Covt (rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 )xt ,          (30)
                                            2
where
                         π                         π            π            π
                  Covt (rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 ) = −σdπ + Bq,n−1 σdq + Br,n−1 σdr + Bx,n−1 σdx .

Real risk premia on nominal bonds are determined by the loadings on expected inflation, the real
riskfree rate and the price of risk, along with the covariance of each of these sources of risk with
shocks to fundamentals. In addition, risk premia are determined by the covariance of unexpected
inflation with fundamentals.
     Equation (27) shows that nominal bond prices are driven by expected inflation, the real interest
rate and the price of risk. Expected dividend growth does not directly influence nominal bond
prices. As (28) shows, an increase in expected inflation lowers bond nominal bond prices at all
maturities. This effect is greater, the greater the maturity, because Πt+n cumulates shocks between
t and t + n. An increase in the real interest rates lowers nominal bond prices at all maturities;
the greater the maturity the greater is this effect because of duration. The same variables that
                                               π
determine risk premia govern the evolution of Bxn . Because nominal bonds will have risk premia
                                               π
that are positive and increasing in maturity, Bxn will be negative and decreasing in maturity. That
is, an increase in the price of risk will lower prices of nominal bonds, and will have a greater effect
on long-term bonds than short-term bonds.
     It is also of interest to consider the nominal return on the nominal bond, and the nominal yield.
Following Campbell and Viceira (2001), we use the superscript $ to denote nominal quantities for
the nominal bond. The nominal (continuously-compounded) yield to maturity on this bond is
equal to

            $     1      π           1 π    π               π    f
                                                                                              
           ynt = − log (Pnt Πt ) = −   An + Bqn (qt − q̄) + Brn (rt+1 − r̄f ) + Bxn
                                                                                 π
                                                                                    (xt − x̄)     (31)
                  n                  n

and, like the yield on the real bond, is linear in the state variables. Finally, we use the notation
 $
Rn,t+1 to denote the nominal return on the nominal n-period bond:
                                                      π
                                           $
                                                     Pn−1,t+1 Πt+1
                                          Rn,t+1   =               .
                                                        Pnt Πt

                                                      11
It is also of interest to compute risk premia on nominal bonds relative to the one-period nominal
bond (as opposed to the real bond, as in (30)). It follows from the equation for nominal prices
(27) that
                             $        $
                                           1       $                $
                          Et rn,t+1 − y1t  + Vart (rn,t+1 ) = Covt (rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 )xt ,                          (32)
                                            2
where
                                 $                  π            π            π
                          Covt (rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 ) = Bq,n−1 σdq + Br,n−1 σdr + Bx,n−1 σdx .

      This section has shown that risk premia on all zero-coupon assets are proportional to xt . While
there is some conditional heteroscedasticity in the aggregate market that arises from time-varying
weights on zero-coupon equity, this effect is small. A natural way to drive a wedge between
time-variation in bond and stock premia is to allow for time-varying correlations as in Campbell,
Sunderam, and Viceira (2009). For simplicity and to maintain our focus on the slope of the term
structures of equity and interest rates, we do not pursue this route here.


2.3       Unconditional term structures of equity and interest rates

Prior to describing the full calibration of the model and results from simulated data, we use the
results developed above to describe the model’s qualitative implications for risk premia on bonds
and stocks. We illustrate the issues by comparing bonds and equity maturing in two periods with
those maturing in one period. It follows from (14) and (15) that the unconditional risk premium
of the real bond maturing in two periods equals3

                                       r        f      1     r
                                    E[r2,t+1 − rt+1 ] + Var(r2,t+1 ) = −σdr x̄.
                                                       2
The risk premium on the one-period real bond is, by definition, equal to zero. The term σdr
represents the covariance of shocks to the real interest rate with shocks to dividend growth: a
negative covariance leads to a positive risk premium on the two-period bond because it implies
that bonds pay off in good times (bond prices move in the opposite direction from the riskfree rate).
The same term appears in the average spread between the yields of the one and the two-period
bond:
                                                             1     1
                                            E[y2r − y1r ] = − σdr − σr2 ,                                         (33)
                                                             2     4
  3            r                                                    r                                     r
      Because rn,t+1 is normal and shocks are homoskedastic, Vart (rn,t+1 ) is constant and equal to Var(rn,t+1 ). This
reasoning also holds for zero-coupon nominal bonds and zero-coupon equity.


                                                           12
(see (13) and (A.19)). The second term represents an adjustment for Jensen’s inequality and is
relatively small.
   The unconditional risk premia on one and two-period equity claims are equal to

                       d        f      1     d
                    E[r1,t+1 − rt+1 ] + Var(r1,t+1 ) = σd2 x̄                                     (34)
                                       2
                       d        f      1     d
                                                   ) = σd2 − σdr + σdz − σd2 σdx x̄.
                                                                                
                    E[r2,t+1 − rt+1 ] + Var(r2,t+1                                                (35)
                                       2

While the one-period equity claim is only exposed to unexpected changes in dividends, the two-
period equity claim is also exposed to unexpected changes in the interest rate, expected dividend
and the price of risk. These risk factors are represented by the covariance terms σdz , σdr and σdx .
If these processes are correlated with the priced fundamental dividend factor, the risk premium of
the two-period equity claim will be different from the one-period premium. Note that the extent
to which two-period equity is driven by xt depends on the one-period premium. This explains why
σd2 multiplies σdx in (35).
   The positive premium of value (short horizon) stocks over growth (long horizon) stocks in the
data suggests that the equity term structure is downward sloping. Thus the premium on two-
period equity should be less than that on one-period equity. Comparing (33) to (34) and (35)
suggests that an upward sloping term structure of interest rates requires interest rate shocks to
be negatively correlated with dividend shocks (σdr < 0). Ceteris paribus, this effect leads also to
an upward sloping term structure of equity, which implies a growth premium rather than a value
premium.
   As shown in Lettau and Wachter (2007), a key parameter for the slope of the equity term
structure is the correlation of fundamental dividend risk with shocks to the price of risk process xt .
To understand the role of this correlation, consider the special case of σdx = 1 and σdr = σdz = 0.
In this case the two-period equity claim is riskless, as (35) shows. Recall that returns of zero-
coupon equity depend on dividend growth and the change in the price-dividend ratio (see (16)). If
σdx = 1, positive dividend shocks are associated with positive price of risk shocks. In this special
case, the effect on the price-dividend ratio cancels out the effect on the dividend growth rate,
creating a perfectly hedged one-period return. This example illustrates a general property of the
model. If dividend shocks are associated with positive price of risk shocks (σdx > 0), long-term
equity tends to be less risky than short-term equity. On the other hand, if σdx < 0, the equity

                                                  13
term structure tends to be upward sloping, which is inconsistent with the large value premium in
the data.
    While the correlation σdx does not enter the formulas for the risk premium and the yield of the
two-period bond, it does for bonds of maturities greater than two periods. A negative correlation
between interest rates and fundamentals implies that long-term bonds have positive risk premia.
Because bond prices are determined by risk premia, it follows that changes in risk premia are
another source of risk for these bonds. Holding all else equal, σdx < 0 leads to a term structure
that is more upward sloping than otherwise. However, as explained above, σdx < 0 also leads to
higher expected returns on long-term equities relative to short-term equities, the opposite of what
cross-sectional asset pricing data suggest. The root of the problem is that duration operates for
both bonds and equities; when shocks to discount rates are priced, risk premia on all long-term
instruments are driven up relative to short-term instruments.
    In the calibration that follows, we show that it is indeed possible to match both the upward
slope of the term structure of interest rates and the downward slope of the term structure of
equities in a model where the riskfree rate and the risk premium vary. Part of the answer lies in
the role of expected dividend growth which appears in the equations for equities above and part
of the answer lies in the role of expected inflation which influences risk premia on nominal bonds.



3     Implications for returns on stocks and bonds
To study our model’s implications for returns on the aggregate market, on real and nominal
bonds, and for portfolios sorted on scaled-price ratios, we simulate 100,000 quarters from the
model. Given simulated data on shocks t , and on expected dividend growth zt , expected inflation
qt , the real riskfree rate rtf , and the price-of-risk variable xt , we compute real prices of real bonds
given (10), ratios of prices to the aggregate dividend for zero-coupon equity (18), and nominal
prices of nominal bonds (27). We also compute a series for realized dividend growth (1) and
realized inflation (3).




                                                   14
3.1    Calibration

The model specifies processes for dividends, inflation, the real riskfree rate and the price of risk. We
calibrate the inflation parameters to data on inflation, dividend parameters to data on dividends
and riskfree rate parameters to data on interest rates. The process for the price of risk and
correlations between the price of risk process and the other variables is then determined jointly by
the term structure of interest rates and equity prices. Tables 1, 2 and 3 give the calibrated values
for the means and autocorrelations, the cross-correlations and the standard deviations respectively.
   To calibrate the process for inflation, we use the maximum likelihood estimates of Wachter
(2006). As Wachter shows, the likelihood function implied by (3) and (4) is the same as that for an
ARMA(1,1) process. This is estimated on quarterly data from the second quarter of 1952 to the
second quarter of 2004. The mean of expected inflation is 3.68% per annum, and expected inflation
is found to have an annual autocorrelation of 0.78 (equivalent to a quarterly autocorrelation of
0.94). The volatility of expected inflation is 0.35% per annum, while the volatility of unexpected
inflation is 1.18% per annum. The correlation between shocks to expected and unexpected inflation
cannot be identified from inflation data alone. As in Wachter (2006), we set this correlation equal
to 1. This has the benefit of reducing the parameter space (because it reduces the number of
shocks by one, and therefore eliminates 5 correlations), and it does not appear to reduce the
model’s ability to fit the data.
   Following Lettau and Wachter (2007), dividend growth is calibrated based on an annual data set
of Campbell (2003) that begins in 1890; we update it to 2004 using data from CRSP. The instability
of many moments of the aggregate market in recent years makes a long data set especially desirable.
Average log dividend growth is set to 1.29%, the average for real growth in log dividends over
that period. We assume the volatility of realized dividend growth is equal to 10% a value that
falls between estimates in the long data (∼ 14%), and in the post-war sample (∼ 6%). Finally,
the standard deviation of zt is set to be 0.32% per annum. The lack of predictability in dividend
growth suggests a standard deviation for zt that is small relative to the standard deviation of
realized dividend growth. As discussed further below, this value implies a reasonable amount
of dividend growth predictability (see Table 6). The autocorrelation for zt and the correlation
between shocks to zt and shocks to dividends is calibrated in the same way as in Lettau and
Wachter (2007); namely the consumption-dividend ratio is used as an empirical proxy for zt . Lettau

                                                  15
and Ludvigson (2005) show that if consumption follows a random walk and if the consumption-
dividend ratio is stationary, the consumption-dividend ratio captures the predictable component
of dividend growth. The consumption-dividend ratio can therefore be identified with zt up to
an additive and multiplicative constant. We therefore take the autocorrelation of zt to be 0.90,
the autocorrelation of the consumption-dividend ratio over the 1890–2004 period. We take the
correlation between shocks to zt and shocks to ∆dt to be -0.83, equal to the correlation between
these shocks over the 1890–2004 period.
      Data on nominal interest rates are taken from CRSP. The yield on the 90-day Treasury bill
represents the short-term nominal yield. Yields of maturities from 1 to 5 years are taken from
Fama–Bliss data, which begin in 1952. We choose the mean of the real riskfree rate in order to
match the sample mean of the short-term nominal yield over the 1952–2004 period. Our procedure
is as follows. From (31) and (A.31) it follows that the mean of the one-period nominal yield is
given by
                                           $              1
                                         Ey1t = r̄f + q̄ − σπ2 − σdπ x̄.
                                                          2
Namely, the expected short-term nominal yield is the sum of the real riskfree rate, expected
inflation, the negative of one-half times the volatility of realized inflation (a Jensen’s inequality
adjustment), and an inflation risk premium. The sample mean on the 3-month bill is 1.31% (5.23%
per annum). The terms q̄ and 12 σπ2 are known from the inflation calibration; subtracting the former
and adding the latter to 1.31% implies a (quarterly) value of 0.39%. Based on this value for r̄f , we
then calibrate σdπ and x̄ as described below, and adjust r̄f for the inflation risk premium (which
turns out to equal 0.15% per quarter). Because the moments of the aggregate market are relatively
insensitive to the precise value of r̄f , it is not necessary to repeat this process more than once to
obtain the correct value of the nominal yield.4
      Choosing the autocorrelation and the volatility of the riskfree rate is less straightforward than
choosing the level because these parameters are less tightly linked to their counterparts in nominal
interest rate data (for example, the volatility of nominal interest rates in the model depends, in a
nonlinear way, on the volatilities and autocorrelations of the real riskfree rate, the price of risk and
expected and realized inflation). We first choose a set of values to give reasonable implications
for the autocorrelation and volatility of nominal interest rates, given a process for xt . We then
  4
      The difference between the simulated value of 5.15% and the mean of 5.23% is due to simulation noise.


                                                        16
re-calibrate the process for xt based on the new values for rtf , and repeat as necessary. Given that
the autocorrelation of inflation is 0.78 (in annual terms), the autocorrelation of the real riskfree
rate must be higher in order to match the autocorrelations of nominal yields, which are above this
value. The autocorrelations and volatilities in the model and in the data are shown in Table 7.
An autocorrelation of 0.92 for the riskfree rate results in an autocorrelation for the three-month
bond that is somewhat higher than in the data , but that matches the autocorrelations for longer
term bonds exactly. Choosing the volatility of the riskfree rate to be 0.19% per annum results in
a good fit to volatilities across the maturity spectrum. The volatility of the three-month yield is
2.89% in the model versus 2.93% in the data, while the volatility of the 5-year yield is 2.67% in
the model versus 2.72% in the data. The model is therefore able to capture the fact that interest
rate volatilities decrease in the maturity of the bond.
       The parameters of the process for xt are chosen to fit moments of stock returns. Like the
volatility and persistence of the real riskfree rate, these values are chosen numerically; there is no
analytical formula that links these parameters to population moments implies by the model. The
average price of risk, x̄σd is chosen to be 0.85; this generates an average maximal quarter Sharpe
        p
ratio of exp(0.852 ) − 1 = 1.03. As shown in Table 10, a high value of x̄ allows us to come close
to the high Sharpe ratio of the extreme value portfolio (0.58 in the model versus 0.63 in the data).
As shown in Table 4, the Sharpe ratio on the market is slightly higher than in the long annual data
set (0.40 in the model versus 0.36 in the data). Note that while the extreme value portfolio has
the highest Sharpe ratio of the ten portfolios in our cross-sectional calibration, it does not achieve
the maximal Sharpe ratio. In order to achieve the maximal Sharpe ratio, its return would need
to be perfectly correlated with the dividend shock. However, because some of its payoffs occur
in future periods, its return depends, to some degree, on expected dividend growth, real interest
rates and the price of risk.5
   5
       In Lettau and Wachter (2007), we choose a lower value for x̄σd , 0.625. Resetting x̄ to this value in the present
model implies lower Sharpe ratios and risk premia. Specifically, the Sharpe ratio for the market portfolio is 0.25
and the Sharpe ratio for the extreme value portfolio is 0.35. The term structure has a flatter slope (the difference
between the average 5-year and 3-month yield is 1.36%). Because discount rates are lower, the average price-
dividend ratio is higher and equal to 35.3. The qualitative implications of the model are unchanged. These results
differ from those of Lettau and Wachter (2007) in large part because of the presence of a time-varying real interest
rate. This introduces a source of risk which is priced to a lesser extent than dividend risk.



                                                            17
       To match the high volatility and predictability of stock returns given the low volatility of
fundamentals as described above, the volatility of the price of risk variable must be high. We
choose the volatility of shocks to σd xt to be 40, implying a volatility of the price-dividend ratio of
0.36 (see Table 4), close to its value of 0.40 in the data. We choose the persistence of xt to equal
0.85; this implies a persistence of 0.86 for the price-dividend ratio, close to its value of 0.87 in the
data. As Table 5 shows, long-horizon stock returns are slightly more predictable than in the data:
the regression of the stock returns on the price-dividend ratio has an R2 of 45% at the one-year
horizon, compared with 25% in the 1890-2004 sample and 38% in the 1890-1994 sample. Raising
the volatility or the persistence of xt to match the data counterparts exactly would increase the
amount of predictability.
       Risk premia in the model are determined by correlations with realized dividends dt . The
correlation between expected inflation qt and realized dividend growth determines the premium
for nominal over real bonds. A value of -0.30 implies that nominal bonds will carry a premium
over real bonds, and moreover, that this premium increases in maturity. (because realized inflation
and expected inflation are perfectly correlated, realized inflation also must have a correlation of
-0.30 with dt ). The correlation between the real riskfree rate and expected dividend growth is also
-0.30. This implies an upward sloping real term structure. As explained in detail in Section 3.4,
these values represent a compromise between fitting the upward slope of the yield curve and the
deviations from the expectations hypothesis. The more negative these correlations are, the greater
the slope of the yield curve, and the greater the deviation from the expectations hypothesis. The
correlation with expected inflation mainly effects the behavior of short-term yields, while the
correlation with the real interest rate mainly effects the behavior of long-term yields. Finally, as
in Lettau and Wachter (2007), the correlation between xt and dividend growth is set to be zero.
The implication of this parameter choice is discussed further in Section 3.5.
       For simplicity, we assume that most remaining correlations are equal to zero.6 Exceptions are
the correlation between realized and expected inflation (as discussed above) and between expected
dividend growth and the price of risk. We allow this latter correlation to be positive based on direct
evidence in Lettau and Ludvigson (2005) that expected dividend growth is positively correlated
   6
       Correlations between variables not including dt do not directly impact risk premia and thus have modest
implications for the return moments that are the focus of this paper.



                                                       18
with the risk premium on stocks. Indeed, Table 6 shows that at long horizons, the price-dividend
ratio predicts dividend growth with a negative sign (though the effect is insignificant). This
counter-intuitive result supports the notion that expected dividend growth and discount rates move
in the same direction, and that the discount rate effect is stronger than the cash-flow effect. We
set the correlation between xt and z to be 0.35; this reduces the predictability of dividend growth
to nearly zero at long horizons despite the persistence of expected dividend growth. Raising the
correlation further results in a variance-covariance matrix for which the Cholesky decomposition
fails to exist.7
       In this calibration we have set a number of interaction terms equal to zero. Richer models that
are used to estimate the term structure allow arbitrary cross-correlations of shocks and interactions
through conditional means. Results from term structure studies (e.g. Dai and Singleton (2003) and
Duffee (2002)) suggest that such interactions may be important for fully capturing the dynamics
of the term structure of interest rates. Appendix A calculates prices under a more general model
that allows for such interactions. Empirically, however, it is not clear how to cleanly identify these
parameters with our macro-based approach. Moreover, our simpler model has the advantage that
it is easier to interpret. While our model may miss some of the term structure properties captured
by the more complex models, it nonetheless seems appropriate for our current purpose.


3.2        Prices and returns as functions of the state variables

Figure 1 shows the factor loadings on each state variable for prices of real bonds, nominal bonds
and equity as functions of maturity. As discussed in Section 2, and shown in this figure, the factor
loadings on the riskfree rate are negative. An increase in the real riskfree rate decreases prices
of all assets. The factor loading on expected inflation is negative for nominal bonds and zero
otherwise: An increase in expected inflation decreases nominal bond prices, while leaving other
prices unchanged. The factor loading on expected dividend growth is positive for equities and zero
otherwise: An increase in expected dividend growth increases stock prices, while leaving other
prices unchanged. The magnitude of all of these effects increase in maturity, and the assumption
   7
       Intuitively, zt and dt are highly negatively correlated. This implies a relation between correlations of variables
with zt and correlations with variables and dt . As explained below, dt and xt have a zero correlation, so the
correlation between zt and xt cannot be too far from zero.



                                                            19
of AR(1) processes implies that the rate of increase declines exponentially.
       Figure 1 also shows that the dynamic effects of changes in the price of risk are subtle and differ
                                                                        r
qualitatively from the effects of the other processes. For real bonds, Bxn is negative and decreasing
                                                                                          r
in magnitude, like the coefficient on the riskfree rate. However, in contrast to that of Brn , the rate
                r
of decrease of Bxn does not die out exponentially. The reason for this is the interaction between
duration and increasing risk premia. At short maturities, the price of risk has little impact (as
compared to the riskfree rate) because these assets have very small risk premia. At long maturities
the price of risk has large impact (as compared to the riskfree rate) because these assets have large
risk premia. Therefore, shocks to xt have a greater effect at longer maturities than would be
                                                                            π
suggested by the size of the persistence φx . Similar comparisons hold for Bxn , the effect of the
price of risk on nominal bonds.
       For equities, the factor loading on xt is not even monotonic. Over a range of zero to ten years,
 d
Bxn decreases in maturity. This is the duration effect: the longer the maturity the more sensitive
                                                              d
the price is to changes in the risk premium. After ten years Bxn increases, and then asymptotes
                               d 8
to a level that is lower than Bx0 . This increase is somewhat surprising because it appears to
contradict the notion of duration: long-maturity equity should be more sensitive to changes in the
risk premium than short-maturity equity. However, because shocks to expected dividend growth
are negatively correlated with shocks to realized dividend growth, long-maturity equity acts as a
hedge. This effect generates risk premia on long-maturity equity that are relatively low. Because
long-maturity equity has lower risk premia, it is less sensitive to changes in xt .
       Figures 2 and 3 show zero-coupon yields as functions of maturities for real and nominal bonds
respectively. The figures show yields at their long-run averages, and when the state variables are
2 standard deviations above or below their long-run averages. An increase in either the riskfree
rate and the price of risk increases yields at all maturities. The riskfree rate and (in the case
of nominal bonds) expected inflation have the greatest effect for short-term yields. In contrast,
xt has very little effect on short-term yields, and much greater effect on medium and long-term
yields.
       Figure 4 displays ratios of zero-coupon equity prices to aggregate dividends as a function of
   8                   d                                                          r             d
       On the figure, Bxn has the appearance of asymptoting to the same level as Bxn ; however Bxn remains lower
      r
than Bxn even in the limit.



                                                        20
maturity. The figure shows the ratios when state variables are at their long-run averages and when
they are two standard deviations above or below these averages. When state variables are equal
to their average values, the ratio of price to dividends is decreasing in maturity; longer-maturity
equity is worth less, on average, than shorter-maturity equity because the effect of the discount
rate dominates the effect of dividend growth.9 Prices are increasing functions of expected dividend
growth zt , decreasing functions of the real interest rate rtf and decreasing functions of xt . This
figure shows that, under our calibration, most of the variation of prices at all maturities comes
from variations in risk premia as represented by xt .


3.3        The aggregate market

Table 4 shows statistics for the aggregate market in simulated and in historical data. In simulated
data, we calculate quarterly returns and compound to an annual frequency. We create an annual
price-dividend ratio in simulated data by dividing the price by the sum of dividends paid over the
previous year.
       As Table 4 shows, the volatility and the autocorrelation of the price-dividend ratio are close to
those found in the data. This is not a surprise as model parameters were chosen in part to produce
reasonable values for these moments. The model implies an average price-dividend ratio of 18.2,
while the mean in the data is 25.9. Matching this statistic is a common difficulty for models of this
type: Campbell and Cochrane (1999), for example, find an average price-dividend ratio of 18.2.
As they explain, this statistic is poorly measured due to the persistence of the price-dividend ratio.
The present model fits the volatility of equity returns (20.0% in the model versus 19.4% in the
data), though it produces an equity premium that is slightly higher than that in the data (8.1%
in the model versus 6.5% in the data). Like the mean of the price-dividend ratio, this number
is estimated with substantial noise. The annual autocorrelation of returns is near zero for both
model and data.
       Table 5 reports results of long-horizon regressions of continuously-compounded excess returns
on the log price-dividend ratio. Horizons range from 1 to 10 years. Panel A reports results from
simulated data, Panel B reports results from the full data set (1890–2004) and Panel C reports
   9
       Any calibration for which the market portfolio is well-defined must have this effect operating for sufficiently
high maturities.


                                                           21
results from the 1890–1994 subsample. As found in many previous studies (e.g. Campbell and
Shiller (1988), Cochrane (1992), Fama and French (1989) and Keim and Stambaugh (1986)), the
price-dividend ratio predicts returns with a negative sign, and this predictability is significant
across all horizons at the 5% level. Because so much of the variance in returns is driven by the
price of risk xt , the model generates substantial return predictability. In fact, the R2 are higher,
and the coefficients more negative for the model as compared with the full sample. The model
results more closely resemble the 1890–1994 subsample.
   Table 6 reports the results of long-horizon regressions of dividend growth on the price-dividend
ratio. Evidence indicates that asset prices have little ability to predict dividend growth (Ang and
Bekaert (2007), Cochrane (2008), Lettau and Ludvigson (2005) and Lettau and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2008)). We replicate this result in our sample as shown in Panel B. In the model, the price-
dividend ratio also fails to predict dividend growth; R2 values from long-horizon regressions do
not exceed 2%. This is both because the variation in expected dividend growth is relatively low,
and because expected dividend growth is positively correlated with the price of risk. Thus risk
premia and expected dividend growth are negatively correlated, leading to less dividend growth
predictability than what one would expect given the present-value nature of this model.


3.4    The term structure of interest rates

Means and volatilities of yields

Table 7 shows the implications of the model for means, standard deviations, and annual auto-
correlations of nominal and real bond yields. Data moments for bond yields using the CRSP
Fama-Bliss data set are provided for comparison. These data are available starting in June of
1952, and are monthly. For the three-month yield, we use the bid yield on the 90-day Treasury
bond, also available from CRSP.
   Panel A shows that the real yield curve is upward sloping. This occurs because of the negative
correlation between the real riskfree rate and fundamentals. Because bond prices fall when the
real riskfree rate rises, bond prices fall when growth in fundamentals are low. Therefore long-term
real bonds carry a risk premium over short-term real bonds, a risk premium that is reflected in
the yield spread.


                                                 22
   The negative correlation between the real riskfree rate and fundamentals also drives the nominal
term spread. In the case of nominal bonds, there is an additional effect arising from the negative
correlation between fundamentals and expected inflation. This negative correlation implies that
nominal bond prices fall when fundamentals are low, leading to a positive inflation risk premium
(this effect also operates in the models of Piazzesi and Schneider (2006), Wachter (2006)). The
model’s implications are consistent with empirical evidence that yields on indexed Treasury bonds
are increasing in maturity, but that this slope is less than for nominal bonds (Roll (2004)).
   The model implies volatilities for nominal bonds that are close to those in the data across
all maturities. Volatilities are decreasing in maturity, as in the data. This decrease follows from
the stationary autoregressive nature of the underlying processes. The table also shows annual
autocorrelations (in the data, these are calibrated based on overlapping monthly observations).
The autocorrelations are also similar, though the pattern is flatter in the model (0.85 at the short
end, 0.87 at the long end) than in the data (0.80 at the short end and 0.87 at the long end).


Campbell and Shiller (1991) regressions

Table 8 shows the outcome of regressions

                          r          r                 1
                         yn−h,t+h − ynt = α n + βn        (y r − y1t
                                                                  r
                                                                     ) + ert+h ,
                                                     n − h nt

for real bonds and
                          $          $                1   $     $
                                                                     + eπt+h
                                                                   
                         yn−h,t+h − ynt = α n + βn       ynt − y1t
                                                     n−h
for nominal bonds in simulated and historical data. To compute the values in the table, we take
h = 4, corresponding to an annual frequency. These “long-rate” regressions are performed by
Campbell and Shiller (1991) to test the hypothesis of constant risk premia on bonds.
   The relation between risk premia and these regressions can be uncovered using the definition
of yields and returns. To simplify the algebra, assume the horizon h = 1. For real bonds:

                               r        r             r          r
                                                                    
                              rn,t+1 = ynt − (n − 1) yn−1,t+1 − ynt   .

Rearranging and taking expectations implies:

                    r          r
                                         1    r     r      1     r        r
                                                                               
                 Et yn−1,t+1 − ynt   =       (ynt − y1t )−     Et rn,t+1 − y1t   .              (36)
                                         n−1               n−1

                                                 23
For nominal bonds, the analogous equation is

                          $          $
                                                  1   $     $
                                                                    1     $        $
                                                                                        
                       Et yn−1,t+1 − ynt   =          ynt − y1t   −     Et rn,t+1 − y1t   .                          (37)
                                                  n−1               n−1

Thus the coefficient of a regression of changes in yields on the scaled yield spread produces a
coefficient of one only if risk premia on bonds are constant. As found by Campbell and Shiller,
the data coefficients are not only less than one, they are negative, indicating risk premia on bonds
that strongly vary over time.
       As Table 8 shows, the model also implies a significant departure from the expectations hy-
pothesis. Coefficients βn are negative for all maturities. However, the failure of the expectations
hypothesis is not as extreme in the model as in the data. This reflects a general limitation of
models driven by a single homoscedastic factor. Indeed, Dai and Singleton (2002) find, within the
affine class, only a model with three factors driving the price of risk is capable of fully matching
the failure of the expectations hypothesis.10
       Using the model, it is possible to write the coefficients βn in terms of more fundamental
quantities. This sheds light on the aspects of the model that lead to the failure of the expectations
hypothesis, as well as tensions inherent in the model. For real bonds, by definition
                                                 r
                                            Cov(yn−1,t+1          r
                                                         − ynr , ynt     r
                                                                      − y1t )
                                     βn =             r             r
                                                                              (n − 1).
                                                Var(yn−1,t+1 − y1t )

Substituting in for changes in yields from (36), and noting that time-(t + 1) shocks have zero
correlation with time-t yields, we have
                                            r     r
                                                            r        r
                                                                         r          r
                                      Cov(ynt − y1t − Et rn,t+1   − y1t  , ynt − y1t    )
                               βn   =                    r          r
                                                  Var(yn−1,t+1 − y1t )
                                                                         r      r
                                               r               Cov(xt , ynt − y1t  )
                                    = 1 − Cov(rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 )      r            r
                                                                                      ,                              (38)
                                                               Var(yn−1,t+1 − y1t )

where the second line follows from (14). If xt were constant, then the covariance term in this ex-
pression would be zero and βn = 1, its value implied by the expectations hypothesis. The deviation
                                                                              r
from the expectations hypothesis depends on two quantities. The first is Cov(rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 ), the
covariance between bond returns and fundamentals. This determines the average risk premium
  10
       In contrast, a single-factor model that allows for significant heteroscedasticity in the state variable can success-
fully match these data (Wachter (2006)). It is also possible that part of the deviation in the data is reflective of a
peso problem (Bekaert, Hodrick, and Marshall (2001)) that is not captured by the model.


                                                             24
on the bond as indicated by (14). The greater are risk premia on bonds, the greater the deviation
from the expectations hypothesis. The second term is the coefficient from a regression of xt on
the yield spread. The more risk premia covary with yield spreads, then, the greater the deviation
from the expectations hypothesis. Similar reasoning leads to the formula for nominal bonds:
                                                                            $     $
                                             $                    Cov(xt , ynt − y1t )
                             βn = 1 − Covt (rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 )           $           $
                                                                                        .                   (39)
                                                                  Var(yn−1,t+1 − y1t  )

       Figure 5 displays Covt (rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 ), Cov(xt , ynt − y1t )/Var(yn−1,t+1 − y1t ), and βn for real
and nominal bonds.11 As Panel A shows, Covt (rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 ) increases in maturity, reflecting the
fact that risk premia increase in maturity and that the term spread is upward-sloping. Risk
premia are greater for nominal bonds then for real bonds, and increase faster in the maturity.
Despite this, as shown in Panel C, the model implies a greater deviation from the expectations
hypothesis for real bonds than for nominal bonds. Moreover, the model predicts coefficients that
are roughly constant in maturity over the range of zero to 5 years, while risk premia are upward
sloping. The reason is that the upward slope for risk premia is canceled out by a downward
slope in Cov(xt , ynt − y1t )/Var(yn−1,t+1 − y1t ), which results from the mean-reverting nature of xt .
Moreover, nominal bonds, whose yields are driven by expected inflation as well as by discount
rates, have lower values of Cov(xt , ynt − y1t )/Var(yn−1,t+1 − y1t ). This explains why the model
produces a less dramatic failure of the expectations hypothesis for nominal bonds, despite their
higher risk premia.


Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) regressions

Finally, we ask whether the model can explain the findings of Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005).
Cochrane and Piazzesi regress annual excess bond returns on a linear combination of forward
rates, where the forward rate for loans between periods t + n and t + n + h is defined as the
difference between the log price of the nominal bond maturing in n − h periods and the the log
price of the nominal bond maturing in n periods:

                            $         π                 π              π            π
                           fnt = log(Pn−h,t Πt ) − log(Pnt Πt ) = log Pn−h,t − log Pnt .
  11
       While (36) and (37) can be interpreted at any frequency and are run at an annual frequency in the data and
the model for Table 8, (38) and (39) require that the frequency be the same as the frequency at which the model
is simulated, namely, quarterly. The implied differences for the coefficients βn are very slight.


                                                         25
In what follows, we take h = 4 so that the forward rate is annual. We refer to n as the forward
rate maturity. Cochrane and Piazzesi show that the regression coefficients on the forward rates
form a tent-shape pattern as a function of maturity (see also Stambaugh (1988)). Moreover, they
show that a single linear combination of forward rates has substantial predictive power for bond
returns across maturities.
       These results offer support for our model’s assumptions in that they imply that a single pre-
dictive factor drives much of the predictability in bond returns. In our model, that factor is
represented by the latent variable xt . Forward rates, like bond prices, are linear combinations of
factors; therefore some linear combination of forward rates will uncover xt . The model therefore
predicts that some linear combination of forward rates will be the best predictor of bond returns,
and that the regression coefficients for bonds of various maturities should be the same up to a
constant of proportionality (because the true premia are all proportional to xt ).
       We replicate the Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) analysis in our simulated data. We report
results for forward rates with n = 1, 3 and 5 years but the results are robust to alternative choices.
Figure 6 shows the regression coefficients as a function of the forward rate maturity. As this
figure shows, the model reproduces the tent shape in regression coefficients.12 Table 9 reports
R2 -statistics in the model and in the data. From monthly Fama–Bliss data (beginning in 1952
and ending in 2004), we construct overlapping annual observations. The R2 -statistics in the model
are smaller than those in the data (16% versus 24% for the 5-year bond), but still economically
significant.13
       Given the 3-factor affine structure of the model, it is straightforward to solve for the linear
combination of any three forward rates that is proportional to the price of risk xt . Appendix D
gives an analytical formula for these regressions coefficients, and shows that they must either form
a tent or a “V”-shape. For example, if we use the 1, 3 and 5-quarter forward rates, and assume
that the horizon for forward rates is one quarter, the linear combination

                                         −φ2q φ2r f1t + (φ2q + φ2r )f3t − f5t                               (40)
  12
       The regression coefficients are larger in magnitude than those shown in Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005); this
occurs because the correlation between bond returns in our model is greater than that in the data.
  13
     The differences between these R2 -statistics and those reported in Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) are due to a
difference in sample period; their sample begins in 1964 whereas ours begins in 1952. In Section 3.6, we report
results for both periods.


                                                         26
equals xt up to a constant of proportionality. The shape arises in part from the fact that forward
rates are highly correlated. The coefficient on the first and the third forward rates must be the
opposite sign of that on the middle forward rate in order to undo the effects of expected inflation
qt and the riskfree rate rtf . Because qt and rtf enter into the equation for forward rates with the
same sign at all maturities, undoing their effects requires that the coefficients reverse in sign.
   Whether the shape is a tent or a “V” depends on the pattern of forward rate sensitivities to
xt . Simulation results suggest that a tent shape occurs as long as xt is not extremely persistent
(i.e. not more persistent than both rtf and qt ). The derivation in Appendix D give some insight
into why this might be true. Intuitively, if xt is extremely persistent, then the forward rate with
the greatest maturity among the three regressors will also be relatively sensitive to xt . In this
case, a “V” shape results because the linear combination that exactly replicates xt loads positively
on the forward rate of greatest maturity. However, if the persistence of xt lies between that of rtf
and qt , the middle forward rate will be relatively sensitive to xt . In this case, a tent shape results
because the linear combination that exactly replicates xt loads positively on the middle forward
rate. The preceding results in this section suggest that this is the most empirically relevant case
because it is the case that also allows the model to capture facts about equity returns. Perhaps
surprisingly, the model implies a tent-shape even if the persistence of xt is below that of rtf and
qt . As discussed in Section 3.2, the response of the yield curve to a change in xt depends on the
pattern of bond risk premia, which in turn depend on the persistences of rtf and qt . Therefore a
change in xt can have a large effect on intermediate-maturity bonds even if xt is not very persistent
itself. For this reason, the tent shape is typical of the model (in the sense that it holds for a variety
of realistic calibrations), while the “V”-shape is the exception.


3.5    The cross-section of equities

This section shows the implications of the model for portfolios formed by sorting on price ratios.
Following Lynch (2003) and Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004), we exogenously specify a share
process for cash flows on long-lived assets. For each year of simulated data, we sort these assets
into deciles based on their price-dividend ratios and form portfolios of the assets within each decile.
We then calculate returns over the following year. This follows the procedure used in empirical
studies of the cross section (e.g. Fama and French (1992)). We then perform statistical analysis

                                                   27
on the portfolio returns.
      We specify our share process so that assets pay a nonzero dividend at each time (implying
that the price-dividend ratio is well-defined), so that the total dividends sum up to the aggregate
dividend of the market (so that the model is internally consistent), and so that the cross-sectional
distribution of dividends, returns, and price ratios is stationary. The continuous-time framework of
Menzly, Santos, and Veronesi (2004) allows the authors to specify the share process as stochastic,
and yet keep shares between zero and one. This is more difficult in discrete time, and for this
reason we adopt the simplifying assumption that the share process is deterministic. We assume
the same process as in Lettau and Wachter (2007): shares grow at a constant rate of 5% per
quarter for 100 quarters, and then shrink at the same rate for the next 100 quarters. Lettau and
Wachter show that these parameters imply a cross-sectional distribution of dividend and earnings
growth similar to that in the data.
      More precisely, consider N sequences of dividend shares sit , for i = 1, . . . , N . For convenience,
we refer to each of these N sequences as a firm, though they are best thought of as portfolios
of firms in the same stage of the life cycle. As our ultimate goal is to aggregate these firms into
portfolios based on price-dividend ratios, this simplification does not affect our results. Firm i
pays sit of the aggregate dividend at time t, si,t+1 of the aggregate dividend at time t + 1, etc.
Shares are such that sit ≥ 0 and N
                                 P
                                    i=1 sit = 1 for all t (so that the firms add up to the market).

Because firm i pays a dividend sequence si,t+1 Dt+1 , si,t+2 Dt+2 , . . ., no-arbitrage implies that the
ex-dividend price of firm i equals
                                                                  ∞
                                                                  X
                                                       PitF   =                 d
                                                                        si,t+n Pnt .
                                                                  n=1

Let s be the lowest share of a firm in the economy, and assume without loss of generality that firm
1 starts at s, namely s11 = s. We assume that the share grows at a constant rate gs until reaching
s1,N/2+1 = (1 + gs )N/2 s and then shrinks at the rate gs until reaching s1,N +1 = s again. At this
point the cycle repeats. All firms are ex-ante identical, but are “out of phase” with one another:
As firms move through the life-cycle, they slowly shift (on average) from the growth category to
the value category, and then revert back to the growth category. Firm 1 starts out at s, Firm 2 at
s21 = (1 + gs )s, Firm N/2 at sN/2,1 = (1 + gs )N/2−1 s, and Firm N at sN 1 = (1 + gs )s. The variable
s is such that the shares sum to one for all t.14 We set the number of firms to 200, implying a
 14
                 PN                                    PN/2−1
      That is,    i=1 sit   = s + (1 + gs )N/2 s + 2    i=1       (1 + gs )i s = 1.


                                                                     28
200-quarter, or equivalently, 50-year life cycle for a firm. These share processes fully define the
firms in the economy.
   Panel A of Table 10 shows moments implied by the model. We compute the expected excess
return, the volatility of the excess return and the Sharpe ratio. We also compute the abnormal
return relative to the CAPM (αi ), and the coefficient on the market portfolio (βi ) from a time series
regression of expected excess portfolio returns on expected excess market returns. Panel B shows
counterparts from the data when portfolios are formed on the book-to-market ratio. Monthly data
from 1952–2004 are from Ken French’s website. Lettau and Wachter (2007) show that very similar
results occur when portfolios are formed on earnings-to-price or cash-flow-to-price ratios.
   Comparing the first line of Panel A with that of Panel B shows that the model matches most
of the spread between expected returns on value and growth stocks. In both the model and the
data, the expected excess return is about 6% per annum for the extreme growth portfolio. In the
model, the extreme value portfolio has an expected excess return of 10%, compared with 11% in
the data. Comparing the second line of Panel A with that of Panel B shows that, in the model, the
risk of value stocks is lower than that of growth stocks, just as in the data. Sharpe ratios increase
from about 0.3 for the extreme growth portfolio to about 0.6 for the extreme value portfolio.
   More importantly, the model is able to match the value puzzle. Even though the model predicts
that value stocks have high expected returns, value stocks in the model have lower CAPM βs than
growth stocks. The CAPM α in the model is -2.5% per annum for the extreme growth portfolio
and rises to 3.3% per annum for the extreme value portfolio. The corresponding numbers in the
data are -1.7% per annum and 4.7% per annum.
   These results for value and growth stocks may at first seem counter-intuitive, especially given
the implications of the model for the term structure of interest rates. The term structure results
in the previous section show that long-run assets require higher expected returns than short-run
assets. The results in this section show that the opposite is true for equities. For equities, it is
the short-run assets that require high expected returns.
   The model resolves this tension between the downward sloping term structure of equities and
the upward-sloping term structure of interest rates by the dividend process, the inflation process,
and the price-of-risk process xt . As implied by the data, expected dividend growth is negatively
correlated with realized dividend growth. This makes growth stocks a hedge and reduces their risk


                                                  29
premium relative to what would be the case if, say, expected inflation were constant. Moreover,
expected inflation is negatively correlated with realized dividend growth. This makes long-term
nominal bonds riskier than short-term nominal bonds and riskier than real bonds.
   The prices of inflation and dividend risks are important for accounting for the combined be-
havior of equities and bonds. However, they are not sufficient. As the discussion in Section 2.3
indicates, characteristics of the price-of-risk process xt are also crucial. Because equities carry a
higher risk premium than bonds, they are more sensitive to changes in xt in the sense that a greater
proportion of their variance comes from xt than from rtf as compared to both real and nominal
bonds. In our specification, variation in the price of risk is itself unpriced. This implies variability
in returns on growth stocks (on account of duration), but, at the same time, low expected returns
because this variability comes in the form of risk that the representative investor does not mind
bearing.


3.6    Interactions

We now examine the model’s implications for interactions between the aggregate market, the term
structure of interest rates and the cross-section of equities. We consider four state variables in
the data and in the model: the price-dividend ratio, the yield spread, the linear combination of
forward rates that best predicts bond returns and the value spread. We also consider three excess
returns: the return on the market portfolio over the short-term bond, the return on the 5-year
nominal bond over the short-term bond and the return on the value portfolio over the growth
portfolio. We calculate cross-correlations of the four state variables, cross-correlations of the three
excess returns, and predictive regressions of each excess return on each state variable.
   Prior to discussing the details of our results, we briefly summarize our findings. While the
model largely succeeds at capturing the ability of equity state variables to predict equity returns
and bond state variables to predict bond returns, the model implies correlations between these
two markets that are higher than what the data imply. This occurs no doubt because of the large
role played by the price of risk xt : xt is an important driver of both bonds and equities in the
model because of the substantial predictability present in both markets. Because the same price
of risk determines risk premia for both bonds and equities (see Section 2), these assets are highly
correlated in the model. The lack of correlation in the data presents a puzzle, at least from the

                                                  30
point of view of a model in which risk premia are driven by a single state variable.
       We construct the prices and return series using monthly data from 1952–2004 (because Fama–
Bliss data on bond yields begin in June of 1952, this is the earliest starting point we consider
for all of the series in this section). We also consider results for the 1964–2004 subperiod.15 The
price-dividend ratio in the data is constructed by dividing the price of the value-weighted CRSP
index by the dividends paid over the previous year. The yield spread is the 5-year yield (from
Fama-Bliss data) minus the 3-month yield (equal to the bid yield on the 90-day Treasury bond).
Both yields are nominal and continuously-compounded. We create a forward-rate factor following
the approach of Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005), namely, we compute the average excess holding
period return on bonds of maturities ranging from 2 to 5 years and regress it on annual forward
rates with maturities ranging from 1 to 5 years. The value spread is defined as in Cohen, Polk,
and Vuolteenaho (2003). That is, we start with the six portfolios formed by first sorting firms into
two portfolios by size and then into three portfolios by the book-to-market ratio (see Fama and
French (1993)). The value portfolio then consists of the portfolio that equally weights the portfolio
of large stocks with high book-to-market ratios and the portfolio of small stocks with high book-
to-market ratios. The growth portfolio is likewise formed from the portfolio of large stocks with
low book-to-market ratios and the portfolio of small stocks with low book-to-market ratios. The
value spread is the difference between the log book-to-market ratio of the value portfolio and the
log book-to-market ratio of the growth portfolio. Data on these portfolios are from Ken French’s
website.
       The return on the value-weighted CRSP index represents the market return. We construct the
return on the 5-year nominal bond using yields on the 4 and 5-year bonds from Fama-Bliss data.
To form excess returns, we subtract the return on the 90-day Treasury bill. We construct the
value minus growth return using returns on the value portfolio and the growth portfolio as defined
in the previous paragraph. All returns are continuously compounded, and we form overlapping
annual (and five-year) observations from the monthly data.
       We construct the price-dividend ratio and yield spread in the model as described in previous
sections. We construct the linear combination of forward rates as in the data, except that (to
  15
       Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005) emphasize the 1964-2004 sample because of concerns about the quality of data
on bond yields prior to 1964.



                                                        31
avoid co-linearity) we use the 1, 3 and 5-year forward rates rather than all five forwards. The
value spread is the dividend-price ratio on the extreme value portfolio minus the dividend-price
ratio on the extreme growth portfolio. The market return and bond return were defined previously;
we subtract from these returns the real return on the one-quarter nominal bond. The value minus
growth return is formed using the return on the extreme value portfolio and the return on the
extreme growth portfolio. All returns are real and continuously compounded. The model is
simulated at a quarterly frequency. From these quarterly observations, we create an annual time
series of state variables and annual returns.
   Table 11 shows the cross-correlations between the state variables in the model and in data from
1952–2004 and from 1964–2004. The table shows that the price-dividend ratio and the yield spread
are negatively correlated in the model (because increases in xt positively impact the price-dividend
ratio but negatively impact the yield spread), but slightly positively correlated in the data. The
price-dividend ratio is also negatively correlated with the linear combination of forward rates (not
surprisingly, because the linear combination of forward rates is perfectly correlated with xt ). This
correlation is close to zero in the 1952–2004 sample and negative in the 1964–2004 sample (though
not as negative as predicted by the model). The model correctly accounts for the strong positive
correlation between the price-dividend ratio and the value spread. This positive correlation results
from the fact that the market and the value spread both respond negatively to increases in xt and
rtf and positively to increases in zt (note that growth firms are more sensitive than value firms
to changes in these variables). The correlation between the value spread and the yield spread is
small and negative in the model and small and positive in the data. The correlation between the
value spread and the linear combination of forwards is negative in both the model and the data,
though the model correlation is larger in magnitude (-0.32 versus -0.17 in the 1964–2004 sample).
This correlation is driven by the fact that the value spread is negatively correlated with xt .
   Table 12 shows the cross-correlations between the three returns in the model and in data
from 1952–2004 and 1964–2004. The excess return on the market and on bonds are positively
correlated in the model and in the data, though the model correlation is higher than in the data
(0.83 versus 0.23 in the 1964–2004 sample). This positive correlation occurs because both bond
and stock returns are driven to a large extent by xt . Likewise, the model predicts a negative
correlation between bond returns and the value-minus-growth portfolio. However, the model


                                                 32
correctly captures the moderately negative correlation between the value minus growth return
and the market return (-0.44 in the model and -0.47 in the data). It may at first seem surprising
that the model can match this negative correlation: after all, both the equity premium and the
value premium depend on xt with a positive sign. However, this correlation is determined to a large
degree by unexpected, rather than expected returns. Positive shocks to xt and rtf lead to negative
market return shocks, while positive shocks to zt lead to positive market return shocks. These
factors also influence the value-minus-growth return, but with the opposite sign because they affect
growth firms more than value firms. The correlation is not perfectly negative because of the role
of shocks to realized dividends, which influence the market portfolio and the value-minus-growth
portfolio in the same direction.
       Tables 13–16 show the outcomes from predictive regressions of each state variable on the three
returns. We consider return horizons of 1 and 5 years. Table 13 reports regressions of the three
returns on the lagged price-dividend ratio. As discussed above, the price-dividend ratio predicts
excess returns on the market in both the data and the model. However, the model implies that
the price-dividend ratio should predict excess returns on bonds, a fact that does not hold up in
the data. Finally, the price-dividend ratio predicts returns on the value-minus-growth strategy
with a negative sign in the model, but fails to predict this return in the data.
       Table 14 repeats the exercise for the yield spread. The model’s predictions are in line with
the data in that the yield spread is capable of predicting both market and bond excess returns in
the model and in the data with the correct sign (however, the effect for bonds is insignificant at
longer horizons). The model produces the correct sign for the value minus growth portfolio at the
1-year horizon, though the R2 -statistic is greater in the model than in the data. In the data (but
not in the model), the sign of the relation reverses at the 5-year horizon. However, the effect is
insignificant when the full sample is used and marginally significant for the 1964–2004 subsample.
Table 15 reports results for the linear combination of forward rates. The results in this table are
similar to those for the yield spread.16
       Table 16 reports regressions of the returns on the value spread. The model correctly captures
the sign and degree to which the value spread predicts the aggregate market return in the data.
  16
       The size of the predictive coefficients are larger in the model than in the data because the linear combination
of forward rates is smoother.



                                                           33
In both model and data, the value spread has little ability to predict bond returns. In the model,
the value spread predicts the return on the value minus growth portfolio with a negative sign,
though the effect is economically small (the R2 is 7% at a five-year horizon). In the data however,
the value spread predicts the value-minus-growth return with a positive sign.
   How should we think about the wedge between model and data when it comes to the value
spread’s ability to predict the value-minus-growth return? One reason for the discrepancy may
arise from the construction of the value spread in the data, a construction which favors small
stocks. Other methods of constructing the value spread that weight large stocks more heavily do
not have a statistically significant ability to predict the value minus growth return. Given that
our results may be best interpreted as a theory for large stocks (given that even the value stocks
in the model are large and well-diversified), it may be that this deviation in predictive ability is
not a significant failing.
   A closer look at the model also indicates that the sign of the relation may not be an intrinsic
property of the model, but may rather depend on the precise definition of value and growth. The
value spread is negatively correlated with xt in our calibration because the growth portfolio is
more sensitive to changes in xt than is the value portfolio. This is why the value spread predicts
the value-minus-growth return with a negative sign. However, one could construct a value spread
in the model that is positively related to xt . As shown in Figure 1, the effect of xt on the
price-dividend ratio reverses for long-maturity equity: medium-maturity equity loads more on xt
than does short-maturity, but long-maturity equity loads less on xt than does medium-maturity
equity. Our current construction of firms implies that the extreme growth firm consists primarily
of medium-maturity equity, since long-maturity equity has a low value and receives little weight.
A construction that put more weight on long-maturity equity could produce a different result.
   To summarize, the model generates strong predictions for the cross-correlations of price-based
variables and excess returns. In general, the model predicts greater positive and lower negative
correlations than are found in the data because of the assumption that a single process drives risk
premia. Some of the model’s predictions are born out. In particular, the model correctly predicts
the sign of the correlation between the price-dividend ratio and the value spread, and the excess
return on the market and the value-minus-growth return. The model also correctly predicts that
term structure variables (such as the yield spread and a linear combination of forward rates) can


                                                34
predict excess returns on both bonds and stocks. Other predictions of the model, such as the fact
that the value spread predicts the value-minus-growth return with a negative sign are not in line
with the data and point towards directions for future research.



4     Conclusion
This paper has shown that properties of the cross-section of returns, the aggregate market and the
term structure of interest rates can all be understood within a single framework. We introduced
a parsimonious model for the pricing kernel capable of accounting for the behavior of value and
growth stocks, nominal bonds, and the aggregate market. At the root of the model are dividend,
inflation, and interest rate processes calibrated to match their counterparts in the data. Time-
varying preferences for risk, modeled using a first-order autoregressive process for the price of
risk, capture the observed volatility in equity returns and bond yields, as well as time-varying risk
premia in the equity and the bond market.
    Our model highlights a challenge for any model that attempts to explain both bonds and the
cross-section of equities. The upward-sloping yield curve for bonds indicates that investors require
compensation in the form of a positive risk premium for holding high-duration assets. However,
data on value and growth stocks imply the opposite: investors require compensation for holding
value stocks, which are short-horizon equity. Our model addresses this tension by specifying a
real riskfree rate that is negatively correlated with fundamentals and a price of risk shock that
has zero correlation with fundamentals. We hope that future work will suggest microeconomic
foundations for these specifications.




                                                 35
Appendix
A     General model
Let Ht be an m × 1 vector of state variables at time t and let t+1 be an (m + 2) × 1 vector of independent
standard normal shocks. We assume that the state variables evolve according to the vector autoregression

                                      Ht+1 = Θ0 + ΘHt + σH t+1 ,                                    (A.1)

where Θ0 is m × 1, Θ is m × m, and σH is m × (m + 2). Assume that the aggregate dividend Dt+1
follows the process (1) and that the price level Πt+1 follows the process (3). However, expected dividend
growth, expected inflation, the riskfree rate and the price of risk will be general affine functions of the
underlying state vector:

                                             zt = δ0 + δ 0 Ht
                                             qt = η0 + η 0 Ht
                                           f
                                          rt+1 = α0 + α0 Ht
                                            xt = ξ0 + ξ 0 Ht ,

where δ0 , η0 , α0 and ξ0 are scalars and δ, η, α and ξ are m × 1 vectors. Assume that the intertemporal
marginal rate of substitution takes the form
                                                                            
                                                 f    1
                                Mt+1 = exp −rt+1    − ||λ||2 x2t − xt λ0 t+1 .                    (A.2)
                                                      2
The price of risk is therefore xt λ. In the main text, we impose the restriction λ = σd0 .
   We describe the solution method for the case of zero-coupon equity. Consider the recursion (17), and
conjecture that the solution takes the form
                                         d
                                        Pnt
                                            = exp{Adn + Bnd Ht },                                    (A.3)
                                        Dt
where Adn is a scalar and Bnd is 1 × m. Substituting (A.3) into (17) and expanding out the expectation
implies
         
                           1
  Et exp −α0 − α0 Ht − (ξ0 + ξ 0 Ht )2 ||λ||2 − (ξ0 + ξ 0 Ht )λ0 t+1 + δ0 + δ 0 Ht + σd t+1 +
                           2
                                                                                          n          o
                                         d        d
                                       An−1 + Bn−1 (Θ0 + ΘHt + σH t+1 )             = exp Adn + Bnd Ht .

It follows from properties of the lognormal distribution that
        
                        1
   exp −α0 − α0 Ht − (ξ0 + ξ 0 Ht )2 ||λ||2 + δ0 + δ 0 Ht + Adn−1 + Bn−1
                                                                      d
                                                                         (Θ0 + ΘHt ) +
                        2
                1                                                                0 
                                0     0     d                       0    0    d
                   σd − (ξ0 + ξ Ht )λ + Bn−1 σH σd − (ξ0 + ξ Ht )λ + Bn−1 σH             =
                2
                                                                                        n          o
                                                                                   exp Adn + Bnd Ht .


                                                    36
Matching coefficients implies:17

                   Bnd = −α0 + δ 0 + Bn−1
                                      d              d
                                          Θ − (σd + Bn−1 σH )λξ 0                               (A.4)
                   Adn = −α0 + δ0 + Adn−1 + Bn−1
                                             d                  d
                                                  Θ0 − (σd + Bn−1   σH )λξ0 +
                                               1                        1 d
                                                 σd σd0 + Bn−1
                                                           d
                                                               σH σd0 + Bn−1      0
                                                                              σH σH  d0
                                                                                    Bn−1 ,      (A.5)
                                               2                        2
with B0d = 01×m and Ad0 = 0. Note that the terms that are quadratic in Ht cancel.
    Note that the recursion for real bonds (9) takes the same form as the recursion for equities (17),
except that there is no dividend growth term. We can therefore apply (A.4) and (A.5), provided that we
replace δ0 with 0, δ1 with 0m×1 and σd with 01×(m+2) . Therefore, real bond prices satisfy
                                                r
                                               Pnt = exp{Arn + Bnr Ht },                        (A.6)

where Arn is a scalar and Bnr is a 1 × m vector satisfying

                     Bnr = −α0 + Bn−1
                                  r        r
                                      Θ − Bn−1 σH λξ 0                                          (A.7)
                                                                 1 r       0  r0
                      Arn = −α0 + Arn−1 + Bn−1
                                           r         r
                                               Θ0 − Bn−1 σH λξ0 + Bn−1 σH σH Bn−1 ,             (A.8)
                                                                 2
with B0r = 01×m and Ar0 = 0.
    To price nominal bonds, note that the recursion (26) takes the same form as the equity recursion
(17), except that growth in dividends is replaced by the inverse of inflation. Therefore, we can again
apply (A.4) and (A.5), provided that we replace δ0 with −η0 , δ with −η and σd with −σπ . Therefore,
the nominal price of the nominal bond satisfies
                                               π
                                              Pnt Πt = exp{Aπn + Bnπ Ht },                      (A.9)

where Aπn is a scalar and Bnπ is a 1 × m vector satisfying

                  Bnπ = −α0 − η 0 + Bn−1
                                     π               π
                                         Θ − (−σπ + Bn−1 σH )λξ 0                              (A.10)
                   Aπn = −α0 − η0 + Aπn−1 + Bn−1
                                             π
                                                 Θ0 − (−σπ + Bn−1π
                                                                     σH )λξ0 +
                                              1                       1 π
                                                σπ σπ0 − Bn−1
                                                          π
                                                              σH σπ0 + Bn−1       0
                                                                              σH σH  π0
                                                                                    Bn−1 ,     (A.11)
                                              2                       2
and B0π = 01×m and Aπ0 = 0.


B        Convergence of the market price-dividend ratio in the general model
This Appendix derives conditions that guarantee the convergence of the price-dividend ratio, assuming
the general model in Appendix A. The results can be specialized to the model in Section 2 using the
  17
       Because ξ 0 Ht and λ0 (σd + Bn−1
                                    d
                                        σH )0 are each scalars,

                                 ξ 0 Ht λ0 (σd + Bn−1
                                                  d
                                                      σH )0   = λ0 (σd + Bn−1
                                                                          d
                                                                              σH )0 ξ 0 Ht
                                                              =           d
                                                                   (σd + Bn−1 σH )λξ 0 Ht .




                                                              37
definitions in Appendix C. Let K1 = Θ − σH λξ 0 and K2 = −α0 + δ 0 − σd λξ 0 . Then (A.4) can be
rewritten as
                                     Bnd = Bn−1
                                            d
                                                K1 + K2 .
The limit of Bnd as n goes to infinity is the fixed point of this equation. As long as the eigenvalues of
K1 have absolute value less than 1, a fixed point exists (see Hamilton (1994, Chapter 10)). In this case
Im − K1 is invertible, and the fixed point is

                                              B = K2 (Im − K1 )−1 .

    Now assume that the eigenvalues of K1 have absolute value less than one. In the general case, the
                                              d /D takes the general form (A.3). Define
price-dividend ratio is given by (23), where Pnt  t

                                                    1                  1        0
              Ā = −α0 + δ0 + BΘ0 − (σd + BσH )λξ0 + σd σd0 + BσH σd0 + BσH σH
                                                                             0
                                                                               B,
                                                    2                  2
It follows from (A.5) that for sufficiently large N ,

                                      Adn ≈ Ān + constant for n ≥ N,

where the constant does not depend on n. Therefore
                     L
                     X        n          o                     L
                                                               X
                                d    d
                                                                   
                           exp An + Bn Ht ≈ exp constant + BHt   exp Ān .
                     n=N                                                    n=N

As long as Ā < 0, the right hand side approaches a finite limit for L → ∞.


C        Solution to the model in Section 2
The model in Section 2 can either be solved directly, or by applying the formulas in Appendix A under
appropriate restrictions. The general model in Appendix A reduces to the model in Section 2 if
                                                                 
                                 1            0             0           0
                                                                 
                                0          1          0          0 
                           δ=  0 , η =  0 , α =  1 , ξ =  0 ,
                                                                                        (A.12)
                                                                 
                                 0            0             0           1
and if                                                                        
                                         φz                                 σz
                                                                              
                                             φq                          σq   
                               Θ=                           ,   σH   =        ,                  (A.13)
                                 
                                                  φr        
                                                             
                                                                        
                                                                           σr   
                                                                                 
                                                        φx                  σx
where Θ is a diagonal matrix. Further, set Θ0 = 04×1 so that g = δ0 , q̄ = η0 , r̄f = α0 and x̄ = ξ0 . Label
the elements of the vectors Bnr , Bnd and Bnπ as follows:

                                         Bnr = [Bzn
                                                 r     r
                                                    , Bqn    r
                                                          , Brn    r
                                                                , Bxn ]
                                         Bnd = [Bzn
                                                 d     d
                                                    , Bqn    d
                                                          , Brn    d
                                                                , Bxn ]                              (A.14)
                                         Bnπ = [Bzn
                                                 π     π
                                                    , Bqn    π
                                                          , Brn    π
                                                                , Bxn ].

                                                        38
We continue to assume that the price of risk is given by the general form (A.2); the formulas in Section 2
can be obtained by setting λ = σd0 .
   For real bonds, (A.7) and (A.8) imply that

                               r     r
                              Bzn = Bz,n−1 φz                                                      (A.15)
                               r     r
                              Bqn = Bq,n−1 φq                                                      (A.16)
                               r                  r
                              Brn       = −1 +   Br,n−1 φr                                         (A.17)
                               r     r           r
                              Bxn = Bx,n−1 φx − σ(n) λ                                             (A.18)
                                                              1 r 2
                               Arn = −r̄f + Arn−1 − σ(n)
                                                     r
                                                         λx̄ + ||σ(n) || ,                         (A.19)
                                                              2
where
                           r      r           r           r           r
                          σ(n) = Br,n−1 σr + Bq,n−1 σq + Bz,n−1 σz + Bx,n−1 σx

is the vector of loadings on the shocks for the return on the n-period real bond. The boundary conditions
are Bz0r = B r = B r = B r = Ar = 0. Equations (A.15) and (A.16) together with the boundary
               q0      r0     x0       0
conditions imply that Bzn r = B r = 0 for all n. The solution to (A.17) is given in the main text. The
                                  qn
solution to (A.18) is
                                     r     σr λ 1 − φnλ     σr λ φnr − φnλ
                                   Bxn  =               −                  ,                      (A.20)
                                          1 − φr 1 − φλ 1 − φr φr − φλ
where φλ = φx − σx λ.
   In the case of equities, (A.4) and (A.5) imply that

                             d         d
                            Bzn = 1 + Bz,n−1 φz                                                    (A.21)
                             d            d
                            Bqn     =    Bq,n−1 φq                                                 (A.22)
                             d          d
                            Brn = −1 + Br,n−1 φr                                                   (A.23)
                             d     d           d
                            Bxn = Bx,n−1 φx − σ(n) λ                                               (A.24)
                                                                1 d 2
                             Adn = −r̄f + g + Adn−1 − σ(n)
                                                       d
                                                           λx̄ + ||σ(n) || ,                       (A.25)
                                                                2
where
                        d           d           d           d           d
                       σ(n) = σd + Br,n−1 σr + Bq,n−1 σq + Bz,n−1 σz + Bx,n−1 σx

is the vector of loadings on the shocks for the return on n-period zero-coupon equity. The boundary
                 d = B d = B d = B d = Ad = 0. Equation (A.22) together with the boundary condition
conditions are Bz0     q0     r0    x0     0
               d
implies that Bqn = 0 for all n. The solutions to (A.21) and (A.23) are given in the main text. The
solution to (A.24) is

                                             1 − φnλ   σr λ φnr − φnλ    σz λ φnz − φnλ
                                          
           d                σr λ     σz λ
          Bxn = −σd λ +           −                  −                +                 .     (A.26)
                           1 − φr   1 − φz 1 − φλ 1 − φr φr − φλ        1 − φz φz − φλ




                                                      39
      In the case of nominal bonds, (A.10) and (A.11) imply that

                               π     π
                              Bzn = Bz,n−1 φz                                                    (A.27)
                               π                 π
                              Bqn   = −1 +      Bq,n−1 φq                                        (A.28)
                               π                 π
                              Brn   = −1 +      Br,n−1 φr                                        (A.29)
                              π     π           π
                             Bxn = Bx,n−1 φx − σ(n) λ                                            (A.30)
                                                                  1 π 2
                              Aπn = −r̄f − q̄ + Aπn−1 − σ(n)
                                                         π
                                                             λx̄ + ||σ(n) || ,                   (A.31)
                                                                  2
where
                              π            π           π           π
                             σ(n) = −σπ + Br,n−1 σr + Bq,n−1 σq + Bx,n−1 σx

is the vector of loadings on the shocks for the return on the n-period nominal bond. The boundary
                 π = B π = B π = B π = Aπ = 0. Equation (A.27) together with the boundary condition
conditions are Bz0      q0   r0     x0     0
               π
implies that Bzn = 0 for all n. The solutions to (A.28) and (A.29) are given in the main text. The
solution to (A.30) is

                                               1 − φnλ   σr λ φnr − φnλ    σq λ φnq − φnλ
                                            
               π              σr λ      σq λ
              Bxn = σπ λ +          +                  −                −                 .  (A.32)
                             1 − φr    1 − φq 1 − φλ 1 − φr φr − φλ       1 − φq φq − φλ

D       Cochrane-Piazzesi regressions
The forward rate for loans between periods t + n and t + n + h is given by the difference in log nominal
prices of nominal bonds
                                     $         π               π
                                    fnt = log Pn−h,t Πt − log Pnt Πt .

Let
                                                     π        π
                                              Cqn = Bq,n−h − Bqn

and likewise for Crn and Cxn . It follows from the formula for nominal bond prices (27), that

                                         $                  f
                                        fnt = Cqn qt + Crn rt+1 + Cxn xt .                       (A.33)

It follows from (28) that
                                               1 − φhq                        1 − φhr
                                Cqn = φn−h
                                       q               ,        Crn = φrn−h           .          (A.34)
                                               1 − φq                         1 − φr
The formula for Cxn is more complicated, but can be calculated from (A.32). Equation A.33 can be
written in matrix form as                        
                                             qt
                                            f 
                                         C  rt+1  = ft                                  (A.35)
                                             xt
where                                                                            
                                    Cqn1       Crn1   Cxn1                   fn$1 t
                              C =  Cqn2       Crn2   Cxn2  ,        ft =  fn$2 t  ,
                                                                                 

                                    Cqn3       Crn3   Cxn3                   fn$3 t

                                                           40
for three forward rate maturities n3 > n2 > n1 .
    We now solve for the linear combination of forward rates that is proportional to xt . Accordingly, let
θ be a 3 × 1 vector such that θ 0 ft = xt . It follows from (A.35) that

       θ = [0 0 1] C −1
             1
         =     [Cqn2 Crn3 − Cqn3 Crn2 , Crn1 Cqn3 − Crn3 Cqn1 , Cqn1 Crn2 − Cqn2 Crn1 ],
           |C|
             1 φ−h   −h        h       h
                 q φr (1 − φq )(1 − φr ) n2 n3
         =                               [φq φr − φnq 3 φnr 2 , φnq 3 φnr 1 − φnq 1 φnr 3 , φnq 1 φnr 2 − φnq 2 φnr 1 ] (A.36)
           |C|      (1 − φq )(1 − φr )

where |C| denotes the determinant of C. Assume φq 6= φr . Because n3 > n2 > n1 , it follows that the
first and third element of θ must take the opposite sign from the second element of θ. Therefore, θ must
either have a tent or “V”-shape.
     Whether θ takes the form of a tent or a “V” depends on the sign of the determinant |C|. The formula
for the determinant of a 3 × 3 matrix implies that |C| is equal to a positive constant times

                Cxn1 (φnq 2 φnr 3 − φnq 3 φnr 2 ) + Cxn2 (φnq 3 φnr 1 − φnq 1 φnr 3 ) + Cxn3 (φnq 1 φnr 2 − φnq 2 φnr 1 )

Consider the case of φr > φq (which holds in our calibration). It follows from (A.36) that θ has a tent
shape if and only if |C| is negative. This will occur when Cxn2 is large relative to Cxn1 and Cxn3 , namely
when the effect of xt is largest at intermediate maturities. Simulation results show that this tends to
occur when φx is less than φr . Long-maturity forward rates are then driven more by φr . Even if φx is
less than φq , it turns out that short-maturity forward rates are driven more by φq , because the effect
of a change in xt tends to be determined by a combination of φx and the autocorrelation of the most
persistent source of risk that is correlated with fundamentals.




                                                                  41
References
Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 2007, Stock return predictability: Is it there?, Review of Financial
  Studies 20, 651–707.

Ang, Andrew, and Monika Piazzesi, 2003, A no-arbitrage vector autoregression of term structure dynamics
  with macroeconomic and latent variables, Journal of Monetary Economics 50, 745–787.

Bakshi, Gurdip S., and Zhiwu Chen, 1996, Inflation, asset prices, and the term structure of interest rates
  in monetary economies, Review of Financial Studies 9, 241–275.

Bansal, Ravi, and Ivan Shaliastovich, 2007, Risk and return on bond, currency and equity markets: A
  unified approach, Working paper, Duke University.

Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron, 2004, Risks for the long-run: A potential resolution of asset pricing
  puzzles, Journal of Finance 59, 1481–1509.

Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Steve Grenadier, 2006, Stock and bond returns with moody investors,
  NBER working paper #12247.

Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick, and David A. Marshall, 2001, Peso problem explanations for term
  structure anomalies, Journal of Monetary Economics 48, 241–270.

Berk, Jonathan B., Richard C. Green, and Vasant Naik, 1999, Optimal investment, growth options, and
  security returns, Journal of Finance 54, 1553–1607.

Bikbov, Ruslan, and Mikhail Chernov, 2008, No-arbitrage macroeconomic determinants of the yield curve,
  Working paper, Columbia University.

Boudoukh, Jacob, 1993, An equilbrium model of nominal bond prices with inflation-output correlation
  and stochastic volatility, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 25, 636–665.

Brennan, Michael J., Ashley W. Wang, and Yihong Xia, 2004, Estimation and test of a simple model of
  intertemporal capital asset pricing, Journal of Finance 59, 1743–1775.

Buraschi, Andrea, and Alexei Jiltsov, 2007, Habit formation and macro-models of the term structure of
  interest rates, Journal of Finance 62.

Campbell, John Y., 2003, Consumption-based asset pricing, in Handbook of the Economics of Finance
  Volume IB (North-Holland, Amsterdam ).

Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based explanation
  of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–251.

Campbell, John Y., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2009, Growth or glamour? Fundamentals
  and systematic risk in stock returns, forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.



                                                   42
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future
  dividends and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195–228.

Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1991, Yield spreads and interest rate movements: A bird’s eye
  view, Review of Economic Studies 58, 495–514.

Campbell, John Y., Adi Sunderam, and Luis Viceira, 2009, Inflation bets or deflation hedges? The
  changing risks of nominal bonds, NBER working paper #14701.

Campbell, John Y., and Luis Viceira, 2001, Who should buy long-term bonds?, American Economic
  Review 91, 99–127.

Campbell, John Y., and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2004, Bad beta, good beta, American Economic Review
  94, 1249–1275.

Carlson, Murray, Adlai Fisher, and Ron Giammarino, 2004, Corporate investment and asset price dy-
  namics: Implications for the cross-section of returns, Journal of Finance 59, 2577–2603.

Cochrane, John H., 1992, Explaining the variance of price-dividend ratios, Review of Financial Studies
  5, 243–280.

Cochrane, John H., 1999, New facts in finance, Economic Perspectives Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
  23, 36–58.

Cochrane, John H., 2008, The dog that did not bark: A defense of return predictability, Review of
  Financial Studies 21, 1533–1575.

Cochrane, John H., and Monika Piazzesi, 2005, Bond risk premia, American Economic Review 95, 138–
  160.

Cohen, Randolph B., Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho, 2003, The value spread, Journal of
  Finance 58, 609–641.

Cox, John C., Jonathan C. Ingersoll, and Stephen A. Ross, 1985, A theory of the term structure of
  interest rates, Econometrica 53, 385–408.

Dai, Qiang, and Kenneth Singleton, 2002, Expectations puzzles, time-varying risk premia, and affine
  models of the term structure, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 415–442.

Dai, Qiang, and Kenneth Singleton, 2003, Term structure dynamics in theory and reality, Review of
  Financial Studies 16, 631–678.

Duffee, Gregory R., 2002, Term premia and interest rate forecasts in affine models, Journal of Finance
  57, 369–443.

Duffee, Gregory R., 2006, Term structure estimation without using latent factors, Journal of Financial
  Economics 79, 507–536.

                                                  43
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1989, Business conditions and expected returns on stocks and
  bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23–49.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected returns, Journal of Finance
  47, 427–465.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on bonds and stocks,
  Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Gabaix, Xavier, 2008, An exactly solved framework for ten puzzles in macro-finance, NBER working
  paper #13724.

Gomes, Joao, Leonid Kogan, and Lu Zhang, 2003, Equilibrium cross section of returns, Journal of Political
  Economy 111, 693–732.

Hamilton, J. D., 1994, Time Series Analysis. (Oxford University Press Princeton, NJ).

Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, and Nan Li, 2008, Consumption strikes back? Measuring long run
  risk, Journal of Political Economy 116, 260–302.

Harrison, Michael, and David Kreps, 1979, Martingales and multiperiod securities markets, Journal of
  Economic Theory 20, 381–408.

Keim, Donald B., and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1986, Predicting returns in the stock and bond markets,
  Journal of Financial Economics 17, 357–390.

Kiku, Dana, 2006, Is the value premium a puzzle?, Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2005, Expected returns and expected dividend growth, Journal
  of Financial Economics 76, 583–626.

Lettau, Martin, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2008, Reconciling the return predictability evidence, Review
  of Financial Studies 21, 1607–1652.

Lettau, Martin, and Harald Uhlig, 2002, Sharpe-ratios and preferences: An analytical approach, Macroe-
  conomic Dynamics 2, 242–265.

Lettau, Martin, and Jessica A. Wachter, 2007, Why is long-horizon equity less risky? A duration-based
  explanation of the value premium, Journal of Finance 62, 55–92.

Lustig, Hanno, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2005, Housing collateral, consumption insurance and risk
  premia: an empirical perspective, Journal of Finance 60, 1167–1219.

Lustig, Hanno, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2008, The wealth-consumption ratio,
  Working paper, Boston University, New York University and UCLA.

Lynch, Anthony W., 2003, Portfolio choice with many risky assets, market clearing, and cash-flow pre-
  dictability, Working paper, New York University.

                                                   44
Menzly, Lior, Tano Santos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2004, Understanding predictability, Journal of Political
 Economy 112, 1–47.

Newey, Whitney, and Kenneth West, 1987, A simple, positive-definite, heteroskedastic and auto-
  correlation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703–708.

Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider, 2006, Equilibrium yield curves, in Daron Acemoglu
  Michael Woodford, and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.: NBER Macroeconomics Annual:2006 (MIT Press, Cam-
  bridge ).

Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Selale Tuzel, 2007, Housing, consumption, and asset pricing,
  Journal of Financial Economics 83, 531–569.

Roll, Richard, 2004, Empirical TIPS, Financial Analysts Journal January/February, 31–53.

Santos, Tano, and Pietro Veronesi, 2006a, Habit formation, the cross section of stock returns and the
  cash-flow risk puzzle, Working paper, Columbia University and University of Chicago.

Santos, Tano, and Pietro Veronesi, 2006b, Labor income and predictable stock returns, Review of Finan-
  cial Studies 19, 1–44.

Stambaugh, Robert F., 1988, The information in forward rates: Implications for models of the term
  structure, Journal of Financial Economics 21, 41–70.

Wachter, Jessica A., 2006, A consumption-based model of the term structure of interest rates, Journal
 of Financial Economics 79, 365–399.

Yogo, Motohiro, 2006, A consumption-based explanation of the cross section of expected stock returns,
  Journal of Finance 61, 539–580.

Zhang, Lu, 2005, The value premium, Journal of Finance 60, 67–103.




                                                  45
                        Table 1: State variable means and autocorrelations



              State variable                    Unconditional mean       Autocorrelation
              Expected dividend growth zt               1.29%                  0.90
              Expected inflation qt                     3.68%                  0.78
              Real riskfree rate rtf                    0.96%                  0.92
              Price of risk σd xt                        0.85                  0.85

Notes: Means of expected dividend growth, expected inflation and the riskfree rate are in annual
terms (i.e. multiplied by 4). Autocorrelations for all state variables are in annual terms (i.e. raised
to the 4th power). The model is simulated at a quarterly frequency.




                         Table 2: Conditional cross-correlations of shocks

                                                                 f
                            Variable    ∆πt      zt      qt     rt+1     xt
                            ∆dt         -0.30   -0.83   -0.30   -0.30    0
                            ∆πt                  0      1.00     0       0
                            zt                           0       0      0.35
                            qt                                   0       0
                             f
                            rt+1                                         0

Notes: The table reports conditional cross-correlations of shocks to dividend growth ∆dt , inflation
                                                                               f
∆πt , expected dividend growth zt , expected inflation qt , the riskfree rate rt+1 and the price-of-risk
variable xt . The model is simulated at a quarterly frequency.




                                                  46
                        Table 3: Conditional standard deviations of shocks



             Variable                             ∆dt    ∆πt       zt       qt    rtf    σd xt
             Conditional standard deviation      10.00   1.18     0.32     0.35   0.19   40.00

Notes: The table reports conditional standard deviations of shocks in annual percentage terms
(i.e. multiplied by 200) for dividend growth ∆dt , inflation ∆πt , expected dividend growth zt ,
expected inflation qt , the riskfree rate rtf and the scaled price-of-risk variable σd xt . The model is
simulated at a quarterly frequency.




                           Table 4: Aggregate price and return moments

                                                         Model          Data
                             E(P m /D)                   18.16          25.95
                             σ(pm − d)                    0.36          0.40
                             AC of pm − d                 0.86          0.87
                             E[Rm − R1π ]                8.09%      6.51%
                             σ(Rm − R1π )                20.02%     19.42%
                             AC of Rm − R1π              -0.05          0.01
                             Sharpe ratio of market       0.40          0.33

Notes: P m /D refers to the price-dividend ratio of the aggregate market, where the aggregate
dividend D equals the sum of dividends paid over the previous year. pm − d refers to log(P m /D).
Rm − R1π refers to the annual return on the market portfolio in excess of the annual return on
the short-term nominal bond, where both returns are measured in real terms. σ(·) refers to the
standard deviation. AC refers to the annual autocorrelation. Data are annual from 1890–2004.




                                                  47
                       Table 5: Long-horizon regressions: Excess stock returns

                                                Horizon in years
                            1         2            4          6        8          10
                                             Panel A: Model
                β1        -0.19      -0.34       -0.60    -0.80      -0.92       -1.01
                R2        [0.11]    [0.19]       [0.32]   [0.41]    [0.43]       [0.45]
                                   Panel B: Data from 1890–2004
                β1        -0.10      -0.21       -0.35    -0.51      -0.72       -0.91
              t-stat     (-2.17)    (-2.70)     (-2.35)   (-2.24)   (-2.66)    (-2.97)
                R2        [0.04]    [0.08]       [0.11]   [0.14]    [0.21]       [0.25]
                                   Panel C: Data from 1890–1994
                β1        -0.19      -0.36       -0.55    -0.79      -1.02       -1.19
              t-stat     (-3.44)    (-3.93)     (-3.10)   (-3.92)   (-5.37)    (-5.44)
                R2        [0.07]    [0.13]       [0.17]   [0.26]    [0.35]       [0.38]

Notes: Continuously-compounded excess returns on the market portfolio are regressed on the
lagged log price-dividend ratio. Returns are measured over horizons ranging from 1 to 10 years
and are in excess of the return on the short-term nominal bond, where both returns are measured
in real terms. For each data regression, the table reports OLS estimates of the regressors, Newey-
West (1987) corrected t-statistics (in parentheses), and R2 -statistics (in brackets). For each model
regression, the table reports OLS estimates of the regressors and R2 -statistics. Data are annual.




                                                   48
                 Table 6: Long-horizon regressions: Aggregate dividend growth

                                               Horizon in years
                           1         2           4           6      8            10
                                            Panel A: Model
                 β1      0.02      0.03        0.05      0.06      0.08         0.10
                R2       [0.00]    [0.00]      [0.01]   [0.01]    [0.01]       [0.02]
                                  Panel B: Data from 1890–2004
                 β1      0.02      0.04        -0.02     -0.02     -0.12       -0.24
               t-stat   (0.43)    (0.57)      (-0.22)   (-0.11)   (-0.71)      (-1.23)
                R2       [0.00]    [0.01]      [0.00]   [0.00]    [0.01]       [0.04]
                                  Panel C: Data from 1890–1994
                 β1      0.07      0.15        0.09      0.04      -0.13       -0.28
               t-stat   (1.18)    (1.51)       (0.70)   (0.19)    (-0.64)      (-1.31)
                R2       [0.02]    [0.04]      [0.01]   [0.00]    [0.01]       [0.04]

Notes: Log growth rates of the aggregate dividend are regressed on the lagged log price-dividend
ratio. Dividend growth is measured over horizons ranging from 1 to 10 years. For each data
regression, the table reports OLS estimates of the regressors, Newey-West (1987) corrected t-
statistics (in parentheses), and R2 -statistics (in brackets). For each model regression, the table
reports OLS estimates of the regressors and R2 -statistics. Data are annual.




                                                  49
                          Table 7: Moments of zero-coupon bond yields



                   Maturity (years)      0.25    1        2     3       4      5
                                                 Panel A: Real bonds
                   Mean                  0.91   1.05    1.23   1.40 1.56      1.71
                   Standard deviation    1.95   1.89    1.83   1.79    1.75   1.71
                   AC(1)                 0.92   0.92    0.92   0.92    0.92   0.91
                                                Panel B: Nominal bonds
                   Mean                  5.15   5.53    5.98   6.38 6.73      7.04
                   Standard deviation    2.89   2.80    2.73   2.70    2.68   2.67
                   AC(1)                 0.85   0.85    0.86   0.86    0.86   0.87
                                                       Panel C: Data
                   Mean                  5.23   5.59    5.80   5.98 6.11      6.19
                   Standard deviation    2.93   2.93    2.87   2.80    2.76   2.72
                   AC(1)                 0.80   0.82    0.84   0.85    0.86   0.87

Notes: Each panel displays means, standard deviations, and 1-year autocorrelations of bond yields.
Yields are in annual percentage terms. Panel A displays moments of real yields in the model, Panel
B displays moments of nominal yields in the model and the Panel C displays moments of nominal
yields in monthly data from 1952–2004.




                                                50
                          Table 8: Long-rate regressions on bond yields



                       Maturity (years)      2             3         4         5
                                                    Panel A: Real bonds
                              βn           -0.64         -0.67     -0.68     -0.70
                              R2           [0.02]        [0.02]    [0.02]    [0.02]
                                                 Panel B: Nominal bonds
                              βn           -0.60         -0.59     -0.59     -0.59
                              R2           [0.02]        [0.02]    [0.02]    [0.01]
                                                         Panel C: Data
                              βn           -0.76         -1.11     -1.50     -1.48
                            t-stat        (-1.66)        (-2.02)   (-2.42)   (-2.13)
                              R2           [0.03]        [0.04]    [0.06]    [0.05]

Notes: The table reports annual regressions of changes in yields on the scaled yield spread for real
bonds in the model:

                         r          r                1    r     r
                        yn−4,t+4 − ynt = α n + βn       (ynt − y1t ) + error,
                                                    n−4

and for nominal bonds in the model and in the data:

                         $          $                1   $     $
                                                                  
                        yn−4,t+4 − ynt = α n + βn       ynt − y1t   + error.
                                                    n−4
 r                                                                $
ynt denotes the annual real yield on the n-quarter real bond and ynt denotes in the annual nominal
yield on the n-quarter nominal bond. For each data regression, the table reports OLS estimates
of the regressors, Newey-West (1987) corrected t-statistics (in parentheses), and R2 -statistics (in
brackets). For each model regression, the table reports OLS estimates of the regressors and R2 -
statistics. The maturities of the bonds range from 2 to 5 years. Data are monthly from 1952–2004.




                                                    51
                      Table 9: R2 -statistics from forward rate regressions



                                                   Maturity in years
                                               2       3      4        5
                            Real bonds       0.14     0.14   0.13   0.12
                            Nominal Bonds    0.22     0.20   0.18   0.16
                            Data             0.22     0.23   0.27   0.24

Notes: Annual continuously-compounded excess returns on zero-coupon bonds of maturities rang-
ing from 2 to 5 years are regressed on 3 forward rates in the model and 5 forward rates in the
data. Bond returns are in excess of the return on the 1-year bond. In the model, the forward rate
maturities are 1, 3 and 5 years. In the data, forward rate maturities are 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 years.
The table reports the resulting R2 -statistics for real bonds in the model, nominal bonds in the
model and nominal bonds in the data. Data are monthly and from 1952–2004.




                                               52
                           Table 10: Moments of equity portfolio returns

                      G                        Growth to Value                       V     V-G
       Portfolio      1      2      3      4      5      6       7     8      9      10    10-1
                                          Panel A: Model
      ERi − R1π     5.72    5.90   6.18   6.57   7.09   7.69   8.33   8.92   9.45 10.35 4.63
     σ(Ri − R1π )   20.72 20.90 21.03 21.05 20.84 20.30 19.45 18.50 17.85 17.86 8.17
    Sharpe Ratio 0.28       0.28   0.29   0.31   0.34   0.38   0.43   0.48   0.53   0.58   0.57
          αi        -2.52 -2.44 -2.24 -1.87 -1.30 -0.51 0.47          1.49   2.35   3.33   5.85
          βi        1.02    1.03   1.04   1.04   1.04   1.01   0.97   0.92   0.88   0.87 -0.15
                                           Panel B: Data
      ERi − R1π     5.91    6.74   7.38   7.29   8.35   8.62   8.56 10.30 10.32 11.64 5.73
     σ(Ri − R1π )   17.60 15.87 15.79 15.45 14.64 14.74 14.71 15.09 15.81 18.37 14.93
    Sharpe Ratio 0.34       0.43   0.47   0.47   0.57   0.58   0.58   0.68   0.65   0.63   0.38
          αi        -1.72 -0.30 0.40      0.65   2.19   2.35   2.58   4.20   4.02   4.70   6.41
          βi        1.10    1.02   1.01   0.96   0.89   0.91   0.87   0.88   0.91   1.01 -0.10

Notes: In Panel A, firms in simulated data are sorted into deciles based on their dividend-price
ratios in each simulation year. Returns are calculated over the subsequent year (portfolio 1 consists
of firms with the lowest dividend-price ratios, portfolio 10 with the highest). In Panel B, firms in
historical data are sorted into deciles based on their book-to-market ratio. Returns are calculated
                                                                                               √
on a monthly basis and annualized (multiplied by 12 in the case of means and intercepts and 12
in the case of standard deviations). Data are monthly from 1952 to 2004. In both panels, Ri − R1π
refers to the return on the ith portfolio in excess of the return on the short-term nominal bond,
where both returns are measured in real terms. Intercepts (αi ) and slope coefficients (βi ) are
from OLS time-series regressions of excess portfolio returns on the excess market return. Means,
intercepts, and standard deviations are reported in percentage terms.




                                                 53
                          Table 11: Cross-correlation of state variables

                                        Yield spread   CP factor Value spread
                                                     Panel A: Model
                 Price-dividend ratio       -0.47         -0.73            0.86
                 Yield spread                             0.80          -0.10
                 CP factor                                              -0.32
                                             Panel B: Data from 1952–2004
                 Price-dividend ratio       0.17          0.03             0.70
                 Yield spread                             0.69             0.03
                 CP factor                                              -0.14
                                             Panel C: Data from 1964–2004
                 Price-dividend ratio       0.18          -0.14            0.78
                 Yield spread                             0.65             0.03
                 CP factor                                              -0.17

Notes: The table reports correlations between the log price-dividend ratio on the market portfolio,
the spread between the 5-year yield and the 3-month yield on nominal bonds (the yield spread),
the linear combination of forward rates constructed to best predict average holding period returns
on bonds (the CP factor), and the value spread. In the model, the value spread is defined as the
log dividend-price ratio of the value portfolio minus the log dividend-price ratio of the growth
portfolio. In the data, the value spread is defined as the log book-to-market ratio of the value
portfolio minus the log book-to-market ratio of the growth portfolio. Data are monthly.




                                                54
                          Table 12: Cross-correlation of excess returns

                                         Bond return      V–G return
                                                Panel A: Model
                        Market return        0.83            -0.44
                        Bond return                          -0.28
                                         Panel B: Data from 1952–2004
                        Market return        0.15            -0.33
                        Bond return                           0.15
                                         Panel C: Data from 1964–2004
                        Market return        0.23            -0.47
                        Bond return                           0.20

Notes: The table reports correlations between three continuously compounded annual excess re-
turns: the return on the market portfolio in excess of the return on the short-term nominal bond,
the return on the nominal five-year zero-coupon bond in excess of the short-term nominal bond,
and the return on the value portfolio in excess of the return on the growth portfolio. Data are
monthly.




                                               55
               Table 13: Long-horizon regressions of returns on the price-dividend ratio

                          Market return                     Bond return            V–G return
     Horizon               1              5                 1        5             1         5
                                                       Panel A: Model
        β1               -0.14          -0.50              -0.06    -0.20       -0.08      -0.31
       R2                [0.07]         [0.23]          [0.09]     [0.22]       [0.15]     [0.19]
                                                 Panel B: Data from 1952-2004
        β1               -0.11          -0.40              0.02     0.06        0.02        0.01
      t-stat            (-1.99)     (-3.37)            (0.89)      (1.02)       (0.40)     (0.18)
       R2                [0.07]         [0.17]          [0.01]     [0.02]       [0.01]     [0.00]
                                                 Panel C: Data from 1964-2004
        β1               -0.08          -0.28              0.02     0.05        0.02       -0.05
      t-stat            (-1.30)     (-2.42)            (0.73)      (0.69)       (0.32)     (-0.52)
       R2                [0.04]         [0.09]          [0.01]     [0.01]       [0.00]     [0.01]

Notes: The table reports regressions
                                  H
                                  X
                                         e
                                        rt+i = β0 + β1 (pm
                                                         t − dt ) + error,
                                  i=1

       e
where rt+1 is either the excess return on the market portfolio, the excess return on the 5-year
nominal zero-coupon bond, or the return on the strategy that is long the value portfolio and short
the growth portfolio. Returns are measured over horizons of one year and five years. The right
hand side variable is the lagged price-dividend ratio on the market. For each model regression,
the table reports OLS estimates of the regressors and R2 -statistics (in brackets). For each data
regression, the table reports OLS estimates of the regressors, Newey-West (1987) corrected t-
statistics (in parentheses), and R2 -statistics (in brackets). Data are monthly.




                                                      56
                Table 14: Long-horizon regressions of returns on the yield spread

                        Market return                    Bond return           V–G return
     Horizon             1             5                 1         5           1         5
                                                      Panel A: Model
        β1              3.15      12.00               1.42        5.35       1.87      7.01
        R2             [0.07]     [0.25]             [0.11]      [0.30]      [0.14]    [0.18]
                                              Panel B: Data from 1952-2004
        β1              4.15      12.68               2.48        1.66       2.30      -4.82
       t-stat          (1.78)     (3.04)             (3.56)      (0.72)      (1.33)   (-1.76)
        R2             [0.04]     [0.10]             [0.13]      [0.01]      [0.02]    [0.04]
                                              Panel C: Data from 1964-2004
        β1              3.79      13.21               2.71        1.90       1.85      -5.52
       t-stat          (1.60)     (2.93)             (3.91)      (0.82)      (1.02)   (-2.04)
        R2             [0.04]     [0.14]             [0.16]      [0.01]      [0.02]    [0.06]

Notes: The table reports regressions
                                H
                                X
                                       e               $     $
                                      rt+i = β0 + β1 (y5t − y1t ) + error
                                i=1

       e
where rt+1 is either the excess return on the market portfolio, the excess return on the 5-year
nominal zero-coupon bond, or the return on the strategy that is long the value portfolio and short
the growth portfolio. Returns are measured over horizons of one year and five years. The right
hand side variable is the lagged spread between the yield on the five-year nominal zero-coupon
bond and the yield on the three-month zero-coupon bond. For each model regression, the table
reports OLS estimates of the regressors and R2 -statistics (in brackets). For each data regression,
the table reports OLS estimates of the regressors, Newey-West (1987) corrected t-statistics (in
parentheses), and R2 -statistics (in brackets). Data are monthly.




                                                    57
    Table 15: Long-horizon regressions of returns on the linear combination of forward rates

                        Market return                    Bond return          V–G return
     Horizon             1          5                    1          5         1          5
                                                      Panel A: Model
        β1              3.80      14.07               1.67        6.18      2.26       8.67
        R2             [0.11]     [0.37]             [0.17]      [0.43]     [0.23]     [0.30]
                                             Panel B: Data from 1952-2004
        β1              1.11       2.80               1.46        2.58      0.94       -0.24
       t-stat          (1.15)     (1.44)             (4.79)      (3.70)     (1.66)    (-0.21)
        R2             [0.02]     [0.03]             [0.24]      [0.14]     [0.02]     [0.00]
                                             Panel C: Data from 1964-2004
        β1              1.53       4.91               1.47        2.31      0.67       -0.85
       t-stat          (1.91)     (4.55)             (7.70)      (4.68)     (1.25)    (-0.94)
        R2             [0.05]     [0.15]             [0.34]      [0.16]     [0.02]     [0.01]

Notes: The table reports regressions
                                  H
                                  X
                                          e
                                         rt+i = β0 + β1 θ 0 ft + error
                                   i=1

       e
where rt+1 is either the excess return on the market portfolio, the excess return on the 5-year
nominal zero-coupon bond, or the return on the strategy that is long the value portfolio and short
the growth portfolio. Returns are measured over horizons of one year and five years. The right
hand side variable is a lagged linear combination of forward rates on nominal bonds, constructed
as in Cochrane and Piazzesi (2005). For each model regression, the table reports OLS estimates
of the regressors and R2 -statistics (in brackets). For each data regression, the table reports OLS
estimates of the regressors, Newey-West (1987) corrected t-statistics (in parentheses), and R2 -
statistics (in brackets). Data are monthly.




                                                    58
                Table 16: Long-horizon regressions of returns on the value spread

                         Market return                        Bond return          V–G return
     Horizon              1                5                  1        5           1        5
                                                        Panel A: Model
        β1              -0.20            -0.75              -0.07     -0.24      -0.12    -0.46
        R2              [0.02]           [0.06]             [0.02]   [0.04]      [0.04]   [0.05]
                                                  Panel B: Data from 1952-2004
        β1              -0.25            -0.63              0.05      0.14       0.23     0.62
      t-stat           (-2.07)          (-2.15)             (1.04)   (0.74)      (2.05)   (3.61)
        R2              [0.05]           [0.07]             [0.02]   [0.02]      [0.09]   [0.17]
                                                  Panel C: Data from 1964-2004
        β1              -0.27            -0.86              0.06      0.22       0.22     0.59
      t-stat           (-2.45)          (-2.95)             (1.18)   (1.19)      (1.77)   (3.16)
        R2              [0.08]           [0.14]             [0.02]   [0.05]      [0.09]   [0.15]

Notes: The table reports regressions
                                H
                                X
                                        e
                                       rt+i = β0 + β1 (value spread)t + error
                                 i=1

       e
where rt+1 is either the excess return on the market portfolio, the excess return on the 5-year
nominal zero-coupon bond, or the return on the strategy that is long the value portfolio and
short the growth portfolio. Returns are measured over horizons of one year and five years. The
right hand side variable is the value spread, constructed as the log dividend-price ratio of the
value portfolio minus the log dividend-price ratio of the growth portfolio in the model and as in
Cohen, Polk, and Vuolteenaho (2003) in the data. For each model regression, the table reports
OLS estimates of the regressors and R2 -statistics (in brackets). For each data regression, the table
reports OLS estimates of the regressors, Newey-West (1987) corrected t-statistics (in parentheses),
and R2 -statistics (in brackets). Data are monthly.




                                                       59
                                                  Figure 1: Model Solution


                    0                       eq                                  0
                                            real bd
                −0.2                        nom bd                            −0.2




                                                                   Bq(1−φq)
     Br(1−φr)




                −0.4                                                          −0.4

                −0.6                                                          −0.6

                −0.8                                                          −0.8

                   −1                                                          −1

                         0   10      20      30       40                             0        10      20      30   40
                              maturity (years)                                                 maturity (years)

                                                                                         −3
                                                                                     x 10
                                                                                0
                    1
                                                                              −0.2
                   0.8
                                                                              −0.4
        Bz(1−φz)




                                                                   Bx(1−φx)



                   0.6
                                                                              −0.6
                   0.4                                                        −0.8

                   0.2                                                         −1

                    0                                                         −1.2

                         0   10      20      30       40                             0        10      20      30   40
                              maturity (years)                                                 maturity (years)


Notes: Solutions to Brn , the sensitivity of prices to the real riskfree rate (top left); to Bqn , the
sensitivity of prices to expected inflation (top right); to Bzn , the sensitivity of prices to expected
dividend growth (bottom left); and to Bxn , the sensitivity of prices to the price of risk variable.
Dotted lines denote the solutions for zero-coupon equity prices expressed in real terms, dashed-
dotted lines denote the solutions for real bond prices expressed in real terms, dashed lines denote
the solutions for nominal bond prices expressed in nominal terms. The solutions are scaled by
the persistence φ of the variables. The solution for Br is identical for all three asset classes. The
solution for Bq is identical for equities and real bonds and equal to zero. The solution for Bz is
identical for real and nominal bonds and equal to zero.


                                                            60
                            Figure 2: Yields on Zero-Coupon Real Bonds

                   −3
                x 10                Panel A:Varying q

           10
            5                                                                        q=−2sd
     yrn




            0                                                                        q=+2sd
           −5
            0           5    10     15     20        25    30     35      40
                   −3
                x 10               Panel B:Varying rf

           10
            5                                                                     rf =−2sd
     yrn




            0                                                                     rf =+2sd
           −5
            0               10            20              30            40
                   −3
                x 10               Panel C:Varying x

           10
            5                                                                       x =−2sd
     yrn




            0                                                                       x =+2sd
           −5
            0               10             20             30             40
                                    maturity (years)


Notes: Panel A shows quarterly yields on real bonds as a function of maturity when the state
variables are equal to their long-run mean (solid line), and when expected inflation qt is equal to
the long-run mean plus (dashed-dotted line) or minus (dotted line) two unconditional quarterly
standard deviations. All other state variables are kept at their long-run mean. Panel B shows
analogous results when the real riskfree rate rtf is varied by plus or minus two unconditional
quarterly standard deviations. Panel C shows analogous results when the price-of-risk variable xt
is varied by plus or minus two unconditional quarterly standard deviations.




                                                61
                          Figure 3: Yields on Zero-Coupon Nominal Bonds

                                     Panel A:Varying q
          0.03

          0.02                                                                        q=−2sd
     $
     yn




                                                                                      q=+2sd
          0.01

              0       5       10     15     20        25    30      35     40
                                                      f
                                   Panel B:Varying r
          0.03

          0.02                                                                     rf =−2sd
     $
     yn




                                                                                   rf =+2sd
          0.01

              0              10            20              30            40
                                    Panel C:Varying x
          0.03

          0.02                                                                       x =−2sd
     $
     yn




                                                                                     x =+2sd
          0.01

              0               10            20             30              40
                                     maturity (years)


Notes: Panel A shows quarterly nominal yields on nominal bonds as a function of maturity when
the state variables are equal to their long-run mean (solid line), and when expected inflation qt
is equal to the long-run mean plus (dashed-dotted line) or minus (dotted line) two unconditional
quarterly standard deviations. All other state variables are kept at their long-run mean. Panel B
shows analogous results when the real riskfree rate rtf is varied by plus or minus two unconditional
quarterly standard deviations. Panel C shows analogous results when the price-of-risk variable xt
is varied by plus or minus two unconditional quarterly standard deviations.




                                                 62
                  Figure 4: Ratios of Prices to Aggregate Dividends for Zero-Coupon Equity

                                        Panel A:Varying z
                   0
     log(Pdn/D)




                  −1                                                                   z=−2sd
                                                                                       z=+2sd
                  −2

                   0      5      10     15      20        25    30    35     40
                                       Panel B:Varying rf
                   0
     log(Pdn/D)




                  −1                                                                 rf =−2sd
                                                                                     rf =+2sd
                  −2

                   0            10             20              30          40
                                        Panel C:Varying x
                   0
     log(Pdn/D)




                  −1                                                                   x =−2sd
                                                                                       x =+2sd
                  −2

                   0             10             20             30            40
                                         maturity (years)


Notes: Panel A shows the log of ratios of zero-coupon equity prices to the aggregate dividend
as a function of maturity when the state variables are equal to their long-run mean (solid line),
and when expected dividend growth zt is equal to the long-run mean plus (dashed-dotted line)
or minus (dotted line) two unconditional quarterly standard deviations. All other state variables
are kept at their long-run mean. Panel B shows analogous results when the real riskfree rate
rtf is varied by plus or minus two unconditional quarterly standard deviations. Panel C shows
analogous results when the price-of-risk variable xt is varied by plus or minus two unconditional
quarterly standard deviations.



                                                     63
                    Figure 5: Decomposition of Coefficients from Long-Rate Regressions

                −4                         Panel A: Cov(r         ,∆ d      )
            x 10                                              n,t+1       t+1
        6

        4

        2

        0
            0        0.5      1      1.5      2         2.5           3         3.5      4   4.5        5

                4                    Panel B: Cov(x,yn − y1)/Var(yn − y1)
            x 10
       15
                                                                                              real
       10                                                                                     nominal

        5

        0
            0        0.5      1      1.5      2         2.5           3         3.5      4   4.5        5

                                                    Panel C: βn
        1



        0



       −1
            0        0.5      1      1.5      2         2.5           3         3.5      4   4.5        5
                                                  maturity (years)


Notes: Panel A shows the covariance between the return on an n-period bond and fundamentals as
a function of maturity. Panel B shows the coefficient from a regression of the price-of-risk variable
xt on the yield spread as a function of the yield maturity. Panel C shows the coefficient βn from
the regression
                                                          1
                             yn−1,t+1 − ynt = αn + βn        (ynt − y1t ) + error,
                                                         n−1
as a function of maturity. Results are shown for real bonds (solid lines) and nominal bonds (dotted
lines). The covariance between returns and fundamentals, the coefficient from a regression of xt
on the yield spread and βn are related by the equation

                                                                Cov(xt , ynt − y1t )
                              βn = 1 − Cov(rn,t+1 , ∆dt+1 )                          .
                                                                Var(yn−1,t+1 − y1t )

The results are from data simulated from the model at a quarterly frequency.

                                                       64
                                       Figure 6: Regressions of Excess Bond Returns on Forward Rates

                                  60
                                                                                                   2−year
                                  50                                                               3−year
                                                                                                   4−year
                                  40                                                               5−year

                                  30
        Regression Coefficient




                                  20

                                  10

                                   0

                                 −10

                                 −20

                                 −30

                                 −40
                                        1               2                3                4            5
                                                            Forward Rate Maturity (Years)


Notes: Annual returns on 2, 3, 4 and 5-year nominal bonds, in excess of the return on the 1-year
bond, are regressed on the 1, 3 and 5-year forward rates in data simulated from the model. The
figure shows the resulting regression coefficients as a function of the forward rate maturity.




                                                                      65
