NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSTRUMENTS OF DEVELOPMENT:
RANDOMIZATION IN THE TROPICS, AND THE SEARCH FOR THE ELUSIVE KEYS TO ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Angus S. Deaton
Working Paper 14690
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14690

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2009

The Keynes Lecture, British Academy, October 9th, 2008. I am grateful to Abhijit Banerjee, Tim Besley,
Anne Case, Hank Farber, Bill Easterly, Bo Honoré, Michael Kremer, David Lee, Chris Paxson, Sam
Schulhofer-Wohl, Burt Singer, Jesse Rothstein, and John Worrall for helpful discussions in the preparation
of this paper. For comments on a draft, I would like to thank Tim Besley, Richard Blundell, David
Card, Winston Lin, John List, Costas Meghir, David McKenzie, Burt Singer, Alessandro Tarozzi,
Gerard van den Berg, Eric Verhoogen and especially Esther Duflo. I also like to acknowledge a particular
intellectual debt to Nancy Cartwright, who has discussed these issues patiently with me for several
years, whose own work on causality has greatly influenced me, and who pointed me towards other
important work; to Jim Heckman, who has long thought deeply about the issues in this lecture, and
many of whose views are recounted here; and to David Freedman, whose recent death has deprived
the world of one of its greatest statisticians, and who consistently and effectively fought against the
(mis)use of technique as a substitute for substance and thought. None of which removes the need for
the usual disclaimer, that the views expressed here are entirely my own. I acknowledge financial support
from NIA through grant P01 AG05842–14 to the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Angus S. Deaton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Instruments of development: Randomization in the tropics, and the search for the elusive keys
to economic development
Angus S. Deaton
NBER Working Paper No. 14690
January 2009, Revised March 2009
JEL No. C21,C31,C9,C93,O11,O12,O19,O22
ABSTRACT
There is currently much debate about the effectiveness of foreign aid and about what kind of projects
can engender economic development. There is skepticism about the ability of econometric analysis
to resolve these issues, or of development agencies to learn from their own experience. In response,
there is movement in development economics towards the use of randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
to accumulate credible knowledge of what works, without over-reliance on questionable theory or
statistical methods. When RCTs are not possible, this movement advocates quasi-randomization through
instrumental variable (IV) techniques or natural experiments. I argue that many of these applications
are unlikely to recover quantities that are useful for policy or understanding: two key issues are the
misunderstanding of exogeneity, and the handling of heterogeneity. I illustrate from the literature on
aid and growth. Actual randomization faces similar problems as quasi-randomization, notwithstanding
rhetoric to the contrary. I argue that experiments have no special ability to produce more credible knowledge
than other methods, and that actual experiments are frequently subject to practical problems that undermine
any claims to statistical or epistemic superiority. I illustrate using prominent experiments in development.
As with IV methods, RCT-based evaluation of projects is unlikely to lead to scientific progress in
the understanding of economic development. I welcome recent trends in development experimentation
away from the evaluation of projects and towards the evaluation of theoretical mechanisms.

Angus S. Deaton
328 Wallace Hall
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
The effectiveness of development assistance is a topic of great public interest. Much of
the public debate among non-economists takes it for granted that, if the funds were made
available, development would follow, Pogge (2005), Singer (2004), and at least some
economists agree, Sachs (2005, 2008). Others, most notably Easterly (2006), are deeply
skeptical, a position that has been forcefully argued at least since Bauer (1971, 1981).
Few academic economists or political scientists agree with Sachs’ views, but there is a
wide range of intermediate positions, recently well assembled by Easterly (2008). The
debate runs the gamut from the macro—can foreign assistance raise growth rates and
eliminate poverty?—to the micro—what sorts of projects are likely to be effective?—
should aid focus on electricity and roads, or on the provision of schools and clinics or
vaccination campaigns? In this lecture, I shall be concerned with both the macro and
micro kinds of assistance. I shall have very little to say about what actually works and
what does not; but it is clear from the literature that we do not know. Instead, my main
concern is with how we should go about finding out whether and how assistance works
and with methods for gathering evidence and learning from it in a scientific and
cumulative way. I am not an econometrician, but I believe that econometric
methodology needs to be assessed, not only by methodologists, but by those who are
concerned with the substance of the issue. Only they (we) are in a position to tell when
something has gone wrong with the application of econometric methods, not because
they are incorrect given their assumptions, but because their assumptions do not apply, or
because they are incorrectly conceived for the problem at hand. Or at least that is my
excuse for meddling in these matters.

1

Any analysis of the extent to which foreign aid has increased economic growth in
recipient countries immediately confronts the familiar problem of simultaneous causality;
the effect of aid on growth, if any, will be disguised by effects running in the opposite
direction, from poor economic performance to compensatory or humanitarian aid. It is
not immediately obvious how to disentangle these effects, and some have argued that the
question is not answerable and that econometric studies of it should be abandoned.
Certainly, the econometric studies that use international evidence to examine aid
effectiveness currently have low professional status. Yet it cannot be right to give up on
the issue. There is no general or public understanding that nothing can be said, and to
give up the econometric analysis is simply to abandon precise statements for loose and
unconstrained histories of episodes selected to support the position of the speaker.
The analysis of aid effectiveness typically uses cross-country growth regressions with
the simultaneity between aid and growth dealt with using instrumental variable methods.
I shall argue in the next section that there has been a good deal of misunderstanding in
the literature about the use of instrumental variables. Econometric analysis has changed
its focus over the years, away from the analysis of models derived from theory towards
much looser specifications that are statistical representations of program evaluation. With
this shift, instrumental variables have moved from being solutions to a well-defined
problem of inference to being devices that induce quasi-randomization. Old and new
understandings of instruments co-exist, leading to errors, misunderstandings and
confusion, as well as unfortunate and unnecessary rhetorical barriers between disciplines
working on the same problems. These abuses of technique have contributed to a general
skepticism about the ability of econometric analysis to answer these big questions.

2

A similar state of affairs exists in the microeconomic area, in the analysis of the
effectiveness of individual programs and projects, such as the construction of
infrastructure—dams, roads, water supply, electricity—and in the delivery of services—
for example for education, health or policing. There is great frustration with aid
organizations, particularly the World Bank, for allegedly failing to learn from its projects
and to build up a systematic catalog of what works and what does not. In addition, some
of the skepticism about macro econometrics extends to micro econometrics, so that there
has been a movement away from such methods and towards randomized controlled trials.
According to Esther Duflo, one of the leaders of the new movement in development,
“Creating a culture in which rigorous randomized evaluations are promoted, encouraged,
and financed has the potential to revolutionize social policy during the 21st century, just
as randomized trials revolutionized medicine during the 20th.” This quote is from a 2004
Lancet editorial headed “The World Bank is finally embracing science.”
In Section 4 of this paper, I shall argue that in ideal circumstances, randomized
evaluations of projects are useful for obtaining a convincing estimate of the average
effect of a program or project. The price for this success is a focus that is too narrow to
tell us “what works” in development, to design policy, or to advance scientific knowledge
about development processes. Project evaluation using randomized controlled trials is
unlikely to discover the elusive keys to development, nor to be the basis for a cumulative
research program that might progressively lead to a better understanding of development.
This argument applies a fortiori to instrumental variables strategies that are aimed at
generating quasi-experiments; the value of econometric methods cannot be assessed by
how closely they approximate randomized controlled trials. Following Cartwright

3

(2007a, b), I argue that evidence from randomized controlled trials has no special
priority. Randomization is not a gold standard because “there is no gold standard,”
Cartwright (2007a.) Randomized controlled trials cannot automatically trump other
evidence, they do not occupy any special place in some hierarchy of evidence, nor does it
make sense to refer to them as “hard” while other methods are “soft”. These rhetorical
devices are just that; a metaphor is not an argument.
More positively, I shall argue that the analysis of projects needs to be refocused
towards the investigation of potentially generalizable mechanisms that explain why and
in what contexts projects can be expected to work. The best of the experimental work in
development economics already does so, because its practitioners are too talented to be
bound by their own methodological prescriptions. Yet there would be much to be said for
doing so more openly. I concur with the general message in Pawson and Tilley (1997),
who argue that thirty years of project evaluation in sociology, education and criminology
was largely unsuccessful because it focused on whether projects work instead of on why
they work. In economics, warnings along the same lines have been repeatedly given by
James Heckman, see particularly Heckman (1992) and Heckman and Smith (1995), and
much of what I have to say is a recapitulation of his arguments.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out some econometric preliminaries
concerning instrumental variables and the vexed question of exogeneity. Section 3 is
about aid and growth. Section 4 is about randomized controlled trials. Section 5 is about
using empirical evidence and where we should go next.

4

2. Instruments, identification, and the meaning of exogeneity
It is useful to begin with a simple and familiar econometric model that I can use to
illustrate the differences between different flavors of econometric practice; this has
nothing to do with economic development, but has the virtue of simplicity and is easy to
contrast with the development practice that I wish to discuss. In contrast to the models
that I will discuss later, I think of this as a model in the spirit of the Cowles Foundation.
It is the simplest possible Keynesian macroeconomic model of national income
determination taken from once-standard econometrics textbooks. There are two equations
which together comprise a complete macroeconomic system. The first equation is a
consumption function, in which aggregate consumption is a linear function of aggregate
national income, while the second is the national income accounting identity that says
that income is the sum of consumption and investment. I write the system in standard
notation as

C = α + βY + u

(1)

Y ≡C+I

(2)

According to (1), consumers choose the level of aggregate consumption with reference to
their income, while in (2), investment is set by the “animal spirits” of entrepreneurs in a
way that is outside of the model. No modern macroeconomist would take this model
seriously, though the simple consumption function is clearly an ancestor of more
satisfactory and complete modern formulations; in particular, we can think of it (or at
least its descendents) as being derived from a coherent model of intertemporal choice.
Similarly, modern versions would postulate some theory for what determines investment

5

I; here it is simply taken as given, and assumed to be orthogonal to the consumption
disturbance u.
In this model, consumption and income are simultaneously determined so that, in
particular, a stochastic realization of u—consumers displaying animal spirits of their
own—will affect not only C, but also Y through equation (2), so that there is a positive
correlation between C and Y. As a result, ordinary least squares estimation of (1) will
lead to upwardly biased and inconsistent estimates of the parameter β .
This simultaneity problem can be dealt with in a number of ways. One is to solve (1)
and (2), to get the reduced form equations
C=

α
1− β

Y=

α
1− β

+

β
1− β

+

I+

u
1− β

I
u
+
1− β 1− β

(3)

(4)

Either of these equations can be consistently estimated by OLS, and it is easy to show
that the same estimates of α and β will be obtained from either one. An alternative
method of estimation is to focus on the consumption function (1), and to use our
knowledge of (2) to note that investment can be used as an instrumental variable (IV) for
income. In the IV regression, there is a “first stage” regression in which income is
regressed on investment; this is identical to equation (4), which is part of the reduced
form. In the second stage, consumption is regressed on the predicted value of income
from (4). In this simple case, the IV estimate of β is identical to the estimate from the
reduced form. This simple model may not be a very good model, but it is a model, if only
a primitive one.

6

I now leap forward sixty years, and consider an apparently similar set up, again using
an absurdly simple specification. The World Bank (let us imagine) is interested in
whether to advise the government of China to build more railway stations. The Bank
economists write down an econometric model in which the poverty head count ratio in
city c is taken to be a linear function of an indicator R of whether or not the city has a
railway station,
Pc = γ + θ Rc + vc

(5)

where θ (I hesitate to call it a parameter) indicates the effect—presumably negative—of
infrastructure (here a railway station) on poverty. While we cannot expect to get useful
estimates of θ from OLS estimation of (5)—railway stations may be built to serve more
prosperous cities, they are rarely built in deserts where there are no people, or there may
be “third factors” that influence both—this is seen as a “technical problem” for which
there is a wide range of econometric treatments including, of course, instrumental
variables.
We no longer have the reduced form of the previous model to guide us but if we can
find an instrument Z that is correlated with whether a town has a railway station, but
uncorrelated with v, we can do the same calculations and obtain a consistent estimate. For
the record, I write this equation
Rc = φ + ϕ Z c + η c

(6)

Good candidates for Z might be indicators of whether the city has been designated by the
Government of China as belonging to a special “infrastructure development area,” or
perhaps an earthquake that conveniently destroyed a selection of railway stations, or even

7

the existence of river confluence near the city, since rivers were an early source of power,
and railways served the power-based industries. I am making fun, but not much.
My main argument is that the two econometric structures, in spite of their
resemblance and the fact that IV techniques can be used for both, are in fact quite
different. In particular, the IV procedures that work for the effect of national income on
consumption are unlikely to give useful results for the effect of railway stations on
poverty. To explain the differences, I begin with the language. In the original example,
consumption and income are treated symmetrically, and appear as such in the reduced
form equations (3) and (4). In contemporary examples, such as the railways, there is no
symmetry. Instead, we have a “main” equation (5), which used to be the “structural”
equation (1). We also have a “first-stage” equation, which is the regression of railway
stations on the instrument, which was previously just one of the equations in the reduced
form. The reduced form, of course, was typically more completely specified than the
first-stage regression, since it was derived from a notionally complete model of the
system. The now rarely considered regression of the variable of interest on the
instrument, here of poverty on earthquakes or on river confluences, is nowadays referred
to as the reduced form, although it was originally one equation of a multiple equation
reduced form within which it had no special significance. These language shifts
sometimes cause confusion, but they are not the most important differences between the
two systems.
The crucial difference is that the relationship between railways and poverty is not a
model at all, unlike the consumption model which embodied a(n admittedly crude) theory
of income determination. While it is clearly possible that the construction of a railway

8

station will reduce poverty, there are many possible mechanisms, some of which will
work in one context and not in another. In consequence θ is unlikely to be constant over
different cities, nor can its variation be usefully thought of as random variation that is
uncorrelated with anything else of interest. Instead, it is precisely the variation in θ that
encapsulates the poverty reduction mechanisms that ought to be the main objects of our
enquiry. Instead, the equation of interest is thought of as a representation of something
more akin to an experiment or a biomedical trial, in which some cities get “treated” with
a station, and some do not. The role of econometric analysis is not, as in the Cowles
example, to estimate and investigate a casual model, but “to create an analogy, perhaps
forced, between an observational study and an experiment,” Freedman (2006, 691).
One immediate task is to recognize and somehow deal with the variation in θ , which
is typically referred to as the “heterogeneity problem” in the literature. The obvious way
is to define a parameter of interest in a way that corresponds to something we want to
know for policy evaluation—perhaps the average effect on poverty over some group of
cities—and then devise an appropriate estimation strategy. However, this step is often
skipped in practice, perhaps because of a mistaken belief that (5) is a structural equation
in which θ is a constant, so that the analysis can go immediately to the choice of
instrument Z, over which a great deal of imagination is often exercised. As in the
traditional model, the instrument is selected to satisfy two criteria, that it be correlated
with Rc and uncorrelated with vc . Of course, if heterogeneity is indeed present, the
probability limit of the IV estimator will in general depend on the choice of instrument,
Heckman (1997). Such a procedure is the opposite of standard statistical practice, in
which a parameter of interest is defined first, followed by an estimator that delivers that

9

parameter. Instead, we have a procedure in which the choice of the instrument, which is
guided by criteria designed for a different situation, is implicitly allowed to determine the
parameter of interest. This goes beyond the old story of looking an object where the light
is strong enough to see; rather, we have control over the light, but choose to let it fall
where it may, and then proclaim that whatever it illuminates is what we were looking for
all along.
Recent econometric analysis has given us a more precise characterization of what we
can expect from such a method. In the railway example, where the instrument is the
designation of a city as belonging to the “special infrastructure zone,” the probability
limit of the IV estimator is the average of poverty reduction effects over those cities who
were induced to construct a railway station by being so designated. This averages is
known as the “local average treatment effect” (LATE), and its recovery by IV estimation
requires a number of non-trivial conditions including, for example, that no cities who
would have constructed a railway station are perverse enough to be actually deterred
from doing so by the positive designation, see Angrist and Imbens (1994), who
established the LATE theorem. The LATE may, or may not, be a parameter of interest to
the World Bank or the Chinese government and in general, there is no reason to suppose
that it will be. For example, the parameter estimated will typically not be the average
poverty reduction effect over the designated cities, nor the average effect over all cities.
I find it hard to make any sense of the LATE. We are unlikely to learn much about
the processes at work if we refuse to say anything about what determines θ ;
heterogeneity is not a technical problem calling for an econometric solution, but is a
reflection of the fact that we have not started on our proper business, which is trying to

10

understand what is going on. Of course, if we are as skeptical of the ability of economic
theory to deliver useful models as are many applied economists today, the ability to avoid
modeling can be seen as an advantage, though it should not be a surprise when such an
approach provides answers that are hard to interpret.
There is a related issue that bedevils a good deal of contemporary applied work,
which is the understanding of exogeneity, a word that I have so far avoided. Suppose, for
the moment, that the effect of railway stations on poverty is the same in all cities, and we
are looking for an instrument, which is required to be exogenous in order to consistently
estimate θ . According to Merriam-Webster’s dictionary, “exogenous” means “caused by
factors or an agent from outside the organism or system,” and this common usage is often
employed in applied work. However, the consistency of IV estimation requires that the
instrument be orthogonal to the error term v in the equation of interest, which is not
implied by the Merriam-Webster definition, see Leamer (1985, p. 260). Heckman (2000)
suggests using the term “external” (which he traces back to Wright and Frisch in the
1930s) for the Merriam-Webster definition, for variables whose values are not set or
caused by the variables in the model (according to this, consumption and investment are
“internal” variables, and investment an “external” variable), and keeping “exogenous” for
the orthogonality condition that is required for consistent estimation in this instrumental
variable context. The terms are hardly standard, but I adopt them here because I need to
make the distinction. The main issue, however, is not the terminology, but that the two
concepts be kept distinct, so that we can see when the argument being offered is a
justification for externality when what is required is exogeneity. An instrument that is

11

external, but not exogeneous, will not yield consistent estimates of the parameter of
interest, even when that parameter is constant.
Failure to separate externality and endogeneity has caused, and continues to cause,
endless confusion in the applied development (and other) literatures. Natural or
geographic variables—distance from the equator (as an instrument for per capita GDP in
explaining religiosity, McCleary and Barro, 2006), rivers (as an instrument for the
number of school districts in explaining educational outcomes, Hoxby, 2000), land
gradient (as an instrument for dam construction in explaining poverty, Duflo and Pande,
2007), month of birth as an instrument for years of schooling in an earnings regression,
Angrist and Krueger, 1991, or rainfall as an instrument for economic growth in
explaining civil war, Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti, 2004, and the examples could be
multiplied ad infinitum)—are not affected by the variables being explained, and are
clearly external. So are historical variables—the mortality of colonial settlers is not
influenced by current institutional arrangements in ex-colonial countries, Acemoglu,
Johnson, Robinson (2001), nor does the country’s growth rate today influence which
country they were colonized by, Barro 1998. Whether any of these instruments is
exogenous depends on the nature of the equation of interest, and is not guaranteed by its
externality. And because exogeneity is an identifying assumption that must be made prior

to analysis of the data, no empirical tests are possible. This does not prevent many
attempts in the literature, often by misinterpreting a satisfactory overidentification test as
evidence for valid identification. Such tests can tell us whether estimates change when we
select different subsets from a set of possible instruments. While the test is clearly

12

informative, acceptance is consistent with all of the instruments being invalid, while
failure is consistent with a subset being correct.
In my running example, earthquakes and rivers are external to the system, and are not
caused by poverty nor by the construction of railway stations, and the designation as an
infrastructure zone may also be determined by factors independent of poverty or
railways. But even earthquakes (or rivers) are not exogenous if they have an effect on
poverty other than through their destruction (or encouragement) of railway stations, as
will almost always be the case. The absence of simultaneity does not guarantee
exogeneity; exogeneity requires the absence of simultaneity, but is not implied by it.
Even random numbers—the ultimate external variables—may be endogenous, at least in
the presence of heterogeneity. Again, the example comes from Heckman’s (1997)
discussion of Angrist’s (1990) famous use of draft lottery numbers as an instrumental
variable in his analysis of the subsequent earnings of Vietnam veterans.
I can illustrate Heckman’s argument using the Chinese railways example with the
zone designation as instrument. Rewrite the equation of interest, (5), as
Pc = γ + θ Rc + wc = γ + θ Rc + {vc + (θ − θ ) Rc }

(7)

where wc is defined by the term in curly brackets, and θ is the mean of θ over the cities
that get the station so that the compound error term w has mean zero. Suppose the
designation as an infrastructure zone is Dc , which takes values 1 or 0, and that the
Chinese bureaucracy, persuaded by young development economists, decides to
randomize and sets the designation of cities by flipping a Yuan. For consistent estimation
of θ , we want the covariance of the instrument with the error to be zero. The covariance
is

13

E ( Dc wc ) = E[(θ − θ ) RD] = E[(θ − θ ) | D = 1, R = 1]P( D = 1, R = 1)

(8)

which will be zero if either (a) the average effect of building a railway station on poverty
among the cities induced to build one by the designation is the same as the average effect
among those who would have built one anyway, or (b) no city not designated builds a
railway station1. If (b) is not guaranteed by fiat, we cannot suppose that it will otherwise
hold, and we might reasonably hope that among the cities who build railway stations,
those induced to do so by the designation are those where there is the largest effect on
poverty, which violates (a). In the example of the Vietnam veterans, the instrument (the
draft lottery number) fails to be exogenous because the error term in the earnings
equation depends on each individual’s rate of return to schooling, and whether or not
each potential draftee accepted their assignment—their veteran’s status—depends on that
rate of return. In practice, most instruments are not random numbers, and the assumption
that the instrument is orthogonal to ν c , which is accepted in (8), will also have to be
defended.
The general lesson here is once again the ultimate futility of trying to avoid thinking
about how and why things work; if we do not do so, we are left with undifferentiated
heterogeneity that is likely to prevent consistent estimation of any parameter of interest.
One appropriate response is to specify exactly how cities respond to their designation, an
approach that leads to Heckman’s local instrumental variable methods, Heckman and
Vytlacil (1999, 2007), Heckman, Urzua and Vytlacil (2006). Similar questions are
pursued in van den Berg (2008).

1

I am grateful to Winston Lin for clarification on this point.

14

3. Instruments of development

The question of whether aid has helped economies grow faster is typically asked within
the framework of standard growth regressions. These regressions use data for many
countries over a period of years, usually from the Penn World Table, the current version
of which provides data on real per capita GDP and its components in purchasing power
dollars for more than 150 countries as far back as 1950. The model to be estimated has
the rate of growth of per capita GDP as the dependent variable, while the explanatory
variables include the lagged value of GDP per capita, the share of investment in GDP,
and measures of the educational level of the population, see for example Barro and Salai-Martin (1995, Chapter 12) for an overview. Other variables are often added, and my
main concern here is with one of these, external assistance (aid) as a fraction of GDP. A
typical specification can be written
Δ ln Yct +1 = β 0 + β1 ln Yct + β 2

I ct
+ β3 H ct + β 4 Z ct + θ Act + uct
Yct

(9)

where Y is per capita GDP, I is investment, H is a measure of human capital or education,
and A is the variable of interest, aid as a share of GDP. Z stands for whatever other
variables are included. The index c is for country and t for time. Growth is rarely
measured on a year to year basis—the data in the Penn World Table are not suitable for
annual analysis—so that growth may be measured over ten, twenty, or forty year
intervals. With around forty years of data, there are four, two, or one observation for each
country.
An immediate question is whether the growth equation (9) is a model-based Cowlestype equation, as in my national income example, or whether it is more akin to the
atheoretical analyses in my invented Chinese railway example. There are elements of

15

both here. If we ignore the Z and A variables in (9), the model can be thought of as a
Solow growth model, extended to add human capital to physical capital, see again Barro
and Sala-i-Martin, who derive their empirical specifications from the theory, and also
Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992), who extended the Solow model to include education.
However, the addition of the other variables, including aid, is typically less well justified.
In some cases, for example under the assumption that all aid is invested, it is possible to
calculate what effect we might expect aid to have, see Rajan and Subramanian (2005). If
we follow this route, (9) would not be useful—because aid is already included—and we
should instead investigate whether aid is indeed invested, and then infer the effectiveness
of aid from the effectiveness of investment. Even so, it presumably matters what kind of
investment is promoted by aid, and aid for roads, for dams, for vaccination programs, or
for humanitarian purposes after an earthquake are likely to have different effects on
subsequent growth. More broadly, one of the main issues of contention in the whole
debate is what aid actually does. Just to list a few of the possibilities, does aid increase
investment, does aid crowd out domestic investment, is aid stolen, or does aid create rentseeking that undercuts the long-run conditions for growth? Once all of these possibilities
are admitted, it is clear that the analysis of (9) is not a Cowles model at all, but is seen as
some sort of biomedical experiment in which different countries are “dosed” with
different amounts of aid, and we are trying to measure the average response. As in the
Chinese railways case, a regression such as (9) will not give us what we want, because
the doses of aid are not randomly administered to different countries, so our first task is
to find an instrumental variable that will generate quasi-randomness.

16

The most obvious problem with a regression of aid on growth is the simultaneous
feedback from growth to aid that is generated by humanitarian responses to economic
collapse or to natural or man-made disasters that engender economic collapse. More
generally, aid flows from rich countries to poor countries, and poor countries, by
definition, are those with poor records of economic growth. This feedback, from low
growth to high aid, will obscure, nullify, or reverse any positive effects of aid. Most of
the literature attempts to eliminate this feedback by using one or more instrumental
variables and, although they would not express it in these terms, the aim of the
instrumentation is to a restore a situation in which the pure effect of aid on growth can be
observed, as if in a randomized situation. How close we get to this ideal depends, of
course, on the choice of instrument.
Although there is some variation across studies, there is a standard set of instruments,
originally proposed by Boone (1996), which include the log of population size and
various country dummies, for example, a dummy for Egypt, or for francophone West
Africa. One or both of these instruments are used in almost all the papers in a large
subsequent literature, including Burnside and Dollar (2000), Hansen and Tarp (2000,
2001), Dalgaard and Hansen (2001), Guillamont and Chauvet (2001), Lensink and White
(2001), Easterly, Levine, and Roodman (2003), Dalgaard, Hansen, and Tarp (2004),
Clemens, Radelet, and Bhavani (2004), Rajan and Subramanian (2005), and Roodman
(2008). The rationale for population size is that larger countries get less aid per capita,
because the aid agencies allocate aid on a country basis, with less than full allowance for
population size. The rationale for what I shall refer to as the “Egypt instrument” is that
Egypt gets a great deal of American aid as part of the Camp David accords in which it

17

agreed to a partial rapprochement with Israel. The same argument applied to the
francophone countries, which receive additional aid from France because of their past
colonial status. By comparing these countries with countries not so favored, or by
comparing populous with less populous countries, we can observe a kind of variation in
the share of aid in GDP that is unaffected by the negative feedback from poor growth to
compensatory aid. In effect, we are using the variation across populations of different
sizes as a natural experiment to reveal the effects of aid.
If we examine the effects of aid on growth without any allowance for reverse
causality, for example by estimating equation (9) by ordinary least squares, the estimated
effect is typically negative. For example, Rajan and Subramanian (2005), in one of the
most careful recent studies, find that an increase in aid by one percent of GDP comes
with a reduction in the growth rate of one tenth of a percentage point a year. Easterly
(2005) paints with a broader brush, and provides many other (sometimes spectacular)
examples of negative associations between aid and growth. When instrumental variables
are used to eliminate the reverse causality, Rajan and Subramanian find a weak or zero
effect of aid, and contrast that finding with the robust positive effects of investment on
growth in specifications like (9). I should note although Rajan and Subramanian’s study
is an excellent one, it is certainly not without its critics, and as the authors note, there are
many difficult econometric problems beyond the choice of instruments, including how to
estimate dynamic models with country fixed effects on limited data, the choice of
countries and sample period, the type of aid that needs to be considered, and so on.
Indeed, it is those other issues that are the focus of most of the literature cited above. The
substance of this debate is far from over.

18

My main concern here is with the use of the instruments, what they tell us, and what
they might tell us. The first point is that neither the “Egypt” nor the population instrument
are plausibly exogenous; both are external—Camp David is not part of the model, nor
was it caused by Egypt’s economic growth, and similarly for population size—but
exogeneity would require that neither “Egypt” nor population size have any influence on
economic growth except through the effects on aid flows, which makes no sense at all.
We also need to recognize the heterogeneity in the aid responses, and try to think about
how the different instruments are implicitly choosing different averages, involving
different weightings of countries. Or we could stop right here, conclude that there are no
valid instruments, and that the aid to growth question is not answerable in this way. I
shall argue otherwise, but I should also note that similar challenges over the validity of
instruments have become routine in applied econometrics, leading to widespread
skepticism by some, while others press on undaunted in an ever more creative search for
exogeneity.
Yet consideration of the instruments is not without value, especially if we move away
from instrumental variable estimation, with the use of instruments seen as technical, not
substantive, and think about the reduced form which contains substantive information
about the relationship between growth and the instruments. For the case of population
size, we find that, conditional on the other variables, population size is unrelated to
growth, which is one of the reasons that the IV estimates of the effects of aid are small or
zero. This (partial) regression coefficient is a much simpler object than is the instrumental
variable estimate; under standard assumptions, it tells us how much faster large countries
grow than small countries, once the standard effects of the augmented Solow model have

19

been taken into account. Does this tell us anything about the effectiveness of aid? Not
directly, though it is surely useful to know that although large countries receive less per
capita aid in relation to per capita income, they have grown just as fast as countries that
have received more, once we take into account the amount that they invest, their levels of
education, and their starting level of GDP. But we would hardly conclude from this fact
alone that aid does not increase growth. Perhaps aid works less well in small countries, or
perhaps there is an offsetting positive effect of population size on economic growth. Both
are possible, and both are worth further investigation. More generally, such arguments
are susceptible to fruitful discussions, not only among economists, but also with other
social scientists and historians who study these questions, something that is typically
difficult with instrumental variable. Economists’ claims to methodological superiority
based on instrumental variables ring particularly hollow when it is economists themselves
who are often misled. My argument is that for both economists and non-economists, the
direct consideration of the reduced form is likely to generate productive lines of enquiry.
The case of the “Egypt” instrument is somewhat different. Once again the reduced
form is useful (Egypt doesn’t grow particularly fast in spite of all the aid it gets after
Camp David), though mostly for making it immediately clear that the comparison of
Egypt versus non-Egypt, or francophone versus non-francophone, is not a useful way of
assessing the effectiveness of aid on growth. Yet almost every paper in this literature
unquestioningly uses the Egypt dummy as an instrument.
I conclude this section with an example that helps bridge the gap between analyses of
the macro and analyses of the micro effects of aid. Many microeconomists agree that
instrumentation in cross-country regressions is unlikely to be useful, while claiming that

20

microeconomic analysis is capable of doing better. We may not be able to answer illposed questions about the macroeconomic effects of foreign assistance, but we can surely
do better on specific projects and programs. Banerjee and He (2008) have provided a list
of the sort of studies that they like and that they believe should be replicated more
widely. One of these, also endorsed by Duflo (2004), is a famous paper by Angrist and
Lavy (1999) on whether schoolchildren do better in smaller classes, a position frequently
endorsed by parents and teacher’s unions, but not always supported by empirical work.
The question is an important one for development assistance, because smaller class sizes
cost money, and are a potential use for foreign aid. Angrist and Lavy’s paper uses a
natural experiment, not a real one, and relies on IV estimation, so it provides a bridge
between the relatively weak natural experiments in this section, and the actual
randomized controlled trials in the next.
Angrist and Lavy’s study is about the allocation of children enrolled in a school into
classes. Many countries set their class sizes to conform to some version of Maimonides
Rule, which sets a maximum class size, beyond which additional teachers must be found.
In Israel, the maximum class size is set at 40. If there are less than 40 children enrolled,
they will all be in the same class. If there are 41, there will be two classes, one of 20, and
one of 21. If there are 81 or more children, the first two classes will be full, and more
must be set up. Angrist and Lavy’s Figure 1 plots actual class size and Maimonides rule
class size against the number of children enrolled; this graph starts off running along the
45-degree line, and then falls discontinuously to 20 when enrollment is 40, increasing
with slope of 0.5 to 80, falling to 27.7 (80 divided by 3) at 80, rising again with a slope of
0.25, and so on. They show that actual class-sizes, while not exactly conforming to the

21

rule, are strongly influenced by it, and exhibit the same saw-tooth pattern. They then plot
test scores against enrollment, and show that they display the opposite pattern, rising at
each of the discontinuities where class-size abruptly falls. This is a natural experiment,
with Maimonides rule inducing quasi-experimental variation, and generating a predicted
class size for each level of enrolment which serves as an instrumental variable in a
regression of test scores on class size. These IV estimates, unlike the OLS estimates,
show that children in smaller class sizes do better.
Angrist and Lavy’s paper, the creativity of its method, and the clarity and
convincingness of its result has set the standard for micro empirical work since it was
published, and it has had a far-reaching effect on subsequent empirical work in labor and
development economics. Yet there is a problem, which has become apparent over time.
Note first the heterogeneity; it is improbable that the effect of lower class size is the same
for all children so that, under the assumptions of the LATE theorem, the IV estimate
recovers a weighted average of the effects for those children who are shifted by
Maimonides rule from a larger to a smaller class. Those children might not be the same
as other children, which makes it hard to know how useful the numbers might be in other
contexts, for example when all children are put in smaller class sizes. The underlying
reasons for this heterogeneity are not addressed in this quasi-experimental approach. To
be sure of what is happening here, we need to know more about how different children
finish up in different classes, which raises the possibility that the variation across the
discontinuities may not be orthogonal to other factors that affect test scores.
A recent paper by Urquiola and Verhoogen (2008) explores how it is that children are
allocated to different class sizes in a related, but different, situation in Chile where a

22

version of Maimonides rule is in place. Urquiola and Verhoogen note that parents care a
great deal about whether their children are in the 40 child class or the 20 child class, and
for the private schools they study, they construct a model in which there is sorting across
the boundary, so that the children in the smaller classes have richer, more educated
parents than the children in the larger classes. Their data match such a model, so that at
least some of the differences in test scores across class size come from differences in the
children that would be present whatever the class-size. This paper is an elegant example
of why it is so dangerous to make inferences from natural experiments without
understanding the mechanisms at work.
In preparation for the next section, I note that the problem here is not the fact that we
have a quasi-experiment rather than a real experiment, so that there was no actual
randomization. If children had been randomized into class size, the problems would have
been the same, unless there had been some mechanism for forcing the children (and their
parents) to accept the assignment.

4. Randomization in the tropics

Skepticism about econometrics, doubts about the usefulness of structural models in
economics, and the endless wrangling over identification and instrumental variables, has
led to a search for alternative ways of learning about development. There has also been
frustration with the World Bank’s apparent failure to learn from its own projects, and its
inability to provide a convincing argument that its past activities have enhanced
economic growth and poverty reduction. Past development practice is seen as a
succession of fads, with one supposed magic bullet replacing another—from planning to

23

infrastructure to human capital to structural adjustment to health and social capital to the
environment and back to infrastructure—a process that seems not to be guided by
progressive learning. For many economists, and particularly for the group at the Poverty
Action Lab at MIT, the solution has been to move towards randomized controlled trials
of projects, programs and policies. RCTs are seen as generating gold standard evidence
that is superior to econometric evidence, and that is immune to the methodological
criticisms that have been characteristic of econometric analyses. Another aim of the
program is to persuade the World Bank to replace its current evaluation methods with
RCTs; Duflo (2004) argues that randomized trials of projects would generate knowledge
that could be used elsewhere, an international public good. Banerjee (2007, Chapter 1)
accuses the Bank of “lazy thinking,” of a “resistance to knowledge,” and notes that its
recommendations for poverty reduction and empowerment show a striking “lack of
distinction made between strategies founded on the hard evidence provided by
randomized trials or natural experiments and the rest.” In all this there is a close parallel
with the evidence-based movement in medicine that preceded it, and the successes of
RCTs in medicine are frequently cited. Yet the parallels are almost entirely rhetorical,
and there is little or no reference to the dissenting literature, as surveyed for example in
Worrall (2007) who documents the rise and fall in medicine of the rhetoric used by
Banerjee. Nor is there any recognition of the many problems of medical RCTs.
The movement in favor of RCTs is currently very successful. The World Bank is now
conducting substantial numbers of randomized trials, and the methodology is sometimes
explicitly requested by governments, who supply the World Bank with funds for this
purpose (see World Bank, 2008 for details of the Spanish Trust Fund for Impact

24

Evaluation). There is a new International Initiative for Impact Evaluation which “seeks to
improve the lives of poor people in low- and middle-income countries by providing, and
summarizing, evidence of what works, when, why and for how much,” (International
Initiative for Impact Evaluation, 2008). The Poverty Action Lab lists dozens of
completed and ongoing projects in a large number of countries, many of which are
project evaluations. Many development economists would subscribe to the jingoist view
proclaimed by the editors of the British Medical Journal (quoted by Worrall, 2007)
which noted that “Britain has given the world Shakespeare, Newtonian physics, the
theory of evolution, parliamentary democracy—and the randomized trial.”

4.1 The ideal RCT

Under ideal conditions, and when correctly executed, an RCT can estimate certain
quantities of interest with minimal assumptions, thus absolving RCTs of one complaint
against econometric methods, that they rest on often implausible economic models. It is
useful to lay out briefly the (standard) framework for these results, originally due to Jerzy
Neyman in the 1920s, currently often referred to as the Holland-Rubin framework or the
Rubin causal model, see Freedman (2006) for a discussion of the history. According to
this, each member of the population under study, labeled i, has two possible values
associated with it, Y0i and Y1i , which are the outcomes that i would display if it did not
get the treatment, Ti = 0, and if it did get the treatment, Ti = 1. Since each i is either in the
treatment group or in the control group, we observe one of Y0i and Y1i , but not both. We
would like to know something about the distribution over i of the effects of the treatment,
Yi1 − Yi 0 , in particular its mean Y1 − Y0 . In a sense, the most surprising thing about this set25

up is that we can say anything useful at all, without further assumptions, or without any
modeling. But that is the magic that is wrought by the randomization.
What we can observe in the data is the difference between the average outcome in the
treatments and the average outcome in the controls, or E (Yi | Ti = 1) − E (Yi | Ti = 0) . This
difference can be broken up into two terms
E (Yi1 | Ti = 1) − E (Yi 0 | Ti = 0) = [ E (Yi1 | Ti = 1) − E (Yi 0 | Ti = 1)]
+[ E (Yi 0 | Ti = 1) − E (Yi 0 | Ti = 0)]

(10)

Note that on the right hand side the second term in the first square bracket cancels out
with the first term in the second square bracket. But the term in the second square bracket
is zero by randomization; the non-treatment outcomes, like any other characteristic, are
identical in expectation in the control and treatment groups. We can therefore write (10)
E (Yi1 | Ti = 1) − E (Yi 0 | Ti = 0) = [ E (Yi1 | Ti = 1) − E (Yi 0 | Ti = 1)]

(11)

so that the difference in the two observable outcomes is the difference between the
average treated outcome and the average untreated outcome in the treatment group. The
last term on the right hand side would be unobservable in the absence of randomization.
We are not quite done. What we would like is the average of the difference, rather
than the difference of averages that is currently on the right-hand side of (11). But the
expectation is a linear operator, so that the difference of the averages is identical to the
average of the differences, so that we reach, finally
E (Yi1 | Ti = 1) − E (Yi 0 | Ti = 0) = E (Yi1 − Yi 0 | Ti = 1)

(12)

The difference in means between the treatments and controls is an estimate of the average
treatment effect among the treated which, since the treatment and controls differ only by

26

randomization, is an estimate of the average treatment effect for all. This standard but
remarkable result depends both on randomization and on the linearity of expectations.
One immediate consequence of this derivation is a fact that is often quoted by critics
of RCTs, but is often ignored by practitioners, at least in economics: RCTs are
informative about the mean of the treatment effects, Yi1 − Yi 0 , but do not identify other
features of the distribution. For example, the median of the difference is not the
difference in medians, so an RCT is not, by itself, informative about the median treatment
effect, something that could be of as much interest to policy makers as the mean
treatment effect. It might also be useful to know the fraction of the population for which
the treatment effect is positive, which once again is not identified from a trial. Put
differently, the trial might reveal an average positive effect although nearly all of the
population is hurt with a few receiving very large benefits, a situation that cannot be
revealed by the RCT, although it might be disastrous if implemented. Indeed, Kanbur
(2002) has argued that much of the disagreement about development policy is driven by
differences of this kind. Given the minimal assumptions that go into an RCT, it is not
surprising that it cannot tell us everything that we would like to know. Heckman and
Smith (1995) discuss these issues at greater length, and also note that, in some
circumstances, more can be learned. Essentially, the RCT gives us two marginal
distributions, from which we would like to infer a joint distribution; this is impossible,
but the marginal distributions limit the joint distribution in a way that can be useful, for
example if the distribution among the treated stochastically dominates the distribution
among the controls.

27

In practice, researchers who conduct randomized controlled trials often do present
results on statistics other than the mean. For example, the results can be used to run a
regression of the form

Yi = β 0 + β1Ti + ∑ θ j X ij + ∑ φ j X ij × Ti + ui
j

(13)

j

where T is a binary variable that indicates treatment status, and the X’s are various
characteristics measured at baseline that are included in the regression both on their own
(main effects) and as interactions with treatment status, see de Mel, McKenzie, and
Woodruff (2008) for an example of a field experiment with micro-enterprises in Sri
Lanka. The estimated treatment effect now varies across the population, so that it is
possible, for example, to estimate whether the average treatment effect is positive or
negative for various subgroups of interest. These estimates depend on more assumptions
than the trial itself, in particular on the validity of running a regression like (13), on
which I shall have more to say below. One immediate charge against such a procedure is
data mining. A sufficiently determined examination of any trial will eventually reveal
some subgroup for whom the treatment yielded a significant effect of some sort, and
there is no general way of adjusting standard errors to protect against the possibility. In
drug trials, the FDA rules require that analytical plans be submitted prior to trial, and at
least one economic experiment—moving to opportunity—has imposed similar rules on
itself, see the protocol by Feins and McInnis (2001).
I am not arguing against post-trial subgroup analysis, only that any special epistemic
status (as in “gold standard,” “hard,” or “rigorous” evidence) possessed by RCTs does
not extend to subgroup analysis if only because there is no general guarantee that a new
RCT on post-experimentally defined subgroups will yield the same result. Yet such
28

analyses do not share any special evidential status that might be accorded to RCTs, and
must be assessed in exactly the same way as we would assess any non-experimental or
econometric study. These issues are wonderfully exposed by the subgroup analysis of
drug effectiveness by Horwitz et al (1996), criticized by Altmann (1998), who refers to
such studies as “a false trail,” Senn and Harrell (1997), “wisdom after the event,” and by
Davey Smith and Egger (1998), “incommunicable knowledge,” drawing the response
“reaching the tunnel at the end of the light,” by Horwitz et al (1997). It is clearly absurd
to discard data because we do not know how to analyze it with sufficient purity. Indeed,
many important findings have come from post-trial analysis of experimental data, both in
medicine and in economics, for example of the negative income tax experiments of the
1960s. None of which resolves the concerns about data-mining. In large-scale, expensive,
trials, a zero or very small result is unlikely to be welcome, and there is likely to be
overwhelming pressure to search for some subpopulation that gives a more palatable
result.
The mean treatment effect from an RCT may be of limited value for a physician or a
policymaker contemplating specific patients or policies. A new drug might do better than
a placebo in an RCT, yet a physician might be entirely correct in not prescribing it for a
patient whose characteristics, according to the physician’s theory of the disease, might
lead her to suppose that the drug would be harmful. Similarly, if we find that dams in
India do not reduce poverty on average, as in Duflo and Pande’s fine (non-experimental)
2007 study, there is no implication about any specific dam, even one of the dams
included in the study, yet it is always a specific dam that a policy maker has to decide
about. Their evidence certainly puts a higher burden of proof on those proposing a new

29

dam, as would be the case for a physician prescribing in the face of an RCT, though the
force of the evidence depends on the size of the mean effect and the extent of the
heterogeneity in the responses. As was the case with the material discussed in Sections 2
and 3, heterogeneity poses problems for the analysis of RCTs, just as it posed problems
for non-experimental methods that sought to approximate randomization. For this reason,
in his Planning of Experiments, Cox (1958, p.15) begins his book with the assumption
that the treatment effects are identical. He notes that the RCT will still estimate the mean
treatment effect with heterogeneity, but argues that such estimates are “quite misleading”,
citing the example of two different subgroups within which the treatment effects are
identical, so that the RCT delivers an estimate that applies to no one. This
recommendation makes a good deal of sense when the experiment is being applied to the
parameter of a well-specified model, but it could not be further away from most current
practice in either medicine or economics.
One of the reasons why subgroup analysis is so hard to resist is that researchers,
however much they may wish to escape the straitjacket of theory, inevitably have some
mechanism in mind, and some of those mechanisms can be “tested” on the data from the
trial. Such “testing,” of course, does not satisfy the strict evidential standards that the
RCT has been set up to satisfy, and if the investigation is constrained to satisfy those
standards, no ex post speculation is permitted. Without a prior theory, and within its own
evidentiary standards, an RCT targeted at “finding out what works,” is not informative
about mechanisms. For example, when two independent but identical RCTs in two cities
in India find that children’s scores improved less in Mumbai than in in Vadodora, the
authors state “this is likely related to the fact that over 80% of the children in Mumbai

30

had already mastered the basic language skills the program was covering,” Duflo,
Glennerster, and Kremer (2008). It is not clear how “likely” is established here, and there
is certainly no evidence that conforms to the “gold standard” that is seen as one of the
central justifications for the RCTs. For the same reason, repeated successful replications
of a “what works” experiment is both unlikely and unlikely to be persuasive. Learning
about theory, or mechanisms, requires that the investigation be targeted towards that
theory, towards why something works, not whether it works. Projects can rarely be
replicated, though the mechanisms underlying success or failure will often be replicable
and transportable. This means that if the World Bank had indeed randomized all of its
past projects, it is unlikely that the cumulated evidence would contain the key to
economic development.
Cartwright (2007a) summarizes the benefits of RCTs relative to other forms of
evidence. In the ideal case, “if the assumptions of the test are met, a positive result

implies the appropriate causal conclusion,” that the intervention “worked” and caused a
positive outcome. She adds “the benefit that the conclusions follow deductively in the
ideal case comes with great cost: narrowness of scope,” (p. 11).

4.2 Tropical RCTs in practice

How well do actual RCTs approximate the ideal? Are the assumptions generally met in
practice? Is the narrowness of scope a price that brings real benefits, or is the superiority
of RCTs largely rhetorical? As always, there is no substitute for examining each study in
detail, and there is certainly nothing in the RCT methodology itself that grants immunity

31

from problems of implementation. Yet there are a number of general points that are worth
discussion.
The first is the seemingly obvious practical matter of how to compute the results of a
trial. In theory this is straightforward, we simply compare the mean outcome in the
experimental group with the mean outcome in the control group, and the difference is the
causal effect of the intervention. This simplicity, compared with the often baroque
complexity of econometric estimators, is seen as one of the great advantages of RCTs,
both in generating convincing results, and in explaining those results to policy makers
and the lay public. Yet any difference is not useful without a standard error, and the
calculation of the standard error is rarely quite so straightforward. As Fisher (1935)
emphasized from the very beginning, in his famous discussion of the tea lady,
randomization plays two separate roles. The first is to guarantee that the probability law
governing the selection of the control group is the same as the probability law governing
the selection of the experimental group. The second is to provide a probability law that
enables us to judge whether a difference between the two groups is significant. In his tea
lady example, Fisher uses combinatoric analysis to calculate the exact probabilities of
each possible outcome, but in practice this is rarely done.
Duflo, Glennerster and Kremer (2008, p.3921) (DGK) explicitly recommend what
seems to have become the standard method in the development literature, which is to run
a restricted version of the regression (13), including only the constant and the treatment
dummy,

Yi = β 0 + β1Ti + ui

32

(14)

As is easily shown, the OLS estimate of β1 is simply the difference between the mean of
the Yi in the experimental and control groups, which is exactly what we want. However,
the standard error from the OLS regression is not correct unless the variance in the
experimental group is identical to the variance in the control group, which will only be
true if the treatment has no effect on the variance, which will not generally be the case
particularly if treatment responses are heterogeneous. (Indeed, assuming that the
experiment does not affect the variance is very much against the minimalist spirit of
RCTs.) If the regression (14) is run with the standard heteroskedasticity correction to the
standard error, the result will be the same as the formula for the standard error of the
difference between two means, but not otherwise unless there are equal numbers of
experimental and controls, in which case the correction makes no difference, and the
OLS standard error is correct. It is not clear in the experimental development literature
whether the correction is routinely done in practice, and the handbook review by DGK
makes no mention of it, although it provides a thoroughly useful review of many other
aspects of standard errors.
Even with the correction for unequal variances, we are not quite done. The general
problem of testing the significance of the differences between the means of two normal
populations with different variances is known as the Fisher-Behrens problem. The test
statistic computed by dividing the difference in means by its estimated standard error
does not have the t–distribution when the variances are different, and the significance of
the estimated difference in means is likely to be overstated if no correction is made. If
there are equal numbers of treatments and controls, the statistic will be approximately
distributed as Student’s t, but with degrees of freedom that can be as little as half the

33

nominal degrees of freedom when one of the two variances is zero. In general, there is
also no reason to suppose that the heterogeneity in the treatment effects is normal, which
will further complicate inference in small samples.
Another standard practice, recommended by DGK, and which is also common in
medical RCTs according to Freedman (2008), is to run the regression (14) with additional
controls taken from the baseline data, or equivalently (13) with the X i but without the
interactions,

Yi = β 0 + β1Ti + ∑ θ j X ij + ui

(15)

j

The standard argument is that, if the randomization is done correctly, the X i are
orthogonal to the treatment variable Ti so that their inclusion does not affect the estimate
of β1 , which is the parameter of interest. However, by absorbing variance, as compared
with (14), they will increase the precision of the estimate—this is not necessarily the
case, but will often be true. DGK, p. 3924 give an example “controlling for baseline test
scores in evaluations of educational interventions greatly improves the precision of the
estimates, which reduces the cost of these evaluations when a baseline test can be
conducted.”
There are two problems with this procedure. The first, which is noted by DGK, is
that, as with post-trial subgroup analysis, there is a risk of data mining—trying different
control variables until the experiment “works”—unless the control variables are specified
in advance. Again, it is hard to tell whether or how often this dictum is observed. The
second problem is analyzed by Freedman (2008), who notes that (15) is not a standard
regression because of the heterogeneity of the responses. Write α i for the (hypothetical)

34

treatment response of unit i, so that, in line with the discussion in the previous
subsection, α i = Yi1 − Yi 0 , and we can write the identity

Yi = Yi 0 + α iTi = Y0 + α iTi + (Yi 0 − Y0 )

(16)

which looks like the regression (15) with the X’s and the error term capturing the
variation in Yi 0 . The only difference is that the coefficient on the treatment term has an i
suffix because of the heterogeneity. If we define α = E (α i | Ti = 1) , the average treatment
effect among the treated, as the parameter of interest, as in Section 4.1, we can rewrite
(16) as

Yi = Y0 + α Ti + (Yi 0 − Y0 ) + (α i − α )Ti

(17)

Finally, and to illustrate, suppose that we model the variation in Yi 0 as a linear function of
an observable scalar X i 0 and a residualηi , we have

Yi = β 0 + α Ti + θ ( X i − X ) + [ηi + (α i − α )Ti ]

(18)

with β 0 = Y0 , which is in the regression form (15), but allows us to see the links with the
experimental quantities.
Equation (18) is analyzed in some detail by Freedman (2008). It is easily shown that
Ti is orthogonal to the compound error, but that this is not true of X i − X . (Nor will it be
true of the interaction terms in equation 15). However, the two right hand side variables
are uncorrelated because of the randomization, so the OLS estimate of β1 is consistent.
This is not true of θ , though this may not be a problem if the aim is to reduce the
sampling variance. A more serious issue is that the dependency between Ti and the
compound error term means that the OLS estimate is biased, and in small samples this

35

bias—which comes from the heterogeneity—may be substantial. Freedman notes that the
leading term in the bias of the estimate of the OLS estimate of α is ϕ / n where n is the
sample size and

ϕ = − lim

1 n
(α i − α )( X i − X ) 2
∑
n i =1

(19)

Equation (19) shows that the bias comes from the heterogeneity, or more specifically,
from a covariance between the heterogeneity in the treatment effects and the squares of
the included covariates. With the sample sizes typically encountered in these
experiments, which are often expensive to conduct, the bias can be substantial. One
possible strategy here would be to compare the estimates of α with and without
covariates; even ignoring pre-test bias, it is not clear how to make such a comparison
without a good estimate of the standard error. Another possibility is to introduce the
interactions between the covariates and the treatment, which leads back to (13). An
incomplete analysis suggests that this might reduce the bias compared with (19).
Of these and related issues in medical trials, Freedman writes “Practitioners will
doubtless be heard to object that they know all this perfectly well. Perhaps, but then why
do they so often fit models without discussing assumptions?”
All of the issues so far can be dealt with, either by appropriately calculating standard
errors, or by refraining from the use of covariates, though this might involve drawing
larger and more expensive samples. However, there are other practical problems that are
harder to fix. One of these is that subjects may fail to accept assignment, so that people
who are assigned to the experimental group may refuse, and controls may find a way of
getting the treatment, and either may drop out of the experiment altogether. The classical
remedy of double blinding, so that neither the subject nor the experimenter know which
36

subject is in which group, is rarely feasible in social experiments—children know their
class size—and is often not feasible in medical trials—subjects may decipher the
randomization, for example by asking a laboratory to check that their medicine is not a
placebo. Heckman (1992) notes that, in contrast to people, “plots of grounds do not
respond to anticipated treatments of fertilizer, nor can they excuse themselves from being
treated.” This makes the important point, further developed by Heckman in later work,
that the deviations from assignment are almost certainly purposeful, at least in part. The
people who struggle to escape their assignment will do so more vigorously the higher are
the stakes, so that the deviations from assignment cannot be treated as random
measurement error, but will compromise the results in fundamental ways.
Once again, there is a widely-used technical fix, which is to run regressions like (15)
or (18), with actual treatment status in place of the assigned treatment status Ti . This
replacement will destroy the orthogonality between treatment and the error term, so that
OLS estimation will no longer yield a consistent estimate of the average treatment effect
among the treated. However, the assigned treatment status, which is known to the
experimenter, is orthogonal to the error term, and is correlated with the actual treatment
status, and so can serve as an instrumental variable for the latter. But now we have come
all the way back to the discussion of instrumental variables in Section 2, and we are
doing econometrics, not an ideal RCT. Under the assumption of no “defiers”—people
who do the opposite of their assignment just because of the assignment (and it is not clear
“just why are there no defiers,” Freedman, 2006)—the instrumental variable converges to
the local average treatment effect (LATE). As before, it is unclear whether this is what
we want, and there is no way to find out without modeling the behavior that is

37

responsible for the heterogeneity of the response to assignment, as in the local
instrumental variable approach developed by Heckman and his coauthors, Heckman and
Vytlacil (1999, 2007). Alternatively, and as recommended by Freedman (2004, p. 4,
2006), it is always informative to make a simple unadjusted comparison of the average
outcomes between treatments and controls according to the original assignment. This
may also be enough if what we are concerned with is whether the treatment works or not,
rather than with the size of the effect. In terms of instrumental variables, this is a
recommendation to look at the reduced form, and again harks back to similar arguments
in Section 2 on aid effectiveness.
There is also a host of operational problems that afflict every actual experiment; these
can be mitigated by careful planning—in RCTs compared with econometric analysis,
most of the work is done before data collection, not after—but not always eliminated. In
this context, I turn to the flagship study of the new movement in development economics,
Miguel and Kremer’s (2004) study of intestinal worms in Kenya. This paper is repeatedly
cited in DGK’s manual, and it is one of the exemplary studies cited by Duflo (2004) and
by Banerjee and He (2008). It was written by two senior authors at leading research
universities, and published in the most prestigious technical journal in economics. It has
also received a great deal of positive attention in the popular press, see for example
Leonhardt (2008), and has been influential in policy, see Poverty Action Lab (2007). In
this study, a group of “seventy-five rural primary schools were phased into treatment in a
randomized order,” with the finding “that the program reduced school absenteeism by at
least one quarter, with particularly large participation gains among the youngest children,
making deworming a highly effective way to boost school participation among young

38

children” (p. 159). The point of the RCT is less to show that deworming medicines are
effective, but because children infect one another, that school-based treatment is more
effective than individual treatment. As befits a paper that aims to change methods as well
as practice, there is emphasis on the virtues of randomization, and the word “random” or
its derivatives appears some 60 times in the paper. But the actual method of
randomization is not precisely described in the paper, and private communication with
Michael Kremer has confirmed that, in fact, the local partners would not permit the use of
random numbers for assignment, so that the assignment of schools to three groups was
done in alphabetical order, as in Albert to group 1, Alfred to group 2, Bob to group 3,
Charles to group 1 again, David to group 2, and so on. Alphabetization, not
randomization, was also used in the experiment on flip charts in schools by Glewwe,
Kremer, Moulin, and Zitzewitz (2004); this paper, like “Worms,” is much cited as
evidence in favor of the virtues of randomization.
Alphabetization may be a reasonable solution when randomization is impossible, but
we are then in the world of quasi- or natural experiments, not randomized experiments.
As is true with all forms of quasi-randomization, alphabetization does not guarantee
orthogonality with potential confounders. Resources are often allocated alphabetically,
because that is how many lists are presented, and it is easy to imagine that the Kenyan
government or local NGOs, like Miguel and Kremer, used the alphabetical list to
prioritize projects or funding. If so, schools higher in the alphabet are systematically
different, and this difference will be inherited in an attenuated form by the three groups.
Indeed, this sort of contamination is described by Cox (1958, 74–5) who explicitly warns
against this sort of convenient design. Of course, it is also possible that the

39

alphabetization causes no confounding with factors known or unknown. If so, there is
still an issue with the calculation of standard errors. Without a probability law, we have
no way of discovering whether the difference between treatments and controls could have
risen by chance. We might think of modeling the situation here by imagining that the
assignment was equivalent to taking a random starting value and assigning every third
school to treatment. If so, the fact that there are only three possible assignments of
schools would have to be taken into account in calculating the standard errors, and
nothing of this kind is reported. As it is, it is impossible to tell whether the experimental
differences in these studies are or are not due to chance.
In the subsection, I have dwelt on practice not to critique particular studies or
particular results; indeed it seems entirely plausible that deworming is a good idea, and
that the costs are low relative to other interventions. My main point here is different, that
conducting good RCTs is difficult and often expensive, so that problems often arise that
need to be dealt with by various econometric or statistical fixes. There is nothing wrong
with such fixes in principle—though they often compromise the substance, as in the
instrumental variable estimation to correct for failure of assignment—but their
application takes us out of the world of ideal RCTs, and back into the world of everyday
econometrics and statistics. So that RCTs, although frequently useful, are not exempt
from the routine statistical and substantive scrutiny that should be routinely applied to
any empirical investigation.
Although it is well beyond my scope in this paper, I should note that are RCTs in
medicine—the gold standard to which development RCTs often compare themselves—
are not exempt from practical difficulties, and their primacy is not without challenge. In

40

particular, ethical (human subjects) questions surrounding RCTs in medicine have
become sufficiently severe to seriously limit what can be undertaken. At the same time
there is much concern that those who sponsor trials and those who analyze them have
large financial stakes in the outcome, which sometimes casts doubts on the results. This is
not currently a problem in economics, but would surely become one if, as the advocates
argue, RCTs became a precondition for funding of projects. Beyond that Concato et al
(2000) argue that, in practice, RCTs do not provide useful information beyond what can
be learned from well-designed and carefully interpreted observational studies.

5. Where should we go from here?

Cartwright (2007b) maintains a useful distinction between “hunting” causes and “using”
them, and this Section is about the use of randomized controlled trials for policy. This
raises the issue of generalizability or external validity—as opposed to internal validity as
discussed in the previous section—grounds on which development RCTs are sometimes
criticized, see for example Rodrik (2008).
There are certainly cases in both medicine and economics where an RCT has had a
major effect on the way that people think. In the recent development literature, my
favorite is Chattopadhyay and Duflo’s (2004) study of women leaders in India. Some
randomly selected panchayats were forced to have female leaders, and the paper explores
the differences in outcomes between such villages and others with male leaders. There is
a theory (of sorts) underlying these experiments; the development community had for a
while adopted the view that a key issue in development was the empowerment of women
(or perhaps just giving them “voice”), and if this was done, more children would be

41

educated, more money would be spent on food and on health, and many other socially
desirable outcomes. Women are altruistic and men are selfish. Chattopadhyay and
Duflo’s analysis of the Indian government’s experiments shows that this is wrong. There
are many similar examples in medicine where knowledge of the mean treatment effect
among the treated, even with some allowance for practical problems, is difficult to
reconcile with currently held beliefs.
Yet I also believe that RCTs of “what works,” even when done without error or
contamination, are unlikely to be helpful for policy unless they tell us something about
why it works, something to which they are often neither targeted nor well-suited. Some of
the issues are familiar and are widely discussed in the literature. Actual policy is always
likely to be different from the experiment, for example because there are general
equilibrium effects that operate on a large scale that are absent in a pilot, or because the
outcomes are different when everyone is covered by the treatment rather than just a
selected group of experimental subjects. Small development projects that help a few
villagers or a few villages may not attract the attention of corrupt public officials because
it is not worth their while to undermine or exploit them, yet they would do so as soon as
any attempt were made to scale up. The scientists who run the experiments are likely to
do so more carefully and conscientiously than would the bureaucrats in charge of a full
scale operation. So that there is no guarantee that the policy tested by the RCT will have
the same effects as in the trial, even on the subjects included in the trial.
It sometimes argued that skepticism about external validity is simply “a version of
David Hume’s justly famous demonstration of the lack of a rational basis for induction,”

42

Banerjee (2005). But what is going on here is often a good deal more mundane. Worrall
(2007, p.995) responds to the same argument with the following:
One example is the drug benoxaprophen (trade name: Opren), a nonsteroidal
inflammatory treatment for arthritis and musculo-skeletal pain. This passed RCTs
(explicitly restricted to 18 to 65 year olds) with flying colours. It is however a fact
that musculo-skeletal pain predominately afflicts the elderly. It turned out, when
the (on average older) `target population’ were given Opren, there were a
significant number of deaths from hepato-renal failure and the drug was
withdrawn.”
In the same way, an educational protocol that was successful when randomized across
villages in India holds many things constant that would not be constant if the program
were transported to Guatemala or Vietnam. These examples demonstrate a failure to
control for relevant factors, not the impossibility of induction.
Pawson and Tilley (1997) argue that it is the combination of mechanism and context
that generates outcomes and that without understanding that combination, scientific
progress is not possible. Nor can we safely go from experiments to policy. In economics,
the language would be about theory, building models, and tailoring them to local
conditions. Policy requires a causal model; without it, we cannot understand the welfare
consequences of a policy, even a policy where causality is established and that is proven
to work on its own terms. Banerjee (2007) describes an RCT by Duflo, Hanna and Ryan
(2008) as “a new economics being born.” This experiment used cameras to monitor and
prevent teacher absenteeism in villages in the Indian state of Rajasthan. Curiously,
Pawson and Tilley (1997, pp 78–82) use the example of cameras (to deter crime in car
parks) as one of their running examples. They note that cameras do not, in and of
themselves, prevent crime because they do not make it impossible to break into a car.
Instead, they depend on triggering a series of behavioral changes. Some of those changes

43

show positive experimental outcomes—crime is down in the car parks with cameras—but
are undesirable, for example because crime is shifted to other car parks, or because the
cameras change the mix of patrons of the car park. There are also cases where the
experiment fails but has beneficial effects. It would not be difficult to construct similar
arguments for the cameras in the Indian schools, and welfare conclusions cannot be
supported unless we understand the behavior of teachers, pupils, and their parents. Duflo,
Hanna, and Ryan (2008) understand this, and use their experimental results to construct a
model of teacher behavior; other papers that use structural models to interpret
experimental results include Todd and Wolpin (2006) and Attanasio, Meghir and
Santiago (2005).
Cartwright (2007a) draws a contrast between the rigor applied to establish internal
validity—to establish the gold standard status of RCTs—and the much looser arguments
that are used to defend the transplantation of the experimental results to policy. For
example, running RCTs to find out whether a project works is often defended on the
grounds that the experimental project is like the policy that it might support. But the
“like” is typically argued by an appeal to similar circumstances, or a similar environment,
arguments that can only be mounted for observable variables. Yet controlling for
observables is the key to the matching estimators that are the main competitors for RCTs,
and that are typically rejected by their advocates on the grounds that RCTs control, not
only for things that we observe, but things that we cannot. As Cartwright notes, the
validity of evidence-based policy depends on the weakest link in the chain of argument
and evidence, so that by the time we seek to use the experimental results, the advantage
of RCTs over matching or other econometric methods has evaporated. In the end, there is

44

no substitute for careful evaluation of the chain of evidence and reasoning by people who
have the experience and expertise in the field. The demand that experiments be theorydriven is, of course, no guarantee of success, though the lack of it is close to a guarantee
of failure.
It is certainly not always obvious how to combine theory with experiments. Indeed,
much of the interest in RCTs—and in instrumental variables and other econometric
techniques that mimic random allocation—comes from a deep skepticism about much
economic theory, and impatience with its ability to deliver structures that seem at all
helpful in interpreting reality. The wholesale abandonment in American graduate schools
of price theory in favor of infinite horizon intertemporal optimization and game theory
has not been a favorable development for young empiricists. Empiricists and theorists
seem further apart now than at any period in the last quarter century. Yet reintegration is
hardly an option because without it there is no chance of long term scientific progress.
One promising area is the recent work in behavioral economics, and the closer integration
of economics and psychology, whose own experimental tradition is clearly focused on
behavioral regularities. The experiments reviewed in Levitt and List (2008), often
involving both economists and psychologists, cover such issues as loss aversion,
procrastination, hyperbolic discounting, or the availability heuristic, all of which are
examples of behavioral mechanisms that promise applicability beyond the specific
experiments. There also appears to be a good deal of convergence between this line of
work, inspired by earlier experimental traditions in economic theory and in psychology,
and the most recent work in development. Instead of using experiments to evaluate
projects, looking for which projects work, this development work designs its experiments

45

to test predictions of theories that are generalizable to other situations. Without any
attempt to be comprehensive, some examples are Karlan and Zinman (2008), who are
concerned with the price-elasticity of the demand for credit, Bertrand et al (2008), who
take predictions about the importance of context from the psychology laboratory to the
study of advertising for small loans in South Africa, Duflo, Kremer and Robinson (2009)
who construct and test a behavioral model of procrastination for the use of fertilizers by
small farmers in Kenya, and Giné and Karlan (2008), who use an experiment in the
Philippines to test the efficacy of a smoking-cessation product designed around
behavioral theory. In all of this work, the project, when it exists at all, is the embodiment
of the theory that is being tested and refined, not the object of evaluation in its own right,
and the field experiments are a bridge between the laboratory and the analysis of
“natural” data, List (2006). The collection of purpose-designed data and the use of
randomization often make it easier to design the sort of acid test that can be more difficult
to construct without them. If we are lucky, this work will provide the sort of behavioral
realism that has been lacking in much of economic theory while, at the same time,
identifying and allowing us to retain the substantial parts of existing economic theory that
remain genuinely useful.
In this context, it is worth looking back to the previous phase of experimentation in
economics that started with the New Jersey income tax experiments. A rationale for these
experiments is laid out in Orcutt and Orcutt (1968), in which the vision is a formal model
of labor supply with the experiments used to estimate its parameters. By the early 1990s,
however, experimentation had moved on to a “what works” basis, and Manski and
Garfinkel (1992), surveying the experience, write “there is, at present, no basis for the

46

popular belief that extrapolation from social experiments is less problematic than
extrapolation from observational data. As we see it, the recent embrace of reduced-form
social experimentation to the exclusion of structural evaluation based on observational
data is not warranted.” Their statement still holds good, and it would be worth our while
trying to return to something like Orcutt and Orcutt’s vision.
Finally, I want to return to the issue of “heterogeneity,” a running theme in this
lecture. Heterogeneity of responses first appeared in Section 2 as a technical problem for
instrumental variable estimation, dealt with in the literature by local average treatment
estimators. Randomized controlled trials provide a method for estimating quantities of
interest in the presence of heterogeneity, and can therefore be seen as another technical
solution for the “heterogeneity problem.” They allow estimation of mean responses under
extraordinarily weak conditions. But as soon as we deviate from ideal conditions, and try
to correct the randomization for inevitable practical difficulties, heterogeneity again rears
its head, biasing estimates, and making it difficult to interpret what we get. In the end, the
technical fixes fail and compromise our attempts to learn from the data. What this should
tell us is that the heterogeneity is not a technical problem, but a symptom of something
deeper, which is the failure to specify causal models of the processes we are examining.
This is the methodological message of this lecture, that technique is never a substitute for
the business of doing economics.

List of references:

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, 2001, “The colonial origins
of comparative development: an empirical investigation,” American Economic
Review, 91(5), 1369–1401.

47

Altman, Douglas G., 1998, “Within trial variation—a false trail,” Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology, 51(4), 301–03.

Angrist, Joshua D., 1990, “Lifetime earnings and the Vietnam era draft lottery,”
American Economic Review, 80(3), 313–36.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Guido Imbens, 1994, “Identification and estimation of local
average treatment effects,” Econometrica, 62(2), 467–75.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan Krueger, 1991, “Does compulsory school attendance affect
schooling and earnings?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(4), 979–1014.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Victor Lavy, 1999, “Using Maimonides’ rule to estimate the
effect of class size on scholastic achievement,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114
(2), 533–75.
Attanasio, Orazio, Costas Meghir, and Ana Santiago, 2005, “Education choices in
Mexico: using a structural model and a randomized experiment to evaluate Progresa,”
London, Institute for Fiscal Studies, processed.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., 2005, “`New development economics’ and the challenge to theory,”
Economic and Political Weekly, October 1st, 4340–4.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., 2007, Making aid work, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., 2007, “Inside the machine: toward a new development economics,”
Boston Review, September 4th.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Ruimin He, 2008, “Making aid work,” in William R. Easterly,
ed., Reinventing foreign aid, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press, pp. 47–92.
Barro, Robert J., 1998, Determinants of economic growth: a cross-country empirical
study, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.

Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, 1995, Economic growth, New York.
McGraw-Hill.
Bauer, T. Peter, 1971, Dissent on development: studies and debates in development
economics, London. Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

Bauer, T. Peter, 1981, Equality, the third world, and economic delusion, Cambridge, MA.
Harvard University Press.

48

Bertrand, Marianne, Dean S. Karlan, Sendhil Mullainathan, Eldar Shafir, and Joanthan
Zinman, 2008, “What’s advertising content worth? Evidence from a consumer credit
marketing field experiment,” Yale University, processed.
Boone, Peter, 1996, “Politics and the effectiveness of foreign aid,” European Economic
Review, 40, 289–329.

Burnside, Craig, and David Dollar, 2000, “Aid, policies, and growth,” American
Economic Review, 90(4), 847–67.

Cartwright, Nancy, 2007a, “Are RCTs the gold standard?” Biosocieties, 2, 11–20.
Cartwright, Nancy, 2007b, Hunting causes and using them: approaches in philosophy
and economics, Cambridge. Cambridge University Press.

Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra, and Esther Duflo, 2004, “Women as policy makers:
evidence from a randomized controlled experiment in India,” Econometrica, 72(5),
1409–43.
Clemens, Michael, Steven Radelet, and Rikhil Bhavnani, 2004, “Counting chickens when
they hatch: the short-term effect of aid on growth,” Center for Global Development,
Working Paper 44, November.
(http://www.cgdev.org/content/publications/detail/2744, accessed December 16, 2008)
Concato, John, Nirav Shah and Ralph I. Horwitz, 2000, “Randomized, controlled trials,
observational studies, and the hierarchy of research designs,” New England Journal of
Medicine, 342(25), 1887–92.

Cox, David R., 1958, Planning of experiments, New York, Wiley.
Dalgaard, Carl-Johan and Henrik Hansen, 2001, “On aid, growth, and good policies,”
Journal of Development Studies, 37(6), 17–41.

Dalgaard, Carl-Johan, Henrik Hansen, and Finn Tarp, 2004, “On the empirics of foreign
aid and growth,” Economic Journal, 114, F191–216.
Davey Smith, George, and Matthias Egger, 1998, “Incommunicable knowledge?
Interpreting and applying the results of clinical trials and meta-analysis,” Journal of
Clinical Epidemiology, 51(4), 289–95.

De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff, 2008, “Returns to capital
in microenterprises: evidence from a field experiment,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 123(4), 1329–72.

49

Duflo, Esther, 2004, “Scaling up and evaluation,” Annual World Bank Conference on
Development Economics 2004, Washington, DC. The World Bank.

Duflo, Ether, Rachel Glennerster, and Michael Kremer, 2008, “Using randomization in
development economics research: a toolkit,” Chapter 61 in T. Paul Schultz and John
Strauss, eds., Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 4, Amsterdam. Elsevier. pp.
3895–962.
Duflo, Esther, Rema Hanna and Stephen Ryan, 2008, “Monitoring works: getting
teachers to come to school,” CEPR Working Paper No. 6682, February.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kremer and Jonathan Robinson, 2009, “Nudging farmers to use
fertilizer: evidence from Kenya,” MIT, processed.
Duflo, Esther, and Rohini Pande, 2007, “Dams,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122(2), 601–46.
Easterly, William R., 2006, The white man’s burden: why the West’s efforts to aid the
rest have done so much ill and so little good, Oxford. Oxford University Press.

Easterly, William R., ed., 2008, Reinventing foreign aid, Cambridge MA. MIT Press.
Easterly, William R., Ross Levine, and David Roodman, “Aid, policies, and growth:
comment,” American Economic Review, 94(3), 774–80.
Feins, Judith D., and Debra McInnis, 2001, “The interim impact evaluation for the
moving to opportunity demonstration,” Abt Associates.
http://www.nber.org/~kling/mto/MTO_OMB.pdf (Accessed December 15th, 2008)

Fisher, Ronald A., 1935, The design of experiments, (8th edition, 1960, New York.
Hafner.)
Freedman, David A., 2004, Statistical models: theory and practice, New York.
Cambridge University Press.
Freedman, David A., 2006, “Statistical models for causation: what inferential leverage do
they provide?” Evaluation Review, 30(6), 691–713.
Freedman, David A., 2008, “On regression adjustments to experimental data,” Advances
in Applied Mathematics, 40, 180–93.

Giné, Xavier, and Dean S. Karlan, 2008, “Put your money where your butt is: a
commitment contract for smoking cessation,” Yale University, processed.

50

Glewwe, Paul, Michael Kremer, Sylvie Moulin, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2004, “Retrospective
vs. prospective analyses of school inputs: the case of flip charts in Kenya,” Journal of
Development Economics, 74, 251–68.

Guillaumont, Patrick, and Lisa Chauvet, 2001, “Aid and performance: a reassessment,”
Journal of Development Studies, 37(6), 66–92.

Hansen, Henrik, and Finn Tarp, 2000, “Aid effectiveness disputed,” Journal of
International Devel;opment, 12, 375–98.

Hansen, Henrik, and Finn Tarp, 2001, “Aid and growth regressions,” Journal of
Development Economics, 64, 547–70.

Heckman, James J., 1992, “Randomization and social program evaluation,” in Manski,
Charles, and Irwin Garfinkel, eds., Evaluating welfare and training programs,
Cambridge, MA. Harvard, pp 201–30. Available as NBER Technical Working Paper
No. 107.)
Heckman, James J., 1997, “Instrumental variables: a study of implicit behavioral
assumptions used in making program evaluations,” The Journal of Human Resources,
32 (3), 441–62.
Heckman, James J., 2000, “Causal parameters and policy analysis in economics: a
twentieth century retrospective,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 45–97.
Heckman, James J., and Jeffrey A. Smith, 1995, “Assessing the case for social
experiments,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(2), 85–115.
Heckman, James J., Sergio Urzua and Edward J. Vytlacil, 2006, “Understanding
instrumental variables in models with essential heterogeneity,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 88 (3), 389–432.

Heckman, James J., and Edward J. Vytlacil, 1999, “Local instrumental variables and
latent variable models for identifying and bounding treatment effects,” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 96(8), 4730–4.

Heckman, James J., and Edward J. Vytlacil, 2007, “Econometric evaluation of social
programs, Part 2: Using the marginal treatment effect to organize alternative
econometric estimators to evaluate social programs, and to forecast their effects in
new environments” Chapter 71, in Heckman, James J. and Edward E. Leamer, eds.,
Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 6B, Amsterdam. Elsevier. pp. 4875–5143.

51

Horwitz, Ralph I., Burton M. Singer, Robert W. Makuch and Catherine M. Viscoli, 1996,
“Can treatment that is helpful on average be harmful to some patients? A study of the
conflicting information needs of clinical inquiry and drug regulators,” Journal of
Clinical Epidemiology, 49, 395–400.

Horwitz, Ralph I., Burton M. Singer, Robert W. Makuch, and Catherine M. Viscoli,
1997, “On reaching the tunnel at the end of the light,” Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology, 50(7), 753–55.

Hoxby, Caroline M., 2000, “Does competition among public schools benefit students and
taxpayers?” American Economic Review, 90(5), 1209–38.
International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3IE), 2008, http://www.3ieimpact.org/
Karlan, Dean S., and Jonathan Zinman, 2008, “Credit elasticities in less developed
economies: implications for micro-finance,” American Economic Review, 98(3),
1040–68.
Kanbur, Ravi M., 2001, “Economic policy, distribution, and poverty: the nature of the
disagreements,” World Development, 29 (6), 1083–94.
Leamer, Edward E., 1985, “Vector autoregressions for causal inference?” CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 22, 255–304.

Lensink, Robert, and Howard White, 2001, “Are there negative returns to aid?” Journal
of Development Studies, 37 (6), 42–65.

Leonhardt, David, “Making economics relevant again,” New York Times, February 20.
Levitt, Steven D., and John A. List, 2008, “Field experiments in economics: the past, the
present, and the future,” NBER Working Paper No. 14356, September.
List, John A., 2006, “Field experiments: a bridge between lab and naturally occurring
data,” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, B. E. Press, 6(2), 1–45.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil, 1992, “A contribution to the
empirics of economic growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(2), 407–37.
Manski, Charles and Irwin Garfinkel, 1992, “Introduction,” in Manski, Charles, and
Irwin Garfinkel, eds., Evaluating welfare and training programs, Cambridge, MA.
Harvard, pp.1–22.
McCleary, Rachel M., and Robert J. Barro, 2006, “Religion and economy,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 20(2), 49–72.

52

Miguel, Edward, and Michael Kremer, 2004, “Worms,” Econometrica, 72(1), 159–217.
Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti, 2004, “Economic shocks and
civil conflict: an instrumental variables approach,” Journal of Political Economy,
112(4), 725–53.
Orcutt, Guy H. and Alice G. Orcutt, 1968, “Incentive and disincentive experimentation
for income maintenance purposes,” American Economic Review, 58(4), 754–72.
Pogge, Thomas, 2005, “World poverty and human rights,” Ethics and International
Affairs, 19(1), 1–7.

Poverty Action Lab, 2007, “Clinton honors global deworming effort,”
http://www.povertyactionlab.org/deworm/ (Accessed December 15th, 2008.)
Pawson, Ray, and Nick Tilley, 1997, Realistic evaluation, London, Sage.
Rajan, Raghuram, and Arvind Subramanian, 2005, “Aid and growth: what does the data
really show?” NBER Working Paper No. 11513, June. (Forthcoming, Review of
Economics and Statistics)

Rodrik, Dani, 2008, “The new development economics: we shall experiment, but how
shall we learn?” (July),
http://ksghome.harvard.edu/~drodrik/The%20New%20Development%20Economics.p
df (Accessed December 15th, 2008).
Roodman, David, 2008, “The anarchy of numbers: aid, development, and cross-country
empirics,” World Bank Economic Review, 21(2), 255–77.
Sachs, Jeffrey, 2005, The end of poverty: economic possibilities for our time, New York,
Penguin.
Sachs, Jeffrey, 2008, Common wealth: economics for a crowded planet, New York,
Penguin.
Senn, Stephen and Frank Harrell, 1997, “On wisdom after the event,” Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology, 50(7), 749–51.

Singer, Peter, 2004, One world: the ethics of globalization, New Haven. Yale University
Press. (First edition, 2002.)
The Lancet, 2004, “The World Bank if finally embracing science,” Editorial, 364, August
28, 731–2

53

Todd, Petra E. and Kenneth I. Wolpin, 2006, “Assessing the impact of a school subsidy
program in Mexico: using a social experiment to validate a dynamic behavioral model
of child schooling and fertility,” American Economic Review, 96(5), 1384–1417.
Urquiola, Miguel, and Eric Verhoogen, 2008, “Class-size caps, sorting, and the
regression-discontinuity design,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
van den Berg, Gerard, 2008, “An economic analysis of exclusion restrictions for
instrumental variable estimation,” VU University Amsterdam, processed.
World Bank, 2008, The Spanish Impact Evaluation Fund,
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTPOVERTY/EXTISP
MA/0,,contentMDK:21419502~menuPK:384336~pagePK:148956~piPK:216618~the
SitePK:384329,00.html (accessed December 15th, 2008).
Worrall, John, 2007, “Evidence in medicine and evidence-based medicine,” Philosophy
Compass, 2/6, 981–1022.

54

