                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   GOVERNMENT TRANSFERS AND POLITICAL SUPPORT

                                            Marco Manacorda
                                             Edward Miguel
                                            Andrea Vigorito

                                          Working Paper 14702
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14702


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                           Cambridge, MA 02138
We are grateful to Uruguay’s Minister forFebruary          2009
                                                Social Development,     Marina Arismendi and her staff, in
particular Marianela Bertoni and Lauro Meléndez at the Monitoring and Evaluation Unit, for making
this research possible; to Gabriel Burdín, Adriana Vernengo and James Zuberi for excellent research
assistance; and to Alberto Alesina, Verónica Amarante, Gary Becker, Michael Boskin, David Card,
Stephen Coate, Raj Chetty, Ernesto Dal Bo, Stefano DellaVigna, Caroline Hoxby, Brian Knight, Botond
Koszegi, Justin McCrary, Susan Parker, Rohini Pande, Matt Rabin, Gerard Roland, and seminar participants
at Columbia University, LSE, U.C. Berkeley ARE, the NBER Political Economy and Public Finance
groups, the Universidad de la República (Uruguay), USC, the 2008 CEPR European Summer Symposium
in Labor Economics, the CEPR Public Policy group meeting, Stanford, the University of Chicago,
RAND, Michigan, Center for Global Development, Universitá Bocconi, Paris School of Economics,
Colegio de Mexico, ITAM and Washington University for comments. Marco Manacorda gratefully
acknowledges hospitality from the British Embassy in Montevideo and the Government of Uruguay.
Some of the data analyzed in this article were collected by Latinobarómetro Corporation. The Latinobarómetro
Corporation is solely responsible for the data distribution and it is not responsible for the views expressed
by the users of the data. The authors appreciate the assistance in providing these data. The views expressed
in this paper are the authors’ own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Government of Uruguay,
the Latinobarómetro Corporation, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors remain
our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Marco Manacorda, Edward Miguel, and Andrea Vigorito. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Government Transfers and Political Support
Marco Manacorda, Edward Miguel, and Andrea Vigorito
NBER Working Paper No. 14702
February 2009, Revised November 2009
JEL No. D72,H53,O12,O23

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate the impact of a large anti-poverty cash transfer program, the Uruguayan PANES, on political
support for the government that implemented it. Using the discontinuity in program assignment based
on a pre-treatment eligibility score, we find that beneficiary households are 11 to 14 percentage points
more likely to favor the current government relative to the previous government. Political support
effects persist after the program ends. A calibration exercise indicates that these persistent impacts
are consistent with a model of rational but poorly informed voters learning about politicians’ redistributive
preferences.


Marco Manacorda                                       Andrea Vigorito
Department of Economics                               Instituto de Economia
Queen Mary University of London                       Facultad de Ciencias Economicas
CEP - London School of Economics                      Universidad de la Republica
Houghton Street                                       Joaquin Requena 1375
London WC2A 2AE                                       Montevideo 11200
UK                                                    Uruguay
m.manacorda@lse.ac.uk                                 andrea@iecon.ccee.edu.uy

Edward Miguel
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
508-1 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
emiguel@econ.berkeley.edu
This paper analyzes the effect of a large anti-poverty program, the Uruguayan Plan de Atención
Nacional a la Emergencia Social (PANES), on expressed political preferences. We exploit the
quasi-random assignment to the program based on a sharp discontinuity in an underlying
eligibility score in order to identify the effect of receiving a government transfer on support for
the incumbent government, and to ultimately advance our theoretical understanding of voter
decision-making.
       The interaction between government policies and voters’ choices is central to debates in
political economy, social choice and public economics, and an extensive literature documents
how voters reward incumbents for desirable outcomes of government policies. The notion that
voters respond to policy outcomes underpins the theory of democracy, by creating a mechanism
for government accountability. Since the work of Kramer (1971), Stigler (1973), Fair (1978) and
Fiorina (1981), many scholars have studied voters’ responsiveness to macroeconomic conditions
and policies. A robust empirical finding in many countries is that economic conditions around
election time have predictive power for the incumbent’s re-election success. This observation
underpins the theory of political business cycles, namely that incumbents seeking re-election can
strategically manipulate the economy via expansionary fiscal policies to win votes, a claim that
squares well with the observation that pre-election periods are indeed characterized by higher
government spending and public goods provision (see Hibbs, 2006 for a review). Yet the existing
empirical work faces obvious econometric concerns, as it typically relies on aggregate data with
few observations, and most importantly, rarely relies on exogenous sources of policy variation.
       Even less is known about the effect of household specific economic conditions, and in
particular targeted government transfers, on the evolution of voter preferences. While it is
conventional political wisdom that targeted government programs sway votes, and thus could be
used strategically by incumbents seeking re-election, there is still little convincing evidence on
the magnitude of these effects. Just as importantly, little is known about the mechanisms that
underpin the exchange of votes for transfers between voters and politicians. The secrecy of the
ballot in modern democracies makes “vote-swaying” through targeted government transfers
impossible to enforce due to intertemporal commitment problems.
       Inherent empirical difficulties have limited progress in identifying the impact of targeted
transfers on political preferences. Both observational studies (Markus, 1988), and the few studies
that seriously attempt to tackle causality issues (Levitt and Snyder, 1997, Chen, 2008, Elinder et


                                                                                                      1
al., 2008) suggest that personal economic conditions affect voting behavior, although some of
this evidence is contested (Green, 2006a).1 Beyond immediate concerns about the existence of
suitable individual level data combining political preferences with government transfer receipt,
omitted variables and reverse causality are likely. For instance, if targeting political “core
supporters” is more effective, as predicted by some pre-electoral competition models (Lindbek
and Weibull, 1987, Cox and McCubbins, 1984, Verdier and Snyder, 2002), one might find a
spurious positive correlation between transfer receipt and political support that does not
constitute a causal effect of the former on the latter, as parties make tactical decisions about
which groups will respond most to transfers. A related difficulty arises if certain social groups,
such as the poor, are more likely to benefit from transfers while at the same time displaying
partisan political preferences, in particular for left-wing parties that favor redistribution.2
         While the empirical claim that voters respond retrospectively to macroeconomic
conditions and government transfers is largely accepted, despite the econometric concerns
described above, considerable disagreement also exists on the interpretation of these patterns,
including the true causal magnitudes, and their implications for theories of voter preference
formation. An early model of voter decision-making based on naïve “adaptive retrospection” fits
the data and can in principle generate a political business cycle (Nordhaus, 1975), but it suffers
from logical weaknesses: if voters respond adaptively, strategic governments can systematically
“fool” voters by adopting expansionary policies on the eve of re-election. Yet aware of
politicians’ distorted incentives, rational voters should dismiss such policies as inconsequential
to their welfare, eliminating politicians’ strategic incentive to engage in expansionary policies.



1
  Levitt and Snyder (1997) study the effect of spending at the district level on voting behavior in U.S. House of
Representatives elections. They instrument spending in each district with spending in neighboring districts within
the same state, and find a positive effect of non-transfer federal spending on the incumbent’s vote share, but
surprisingly no effect of transfer spending. A possible concern with their IV strategy is a violation of the exclusion
restriction, for instance, if spending on roads or military bases in nearby districts directly affects voters’ choices.
Sole-Olle and Sorribas-Navarro (2008) use a similar approach and estimate positive impacts of government
spending on incumbent support in Spain. Chen (2008a, 2008b) estimates the impact of transfers on voting in the
U.S. Chen uses aggregated voting data and relies on the quasi-random path of hurricanes to predict federal transfers.
Green (2006a) uses the discontinuity in assignment to Progresa across Mexican communities to estimate voting
impacts, and finds a slightly larger incumbent vote share in treated communities but this pattern is also present
before the program, suggesting endogenous political selection of beneficiaries rather than a causal impact.
2
  A related literature explores the implications of voters’ political ideology on political parties’ transfer choices.
Dahlberg and Johansson (2002) find support for the swing voter model using the introduction of discretionary funds
in Sweden, while others find evidence of core voters being targeted (Case, 2001, Schady, 2000, Green 2006b). There
is also evidence of direct vote buying in Latin America, including Schaffer (2007) and Stokes (2005).

                                                                                                                     2
         Springing from the 1980s rational expectation revolution, several scholars have shown
how political business cycles can arise even in the presence of “rational” voting. In this view,
past economic performance matters to rational voters to the extent they help predict future
outcomes. While some versions simply rely of wage stickiness and output surprises to produce
booms and busts around election times (e.g. Alesina et al., 1993), micro-founded theories of
rational business cycle embedded in models of asymmetric information and politician career
concerns (like Ferejohn, 1986, Rogoff, 1990, Persson and Tabellini, 2002, chapter 4, Besley,
chapter 3) suggest in particular that incumbents use expansionary policies to signal their quality
or competence to voters. In a world with asymmetric information about incumbent competence,
good macroeconomic performance serves a useful signaling role, and, as in the literature on CEO
compensation (Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001), elections provide high powered incentives for
politicians with career concerns to exert greater effort. In such models, retrospective voting is
fully consistent with rational forward-looking voter decision-making.
         A related but distinct rationale also relying on asymmetric information between
politicians and voters has been invoked to explain why targeted transfers might affect rational
voters’ choices: government transfers could act as a signal to imperfectly informed citizens about
incumbents’ preferences for different socio-demographic groups. In this spirit, Drazen and
Eslava (2006) develop a formal model where it is rational for voters targeted by government
transfers to have stronger political preferences for the incumbent, as they presumably learn that
their population subgroup is also more likely to be favored by that party again in the future.3
         The assertion that voters are fully rational, in the sense that they gather and process all
relevant information to maximize expected future outcomes when making their political choices,
is arguably a blunt view of reality, especially in light of the growing body of empirical evidence
from psychology and economics demonstrating more complex individual motivations
(DellaVigna, 2009). Some empirical evidence in political economy also increasingly leans
against the textbook models of perfectly rational retrospective voters discussed above. Alesina et
al. (1993) reject the rational retrospection model using data on U.S. presidential elections in the
context of a structural model, and Wolfers (2009) shows that U.S. voters are only partially able
to extract a signal of incumbent ability based on local economic outcomes. That voters are


3
 A growing empirical literature shows that politician identity strongly affects policy preferences, most notably
Pande (2003) and Chattopadhyay and Duflo (2004).

                                                                                                                   3
unable to perfectly assess government policies and politician competence is similarly attested to
by their tendency to punish incumbents for natural disasters (Cole et al., 2008) and even shark
attacks (Achen and Bartels, 2004). The issues of reciprocity, fairness and gratitude (Rabin, 1993,
Cox et al., 2007) that have been shown to be empirically relevant in real-world labor market
situations (Gneezy and List, 2006, Kube et al., 2007) could plausibly also play a role in the
evolution of voters’ political decision making
       To contribute to the understanding of voter decision-making, in this paper, we measure
the extent of voters’ responsiveness to targeted public transfers by exploiting the quasi-random
assignment of a large anti-poverty program in Uruguay, together with individual micro-data on
expressed support for the incumbent government. In March 2005, against the backdrop of an
economic crisis, a center-left coalition took power in Uruguay for the first time and swiftly
launched a large anti-poverty program, called PANES. The main components of PANES were a
cash transfer and a food card (basically a debit card pre-loaded with a certain sum of money that
could be spent only on food). Unlike some recent Latin American anti-poverty programs
(notably Progresa/Oportunidades in Mexico), PANES was conceived as a temporary program
from its inception. Household eligibility for the program was determined by a predicted income
score based on a large number of pre-treatment covariates. Only households with scores below a
predetermined threshold were eligible for PANES. Around eighteen months following the start of
the program, households with income scores in the neighborhood of the threshold were surveyed
and asked a series of questions including their support for the current government, and a second
similar follow-up survey took place the following year. Because assignment to the program near
the threshold was nearly “as good as random”, we are able to circumvent the problems of reverse
causality, endogenous political selection, and omitted variables highlighted above to more
reliably estimate the impact of transfers on political preferences.
       To preview our main findings, program beneficiaries are much more likely to support the
incumbent than non-beneficiaries, by 11 to 14 percentage points, and these effects are
statistically significant at high levels of confidence and pass numerous regression discontinuity
validity checks. Uruguay has highly developed democratic political institutions for a middle-
income country, suggesting that some of the political findings could also be relevant for
wealthier countries. In a novel twist that helps us understand voter motivations and overcome



                                                                                                    4
certain misreporting concerns, we also use post-program survey data to show that the positive
impacts on support for the incumbent persist even in the year after the program ended.
        We next adapt a formal model of rational but poorly informed voters learning about
politicians’ redistributive preferences to assess whether this framework can rationalize the main
empirical patterns, and in particular account for the persistent impacts on political support into
the post-program period. An empirical exercise indicates that the estimated impacts on political
support for the government due to the transfer program, and, importantly, the persistence of these
effects into the year after the program ends, can in fact be reconciled with this model. Though we
cannot definitively disentangle this rational learning model from behavioral explanations relying
on reciprocity, and both plausibly play a role in driving our findings, this exercise indicates that a
standard political economy framework can in fact go a long way towards rationalizing voter
decision-making.
        The paper proceeds as follows. Section I presents details of the PANES program and the
data. Section II investigates the effect of the transfer program on political support for the
government, and section III presents a formal model of voter learning about politician
redistributive preferences and fits it to the program data, providing insights into the channels
behind the increase in political support. The final section concludes.


I. THE PANES PROGRAM IN URUGUAY
Uruguay is a small Latin American country, home to 3.3 million individuals, half of whom live
in the capital of Montevideo. The country experienced rapid economic growth in the first
decades of the twentieth century, and was among the first countries in the region to complete the
demographic transition, implement universal primary education, and establish a generous old age
pension system. Although economic growth stagnated in the second half of the century, Uruguay
is still among the most developed Latin American countries according to the UNDP Human
Development Index, with strong life expectancy and schooling indicators (Supplementary
Appendix Table A1). Currently, PPP-adjusted annual per capita income is just below
US$10,000. According to The Economist Intelligence Unit, the country’s political system has
low levels of corruption and free and fair elections.4

4
 The Economist ranks Uruguay as one of only two “full democracies” in Latin America (the other is Costa Rica).
Transparency International ranks Uruguay second only to Chile in the region in perceived control of corruption (see
Appendix Table A1).

                                                                                                                 5
        After years of economic stagnation, the country experienced a severe economic crisis in
2002. Between 2001 and 2002 per capita income fell 8%, the poverty rate increased from 18.8%
to 23.6%, unemployment reached its highest level in twenty years (at 17%), the exchange rate
collapsed, and a financial crisis led to bank runs. The crisis laid bare the weakness of the existing
social safety net, which was largely focused on transfers to the elderly population.5 Yet
constrained in part by a severe fiscal adjustment, the ruling center-right Colorado party
government (which had been in power since 1999 in coalition with the National party) focused
on expanding existing programs rather than adopting new measures, with the exception of a
small emergency food plan.
        The left-wing Frente Amplio (FA) coalition took power in March 2005 after winning the
October 2004 elections, capitalizing on widespread dissatisfaction with the economy and the
previous government’s management of the crisis. The FA campaigned on a platform of extensive
pro-poor redistribution and structural economic reforms. The new FA government swiftly created
the Ministry for Social Development (Ministerio de Desarrollo Social, MIDES) and
implemented the National Social Emergency Plan (Plan de Atención Nacional a la Emergencia
Social), or PANES, which we study.


I.a PANES objectives and components
The PANES program was designed to be temporary, running from April 2005 to December 2007,
and had two main aims: first, providing direct assistance to households that had experienced a
rapid deterioration in living standards since the onset of the 2001-2002 crisis; and second, and in
light of rising poverty during the 1980s and 1990s, strengthening the human and social capital of
the poor, to enable them to eventually climb out of poverty on their own. PANES is the most
ambitious and generous anti-poverty program in the country’s history, and was heavily
publicized by the government and the mass media.
         The target population consisted of the poorest households in the country, namely the
bottom quintile of households falling below the national poverty line. PANES included several
distinct components. The largest element was a monthly cash transfer (ingreso ciudadano,
“citizen income”), whose value was set initially at UY$1,360 (US$70 at the January 2008 real

5
  In 2002, total expenditure on elderly pensions represented 65% of all government social expenditures, 96% of cash
transfers and almost 13% of GDP. This is reflected in marked differences in poverty incidence by age: while nearly
half of children under age five lived in poverty that year, the rate for those 65 and older was only 8% (UNDP, 2008).

                                                                                                                   6
exchange rate), independent of household size. This is a very large transfer for the target
population, amounting to more than 50% of average pre-program household self-reported
income among program applicants.6 Households with children or pregnant women were also
entitled to a food card (tarjeta alimentaria), an in-kind transfer that operated through an
electronic debit card, whose monthly value varied between UY$300 and US$800 (UY$15 and
US$41) depending on the number of children and pregnant women in the household. Around
seventy percent of PANES beneficiaries also received the food card.7 Additional but less
common components included public works employment opportunities, education and training,
and health care subsidies (further details on PANES are in Supplementary Appendix B).8


I.b PANES eligibility, enrollment and baseline data
Participant enrollment occurred in stages. All low income households were first publicly invited
to apply via mass media outlets, and the government also made a large outreach effort, sending
enumerators to poor communities with the intent of boosting applications. After an initial
enrollment phase, where applicants self-reported their income and household size, the 188,671
applicant households were then visited by MIDES personnel and administered a detailed baseline
survey, providing information on household characteristics, housing, income, work, and
schooling, characteristics that were used to determine program eligibility. Of the 188,671
applicant households, 102,353 households eventually became program beneficiaries, nearly 10%
of all Uruguayan households.
        To determine program assignment, the government used a predicted income score that
depended only on household socioeconomic characteristics collected in the baseline survey, not
directly on self-reported reported income itself. The income score was devised by researchers at
the University of the Republic (Universidad de la República), including one of the authors of this
paper (Arim et al., 2005), and was based on a probit model of the likelihood of being below a
critical per capita income level, using a highly saturated function of household variables. The

6
  One should be cautious in interpreting this figure as some households might have perceived an incentive to
underreport baseline income. As noted below, self-reported baseline income is not used in the predicted income
score that determined PANES program eligibility.
7
  Nearly 85% of applicant households had at least one child and/or a pregnant woman. However, this component of
the program took same time to be implemented due to logistical difficulties. This explains why by the beginning of
2007 only around 70% of beneficiary households report having received a food card.
8
  The transfer program continued alongside a system of family allowances that had been in place since 2004. Both
PANES eligible and ineligible households maintained access to that program, which was much less generous.

                                                                                                                     7
underlying model was estimated using the 2004 National Household Survey (Encuesta Continua
de Hogares). The resulting coefficient estimates were then used to predict an income score for
each applicant household using PANES baseline survey data.9 Only households with predicted
income scores below a predetermined threshold were assigned to program treatment.
         The choice of using predicted income rather than actual reported income was driven by a
number of factors. First, many households had highly unstable income during the crisis, so
current income was seen as a bad proxy for permanent income, and thus less likely to target the
chronically poor. Second, because the target population often worked in the informal sector, it
was difficult to verify their reported income levels against official social security records,
opening up the risk of misreporting. By using a wide array of socioeconomic characteristics in
the income score, as opposed to self-reported income, the government hoped to minimize
strategic misreporting.10
         This discontinuous rule for program assignment was suggested to Ministry officials by
the authors of this paper with the explicit goal of carrying out the prospective evaluation of
PANES. Government officials proved remarkably receptive to the proposal and were uninvolved
in the design and calculation of the eligibility score, which was computed with the assistance of
bureaucrats at the Social Security Administration (Banco de Previsión Social). Similarly, neither
the enumerators nor households were ever informed about the exact variables that entered into
the score, the weights attached to them, or the program eligibility threshold, easing concerns
about manipulation of the score and also making the program assignment process somewhat
opaque to both enumerators and applicants.11 Moreover, the score was developed in August-

9
  Variables used to predict income included: the type of household (head only; head and spouse; head and children;
head, spouse and children only; with non-relatives, with relatives other than head, spouse or children), an indicator
for public employees in the household, an indicator for pensioners in the household, average years of education of
individuals over age 18 and its square, interactions of age indicators (0-5, 6-17, 18-24, 25-39, 40-54, 45-64, 65 and
over) with gender, indicators for household head age, residential overcrowding, whether the household was renting,
toilet facilities (no toilet, flush toilet, pit latrine, other) and a wealth index based on durables ownership (e.g.,
refrigerator, TV, car, etc.). The weights attached to the observed covariates to determine the predicted income score
differed between Montevideo and the rest of the country. The eligibility thresholds were also allowed to vary
slightly across the country’s five main administrative regions to entitle similar numbers of poor households in each
area of the program. The regions are: Montevideo, North (Artigas, Salto, Rivera), Center-North (Paysandú, Río
Negro, Tacuarembó, Durazno, Treinta y Tres, Cerro Largo), Center-South (Soriano, Florida, Flores, Lavalleja,
Rocha) and South (Colonia, San José, Canelones, Maldonado).
10
   Martinelli and Parker (2009) discuss the risks of under- and over-reporting of assets in the context of a similar
anti-poverty program eligibility score in Mexico.
11
   A relatively small number of households (7,946) were included in the program before August 2005, before the
predicted income score was even constructed, but were later removed if their score exceeded the eligibility
threshold. An additional 2,552 homeless households were included in the program irrespective of their income

                                                                                                                    8
September 2005, months after the baseline survey was collected from households in our sample,
the timing making it impossible for enumerators or households to know exactly how to
manipulate surveys for a formula that did not yet exist. The eligibility score components and
weights were eventually made public on the MIDES website after the program ended.12 The
program was fully rolled out within a year of its launch in April 2005. On an annual basis, the
total cost of the program was 0.41% of GDP and 1.95% of government social expenditures. The
program was entirely financed through Uruguayan government revenue.13
        The PANES program was designed to be temporary ending in December 2007 (see Figure
1). In January 2008, PANES was replaced by a new transfer program, the Plan de Equidad (PE).
PE was part of a broader tax and social program reform, and also included a generous cash
transfer for poor households with children, with an average PE monthly transfer of UY$1,300
(US$67 at the January 2008 real exchange rate), nearly the PANES level. A revised predicted
income score was computed for all original PANES applicant households (whether beneficiaries
or not) based on the same baseline characteristics measured in 2005, but using a new formula,
and also featured a different threshold score. Households did not need to reapply for the PE, as
inclusion was automatic among eligible households. PANES households were informed by mail
of the program’s end date in late 2007, and both PANES and non-PANES households who were
admitted to the new PE program received a written formal communication from MIDES about
their inclusion in the new program.
         PANES beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries in our sample, near the original PANES
eligibility threshold, were equally likely to receive PE transfers in 2008, as discussed further


score. The score was slightly modified in September 2005 when MIDES realized that few one person households
would receive program assistance, and the new formula (which we use) applied from that point forward. There was
an additional participation condition that in practice disqualified around 10% of applicants: only households with
actual monthly per capita income below UY$1,300, excluding pension earnings and child benefits, were
administered the baseline survey and could thus apply for. Household income for eligibility purposes was computed
as the maximum of self-reported income and earnings reported in official social security records. Hence, the
predicted income score was not even computed for households with income exceeding that threshold. All
participating households were informed of this rule before applying. Beneficiary households whose social security
earnings later exceeded the UY$1,300 threshold eventually lost eligibility.
12
   Program participation was also technically contingent on school attendance of all children under age 14 years and
regular health checkups for all children and pregnant women, as in many other Latin American conditional cash
transfer programs (e.g., Mexico’s Progresa/Oportunidades). However, due to lack of monitoring capacity, the
program was unconditional de facto, a fact publicly acknowledged by MIDES after the end of the program, and there
is no record of any household losing PANES benefits for failing to meet these criteria. Despite non-enforcement of
the conditionalities, most beneficiaries were aware of their existence: 56% of beneficiary households report knowing
of at least one program conditionality.
13
   Although payment did not begin until the second half of 2005, beneficiaries were paid arrears back to enrolment.

                                                                                                                  9
below. The PE program also involved expansion of food card coverage to all PE households,
whether earlier in PANES or not. However, the implementation of this additional component was
delayed for new household until mid-2008, and thus in early 2008 when our second follow-up
survey was carried out the former PANES households (among PE beneficiaries) were still
receiving their food card while non-PANES households were not.


I.c. Follow-up surveys in 2007 and 2008
Figure 1 presents a timeline of the PANES program and data collection. The first PANES follow-
up survey was carried out between October 2006 and March 2007, roughly eighteen months after
the start of the program. The questionnaire was designed by the authors of this paper, in
collaboration with Verónica Amarante at the University of the Republic, Ministry of Social
Development staff, and the Economics and Sociology Departments at the University of the
Republic. The University departments were also in charge of data collection. To exploit the
discontinuity design, the original survey sample contained data on approximately 3,000
households, including both eligible and ineligible applicants, in the neighborhood of the program
eligibility threshold score (households with a predicted probability of being below the target
income level within two percentage points of the cutoff eligibility score). There was a desire to
over-represent eligible households, leading the sample to be split between eligible and ineligible
households in a 2:1 ratio.14 Although the initial non-response rate was relatively high at 36%,
replacement households with roughly the same score as the non-response households were
subsequently interviewed; we discuss the implications of non-response below. Since the
eligibility formula was slightly modified in the early months of the program, we restrict the
sample to households whose score was computed after September 2005 (thus using the final
eligibility formula), who were not homeless, and with a valid response to the question on support
for the current government. These criteria disqualified around 1,100 households.15 Overall, the
analysis sample contains complete data on the remaining 1,942 households.
         In addition to information on housing, household composition, durables, work, income
and schooling, the survey collected information on health, economic expectations, knowledge of


14
   This main sample was supplemented with data on 500 eligible households farther away from the eligibility
threshold, although we do not use these data in the discontinuity analysis in this paper.
15
   These excluded households were used in an earlier version of this paper, and the main political support impacts
and statistical significance levels remain unchanged (not shown).

                                                                                                                     10
political rights, participation in social groups, opinions about the PANES program, and political
attitudes, including support for the government, our key outcome variable.
        A second follow-up household survey round was collected in February and March 2008,
three months after PANES had ended and had been replaced by the PE (Figure 1). It was similar
to the first follow-up survey, with the addition of several questions on respondents’ social and
political attitudes, for instance, a question on respondents’ national pride as a Uruguayan.
Attrition across follow-up rounds is a minor concern, as 92% of households from the first follow-
up round were successfully re-surveyed in the second follow-up, and was balanced across
PANES and non-PANES households.


I.d Program implementation
Figure 2 reports the proportion of sample households who benefited from the program at any
point since its inception, as a function of the baseline predicted income score. The figure is based
on program administrative records. The score was normalized so that all figures are centered on
zero, the eligibility threshold, and such that predicted income increases moving to the right on
the horizontal axis.16 In this and all subsequent figures (though not in the regression tables) the
normalized predicted income score is discretized into intervals. Since there are approximately
twice as many households to the left of the eligibility threshold (i.e., the PANES eligible
households) as to the right, we present twice as many cells for eligible households (30) as for
ineligible ones (15), such that each cell contains approximately the same number of observations
(43 households). These cells thus correspond to consecutive percentiles of the score distribution.
A linear polynomial on each side of the discontinuity is also fit to the data.
        The figure demonstrates that program implementation was remarkably clean. Among
applicants, practically all potential beneficiaries – i.e., those with a standardized predicted
income score below zero – benefited from the program. The opposite holds for ineligible
households, and the discontinuity in program receipt at the threshold is 99 percentage points.
This implies that enforcement of the rule was nearly as strict as implied by the letter of the law. 17


16
   Official Uruguayan government documents report these graphs on a reverse horizontal axis, i.e., with a predicted
“poverty score”. Obviously, this is only a presentational issue and makes no difference to the estimates.
17
   Self-reported information from the follow-up surveys is highly correlated with official records. Self-reports
indicate that 97% of beneficiary households report having participated in the program and only 7% of non-eligible
households report ever having participated, for a discontinuity at the threshold of over 90% (compared to a
discontinuity of 99% using official administrative records)..

                                                                                                                 11
        Although the program included a variety of components, we do not attempt to disentangle
what roles these different elements played in shaping outcomes since there was potentially non-
random selection into some of them. We concentrate instead on the overall effect of program
participation at the threshold, which for the vast majority of beneficiary households consisted
solely of the monthly income transfer and the food card.


II. RESULTS
We use the two follow-up surveys, together with the baseline survey (and the Latinobarómetro
public opinion surveys in some cases) to explore PANES program effects on political support for
the FA government, the main outcome of interest. We first present average treatment effects (in
Table 1), then test the validity of our identification assumption, namely that assignment around
the eligibility threshold was nearly “as good as random”, as envisioned in the prospective
evaluation design (Table 2). A concern is manipulation of program assignment by either officials
or enumerators, due to strategic responses or a correlation between survey non-response and
political views. We also begin to highlight the channels through which PANES affects attitudes
by investigating post-program income and participation in other programs (Table 3).


II.a. Impacts on political support for the government
We use the following question from the follow-up survey to measure support for the incumbent
government: “In relation to the previous government, do you believe that the current government
is worse (0), the same (1/2), better (1)?”.18
        Figure 3 presents support for the government as a function of the normalized predicted
income score. The discontinuity at zero provides an estimate of the proportion of individuals
who support the current government in the PANES eligible group versus the ineligible. PANES
households are significantly more pro-government: among eligible households support for the
current government is around 91%, compared to 77% for ineligible households (still a high level
of support, as might be expected since the left-wing coalition is widely supported by the poor).
The estimated discontinuity implies that program eligibility is associated with a 14 percentage


18
  The questionnaire presents responses in the following order “1: the same, 2: worse, 3: better. Supplementary
Appendix Table A2 provides exact wording (translated) and codes for this question and the other main survey
questions included in the analysis. We also combined responses into a simple indicator for responding that the
current government is strictly “better” than the opposition and get nearly identical results (not shown).

                                                                                                                 12
point increase in support for the government over the opposition coalition. This provides
evidence that households’ political views are responsive to government transfers.
         The outcome measure we use merits further discussion. One concern is that the question
refers to preferences for the incumbent relative to the previous government, not to the current
opposition coalition, hence not allowing for any policy repositioning by the opposition. The
framing of the question may also fail to accommodate expectations about government
performance going forward. Actual voting data at the individual level would be the ideal
outcome, but is typically impossible to collect in democracies given the secret ballot. Moreover,
no national elections were held in Uruguay during the 2005-2008 period. A second best
alternative is survey voting intentions, although these were not collected in either the baseline or
follow-up surveys, since MIDES feared this would appear inappropriate.
         To circumvent these difficulties, we examine several other useful measures of political
attitudes contained in our surveys, including a question in the 2008 follow-up on “confidence in
the President” (coded 0=“Little” 1/2=“Some confidence”, 1=“A lot”). The estimated
discontinuity in this variable at the threshold is similar to the impact on FA support, at 9
percentage points, and is highly statistically significant (section III.c below contains further
discussion). We included this “confidence in the President” question in the survey in part
because a question with the exact same wording is included in nationally representative
Latinobarómetro surveys, allowing us to evaluate how it correlates with voting intentions and
actual votes.19 The Uruguayan electoral system is presidential (with proportional representation
in Congress), so confidence in the President is a compelling measure of voting intentions.
Indeed, in the Latinobarómetro survey (2005-2007), the correlation between confidence in the
President and stated FA voting intentions is very strong, at 0.50 (statistically significant at 99%
confidence). Moreover, we matched up Latinobarómetro data to actual vote share (at the
Uruguayan departamento level, roughly equivalent to a U.S. county) and find a correlation
between stated FA voting intentions and actual FA votes in the 2004 election at 0.85. Thus while
we cannot translate the gains in self-expressed FA support due to PANES into a precise number
of additional votes for the FA, expressed support and actual votes are likely to be closely related.


19
  Latinobarómetro is a survey conducted every year in 18 Latin American countries by the Latinobarómetro
Corporation, a non-profit organization based in Chile. The survey gathers information on public opinion, attitudes,
behavior and values. Every year around 19,000 households are interviewed throughout the continent, with a
nationally representative sample of approximately 1,200 households in Uruguay.

                                                                                                                  13
         To refine the analysis, we next present regression results to explore robustness to
different parametric specifications and the inclusion of baseline control variables. Let Si be the
predicted income score for household i (where a higher score denotes higher predicted income)
and let E denote the eligibility threshold, such that in principle only households with scores
below E are eligible for treatment. Let Ni=Si–E be the normalized income score. Following Card
and Lee (2008), we regress a variable of interest (here being a PANES beneficiary) for household
i, yi, on a constant, an indicator for households below the threshold 1(Ni<0), and two parametric
polynomials in the normalized score (f1(Ni) and f2(Ni)), on each side of the threshold, such that
f1(0)=f2(0)=0:
(1)               yi=0 + 1 1(Ni<0) + f1(Ni) + 1(Ni<0) f2(Ni) + ui


The impact of program assignment is captured by 1, i.e., the change in y at the eligibility
threshold. The two fitted plots in Figures 2 and 3 (and subsequent figures) are obtained by letting
f1(.) and f2(.) be linear, though in the regressions we also allow for quadratic functions.
         The top panel of Table 1 reports first-stage regression discontinuity (RD) estimates of
equation (1) with an indicator for ever being a PANES beneficiary household as the dependent
variable. Columns 1 to 3 present specifications with different parameterizations of the functions
f1(.) and f2(.): no polynomial, a first order polynomial (as in Figure 2), and a quadratic
polynomial, respectively. The first stage is strong and estimates vary minimally, between 0.98
and 0.99 across specifications, including those that also control for a variety of baseline
household controls (columns 4-6).
          The second panel of Table 1 reports reduced form intention-to-treat (ITT) estimates,
where the dependent variable is political support for the government in the first follow-up survey
in 2007. All estimates are of similar magnitude and statistically significant, suggesting an
increase of 11 to 14 percentage points in support for the government among those eligible for
PANES. We strongly reject the hypothesis that government transfer income does not affect
support for the government.20
          The third panel extends the analysis to the 2008 survey, which was collected after
PANES had ended, and finds similar though somewhat smaller gains in FA support of between 8


20
  This effect is mainly driven by a shift among beneficiaries from indifference between the two parties to support
for the government, although there is also a small reduction in expressed support for the opposition (not shown).

                                                                                                                     14
and 12 percentage points.21 This result is displayed graphically in Figure 4. The program we
study thus had persistent impacts on political support for the government, suggesting that past
transfers also factor meaningfully into voters’ decision-making.22


II.b Potential threats to the validity of the RD estimates
One potential concern with the results in Table 1 is the possibility that assignment to PANES
somehow favored households with higher underlying support for the governing Frente Amplio
(FA) party. Evidence on manipulation of a program eligibility score in a recent Colombian health
insurance program (Conover and Camacho, 2007) suggests that this is far from a remote
possibility. Unfortunately, we lack data on baseline household political orientation, which
prevents us from directly testing this alternative hypothesis; however, a variety of evidence
makes it appear implausible.
         First off, the evidence in Figure 2 that virtually all eligible households received the
program while nearly all ineligible households did not, suggests that blatant patronage is unlikely
to have occurred. An alternative possibility is that the variables recorded in the baseline survey,
and that determined the predicted income score for PANES eligibility, were manipulated by
either government officials or enumerators, or that households with closer FA ties somehow
learned the formula and were thus able to answer the questionnaire strategically to gain
eligibility. However, this is essentially impossible since the formula was not yet developed until
months after the baseline surveys had been collected in 2005. The predicted income score
formula was also developed by outside researchers and never publicly disclosed or shared with
21
   In results not shown, we find that expressed political support for the government is highly persistent at the
household level across the two follow-up survey rounds. To check whether the discontinuity at the true cut-off
provides the best fit for the data, we have run 30 additional RD regressions using the political support variable (in
specifications like that in Table 1 column 2), where we “incorrectly” set the threshold at equally spaced intervals
around the true eligibility threshold (ranging from -0.015 to 0.015, where the true threshold is zero). The true
eligibility threshold provides the best fit to the data as measured by the regression R2 (not shown), providing
reassurance that the discontinuity we exploit is a genuine feature of the data. As an additional robustness check, we
take advantage of the fact that the PANES eligibility threshold differs slightly across Uruguayan regions to estimate
a difference-in-differences model, conditioning on the un-standardized income score and regional fixed effects and
focusing on the coefficient estimate on an indicator for PANES eligibility (in that region). Political support impacts
are statistically significant at 95% confidence and are remarkably similar to those in Table 1 (not shown).
22
   In further analysis not presented here, we explored the possibility of heterogeneous treatment among different
population subgroups. While older individuals and those living in Montevideo are marginally less responsive to the
transfer in some specifications, these effects are generally not statistically significant (results not shown). In an
earlier version of this paper (Manacorda et al, 2009) we also found significantly larger PANES impacts among
households with lower baseline self-reported income, and for households predicted to be politically moderate (fitted
using Latinobarómetro data), using the 2007 survey data. However, these results are not robust to using the second
2008 follow-up, and we do not emphasize them here.

                                                                                                                   15
the MIDES officials implementing PANES until after household assignment had been carried out
(although the formula was of course presented to and approved by the Minister of MIDES).
         As a first check for non-random assignment around the eligibility threshold, we estimate
equation 1 for multiple pre-treatment covariates in Table 2 (and present the results graphically in
supplementary appendix Figure A1). If score manipulation systematically occurred, we might
find these characteristics varying discontinuously at the eligibility threshold, to the extent that
they are correlated with households’ political orientation. Focusing on our preferred specification
with the linear fits (as in Table 1, column 2), we fail to find evidence of a discontinuity at the
threshold for any household covariate including: average household members’ age and education
(among those over 18), income, and for the gender, age and years of education of the survey
respondent, as well as in survey non-response. Consistent with this validity check, the results in
Table 1 are almost unchanged when household controls are included (columns 4-6). Similarly,
there is no evidence of a difference in voter turnout in the previous national election at the
eligibility threshold: self-reported turnout in the previous national election was 93% for
ineligible households and 94% for the eligible (and the difference is not statistically significant),
in line with the consistently high turnout in Uruguay, where voting is mandatory.23
           As an additional check for manipulation around the eligibility threshold, we present the
non-parametric distribution of the standardized score. If manipulation occurred so that some
ineligible households were assigned a low predicted income score, one would expect excess
bunching of households just below the threshold (DiNardo and Lee, 2004; McCrary, 2008a).
Supplementary appendix Figure A2 reports the proportion of households with different score
levels, for the population of households (20,463) in the neighborhood of the threshold (-0.02 to
0.02). Following McCrary (2008a) we augment this graph with a local linear estimator of the
density function on either side of the threshold. There is no indication of households just below
the eligibility threshold being overrepresented relative to those just ineligible.24 Manipulation of
the eligibility score does not appear responsible for the effects in Table 1.
         Another concern is that non-response rates for the survey overall, or on the political
questions, were systematically related to program eligibility. This could be a concern even


23
   Voting is mandatory in Uruguay and citizens who fail to vote (other than for justified reasons, i.e., hospitalization)
are officially barred from receiving public benefits and transfers, enrolling in public education, accessing public
employment or leaving the country, unless they pay a non-trivial fine.
24
   The point estimate of the log difference at the threshold in Figure 3 is just 0.041 (s.e. 0.027).

                                                                                                                      16
though non-respondents were in practice replaced by households with a similar predicted income
score, if unobservables differ for non-responding households. In Table 2 we report the
relationship between survey non-response and PANES eligibility among households in the
original sample as well as the probability of being a replacement household in the final analysis
sample, and neither coefficient estimate is statistically significant at conventional confidence
levels. We also do not find a significant relationship between survey non-response and baseline
log household income, or with income interacted with PANES eligibility (not shown), further
evidence that differential attrition as a function of program eligibility is not a leading concern.
         A final concern is that PANES households might have expressed higher support for the
government in the follow-up survey for fear of losing their benefits. This is unlikely given the
degree of institutional transparency and relative lack of corruption in Uruguay, but precautions
were taken to address this concern during data collection, nonetheless. Households were not
informed about the precise objectives of the follow-up survey: both the title of the survey and
information provided to respondents only referred to the University departments administering
the survey and neither made specific mention of PANES or MIDES.25 Questions about the
PANES program were only asked at the very end of the questionnaire and after the questions on
political views. Both follow-up survey questionnaires were modeled after the National
Household Survey, further easing concerns that respondents would associate the survey with
PANES. A final piece of evidence against strategic responses to the political questions is the fact
that stated support for the government among PANES households remains higher in 2008 even
after PANES had ended.


II.c. Greater support among recipients - or bitterness among non-recipients?
A remaining issue is one of interpretation, namely whether the estimated PANES impacts are due
not only to treated households being more supportive of the government, but whether the
ineligible are also bitter at their exclusion from the program, in which case the estimates are a
combination of two distinct effects. The growing field evidence on the power of negative
reciprocity in driving labor effort and other economically relevant behaviors (surveyed in

25
  The wording used by enumerators in the consent statement was: “Good morning/afternoon, my name is ___ and
I’m a student at the University of the Republic. We are currently in this neighborhood carrying out a survey of
families who live here. Your name and address were randomly chosen from a list of neighbors (provided by the
National Statistics Bureau). Could I ask you a few questions? I remind you that all information that you give me is
confidential (Statistics Secret Law #16.016) and will only be used for statistical purposes.” (authors’ translation).

                                                                                                                    17
DellaVigna, 2009) suggests this is potentially important. A finding that those who barely lost out
on receiving the PANES transfer have lower political support due to bitterness is not a threat to
our overall strategy, though, since the RD design still allows us to test our overarching empirical
hypothesis, namely, that differential transfer receipt due to PANES at the eligibility score
threshold significantly impacts political support. However, it would have implications for
understanding the net support the FA gained or lost among those households near the threshold.
          Although there is no direct way to measure these effects, we provide suggestive
evidence that any embitterment effect is unlikely to be large, and that most of the support
difference we estimate is due to gains among PANES beneficiaries. We use the Latinobarómetro
opinion data to predict household support for the President. As in the second follow-up survey of
February-March 2008, the September 2007 Latinobarómetro asks: “How much confidence do
you have in the President?”, which we again code up to take on values from zero to one.26 If the
Latinobarómetro sample contains relatively few PANES applicants (as they were a small share of
all Uruguayan households), one can estimate the counterfactual level of confidence in the
President among beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries by simply extrapolating what is observed in
the population at large. To do so, we run a regression of confidence in the president on a range of
household covariates in the 2007 Latinobarómetro, and use the predictions from this model to
derive counterfactual support among households in our 2008 sample.27 It is reassuring that the
correlation between the predictions from this model and actual responses in our follow-up survey
data is positive and large (at 0.49), and statistically significant at 99% confidence.
          Figure 5 reports predicted confidence in the President for various levels of the
normalized income score, as well as presenting the actual level of confidence in the President in
the 2008 follow-up survey. Unsurprisingly, predicted support for the President is smooth around
the PANES eligibility discontinuity, since we are not controlling for a discontinuous function of
the eligibility score and have access to only a limited set of common respondent covariates (in
both the follow-up surveys and the Latinobarómetro). Nonetheless, predicted confidence in the

26
   Because the 2007 Latinobarómetro provides four possible answers to this question (1: None, 2: Little, 3: Some, 4:
Much) while the 2008 follow-up survey provides three possible answers (1: Little, 2: Some, 3: Much), we reclassify
the Latinobarómetro data by lumping the first two answers into one (1: None or little, 2: Some, 3: Much). As in the
other regressions we rescale these variables to vary between 0 and 1. Note that there is no question on confidence in
the President in the 2008 Latinobarómetro, unfortunately.
27
   To predict confidence in the President, we use a quadratic in respondent age, a quadratic in years of schooling and
interactions of these variables with the gender indicator, a home ownership indicator, an indicator for whether the
household has a color television set, and a car ownership indicator

                                                                                                                   18
President among ineligible households (to the right of zero) is very similar to the levels in the
follow-up survey and far below the support expressed by PANES beneficiaries, providing some
suggestive evidence against the hypothesis that embitterment is responsible for most of the
difference in government support between PANES eligible and ineligible households.


III. EXPLAINING PERSISTENT POLITICAL SUPPORT
III.a Impacts on income and participation in other programs
The estimates in the previous sections show a large increase in support for the government
among households that received the PANES transfer program. The next question is why.
          A leading explanation for the 2007 effects (when PANES was still ongoing) is that
households were insufficiently informed about the program’s temporary nature and thus
anticipated permanent living standard gains from the program. This explanation seems unlikely
since we find in 2007 survey data that only 3% of PANES beneficiaries believed the program
was permanent, while 57% knew it was temporary (and the remaining respondents were unsure).
          More importantly, the effect of PANES on support for the government is persistent to
2008, lasting even after the program had ended. The 2008 effect might be explained by the
PANES program leading to persistent living standards gains among former beneficiaries, if some
respondents interpreted the question about support for the government in terms of whether they
were personally better off under the current government than the previous one. However, the
notion that there were persistent gains in living standards is not borne out in the data. We first
report impacts on log per capita household income in the two follow-up surveys (Table 3, rows 1
and 2), in our preferred specification with linear polynomial controls. Per capita income is
significantly higher (by 18%) for PANES beneficiaries in 2007, but drops to near zero and is not
statistically significant in 2008 after the program had ended. Thus lasting income gains alone
cannot explain the persistent FA support gains in 2008. Note that self-reported per capita income
grew by a remarkable 25% for PANES ineligible households from 2005 to 2007, presumably due
to Uruguay’s rapid macroeconomic recovery after 2004, although mean reversion or
underreporting of baseline income could also be playing a role.28


28
   The estimated income gains in 2007 (UY$452) among PANES beneficiaries are smaller than the transfer amount
(UY$1,360) suggesting some offsetting behavioral responses in terms of reduced labor income from other sources,
although note that impacts on hours of labor supply are not statistically significant (not shown). While the income
transfer alone might have depressed household labor supply due to an income effect or due to the program being

                                                                                                                  19
          The PE program introduced in early 2008 enrolled equal proportions of households on
both sides of the PANES eligibility score threshold (Table 3 and Figure 6), at roughly 55% of
households, and this seems to rule out another possible channel for persistent 2008 FA support
gains among former PANES beneficiaries. While enrollment in the main PE program was equal
in 2008, however, former PANES beneficiaries were more likely to receive a food card in early
2008 (point estimate 0.145, s.e. 0.032), although this constituted only a relatively small monetary
amount relative to the main PANES and PE cash transfers. Interestingly, even if the PANES
beneficiaries who continued receiving a food card in 2008 are excluded from the analysis, the
effect on government support in 2008 remains statistically significant (estimate 0.079, s.e.
0.020).
          The experiences of PANES beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries had a major impact on
their perceptions of both the PANES and PE programs (Table 3). PANES beneficiaries have a far
more positive opinion about the PANES program, with support increasing from 58% among non-
beneficiaries up to 84% among beneficiaries, and this effect is highly significant. Similarly,
while households on both sides of the eligibility threshold have serious doubts about the fairness
of PANES targeting – with large majorities believing that some beneficiaries should not have
received the transfers, that some non-beneficiaries should have, and that the program should
have spread around transfers to additional households – these critical views are significantly less
pronounced among PANES beneficiaries, clear evidence of self-serving beliefs. Former PANES
beneficiaries also appear more knowledgeable about and supportive of the new PE transfers.
          The main takeaway message from this subsection is that a simple model where
contemporaneous transfers and income are the sole factors determining voters’ political
preferences cannot explain our finding that support for the FA remains higher among former
PANES beneficiaries into the post-program period. Similarly, continued income gains (from
government transfers or other sources) for former PANES beneficiaries are unlikely to explain


means tested, other PANES components (e.g., education and training and public works employment) likely acted in
the opposite direction, and these two effects appear to have roughly cancelled, leading to no discernible program
effect on work hours. This limited adult labor supply response is consistent with results from Mexico’s Progresa
program (Parker and Skoufias, 2000). We also find only modest positive effects of the program on current school
enrollment (for children aged 7-18) and medical visits in the last three months (for children aged 0-6 and women of
childbearing age, 14-35), not shown, perhaps due to the conditions officially attached to program receipt, which may
have swayed some households even though they were never enforced. However, there is no evidence of impacts on
durables ownership, home characteristics or self-reported health (see Amarante et al., 2008). Although there is no
detailed consumption or savings information in the survey, PANES households claim to have spent the transfer
primarily on food and clothes (71%), to pay utility bills (10%) and to repay debts or loans (10%).

                                                                                                                 20
their persistent increase in FA support in 2008, since these are minimal or nonexistent, and thus
we need to explore other channels to understand the evolution of political preferences.


III.b Voter learning about politician preferences: a model and calibration
The goal of this subsection is to calibrate parameter values in a standard political economy
model to assess whether it provides a reasonable fit to the PANES data. The attraction of this
approach is that, although transfer levels fell in 2008 for former PANES beneficiaries, earlier
transfers (from 2005-2007) may leave a legacy of greater government support if voters only
partially updated their beliefs about future transfers downwards after the introduction of the PE.
         The framework we develop, which is related to Drazen and Eslava (2006), assumes
asymmetric information between voters and politicians, with imperfect knowledge of politicians’
true redistributive preferences across population subgroups, i.e., those of different social classes,
different regions, by gender, education, and disability, etc. Politician campaign promises are a
form of cheap talk in the absence of a binding commitment technology, leaving room for
uncertainty about these preferences, and thus noisy priors before the FA came into power. Voters
then learn about politician preferences by observing the targeting of their social group in actual
government programs, and update beliefs about politician redistributive preferences according to
a standard Bayesian approach.29
         The assumption that voters also have poor information about the PANES targeting criteria
is also critical in what follows. Individuals fully informed about the PANES targeting rule, who
also knew their own predicted income score lay just to the right of the eligibility score threshold,
should rationally deduce that their chance of receiving a future government program is
effectively the same as a household located just to the left of the threshold. This would lead
expected future transfers to be equal for both groups of households, and thus no meaningful
difference in political support looking forward. However, these assumptions about voters’
program knowledge seem unrealistic in this context. In the case of PANES, the opacity of the
program targeting rule, which was not publicly released until the end of the program, means that
the observed targeting of the program delivers only an imperfect signal about government
preferences. This is true even for households, like those in our analysis, who lie near the program


29
  Note that we refer to politician and political party preferences interchangeably in what follows. We leave an
extension of this model that distinguishes between individual politician versus party preferences to future research.

                                                                                                                    21
eligibility score threshold (for whom the program inclusion criteria might appear particularly
unclear). Note that households were never provided with their predicted income score (the
variable used internally for program assignment) and thus do not even know whether they were
“close” to the threshold or not. It is also unrealistic for them to derive the formula on their own
through personal observation (of themselves and other households in their social circle, say)
given the many different household factors that entered into the predicted income model.
       We begin by describing politicians’ preferences in the model. The government in power
has true preferences over net transfers to socio-demographic subgroup i denoted i. The transfers
to each group in an actual government transfer program in period t, git, yields a noisy signal of
this underlying preference parameter: git = i + it where voters’ prior belief on the preference
parameter is distributed i0  N(i , 0 2), and it  N(0, 1). The assumption that 1/0 < 1 implies
that prior beliefs are less informative than actual policies in capturing true politician preferences,
perhaps due to the cheap talk problem alluded to above.
       Bayesian updating by voters implies that voters’ expected future transfer after t signals
from actual government programs is:
                                           1 /  02   t g is             t      
(2)             Et [ g i ,t 1 ]   i 0                                   
                                           1 /  2
                                                  0  t    s 1 t    1 /  0  t 
                                                                               2




where Et[gi,t+1] captures expected future transfers at time t+1. Given the uncertainty in
government targeting criteria and preferences, and voters’ only partial information on program
design, we assume below that voters use the transfer they personally receive as the signal of
government redistributive preferences towards people “like them”. Thus while voters are
perfectly rational and use standard Bayesian updating, we assume they are operating in an
environment with limited information on politician intentions and program implementation.
       Expected voter utility from supporting a particular political party is a function of many
factors, including voter ideology and a range of time-varying policies beyond transfers. In
particular, voter expected utility from supporting the Frente Amplio is:
(3)            VFA,it = FA,t + bEt[gi,t+1] – it ,


where overall population support for the FA in period t is captured by FA,t, the impact of future
expected transfers targeted to group i is bEt[gi,t+1], and it denotes an idiosyncratic determinant of

                                                                                                   22
individual support for the FA, for instance from individual political ideology or other life
circumstances, and is assumed to be distributed extreme value to allow for the use of the logit
model. For simplicity, expected utility from supporting the opposition in period t is VOP,it = OP,t.
        We assume individuals vote sincerely, and also sincerely express their voting intentions
on our surveys, convenient assumptions in political economy empirical work. Voter i supports
the FA when VFA,it > VOP,it, or equivalently at + bEt[gi,t+1] > it, where at = FA,t – OP,t. The logit
solution, where the probability of supporting the FA government (opposition) is PFA,it (POP,it), is:
(4)              ln(PFA,it / POP,it) = at + bEt[gi,t+1]


        The empirical calibration is straightforward. We consider three time periods, where t=0
corresponds to the pre-PANES period, t=1 corresponds to the 2007 survey round (when PANES
was still ongoing) and t=2 is the 2008 follow-up (when PANES had already ended). Households
are assumed to receive i.i.d. signals about future government transfers in periods t=1 and t=2.
These differ across PANES and PE program beneficiaries, with the average household transfer at
US$89.50 for PANES beneficiaries in t=1 and zero for non-beneficiaries (Table 4)30, and the
average PE transfer is at US$67.00 in t=2 for both the former PANES beneficiaries and non-
beneficiaries now enrolled in PE (and zero for those not in PE), although former PANES
beneficiaries also continue to receive a food card valued at US$19.50 per month.
        The quasi-experimental variation in the PANES transfer allows us to identify the
parameter b by comparing FA support between PANES beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries in
2007. The model laid out above implies that this difference in FA support is driven by
differences in the transfers they expect to receive in the future, which is in turn determined by
their past transfer experiences. Further assumptions are needed to pin down these expectations
about future transfers and calibrate the model, most importantly on voters’ prior beliefs at t=0
about the transfer they would receive from the FA and on the precision of this prior. We assume
that both PANES beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries held a common prior on the government’s
redistributive preferences towards them, which is reasonable given the similarity of their
observed characteristics and the quasi-random assignment of the program near the threshold, and
we set this transfer level i0 to 50% of the actual PANES transfer, or US$44.75, although results


30
  For simplicity, we assume that all beneficiary households receive the usual cash transfer (US$70.00) plus a food
card corresponding to having two children, of value US$19.50 per month.

                                                                                                                 23
are not sensitive to this assumption. We also assume that the prior precision is 1/0 2 = 0.5 as our
leading case, and discuss robustness to a wider range of precisions, from 0.1 to 0.9.
       To apply the binary logit framework, we group together voters who are indifferent
between the FA and opposition with opposition supporters (although the results are similar if the
indifferent are shifted to the FA camp, not shown). This yields a level of predicted support for
the FA among beneficiaries in 2007 of 0.843 and among non-beneficiates of 0.639 (Table 4), i.e.
a difference in the log odds ratio of 1.101. Calibrating the model in the case of 1/0 2 = 0.5, we
find that at t=1, PANES households expect a transfer of US$61.58 in the next period while non-
PANES households expect a transfer of US$14.91, so a difference of US$46.67. This yields a
parameter estimate of b = 0.024 (=1.101/46.67, see Table 4). At time t=2, we use this estimate of
b and the actual level of support among non-PANES beneficiaries in 2008 (57.4%) to pin down
a2, and thus to predict FA support in 2008 among former PANES beneficiaries. As shown in the
bottom row of Table 4, predicted FA support is 74.4% using a prior precision of 1/0 2 = 0.5, and
ranges from 72.5% (with precision 1/0 2 = 0.1) to 75.7% (1/0 2 = 0.9). These are very similar to
the actual FA support of 74.6% reported among former PANES beneficiaries in the 2008 survey.
       This analysis implies that, under plausible assumptions, a model of rational but poorly
informed voters learning about politician redistributive preferences can rationalize the broad
patterns in the Uruguay data, and in particular the persistence of FA support gains into the post-
PANES period. However, these findings do not necessarily imply that models of reciprocity from
psychology and economics are not also at work in this or other related contexts. In particular, the
learning model we present cannot be conclusively distinguished from a gift-exchange model
between voters and politicians, with decaying effects as time elapses since the transfer (as
Gneezy and List, 2006 find empirically in a labor market setting). Disentangling these two
models remains an important objective for future research.


III.c Impacts on political attitudes and social perceptions
The results presented in section II provide clear evidence of voters’ responsiveness to the
program, with targeted transfers securing additional supporters for the government both during
the life of the program (2007) and shortly after its end (2008). The previous subsection assesses
whether a model of voter learning about politician preferences can rationalize the persistence of
FA support gains. In this sub-section, we present evidence on an array of additional political and

                                                                                                 24
social attitudes, to gauge whether they are consistent with the implications of the model and also
to describe broader PANES impacts on respondents.
       In addition to the income transfer, beneficiaries also received in-kind transfers and
services, not all easy to monetize and all potentially enhancing well-being. For instance, just by
virtue of being included in an assistance program, some beneficiary households might have also
experienced an improvement in their self-esteem and psychic well-being. To investigate these
issues further, we consider an alternative, subjective measure of household satisfaction, using the
following question from the follow-up survey: “on a scale 1 to 5, where 1 is very bad and 5 very
good, how would you qualify the current situation of your household?” (We re-scale this and all
questions that follow from 0 to 1, as described in Supplementary Appendix Table A2.) Related
questions ask about the country’s current situation and expectations one year into the future.
       A first key difference between former PANES beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries in 2008
is the increased optimism about their household’s own current and future situation (point
estimates 0.059, s.e. 0.019 and 0.045, s.e. 0.016, respectively in Table 5). This increased
optimism about the future is consistent with the previous sub-section’s model, to the extent that
these individuals may be expecting greater government transfers in the future. Beneficiaries’
report of greater subjective satisfaction with their own household situation is also broadly
consistent with self-interested “pocketbook voting”. However, the conclusion that self-interest
alone is driving increased FA support is tempered by the observation that, relative to non-
beneficiaries, former PANES beneficiaries also have a more positive perception of the country’s
situation, both currently and for the future (gains of 0.059 and 0.055, respectively). They are also
significantly less likely to have perceived increased social differences in the past year (-0.109,
s.e. 0.041). This suggests that voters overweigh their own personal experience in making sense
of economic and social conditions, a possibility that has recently found widespread support in
experimental economics (see Simonsohn et al., 2008 for an example). It is plausible that voters’
support for a particular party is driven both by their own individual situation and economic
conditions in society at large; misperceptions about the latter (for instance, the sanguine views
about social inequalities among former beneficiaries) might thus also help partially explain the
persistent differences in expressed FA support. This leaves the basic intuition of the model
developed in the previous subsection intact, but suggests an even richer set of explanations for
the persistent FA support gains among former PANES beneficiaries in 2008.


                                                                                                     25
         Changes in attitudes are manifested in higher support not only for the incumbent
government (Table 1), the President, and PANES itself (in Table 3), but also confidence in the
Ministry of Social Development (0.192, s.e. 0.038, Table 5), which designed, and administered
PANES. However, we find no significant increases in support for other institutions not directly
related to PANES (for instance, Parliament, local councils) or even the social security
administration that disbursed the transfers, indicating that former PANES beneficiaries are not
simply casting a more optimistic eye on political institutions and organizations across the board,
although point estimates tend to be positive, suggesting small positive spillovers.
         There are a number of other provocative impacts of PANES receipt, including a
statistically significant increase in national pride at being Uruguayan (coefficient estimate 0.046,
s.e. 0.024, from an already high level of patriotic feeling, Table 5), and significantly more self-
expressed interest in politics in general (0.067, s.e. 0.031). However, there is no evidence of an
ideological shift to the left, at least based on responses to a question about whether “hard work
pays off in life” (0.019, s.e. 0.026). Similar questions in other social surveys are generally
thought to capture more conservative views.31 This suggests that a change in left-right ideology
is not the key driver behind the increase political support for the FA.


IV. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
We find that beneficiaries of a large government anti-poverty program in Uruguay are
significantly more likely to support the current government than non-beneficiaries. We use
individual level data on political support and a credible regression discontinuity research design
to estimate these effects, constituting a novel approach in this branch of the empirical political
economy literature. We find large and robust effects on the order of 11 to 14 percentage points,
and these effects last into the post-program period. These results indicate that government
economic policies can have large and potentially persistent impacts on beneficiaries’ political
and social attitudes. DiTella et al. (2007) reach a similar conclusion in their study of the long-run
impacts of a land reform program in Argentina.


31
  The Latinobarómetro 2006 and 2007 ask the same question: “Do you believe that in (country X) a person who is
born poor and who works hard can become rich? (1: Born poor working hard can become rich 2: Born poor can
never become rich)”. We correlate this variable to self-expressed political ideology (“In politics, people normally
speak of "left" and "right". On a scale where 0 is left and 10 is right, where would you place yourself?”). The
correlation coefficient (among households in all countries) is negative and statistically significant at 99%, implying
that left-leaning individuals are indeed less likely to believe that hard work pays off in life (not shown).

                                                                                                                    26
         It is difficult to extrapolate these results to the case where a right-wing party would have
implemented a similar transfer policy, or if the policy had been implemented in a period of
economic contraction, rather than the largely favorable macroeconomic environment that
Uruguay experienced from 2005 to 2008, in which even non-beneficiaries might have given the
government some credit for their income gains. Another important validity issue is how likely
these results are to generalize to other countries. While Uruguay is a middle income country, it
has well-developed democratic institutions and a long tradition of strong political parties,
suggesting that the findings of this paper are relevant not only for Latin America but also
possibly for wealthier countries with similarly capable political institutions.
         Finally, we estimate a local treatment effect in this paper at the program eligibility
threshold (among poor households), and thus extrapolating treatment effects to other
populations, such as middle or wealthy class voters, requires stronger assumptions. We cannot
rule out the possibility that the Frente Amplio government in Uruguay even lost some votes
among better-off voters who had to pay for the policy though higher taxes, offsetting the political
support gains we estimate among the poor; our dataset and research design do not allow us to
measure any such effects. Thus while it would be interesting to compute a cost per extra vote due
to PANES, we are reluctant to do so due these potentially lost votes among richer households, as
well as the imperfect correspondence between stated support in a survey and actual votes.
         A further caveat relates to the possibility that the PANES program caused an erosion in
support among those households who just barely failed to qualify. While the presence of “sore
losers” would not change our basic punch line – that differences in transfers across groups
translate into different degrees of political support – and we do present suggestive evidence that
leans against the “bitterness” interpretation, a government seeking re-election is obviously not
indifferent about whether transfers alienate more voters than they gain.
         We present a formal model of rational but poorly informed voters who use anti-poverty
transfers as signals of government redistributive preferences towards them, and find that it can
rationalize the broad patterns in our data, in particular the persistent post-program political
support gains. In a similar framework, Drazen and Eslava (2006) show that heterogeneous
politician preferences across different socio-demographic groups can generate a political
economy equilibrium where parties favor certain groups and these groups in turn reward the



                                                                                                  27
incumbent with their votes, even if voters are fully aware of politicians’ incentives to target
transfers strategically to maximize their vote share.
       Although our results are consistent with this model of voter learning about politician
preferences, we cannot conclusively rule out the possibility that theories of reciprocity rooted in
psychology and economics are also playing a role in driving the persistent political support gains
for the party that implemented this large and unprecedented transfer program in Uruguay. In
particular, the persistent but slightly diminished effects we estimate in the year after the PANES
program had ended are also consistent with a model of voter “gratitude” that decays gradually
over time. Pinpointing the role, if any, that gratitude and reciprocity play in generating persistent
political support gains among transfer recipients is an important area for future research.



REFERENCES
Achen, C.H., and L.M. Bartels (2004), Blind retrospection: electoral responses to drought, flu
       and shark attacks, mimeo, Princeton University.
Adato M., B. de la Brière, D. Mindek and A. Quisumbing (2000), The Impact of Progresa on
       Women’s Status and Intrahousehold Relations, Final Report, International Food Policy
       Research Institute, Washington D.C.
Alesina, A., J. Londregan, and H. Rosenthal (1993), “A Model of the Political Economy of the
       United States”, American Political Science Review, 87, 12-33.
Arim R., V. Amarante and A. Vigorito (2005), Criterios para la selección de beneficiarios del
       Plan de Atención Nacional a la Emergencia Social, mimeo, Universidad de la Republica,
       Instituto de Economía, Montevideo.
Amarante V., G. Burdín, M. Manacorda and A. Vigorito (2008), Informe final de la evaluación
       intermedia del impacto del PANES, mimeo, Universidad de la Republica, Instituto de
       Economía, Montevideo.
Besley, T. (2006), Principled Agents?: The Political Economy of Good Government, Oxford
       University Press.
Bertrand, M., and S. Mullainathan (2001), “Are CEOs rewarded for luck? The ones without
       principals are”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), 901-932.
Card D. and D. Lee (2008), “Regression discontinuity inference with specification error”,
       Journal of Econometrics, 142, (2), (February 2008), 655-674.
Case A. (2001), “Election goals and income redistribution: Recent evidence from Albania”,
       European Economic Review, 45 (2001), 405-423.
Chattopadhyay, R., and E. Duflo (2004), “Women as policymakers: Evidence from a randomized
       policy experiment in India”, Econometrica, 72(5), 1409-1443.
Chen, J. (2008a), When do government benefits influence voters’ behavior? The effect of FEMA
       disaster awards on US Presidential votes, mimeo, Stanford University.
Chen, J. (2008b), Are poor voters easier to buy off? A natural experiment from the 2004 Florida
       hurricane season, mimeo, Stanford University.


                                                                                                   28
Cole, S., A. Healy, and E. Werker (2008), “Do voters appreciate responsive governments?
        Evidence from Indian disaster relief”, Harvard Business School Finance Working
        Papers, No. 09-050.
Conover E. and A. Camacho (2007), Manipulation of Social Program Eligibility: Detection,
        Explanations and Consequences for Empirical Research, mimeo, U.C. Berkeley.
Cox G.W. and D. McCubbins (1986), “Electoral Politics as a Redistributive Game”, Journal of
        Politics, 48(May), 370-389.
Cox, J.C., D. Friedman, and S. Gjerstad (2007), “A tractable model of reciprocity and fairness”,
        Games and Economic Behavior, 59(1), 17-45.
Dahlberg M. and E. Johansson (2002), “On the Vote-Purchasing Behavior of Incumbent
        Governments”, American Political Science Review, Vol. 96, No. 1. (Mar., 2002), 27-40.
DellaVigna, S. (2009), “Psychology and economics: evidence from the field”, Journal of
        Economic Literature, 47(2), 315-372.
DiNardo J. and D. Lee (2004), “Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private Sector
        Employers: 1984-2001”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4), 1383-1441.
DiTella, R., S. Galiani, and E. Schargrodsky (2007), “The Formation of Beliefs: Evidence from
        the Allocation of Land Titles to Squatters”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122 (1),
        209-241.
Dixit A. and J. Londregan (1996), “The Determinants of Success of Special Interests in
        Redistributive Politics”, Journal of Politics, Vol. 58, No. 4. (Nov., 1996), 1132-1155.
Dixit A. and J. Londregan (1998), “Ideology, Tactics, and Efficiency in Redistributive Politics”,
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(2), 497-529.
Drazen A. and E. Eslava E. (2006), “Pork Barrel Cycles”, NBER Working Papers, #12190.
Economist Intelligence Unit (2007), The World in 2007, London.
Elinder, M., H. Jordahl and P. Poutvaara (2008), “Selfish and Prospective: Theory and Evidence
        of Pocketbook Voting”, IZA Discussion Papers, 3763, Institute for the Study of Labor
        (IZA).
Fair, R. (1978), “The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President”, Review of Economics
        and Statistics, 60, 159-172.
Ferejohn, J. (1986), “Incumbent performance and electoral control”, Public Choice, 50, 5-25.
Fiorina, M. (1981), Retrospective Voting in American National Elections, New Haven: Yale
        University Press.
Gneezy, U., and J.A. List (2006), “Putting Behavioral Economics to Work: Testing for Gift
        Exchange in Labor Markets Using Field Experiments.” Econometrica, 74(5): 1365–84.
Green T. (2006a), Do Social Transfer Programs Affect Voter Behavior? Evidence from
        PROGRESA in Mexico, 1997-2000, mimeo, U.C., Berkeley.
Green T. (2006b), The Political Economy of a Social Transfer Program: Evidence on the
        Distribution of PROGRESA in Mexico, 1997-2000, mimeo, U,C., Berkeley.
Hibbs, D.A. (2006), “Voting and the Macroeconomy”, in Oxford Handbook of Political
        Economy, B.R. Weingast and D. A. Wittman eds., Oxford University Press.
Kramer, G. (1971), “Short-term fluctuations in U.S. Voting Behavior, 1896-1964”, American
        Political Science Review, 65, 131-143.
Kube, S., M.A. Maréchal, and C. Puppe (2008), Do Wage Cuts Damage Work Morale? Evidence
        from a Natural Field Experiment”, mimeo, University of Karlsruhe.
Levitt S.D. and J.M. Snyder (1997), “The Impact of Federal Spending on House Election
        Outcomes”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 105, No. 1. (Feb., 1997), 30-53.


                                                                                              29
Lindbek A. and H.W. Weibull (1987), “Balanced-budget redistribution as the outcome of
        political competition, Public Choice, 52, 273-297.
Markus G. B (1988),"The Impact of Personal and National Economic Conditions on the
        Presidential Vote: A Pooled Cross-Sectional Analysis”, American Journal of Political
        Science, 32, No. 1. (Feb., 1988), 137-15.
Manacorda, M., E. Miguel, and A. Vigorito (2009), “Government Transfers and Political
        Support”, NBER Working Papers, #14702.
Martinelli, C., and S. Parker (2009), “Deception and Misreporting in a Social Program”, Journal
        of the European Economic Association, 7(4), 886-908.
McCrary J. (2008a), “Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
        design: A density test”, Journal of Econometrics, 142, (2), (February 2008), 698-714.
McCrary J. (2008b), “Inference and Specification Testing in the Regression Discontinuity
        Design”, mimeo, U.C. Berkeley.
Nordhaus, W. (1975), “The Political Business Cycle”, Review of Economic Studies, 42, 169-190.
Pande, R. (2003), “Can mandated political representation increase policy influence for
        disadvantaged minorities? Theory and Evidence from India”, American Economic
        Review, 93(4), 1132-1151.
Parker S.W. and E. Skoufias (2000), The Impact of Progresa on Work, Leisure, and Time
        Allocation, Final Report, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington D.C.
Persson T. and G. Tabellini (2002), Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy, MIT
        Press: Cambridge MA.
Rabin, M. (1993), “Incorporating fairness into game theory and economics”, American
        Economic Review, 83(5), 1281-1302.
Rogoff, K. (1990), “Equilibrium political budget cycles”, American Economic Review, 80, 21-
        36.
Schady N.R (2000), “The Political Economy of Expenditures by the Peruvian Social Fund
        (FONCODES), 1991-95”, American Political Science Review, 94, No. 2 June 2000.
Schaffer, F. C (2007), “Lessons learned? (Chapter 11)”, in F. C. Schaffer, ed., Elections for Sale:
        The Causes and Consequences of Vote Buying, Boulder, CO.
Simonsohn, U., N. Karlsson, G. Loewenstein, and D. Ariely (2008) “The Tree of Experience in
        the Forest of Information: Overweighing Experienced Relative to Observed Information”,
        Games and Economic Behavior, 62, pp. 263-286.
Sole-Olle, A. and P. Sorribas-Navarro (2008), “Does Partisan Alignment Affect the Electoral
        Reward of Intergovernmental Transfers?”, CESifo Working Paper, No. 2335.
Stigler, G. (1973), “General economic conditions and national election”, American Economic
        Review, Papers and Proceedings, 63, 160-167.
Stokes, S.C. (2005), “Perverse accountability: A formal model of machine politics with evidence
        from Argentina”, American Political Science Review, 99(3), 315-325.
UNDP (2007), Human Development Report 2007/2008: Fighting climate change: Human
        solidarity in a divided world, New-York.
UNDP (2008), Política, políticas y desarrollo humano. Informe Nacional de Desarrollo
        Humano, Montevideo.
Verdier T. and J.M. Snyder (2002), “The Political Economy of Clientelism”, CEPR discussion
        papers, 3205.
Wolfers, J (2009), Are voters rational? Evidence from gubernatorial elections, mimeo,
        University of Pennsylvania.


                                                                                                30
                           Figure 1: PANES program and data collection timeline


                                         Baseline                   First              Second
                                         survey                     follow-up          follow-up
                                         (4/2005)                   survey             survey
                                                                    (3/2007)           (3/2008)




                                                                                                    time

12/2001:          11/2004:            4/2005:                                     12/2007:
Economic crisis   Frente Amplio       PANES program                               PANES program
starts            elected             launched                                    ends; replaced
                                                                                  with Plan de
                                                                                  Equidad program




                                                                                                      31
                                                    Figure 2: PANES program eligibility and participation




                               1
                               .9
                               .8
                               .7
                               .6
                               .5
                               .4
                               .3
                               .2
                               .1
                               0




                                    -.02                    -.01                    0                         .01                      .02
                                                                            Predicted income


Notes. The picture reports the proportion of households ever enrolled in PANES as a function of the standardized score (based on administrative data). The fitted
plots are linear best fits on each side of the eligibility threshold.




                                                                                                                                                              32
               Figure 3: PANES Program eligibility and political support for the government, 2007 follow-up survey round




                        1
                        .9
                        .8
                        .7
                        .6




                             -.02                     -.01                    0                          .01                       .02
                                                                      Predicted income


Notes. The figure reports the average support for the current government (compared to the previous government) as a function of the standardized score. Source:
first PANES follow-up survey (2007). The fitted plots are linear best fits on each side of the eligibility threshold.




                                                                                                                                                            33
               Figure 4: PANES Program eligibility and political support for the government, 2008 follow-up survey round




                        1
                        .9
                        .8
                        .7
                        .6




                             -.02                     -.01                    0                          .01                       .02
                                                                      Predicted income


Notes. The figure reports the average support for the current government (compared to the previous government) as a function of the standardized score. Source:
the second PANES follow-up survey (2008). The fitted plots are linear best fits on each side of the eligibility threshold.




                                                                                                                                                            34
                                                         Figure 5: Confidence in President:
                        Actual (triangles / solid line) and predicted based on Latinobarómetro (diamonds / dashed line)




                           .8
                           .6
                           .4
                           .2




                                -.02                     -.01                     0                          .01                      .02
                                                                          Predicted income


Notes. The figure reports the average actual confidence in the President (triangles / solid line) in the second follow-up survey (2008) and the predicted probability
based on the Latinobarómetro 2007 (diamonds / dashed line) as a function of the standardized PANES eligibility score and respondent demographic
characteristics. See text for details.




                                                                                                                                                                 35
                        Figure 6: PANES program eligibility and participation in the later Plan de Equidad Program




                           1
                           .8
                           .6
                           .4
                           .2
                           0




                                -.02                  -.01                    0                        .01                     .02
                                                                      Predicted income


Notes. The figure reports the proportion of households ever enrolled in Plan de Equidad as a function of the standardized PANES eligibility score. The fitted
plots are linear best fits on each side of the eligibility threshold.




                                                                                                                                                          36
   Table 1: PANES program eligibility, participation, and political support for the government
                                             (1)              (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)            (6)
Panel A:                     Mean
                          non-eligibles      Dep. var: Ever received PANES, 2005-2007 (administrative data)
Program eligibility           0.002       0.997***          0.993***   0.996***    0.997***   0.993***       0.997***
                                          (0.002)           (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.002)    (0.004)        (0.005)

Panel B:                                                        Dep. var: Government support , 2007
                                                   ***
Program eligibility           0.770       0.137             0.118***   0.138***    0.135***   0.112***       0.136***
                                          (0.014)           (0.028)    (0.043)     (0.015)    (0.029)        (0.045)
Panel C:                                                 Dep. var: Government support, 2008 (post-program)
                                                   ***
Program eligibility           0.729       0.116             0.095***    0.092**    0.117***   0.091***         0.081*
                                          (0.015)           (0.030)     (0.043)    (0.016)    (0.032)         (0.045)

Score controls                             None             Linear     Quadratic    None       Linear        Quadratic
Other controls                              No               No          No         Yes         Yes            Yes

Notes: The table reports estimates of the effect of PANES eligibility on program receipt (Panel A) and political
support in 2007 and 2008 (Panels B and C, respectively). Eligibility is an indicator for a household score below the
eligibility threshold. Columns 1 to 3 include, in order, a polynomial in the standardized score of degree 0, 1 and 2,
and these polynomials interacted with the eligibility indicator. Columns 4 to 6 additionally control for pretreatment
characteristics of household members, log per-capita income, age, education and gender of the household head,
localidad indicators and separate indicators for missing values of each of these variables. Number of observations in
Panes A and C: 1,938; in panel A: 1,826. Standard errors clustered by score in brackets. Standard errors are almost
identical (differing by roughly 1%) with the jackknife approach in McCrary (2008b). Statistically significant at 90%
(*), 95% (**), and 99% (***) confidence level.




                                                                                                                        37
            Table 2: Program eligibility, pre-treatment characteristics and response rates
      Dependent variable:                                    Mean          Coefficient    Observations
                                                          non-eligibles       (s.e.)
      Log per-capita income (2005)                            6.33           -0.061          1,876
                                                                            (0.063)
      Household average years of education 16+ (2005)         4.04            0.091          1,887
                                                                             (0.200)
      Household size (2005)                                   3.05            -0.323         1,938
                                                                             (0.237)
      Household average age (2005)                            31.69           -1.599         1,938
                                                                             (2.126)
      Respondent is female (2005)                             0.699           -0.016         1,937
                                                                             (0.056)
      Respondent years of education (2005)                    6.45            0.294          1,916
                                                                             (0.321)
      Respondent age (2005)                                   44.10          -1.811          1,938
                                                                             (1.583)
      Survey non-response rate (2008)                         0.384           0.071          2,367
                                                                             (0.045)
      Replacement household (2008)                            0.349          -0.069          1,938
                                                                             (0.045)
      Voted in 2004 elections                                 0.924           0.014          1,911
                                                                             (0.024)

      Linear score controls                                                   Yes

Notes. The table reports results from regressions of various pre-treatment (2005) characteristics on the program
eligibility indicator. The specification is equivalent to column 2 in Table 1. See also notes to Table 1.




                                                                                                             38
                  Table 3: Program eligibility, income and participation in other programs
Dependent variable:                                                            Mean         Coefficient   Observations
                                                                            non-eligibles     (s.e.)
Log household per-capita income (2007)                                         6.869         0.176**         1,889
                                                                                             (0.072)
Log household per-capita income (2008)                                         7.125          -0.071         1,893
                                                                                             (0.070)
Positive opinion about PANES (2008)                                            0.583         0.256***        1,906
                                                                                             (0.026)
PANES targeting and design (2007)
There are people who received PANES who should not have                        0.917         -0.072**        1,843
                                                                                             (0.031)
There are people who did not receive PANES who should have                     0.981         -0.055***       1,878
                                                                                              (0.016)
Beneficiaries should have received less so that more people could benefit      0.876         -0.105***       1,878
                                                                                              (0.033)
Received Plan de Equidad (2008), administrative data                           0.555          -0.022         1,938
                                                                                             (0.048)
Received food card (2008)                                                      0.039         0.145***        1,935
                                                                                             (0.032)
Heard about Plan de Equidad (2008)                                             0.626         0.154***        1,916
                                                                                             (0.042)
Positive opinion about Plan de Equidad (2008)                                  0.704         0.056**         1,251
                                                                                             (0.024)
Relative to PANES, Plan de Equidad has improved the situation of:
 The respondent                                                                0.653          -0.046         1,179
                                                                                             (0.045)
 The country                                                                   0.636         0.097**         1,186
                                                                                             (0.045)

Linear score controls                                                                          Yes

   Notes. The table reports results from regressions of various outcomes and survey responses on the program
   eligibility indicator. The specification is equivalent to column 5 in Table 1. See also notes to Table 1.




                                                                                                                  39
                                Table 4: Voter Learning Model Calibration Results

                                                                            ------------ Expected transfer (US$) -----------
                                                            FA support
Panel A:                                                     (actual)        1/02 = 0.5      1/02 = 0.1       1/02 = 0.9
PANES beneficiaries, in 2007 (t=1)                            0.843             61.6             67.7              58.0
PANES non-beneficiaries, in 2007 (t=1)                        0.639             14.9              4.1              21.2
Former PANES beneficiaries, in 2008 (t=2)                     0.746             56.0             58.1              54.4
Former PANES non-beneficiaries, in 2008 (t=2)                 0.574             23.7             19.7              26.6

                                                                             --------------Parameter estimates --------------
Panel B:                                                                     1/02 = 0.5       1/02 = 0.1     1/02 = 0.9
Parameter estimates for:
                           a1                                                  0.216              0.500           -0.067
                           a2                                                  -0.265            -0.045           -0.503
                           b                                                   0.024              0.017           0.030

                                                                            -------- Predicted FA support (model) --------
                                                           FA support
Panel C:                                                    (actual)         1/02 = 0.5      1/02 = 0.1       1/02 = 0.9
FA support in 2008 (t=2), former PANES beneficiaries:        0.746             0.744            0.725             0.757


 Notes. The table reports actual and predicted support for the Frente Amplio based on the model of Bayesian learning
 presented in section III.b. The calibration exercise assumes monthly transfer amounts for PANES households of
 US$89.50 in 2007, and US$86.50 in 2008 among PE recipients (and zero for non-PE recipients). For PANES non-
 beneficiaries, these values are US$0 in 2007 and US$67.00 in 2008 among PE recipients (and zero for non-PE
 recipients). The latter is less than $86.50 since they had not yet received the food card. The prior belief on future
 transfers at time t=0 is assumed to be half the transfer actually received by PANES households at t=1. The precision
 of the prior is denoted by 1/02. See text for further details.




                                                                                                                     40
                        Table 5: Program eligibility and political and social attitudes (2008)
Dependent variable:                                                         Mean         Coefficient   Observations
                                                                         non-eligibles     (s.e.)
Assessment of the respondent’s current household’s situation (2008)         0.448         0.059***        1,933
                                                                                          (0.019)
Expectation of the respondent’s household’s situation next year (2008)      0.646         0.045***        1,813
                                                                                          (0.016)
Assessment of the country’s current situation (2008)                        0.496         0.059***        1,912
                                                                                          (0.022)
Expectation of the country’s situation next year (2008)                     0.597         0.055***        1,788
                                                                                          (0.018)
Relative to last year, are social differences greater? (2008)               0.515         -0.109***       1,721
                                                                                           (0.041)
Respondent confidence (2008) in the:
 Minister of Social Development                                             0.391         0.192***        1,722
                                                                                          (0.038)
 President
                                                                            0.371         0.089**         1,844
                                                                                          (0.040)

 Political parties                                                          0.123          0.033          1,794
                                                                                          (0.028)
 Social Security administration                                             0.472          0.025          1,803
                                                                                          (0.036)
 Local councils                                                             0.303          0.027          1,763
                                                                                          (0.036)
 Parliament                                                                  0.21          0.016          1,363
                                                                                          (0.038)
Interest in politics (2008)                                                 0.201         0.067**         1,929
                                                                                          (0.031)
National pride (2008)                                                       0.788          0.046*         1,890
                                                                                          (0.024)
Hard work pays off in life (2008)                                           0.349          0.019          1,900
                                                                                          (0.026)
Linear score controls                                                                       Yes

    Notes. The table reports results from regressions of various outcomes and survey responses on the program
    eligibility indicator. The specification is equivalent to column 5 in Table 1. See also notes to Table 1.




                                                                                                              41
    Supplementary Appendix [NOT INTENDED FOR PUBLICATION]


    Supplementary Appendix A: Additional figures and tables [not intended for publication]

      Appendix Table A1: Human development and democracy in Uruguay and selected countries
               UNDP Human Development Report 2007               The Economist Intelligence Unit democracy index
              Human      GDP      Life        Gross           Democracy Rank Electoral Functioning Political
            development  per   expectancy    school                               process      of govt.     culture
               index    capita             enrolment
                        (PPP)                  rate

Uruguay        0.852       9,962      75.9         88.9           Full      27      10.00        8.21        6.88

USA            0.951      41,890      77.9         93.3          Full       17      8.75         7.86        8.75
Argentina      0.869      14,280      74.8         89.7         Flawed      54      8.75         5.00        5.63
Brazil         0.800      8,402       71.7         87.5         Flawed      42      9.58         7.86        5.63
Chile          0.867      12,027      78.3         82.9         Flawed      30      9.58         8.93        6.25
Colombia       0.791      7,304       72.3         75.1         Flawed      67      9.17         4.36        4.38
Mexico         0.829      10,751      75.6         75.6         Flawed      53      8.75         6.07        5.00
Venezuela      0.792      6,632       73.2         75.5         Hybrid      93      7.00         3.64        5.00

    Source: UNDP (2007) and The Economist Intelligence Unit (2007).




                                                                                                              1
                       Appendix Table A2: Description of categorical attitude variables

                                           Range of
Variable                                    values Question wording (translated from Spanish by the authors)

Supports current government                 1 to 3   Compared to previous government is the current
                                                     government: 1: worse, 2: same, 3: better?
Positive opinion about PANES                1 to 5   At a general level how do you feel with respect to PANES:
                                                     1: very bad, 2: bad, 3: neither good nor bad, 4: good, 5:
                                                     very good?
Positive opinion about PE                   1 to 6   At a general level what did you think of the PANES/PE: 1:
                                                     very bad, 2: bad, 3: decent, 4: neither good nor bad, 5:
                                                     good, 6: very good?
Confidence in: President, Minister of       1 to 3   How much confidence do you have in __: 1 little, 2: some,
Social Development, local councils,                  3: much?
political parties, Social Security
administration, Parliament
Interest in politics                        1 to 4   How interested are you in politics: 1: not at all, 2: not very,
                                                     3: somewhat, 4: very?
National pride                              1 to 4   How proud are you of being Uruguayan: 1: not at all, 2:
                                                     little, 3: somewhat, 4: very?
Assessment of current household /           1 to 5   What is the current situation of your household / the
country situation                                    country: 1: very bad, 2: bad, 3: neither bad nor good, 4:
                                                     good, 5: very good?
Expectation of future household /           1 to 5   Next year, do you expect that the situation of your
country situation next year                          household/ the country will: 1: worsen very much, 2:
                                                     worsen, 3: be the same, 4: improve, 5: improve very much?
Relative to last year, are social           1 to 3   Relative to two years ago, do you think that social
differences higher?                                  differences in Uruguay are: 1: lower, 2: the same, 3:
                                                     higher?
Relative to PANES, situation of             1 to 3   Relative to PANES, do you believe that with the PE the
person/household/country with PE                     situation (of person/household/country) is: 1: worse, 2: the
                                                     same, 3: better?
Hard work pays off in life                           Do you believe that through hard work a poor person can
                                                     make a lot of money: 1: Very much in disagreement, 2: in
                                                     disagreement, 3: neither in agreement nor in disagreement,
                                                     4: in agreement, 5: very much in agreement




                                                                                                                       2
                                    Appendix Figure A1: Program eligibility and baseline characteristics
        Panel A: Log per capita income                 Panel B: Average years of education                                    Panel C: Household size
6.6




                                                                                                                 4.5
                                                       5
6.5




                                                                                                                 4
                                                       4.5
6.4




                                                                                                                 3.5
6.3




                                                       4
6.2




                                                                                                                 3
6.1




                                                       3.5




                                                                                                                 2.5
6




                                                       3




                                                                                                                 2
      -.02       -.01           0          .01   .02         -.02         -.01           0          .01   .02          -.02      -.01           0          .01       .02
                        Predicted income                                         Predicted income                                       Predicted income



               Panel D: Average age                                 Panel E: Respondent female                  Panel F: Respondent years of education




                                                                                                                 8.5
40




                                                       .9




                                                                                                                 8
35




                                                       .8




                                                                                                                 7.5
30




                                                       .7




                                                                                                                 7
                                                                                                                 6.5
25




                                                       .6




                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                 5.5
20




                                                       .5




      -.02       -.01           0          .01   .02         -.02         -.01           0          .01   .02          -.02      -.01           0          .01       .02
                        Predicted income                                         Predicted income                                       Predicted income



              Panel G: Respondent age                               Panel H: Survey non-response                        Panel I: Replacement households
50




                                                       .6




                                                                                                                 .6
                                                       .5




                                                                                                                 .5
45




                                                       .4




                                                                                                                 .4
40




                                                       .3




                                                                                                                 .3
35




                                                       .2




                                                                                                                 .2
30




                                                       .1




                                                                                                                 .1




      -.02       -.01           0          .01   .02         -.02         -.01           0          .01   .02          -.02      -.01           0          .01       .02
                        Predicted income                                         Predicted income                                       Predicted income




             Notes. Panels A to G report the average value of a number of pre-treatment characteristics as a function of the
             standardized score. Panel H reports survey non-response and Panel I reports the proportion of replacement
             households.




                                                                                                                                                                 3
           .Appendix Figure A2: Distribution of the standardized PANES eligibility score
     25
     20
     15
     10
     5




          -.02                    -.01                        0                       .01                       .02


Notes. The graph reports the density of the standardized eligibility score for the universe of applicant households in
the neighborhood of the discontinuity point (following McCrary 2008a).




                                                                                                                    4
Supplementary Appendix B: PANES program components [not intended for publication]
The table below presents the probability of ever having received each separate component of the
PANES program as reported by respondents in the first follow-up survey (2007). Data refer only
to households who report having participated in PANES at some point. The first row reports the
probability of ever having received the main cash transfer (ingreso ciudadano), the central
element of the program, consisting of a monthly transfer independent of household size initially
set at UY$1,360 per month, equivalent to half the monthly minimum wage, and later adjusted
upward in nominal terms for inflation. Households in the treatment group received the monthly
income provided they were not involved in public works employment (trabajo por Uruguay),
which paid a monthly salary of UY$2,720 in lieu of the cash transfer. Participation in this
employment scheme was voluntary and, among households who applied for jobs, participants
were selected by lottery. Nearly all eligible households declared having received the cash
transfer at some point during the program while only a minority (17.6%) benefited from public
works employment, as shown in row 3.
        Row 2 reports the proportion of households receiving the food card (tarjeta alimentaria).
This was the second central element of PANES and covered households with children under age
18 and pregnant women. This was an in-kind transfer that operated through an electronic debit
card, whose monthly value varied between UY$300 and US$800 depending on household
demographic composition. Purchases could be made in authorized stores. The program covered
around 71% of eligible households while participation among ineligibles was close to zero.
        Around 16% of eligible households reported having participated in training and
educational activities (rutas de salida) intended to foster social “inclusion” by strengthening
work habits, promoting knowledge of individual rights and strengthening social ties. These were
programs of six months duration implemented by NGOs, neighborhood commissions, and
political and trade union organizations for groups of up to 25 participants. While participation for
beneficiary households was compulsory in principle, no formal criterion was established
regarding which member of the household had to participate, or the content of the training, and
row 4 shows clearly that the aim of universal training was far from being achieved.
        For simplicity the remaining components of the PANES program are collected into an
“other” category in the last row of the table. This category includes: regularization of
beneficiaries’ connection to public utilities networks (water and electricity) for a nominal fee, in-
kind transfers of building materials for home improvements; health care including free dental
and eye care (e.g., cataract surgery performed in Cuba) and prostheses; micro-finance loans and
technical assistance for small entrepreneurial activities; and temporary accommodation for
homeless households. Overall, around 13% of beneficiary households reported having received
at least one of these additional components. Additional government programs that affected both
PANES beneficiary and non-beneficiary households included additional school teachers in
disadvantaged neighborhoods (maestros comunitarios) and public health investments.

   Appendix Table B1: Self-reported PANES take-up among beneficiaries, by component (%)
                      1.     Citizen Income                             96.7
                      2.     Food card                                  70.9
                      3.     Public works employment                    17.6
                      4.     Education and training                     16.0
                      5.     Other components                           12.7




                                                                                                   5
