                                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                                   DISCLOSURE BY POLITICIANS

                                                               Simeon Djankov
                                                                Rafael La Porta
                                                          Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
                                                                Andrei Shleifer

                                                           Working Paper 14703
                                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w14703


                                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                  February 2009


The authors are from the World Bank, Dartmouth College, EDHEC Business School, and Harvard
University, respectively. This paper is part of a broader project examining the rules of political disclosure
and their consequences. A preliminary report on other data collected for this project is Schneider (2007).
This paper would not have been possible without the extensive research by the World Bank team which
included: Elena Gasol, Teymour Abdel Aziz, Doina Cebotari, Hania Dawood, Joyce Ibrahim, Stephanie
Musialski, Ivana Rossi, and Larisa Smirnova. We also want to thank Christopher Brouwer, Daniel
Chen, Nicholas Coleman, William Gaybrick, Wonbin Kang, and Francisco Queiro for help with the
project. We would also like to thank William Easterly and Luigi Zingales and participants at the seminars
of the Universities of Amsterdam, Brown, EDHEC, Harvard, La Sorbonne, Tilburg, and Toulouse
for extremely useful suggestions. Shleifer is grateful to the Kauffman Foundation for the support of
this research. The full data set, disclosure blank forms, and a legal appendix for each country can be
found at http://www.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/shleifer/dataset and at http://professoral.edhec.com/jsp/fiche_pagelibre.jsp?CODE=77297528&LANGUE=0&RH=profcompta
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Disclosure by Politicians
Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 14703
February 2009
JEL No. H11,K42,P16

                                             ABSTRACT

We collect data on the rules and practices of financial and conflict disclosure by politicians in 175
countries. Although two thirds of the countries have some disclosure laws, less than a third make
disclosures available to the public. Disclosure is more extensive in richer and more democratic countries.
 Disclosure is correlated with lower perceived corruption when it is public, when it identifies sources
of income and conflicts of interest, and when a country is a democracy.


Simeon Djankov                                       Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
The World Bank                                       EDHEC Business School
1818 H Street                                        393, Promenade des Anglais BP 3116
Washington, DC 20433                                 06202 Nice Cedex 3, France
sdjankov@worldbank.org                               and NBER
                                                     Florencio.lopezdesilanes@edhec.edu
Rafael La Porta
Tuck School                                          Andrei Shleifer
314 Woodbury                                         Department of Economics
Hanover, NH 03755                                    Harvard University
and NBER                                             Littauer Center M-9
rafael.laporta@dartmouth.edu                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                     and NBER
                                                     ashleifer@harvard.edu
I. Introduction.

       Successful political systems hold politicians accountable for corrupt behavior.

The principal mechanisms of such accountability include checks and balances among

branches of government, law enforcement, and voting in elections. Political theorists

going back to Locke, Montesquieu, and Madison emphasize the centrality of

accountability for good government. More recently, the various mechanisms have been

investigated by Barro 1973, Ferejohn 1986, Przeworski et al. 2000, Schedler et al. 1999,

Persson and Tabellini 2003, Besley and Prat 2006, among others. A number of empirical

studies show the benefits of accountability for the quality of government (e.g., Besley and

Case 1995, La Porta et al. 1999, Adsera et al. 2003, Eijffinger and Geraats 2005, Olken

2007, Dyck et al. 2008, Ferraz and Finan 2008, Bjorkman and Svensson 2009).

       Accountability of government officials for corruption relies on availability of

information about their activities. Recent analyses focus on the role of the media as the

source of discovery and dissemination of such information to both voters and law

enforcement agencies (e.g., Brunetti and Weder 2003, Djankov et al. 2003, Besley and

Prat 2006, Reinikka and Svensson 2004). Media surely matter, but there is another,

relatively neglected, source of information that facilitates discovery of corruption, namely

disclosure by politicians of their finances and business activities. By exposing

inconsistencies between the politician’s actual conduct and his reports about it, disclosure

can influence both reporting in the media (and thus voting) and law enforcement.

       There are complex theoretical issues concerning what should be disclosed and

how publicly. Disclosure conflicts with privacy, for example, which many regard as a

value in itself. Privacy also protects politicians, particularly the well-off ones, from




                                                                                          2
populist media coverage or even from robbery or kidnapping. Such protection might, in

turn, bring more qualified people into politics. But if the political market is like other

markets, then better information about the goods being transacted, such as politicians,

improves market performance (see Hirshleifer 1980, Stigler 1980, Posner 1981).

       Even if some disclosure is warranted to improve the performance of the political

market, the community needs to decide what should be disclosed and to whom. The law

can emphasize the disclosure of sources of income and business connections, presumably

to deter politicians from supporting legislation from which they benefit personally.

Alternatively, the law can emphasize the disclosure of levels of income, consumption,

and wealth, presumably to make it easier to identify consumption unaffordable from

official resources. Or the politicians may have to disclose both.        We do not know

empirically whether actual disclosures focus on asset and income levels or on sources,

and whether either of these types of disclosure matters for accountability.

       Another key question is whether disclosure should be made public. Those

concerned with privacy can argue that politicians should disclose to some official office

that keeps the information secret unless questions are raised about the politician’s

conduct that require an investigation. On the other hand, political mechanisms such as

media coverage, voting, and investigation are most effective when disclosure is public.

Again, it is an empirical question whether confidential or public disclosure works better.

       In this paper, we analyze the rules and the practices of disclosure by members of

the lower house of parliament or congress (henceforth MPs) in 175 countries. The

analysis is based on the laws governing financial and business disclosure of MPs, and on

their implementation in practice. We pay attention to 1) the existence of disclosure




                                                                                             3
mandates, 2) public availability of disclosures in practice, and 3) the extent of

information being disclosed. We collect new data to construct several disclosure indices

for all countries and to assess their determinants and their effects on perceived corruption.

       We find that, although 109 of 175 countries in our sample have disclosure laws,

more than half of them do not make disclosures available to the public in practice. Even

in cases of public disclosure, what is available to the public is often limited. Using a new

methodology that compares the potential and the actual disclosure, we find that, for the

average country with required disclosures, less than 15 percent of potential information

about the MPs is actually available to the public. Yet we also find that it is public rather

than confidential disclosure that is associated with lower perceived corruption. With

respect to the content of disclosure, our evidence shows that identifying the assets,

liabilities, income sources, and conflicts is associated with lower perceived corruption.

In contrast, we find no significant evidence of benefits from the disclosure of values of

income, consumption, and wealth.

       We construct indices of disclosure by politicians for 175 countries and assess their

relationship to corruption. But why would one think, a priori, that such disclosure

matters? We have found recent newspaper accounts of failures to disclose accurately

leading to criticism and disciplinary action against MPs in over 20 countries. Some

examples illustrate how this works. A Puerto Rican legislator, Nicolas Nogueras, was

forced to resign as vice president of the senate because “financial statements he filed in

recent years do not explain where he came with the money to make a $50,000 down

payment for a $350,000 second home.” The Argentine Economy Minister, Felisa Miceli,

resigned after an envelope containing US$80,000 in cash was found in the private




                                                                                           4
bathroom of her office, and she failed to explain where the money came from in light of

the asset declaration she had submitted. In South Africa, several prominent politicians,

including Winnie Mandela, were caught with assets far in excess of their declarations,

and eventually left their parliamentary positions, some landing in jail. In the U.K., two

Labour MPs, Mo Mowlam and Bob Wareing, failed to declare outside interests and gave

wrong information when challenged. The former was mildly censured, the latter

suspended from the Commons. Finally, in 2008 the U.S. saw two major investigations

(and in the second case, a criminal conviction) related to a failure to disclose:

Democratic Representative Charlie Rangel and Republican Senator Ted Stevens.

       In all these examples, financial and conflict of interest disclosure is part of a

broader system of accountability that includes media reporting, law enforcement, party

discipline, and voting itself. In general, MPs are vulnerable to at least two major sources

of undue influence.     First, they are sometimes paid directly by heads of government

needing their votes with bribes (or perhaps more benignly through appropriations for

their constituents).   Such direct payments have been alleged in Brazil, Russia, and

Argentina, and have been extensively documented in Peru under Fujimori (McMillan and

Zoido 2004). Second, MPs may support bills that either benefit themselves or their

families directly, or alternatively benefit selected constituents who pay for the bills

through bribes or favors (Faccio 2006, Gehlbach et al. 2007). Both kinds of corruption

are more easily detected when MPs must disclose their assets because their observed

consumption exceeds the declared resources (Di Tella 2007). Voting for bills benefiting

the MP or specific constituents can also be more easily detected when business dealings

or income sources are disclosed. Once excessive consumption or conflicted voting is




                                                                                         5
detected, they can be addressed by law enforcement agencies or exposed in the

newspapers, which may sway voters. Disclosure thus sheds light on misconduct by MPs

by pointing to discrepancies or outright conflicts.

        There is a natural parallel between financial and business disclosure by politicians

and that by corporations issuing securities (Grossman and Hart 1980, La Porta et al 2006)

or by corporate executives involved in self-dealing transactions (Djankov et al. 2008). In

all these instances, disclosure brings the potentially conflicted conduct into light, so that

the ultimate decision makers, be they law enforcement officials, shareholders, or voters,

can exercise their rights in disciplining misconduct.

        We examine the relationship between perceived corruption2 and the various

channels of accountability, including disclosure, media, and democratic institutions. We

face the challenge that disclosure rules are recent.                Although some countries had

disclosure earlier, modern disclosure practices begin in the 1980s, and the international

push toward disclosure by politicians occurs in the last 20 years, as part of a broader

wave of democratization. Close to half of the countries in our sample passed disclosure

laws in the 1990s. If the effects of disclosure materialize slowly, we might not be able to

observe, at the start of the 21st century, their full effect on corruption.3

        More generally, we do not have enough information to causally interpret the link

between disclosure and corruption, in part because there are omitted variables, and in part

because corruption itself can shape disclosure legislation. Some obvious instruments

such as culture or legal traditions are likely to predict corruption directly and not just


2
  In addition to the papers already mentioned, empirical studies of determinants of corruption include
Treisman (2000, 2007), Fisman and Gatti (2002), and Svensson (2005).
3
  We have no data on the role of law enforcement in battling corruption. We have made a substantial effort
to explore the effects of the introduction of the laws, but do not have enough data to do this properly.


                                                                                                        6
through disclosure. Nonetheless, our paper provides the first evidence as to which

aspects of disclosure are correlated with perceived corruption, and as such generates

useful hypotheses for future work.

        In section II, we describe our data. Section III presents the basic facts about the

determinants of disclosure rules around the world. Section IV shows the effects of

various institutions, including disclosure, on perceived corruption. Section V concludes.



II. Data.

Sample Description

        We present a new database on financial and business disclosure of members of

the lower house of parliament (MPs) in 175 countries.4 Upper house members, cabinet

members, and judges are also frequently required to file disclosure forms, but this paper

focuses on MPs in part because other high level officials are often subject to similar

disclosure requirements, and in part because MPs are numerous enough that extreme

political sensitivity in data collection can be avoided. The data have been assembled by

the co-authors and several collaborators over three years.

        As a first step, we used the internet as well as contacts with country government

agencies, World Bank country offices, UN missions, and local Non-Governmental

Organizations and academics to assemble the database of laws governing disclosure by

MPs as of June 2008. There is no standard “law” that addresses disclosure, so in the end

we assembled (and translated) over 1000 laws and regulations, including constitutions,


4
 The distribution of countries in the sample is: 45 from Sub-Saharan Africa; 19 from Middle East and
North Africa; 7 from South Asia; 28 from East/Central Europe and Central Asia; 23 from East Asia and
Pacific; 30 from Latin America and Caribbean; and 23 from OECD.



                                                                                                  7
parliament standing orders, and anti-corruption and conflict of interest laws. Whenever

possible, we contacted multiple sources to verify the accuracy of information.

           The analysis of the laws revealed that some kind of disclosure is required of MPs

in 109 of our 175 countries, and no disclosure is legally required in the remaining 66

countries (see Table 1). The list of countries with no legally required disclosure is

dominated by 27 countries from Sub-Saharan Africa, but also includes 12 from the

Middle East and North Africa, and another 11 from East Asia Pacific. In addition to the

109 countries with disclosure requirements, 5 countries have no legal requirement but use

voluntary disclosure mechanisms established either by parliamentary rules (Denmark,

Finland, and Norway),5 internal party regulations (Singapore), or imitation of disclosure

by cabinet members (Zambia).

           An examination of the laws yielded a crucial observation that became central to

our analysis. Specifically, there are large differences among countries in the ability of

citizens to access the MPs’ disclosure forms. In 46 of the 109 countries mandating

disclosure by law, disclosure is made solely to specific government agencies, such as the

Speaker of Parliament or an internal Comptroller, but is inaccessible to the public. Most

of these countries without public disclosure are from low and middle income groups.

Among OECD countries, only France has disclosure without public availability by law.

The other 63 countries make some kind of disclosure available to the public by law. In 3

of these countries, disclosure must be made public after application by members of the

press.      Another 9 countries only make disclosure publicly available under certain

conditions, such as the authorization of the Speaker, the Comptroller, or the MP. Finally,

6 countries have different public availability standards for different kinds of disclosure,
5
    Until 2007, Sweden, like other Scandinavian countries, did not require disclosures by law.


                                                                                                 8
keeping some disclosures from public access.6 Of the 175 sample countries, only 46

mandate that MPs make all required disclosures publicly available without conditions!

This is a rather low number if this information is relevant to voting decisions.

         As it turns out, even mandating public disclosure by law is no guarantee that the

public can obtain this information. To take this into account, we tried to collect the filled

out disclosure forms in countries with public disclosure, using the assistance of the World

Bank researchers and students in the relevant countries. We tried to obtain the filled out

forms of the first four MPs in alphabetical order and of the speaker of the lower house.

We made sure that no inappropriate methods were used to obtain the forms. We were

able to obtain the actual filled-out disclosure forms in 55 countries. In 50 of these cases

disclosures are publicly available by law, in one case (Bahrain) we obtained the forms

even though public disclosure is not mandatory, and in another 4 cases there is a

voluntary system of disclosure in place without legal mandates. We obtained the filled-

out forms either through the internet, or through one or multiple appearances at the

relevant government office.7 We failed to obtain the filled-out forms in 13 countries.

These include countries where forms must be publicly available by law (Algeria, Angola,

Namibia, Peru, Sri Lanka, and Uganda), with specific conditions (Bahamas, Belize, Cape

Verde, Kazakhstan, Mexico and Nicaragua), or via the press (Russia). The central

distinction we measure is that between any legal disclosure requirement and disclosures

actually available to the public. We have also constructed measures of public disclosure

according to the law, as opposed to in practice, but as we show they are not what matters.


6
   South Korea is included in this group because the law does not specify the public availability of conflicts
of interest’s disclosures. In practice, we were able to access all disclosures for South Korean MPs.
7
  In 4 countries (Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, and Spain), we could not photocopy the forms but could copy
information by hand.


                                                                                                            9
        As a second aspect of measuring disclosure, we consider its content and

comprehensiveness. Even among the countries that mandate public disclosure, the actual

disclosure available to the public is often far less complete than that available to

government agencies. To get at the content, we sought to obtain the blank forms that

MPs are asked to fill out from all countries with legally required disclosures or with

voluntary disclosure systems. We obtained such blank forms from 106 countries,

including 101 with legally required disclosures and another 5 with voluntary disclosure

systems in place. We failed to obtain blank forms in eight countries.8 For the countries

where public disclosure is more limited than that to congress, we collected both types of

forms. We then used the blank and filled-out disclosure forms to construct indices of

completeness of disclosure relative to the benchmark of a “universal” disclosure form

that contains all the disclosures used in any of sample countries.                     We thus have

information not only about the broad mandates required by the law, but also about the

extent of actual disclosure when the MPs fill out the forms.



Disclosure Variables

        Based on the information-gathering strategies described above, we construct eight

disclosure variables. These and other variables used in the analysis are defined in Table

2. Summary statistics are presented in Table 3.

        The first group includes two indicators that do not rely on the content of

disclosures. The first records whether any disclosure is required from MPs. As Table 3

shows, 62 percent of countries in our sample require some kind of disclosure from MPs

8
  In Angola and Togo there is a “free form” system in place, in Morocco and Swaziland the form does not
exist, in Papua New Guinea we were told the form is confidential, and we have not been able to confirm if
the form exists in Comoros, Sao Tome and Principe, and the Solomon Islands.


                                                                                                      10
and these disclosures are always available to congress or another specified body. High-

and upper-middle income countries are more likely to require disclosures, while only 35

percent of low income nations have MP disclosure requirements. The second variable in

Table 3 records whether disclosure is actually available to the public, i.e., citizens have

access to the completed forms in practice. In our sample, disclosure is publicly available

by law or under certain conditions in 63 countries but publicly available in practice in 55

countries, including the four countries with voluntary disclosures mentioned above (see

Table 1). Less than a third of the total sample has genuine public disclosure.

         The second group of variables deals with the content of disclosure. Roughly

speaking, we ask what share of “conceivable” disclosures are actually made by MPs. For

these content variables, we construct a measure of what is available to congress9 (based

on the blank forms) and a measure of what is actually available to the public (based on

the filled out forms we obtained).10 We assume that MPs disclose what they are asked to

disclose on the blank form, but not more. We use the blank disclosure forms collected

from 106 countries to construct an artificial universal disclosure form that incorporates all

information that any country requires its MPs to disclose. For each country, we keep

track of which of these “universal form” items are disclosed to congress or to the public.

When there is an ambiguity as to what a particular disclosure request calls for (i.e., Does

a request to disclose share ownership cover mutual funds?), we assume that the form

intends broader disclosure (i.e., yes, it does), thus raising national content scores.



9
   Throughout the paper, we refer to “disclosures to congress,” as a shortcut for disclosures available either
congress or any other entity that serves as the registry for the disclosures of MPs, even if this entity
independent from congress.
10
   In many countries, MPs need to fill in more than one form either at the beginning of their job, during
their work and at the end of their terms (e.g., financial interests, conflicts of interest, gifts, and travel
forms). All of these forms were considered as part of their disclosures.


                                                                                                          11
           The “universal form” covers items in the following seven areas: (1) assets (e.g.

real estate, vehicles, bank accounts, stocks, and business ownership); (2) liabilities (e.g.,

mortgages, loans); (3) expenditures (e.g., home expenses, education, health, taxes); (4)

income (e.g., from public and private employers, independent activities, businesses,

financial gains, other sources such as gambling); (5) potential conflicts of interest (e.g.,

unpaid advisory work or board memberships, participation in associations and non-

profits, post-tenure agreements); (6) gifts; and (7) travel.

           Some countries restrict business activities of the MPs, their ability to receive gifts,

or to own assets. Such restrictions can substitute for disclosure. The universal form

allows us to account for such restrictions. Whenever there is a restriction that is binding

in a given item, we code the restriction as the highest disclosure standard.

           MPs may need to make two types of disclosure of items in these seven areas: (1)

the values of their assets, liabilities, expenses, income, gifts, and travel, and (2)

information needed to identify assets, liabilities, the sources of income, gifts and travel,

and parties with whom they have relationships or associations. We refer to these two

types of disclosure as values and sources, recognizing that “sources” is a somewhat loose

reference encompassing all matters of identification of assets or activities. In our coding,

for each of the areas, the index of values equals 0 if no disclosure is required, 0.5 if only

aggregate values need to be disclosed (e.g., total wages, total real estate), and 1 if

itemized values need to be disclosed. Similarly, for each of the areas, the index of

sources equals 1 if items need to be identified precisely and 0 otherwise.11 We measure

the indices of values and sources separately for what is available to congress and to the

public. These data are shown in the four columns under “form content” in Table 3.
11
     “Conflicts of interest” have no values. Likewise, “expenditures” only have values, not sources.


                                                                                                       12
        Measures based on the universal form can take into account the extent of

disclosure not only by the MP, but also by family members. We do not present results

with family members, although our findings are robust to their inclusion.12

        In sum, we have four disclosure content variables, based on what goes to congress

and to the public, and dividing disclosures into values and sources. The Canadian blank

form illustrates the components of the “universal form.” Canada has different disclosure

standards for congress and the public. We start by describing the blank form available to

congress. As explained above, there are seven areas of disclosures required from MPs.

The first area is assets. In Canada, MPs must fill out all the details (i.e., address,

estimated value, description, purpose, co-owners) about their personal residence and

other real property (i.e., buildings, farms, land, and property investments). The blank

form also asks about the details and the values of business assets, as well as financial

investments and securities (i.e., stocks, bonds, funds, options, insurance policies, savings

plans, retirement accounts).           However, Canada only requires MPs to disclose an

aggregate value for term deposits and other interest-bearing financial instruments, which

would not allow the reader to know their individual values or their location. Moreover,

unlike many countries, Canada does not require the disclosure of movable assets, such as

vehicles, jewelry, or art. Overall, Canada gets a values (sources) disclosure to congress

score of 0.58 (0.67) in the category of assets.

        Liabilities are the second category of disclosure. Here the Canadian blank form

requires all the information to identify individual debts or liabilities, mortgages, and

guarantees in amounts over 10,000 Canadian dollars. The form requests the amount of

12
   In our data, 73 of the 106 countries with blank form required the disclosure of all or some items for the
family members of the MP. All the analysis and regressions of the paper have also been conducted for
indexes that average the content of both the MP form and the MP’s family form. Results do not change.


                                                                                                        13
each obligation and the name of the creditor or lending institution. This information gives

Canada a score of 1.0 for the disclosure of both values and sources of liabilities.

        The third area of disclosure is expenditures. In Canada, as in the majority of

countries in our sample, MPs are not required to detail their expenditure patterns, so

Canada gets the minimum score of 0 for values in the expenditure area.13

        The fourth area of disclosures is income. In Canada, the blank form asks the MP

to check from a list of possible sources of income and benefits beyond the parliamentary

compensation (i.e., businesses, farms, jobs, partnerships, professions, offices and

directorships, contracts, royalties, interest, dividends, rents, trusts, pensions, annuities,

disability benefits). In each case, the MP needs to identify the exact source and nature as

well as the amount received in the past and the coming year. Canada gets a score of 1.0

for the disclosure of both values and sources of income.

        Potential conflicts of interest are also addressed prominently in the Canadian

blank form, as it requests that the MP identify his activities and involvements in paid and

unpaid contractual or employment relationships, professions, businesses, directorships

and management positions in corporations, associations, trade unions and non-profit

organizations. The name of the organization and the MP’s position must be provided in

each case. He must also report his positions and incomes for the following 12 months.

Canada has a score of 1.0 in the sources of conflicts of interest reported to congress.

        The last two areas covered by the universal form are travel and gifts. Canadian

MPs must file a form for each sponsored trip they undertake. In this form, they provide


13
   Only 13 countries with available disclosure forms actually require expenditure disclosure. Only El
Salvador, Georgia, Honduras, Indonesia, Italy, and Ukraine have disclosure levels that give them a score
above 0.20 in this area.



                                                                                                     14
the destination, dates, purpose, sponsors, accompanying passengers, and the description

and value of gifts received, with supporting documents. Canada gets a score of 1.0 in the

areas of values and sources of travel.            Finally, Canadian MPs also have to file an

additional form for each individual gift or benefit received, stating the nature, the source,

and the circumstances. Although we would know the specific value of gifts obtained

during a trip, there is no general requirement to provide the individual value of each gift,

so Canada scores 0.0 for the disclosure of gift values and 1.0 for gift sources.14

        The average of the six indices of the areas of disclosures with values gives

Canada a total score of values to congress of 0.76. A similar calculation for the six

indices of the areas of disclosure with sources gives Canada a score of 0.94. Not all

countries disclose as much as Canada. The mean score over 175 countries for values

available to congress is 0.22. If we only consider the 106 countries with available blank

forms, this mean rises to 0.34.         At the top are Canada, Costa Rica, Jamaica, Georgia,

Israel, Indonesia, Namibia, Puerto Rico, and St. Lu cia, with scores above 0.65.                    The

mean score for sources available to congress is 0.29 over all countries and 0.45 over

countries with an available blank form. At the top are Australia, Canada, Israel, Namibia,

Puerto Rico, Poland, the United Kingdom, and the United States, with scores above 0.80.

        Canada and another 25 countries only make a subset of disclosures available to

the public. The “summary” blank forms and the filled-out disclosure forms allow us to

compute sources and values indices for disclosures available to the public, and not just to

congress. The Canadian values and sources disclosure scores fall to 0.33 and 0.92. The


14
    Canadian gift policy is an example of binding restrictions. The disclosure of gifts described above
refers only to gifts which are considered to be an expression of courtesy or protocol. Canadian MPs are
prohibited from any other kind of gifts. Because we code restrictions as the highest disclosure standard,
Canada gets a full score of 1 in both values and sources of gifts.


                                                                                                      15
main cause of this reduction is the suppression of the main details of the addresses of

properties, and of the individual values of assets, liabilities and incomes.          Public

disclosure in Canada still contains information that allows identification of accounts,

assets, sources of income, and business connections. The individual forms for gifts and

travel are also publicly available in full. Canada still ranks among the top ten countries in

content of disclosures publicly-available.

       Columns 5 and 6 in Table 3 present the indices for values and sources publicly-

available in practice. These two columns are our most comprehensive summary measures

of the content of MP disclosures, as they consider not only the breadth of the content of

the forms, but also the failure of some countries to comply with their public disclosure

laws and the availability of data in other countries despite the absence of legal mandates.

In the full sample of 175 countries, the mean public disclosure score is 0.09 for values

and 0.15 for sources. If we focus on the countries for which we have a blank form, the

mean public disclosure score is 0.14 for values and 0.24 for sources. Transparency is

quite scarce once we take both the completeness and the actual public availability of

disclosures into account.

       The last two variables presented in Table 3 concern enforcement of disclosure.

The first is the index of the strength of the registrar, the body that collects disclosures.

This index reflects three dimensions: whether the registrar is independent from

parliament, whether it publishes compliance data, and whether it can penalize MPs for

failure to disclose. The second enforcement measure is the index of the strength of the

administrative unit which checks the accuracy of disclosure, which might be different

from the registrar. The index again aggregates information on whether this unit is




                                                                                          16
independent from parliament, whether it publishes the results of verification of accuracy

of disclosure, and whether it can penalize MPs for inaccurate disclosure. The strength of

the registrar and the checking units are 0.32 and 0.21 for the full sample. For the group

of countries with available blank forms, the mean scores for the strength of the registrar

and checking units are higher reaching 0.50 and 0.34 respectively.



III. Determinants of Disclosure.

       Table 3 also presents average scores of disclosure variables grouped by income.

Across our measures, high and upper middle income countries generally have the highest

disclosure scores and low income countries the lowest. Moreover, although disclosures

of values and sources are positively correlated as illustrated in Figures 1 and 2, high

income countries stress the disclosure of sources over that of values. Public disclosure of

sources is the highest in rich countries (0.32) and declines monotonically with income.

The corresponding values disclosure for high income countries (0.09) identical to the

world mean. Another finding is that enforcement variables are the highest in upper

middle income countries.

       Table 4 examines the potential determinants of the six disclosure and two

enforcement measures more systematically. We report OLS regressions but have

confirmed our results using probits. We always include per capita income as an

explanatory variable. One might worry that income is endogenous, so we have also run

all the regressions with latitude, yielding very similar results. We also include the

average democracy score over 1975-2006 from Polity IV, on the theory that disclosure is

more likely in democracies. In Panel A, we include one cultural variable that is often




                                                                                        17
significant in the studies of public institutions, namely the percentage of population that

is protestant (see, e.g., La Porta et al. 1999). In Panel B, we alternatively add another

common predictor of institutional arrangements (including transparency in the corporate

sector), namely the legal origin of the country’s commercial laws (La Porta et al. 2008).

We have also experimented with ethnic fractionalization, which has been shown to

influence the quality of government (see, e.g., Easterly and Levine 1997, Alesina et al.

2003), but it is never significant and so is omitted.

       The results in Table 4 confirm that economic development is associated with

greater disclosure. This is especially true for measures of disclosure to the public, as

opposed to merely to congress. A plausible interpretation of this finding is that richer (or

higher human capital) countries demand greater accountability of their politicians, and to

this end impose more stringent disclosure rules to promote such accountability. There is

no evidence that enforcement measures are higher in richer countries.

       An even stronger finding in Table 4 is that, for every single measure of disclosure,

including enforcement, democratic countries have higher scores, even holding per capita

income constant.     A plausible interpretation, again, is that disclosure is needed for

political accountability, which works through the democratic process.

       The results on cultural and legal variables are mixed.      Percentage protestant is

generally associated with lower disclosure requirements, less disclosure of values and

sources to congress, and fewer enforcement powers, but with more publicly available

disclosure of sources of assets and conflicts.     French civil law countries are similar to

common law countries in their disclosure scores. German and Scandinavian civil law

countries have greater emphasis on public availability of disclosure than do the common




                                                                                         18
law countries, but only German law countries have statistically higher content of values

and sources publicly available than common law ones. Partly as a result of the voluntary

nature of disclosure in most Scandinavian countries, they show statistically lower indices

of the strength of both the registrar and checking units than do common law countries.

        The bottom line so far is that per capita income and especially democracy are the

strongest correlates of disclosure.           We can alternatively ask: what determines the

difference between public disclosure and disclosure to congress, which we refer to as “the

wedge”? In Table 5, we use the difference between disclosures to public and to congress

as dependent variables, and restrict attention to the subsample with some required

disclosure.     As in Table 4, we use economic development, democracy, percentage

protestant, and legal origins as explanatory variables. Per capita income is a statistically

significant predictor of the wedge. Democracy enters negatively, but insignificantly, for

public availability, values and sources disclosure. German and Scandinavian law

countries have relatively more public disclosure than others. The next question is which,

if any, of these aspects of disclosure are related to perceived corruption.



IV. Consequences of Disclosure for Perceived Corruption.

        To investigate the effect of disclosure on corruption, we focus on the average over

2003-2007 corruption score from the International Country Risk Guide, a standard

measure of perceived corruption with the largest span of country-years. We look at key

disclosure variables, and usually control for the log of income per capita in 2006.15



15
   The results do not change if we control for our enforcement measures. The results are also similar if we
use lagged per capita income or latitude. We have also added ethnic fractionalization (Alesina et al 2003)
to the specification, but it is never significant and is not used.


                                                                                                        19
       Disclosure by politicians is part of a broader framework of accountability, which

also includes the political system, media, and law enforcement. Accordingly, in addition

to considering disclosure by itself as a determinant of corruption, we also examine its

consequences in conjunction with other measures of governance. These fall into three

groups. First, we consider democracy and its types, including (1) average democracy

over 1975-2006, introduced earlier, (2) proportional representation, and (3) party-

specific, as opposed to candidate-specific, voting.         Previous research shows that

democracy and proportional representation are associated with lower corruption (Persson

and Tabellini 2003). Party-specific voting may deter corruption because parties bear the

costs of corruption by their members, and so might discipline them on their own.

       Second, in most research in this area, media play a crucial role. We consider

three indicators of potential media effectiveness in deterring corruption. The first two are

government ownership of the press and of television, respectively, both of which may

undermine media’s effectiveness in exposing corruption (Djankov et al. 2003). The third

indicator is the logarithm of daily newspaper circulation per thousand inhabitants, which

in theory should improve media’s effectiveness.

       Third, again in most theories, the judiciary plays an important role in promoting

the accountability of politicians. Our measure of the power of the judiciary is judicial

independence from La Porta et al. (2004), which is presumably helpful in making sure

that judges can fight corruption without fear of retribution.

       Table 6 presents the results for two indicators of disclosure: to congress and to the

public. Table 7 then shows the results for the content of public disclosure for both values

and for sources. Tables 8 and 9 present some findings separately for democratic and non­




                                                                                         20
democratic countries.    Tables 10 and 11 examine the robustness of the results to

alternative measure of corruption and additional controls.

       Before turning to the results on disclosure, Panel A of Table 6 presents the

regressions of corruption on measures of governance other than the disclosure variables,

such as democracy, media, and judicial independence. All these measures of governance

influence corruption.      Countries that are more democratic, have proportional

representation, party-specific voting, low government ownership of the press and

television, and independent judiciaries are all perceived to be less corrupt. These are old

results, and they raise the question of whether disclosure by politicians also matters.

       In panel B, we add the disclosure requirement dummy (disclosure to congress) to

the specifications in Panel A. In most of these specifications, the existence of the

disclosure requirement by MPs is associated with higher, not lower, perceived corruption,

although the results are only marginally significant. Only two other governance variables

(democracy and judicial independence) are significant; the most important (and well-

known) influence on perceived corruption is per capita income (Treisman 2007).

       The results are radically different for public disclosure, as illustrated in Panel C.

This variable is a statistically significant predictor of lower perceived corruption in every

specification, even holding per capita income constant and controlling for other measures

of governance. Parameter estimates suggest that introducing public disclosure in practice

raises the ICRG corruption score over a third of a standard deviation (which is 1.14).

Only democracy and judicial independence retain statistical significance once public

disclosure is used as an explanatory variable; media variables lose their significance. Per

capita income remains significant in all specifications.




                                                                                          21
          Table 7 focuses only on public disclosure, but distinguishes between values and

sources.16       As Panel A shows, public disclosure of values is never statistically

significantly associated with perceived corruption. In contrast, as we see in Panel B,

greater public disclosure of sources by MPs is statistically significantly associated with

lower perceived corruption in every specification. Going from no to complete public

disclosure of sources raises the ICRG score by about a standard deviation.

          Tables 8 and 9 consider the public disclosure indicator and public disclosure of

sources, but divide countries into those with above and below mean average democracy

scores.      Both of these public disclosure variables are consistently correlated with

perceived corruption in democratic, but not in the undemocratic countries (Figures 3 and

4).    This evidence is supportive of the idea that transparency matters in so far as it

influences accountability. We have run similar regressions dividing countries into those

above and below the mean income per capita, and found that the benefits of public

disclosure are concentrated in the richer countries.

          Table 10 presents the results for alternative measures of corruption using the

public disclosure indicator and public disclosure of sources as alternative independent

variables. Panel A presents the results for the whole sample, Panel B for democracies.

We consider five additional corruption measures: from Kaufmann et al. (2008),

Transparency International, the Heritage Foundation, the Global Competitiveness Report,

and for a few countries the percentage of firms reporting bribes from the World Bank

Enterprise Surveys. These variables are defined in Table 2.



16
   Disclosure of either sources or values to congress or to the public by law is uncorrelated with perceived
corruption in similar regressions. The enforcement variables come in significant, but with the “wrong”
sign: greater strength of registrar and checking unit is related to higher perceived corruption.


                                                                                                        22
       In the full sample, the public disclosure indicator does not predict other measures

of corruption, while the public disclosure of sources predicts Kauffman et al. and

Transparency International measures, but not the others. For the democratic sub-sample,

however, both the public indicator and the public disclosure of sources are statistically

significant for all but the Enterprise Survey measures. Our indicators of disclosure are

significant in seven of the 10 specifications. As in Tables 8 and 9, neither indicator is

significant in the low democracy sub-sample. In Table 11, we consider the robustness of

these findings to the inclusion of percentage protestant, which has been shown in earlier

work to influence corruption (La Porta et al. 1999). Percentage protestant is highly

predictive of lower corruption. The results for the two measures of public disclosure

become weaker, but they remain significant in ten of the twelve specifications for the

democratic sub-sample shown in Panel B.



V. Conclusion.

       We present new measures of disclosure by MPs in 175 countries, and examine

their determinants and influences on perceived corruption. The measures distinguish

between public and non-public disclosure and between more and less comprehensive

disclosure. These distinctions motivate the creation of several indices of disclosure.

       Several findings emerge. First, there is tremendous variation among countries –

and even among countries with some disclosure mandates – in whether disclosure is

made public and how much is made public. Only a third of the 175 countries allow

public access to disclosure by politicians.




                                                                                       23
        Second, perhaps the crucial imperative for political accountability is that

disclosure be made publicly. Many countries keep disclosure by MPs in congress, and

such secret disclosure, even if extensive, is uncorrelated with perceived corruption. In

contrast, public disclosure is associated with lower perceived corruption even controlling

for other measures of governance, such as media freedom and democracy. The privacy

of politicians may have benefits, but those may come at a cost of higher corruption.

        Third, with respect to the content of disclosure, what matters most is identification

of sources of an MP’s assets, gifts, and activities, rather than the reporting of values of

assets and income. This result is perhaps unsurprising once we recognize that disclosure

of sources is crucial for detecting conflicts of interest.

        Fourth, public disclosure is strongly associated with lower corruption in the

democratic but not the undemocratic countries, which points to complementarity of

transparency and democratic governance.

        Our data do not allow for a causal interpretation of this evidence.            Public

disclosure by MPs may reduce corruption, or, alternatively, legislatures in corrupt

countries may successfully protect themselves against disclosure, particularly public

disclosure of conflicts. But this endogeneity concern only reinforces our message as to

what might possibly work in reducing corruption; after all, there is surely a good reason

why MPs wish to keep disclosures private. And the message is this: If a country,

especially a democracy, wishes to pass disclosure laws with the aim of reducing

corruption, the most effective laws are those that make disclosure public, and that focus

on the sources of the MP’s assets and activities, rather than on values. Secret disclosure,

in contrast, does not do much for political accountability.




                                                                                          24
                                      References

Adsera, Alicia, Carles Boix, and Mark Paine. 2003. “Are you being served? Political
   accountability and quality of government,” Journal of Law, Economics, &
   Organization 19(2): 445-490.

Alesina, Alberto, Devleeschauwer, Arnaud, Easterly, William, Kurlat, Sergio, and
   Wacziarg, Romain. 2003. “Fractionalization,” Journal of Economic Growth 8(2):
   155-194.

Barro, Robert. 1973. “The control of politicians: An economic model,” Public Choice
   14(1): 19-42.

Beck, Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer, and Patrick Walsh. 2001.
   “New tools in comparative political economy: The Database of political institutions,”
   World Bank Economic Review 15(1): 165-176.

Besley, Timothy and Anne Case. 1995. “Does electoral accountability affect economic
   policy choices? Evidence from gubernatorial term limits,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 110(3):769-98.

Besley, Timothy and Andrea Prat. 2006. “Handcuffs for the grabbing hand? Media
   capture and government accountability,” American Economic Review 96(3): 720-736.

Bjorkman, Martina and Jakob Svensson. 2009. “Power to the people: Evidence from a
   randomized field experiment of a community-based monitoring project in Uganda,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Brunetti, Aymo and Beatrice Weder. 2003. “A free press is bad news for corruption,”
   Journal of Public Economics 87(7-8): 1801-1824.

Central Intelligence Agency. CIA World Factbook, published online.

Di Tella, Rafael. 2007. “Choosing agents and monitoring consumption: A note on wealth
   as a corruption-controlling device,” NBER Working Paper 13163.

Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, Tatiana Nenova, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “Who
   owns the media?” Journal of Law and Economics, 46(2): 341–81.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer.
   2008. “The law and economics of self-dealing,” Journal of Financial Economics
   88(3): 430-465.

Dyck, Alex, David Moss, and Luigi Zingales. 2008. “Media versus special interests,”
   Mimeo, University of Chicago.




                                                                                      25
Easterly, William and Ross Levine. 1997. “Africa’s growth tragedy: policies and ethnic
   divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4): 1203–1250.

Eijffinger, Sylvester and Petra Geraats. 2005. “How transparent are central banks?”
    European Journal of Political Economy, 22(1): 1-21.

Faccio, Mara. 2006. “Politically connected firms,” American Economic Review 369-386.

Ferejohn, John. 1986. “Incumbent performance and electoral control,” Public Choice
   50(1-3), 5-25.

Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan. 2008. "Exposing corrupt politicians: The Effects of
    Brazil's publicly released audits on electoral outcomes," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 123(2): 703-746.

Fisman, Raymond and Roberta Gatti. 2002. “Decentralization and corruption: Evidence
   across countries,” Journal of Public Economics 83(3): 325-345.

Gehlbach, Scott, Konstantin Sonin, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2007. “Businessman
   candidates,” Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=917778 .

Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart. 1980. “Disclosure laws and takeover bids,” Journal
   of Finance 35(2): 323-334.

Hirshleifer, Jack. 1980. “Privacy: its origin, function, and future,” The Journal of Legal
   Studies 9(4), 649-664.

Johnson, Joel and Jessica Wallack, 2006. “Electoral systems and the personal vote:
   Update of database from ‘Particularism Around the World,” San Diego: University of
   California.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Kraay, Aart, and Mastruzzi, Massimo. 2008. “Governance matters
   VII: Aggregate and individual governance indicators, 1996-2007,” World Bank
   Policy Research Working Paper No. 4654.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny.
   1999. “The quality of government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization
   15(1): 222–79.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Cristian Pop-Eleches, and Andrei Shleifer.
   2004. “Judicial checks and balances,” Journal of Political Economy 112(2): 445–70.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2006. “What works in
   securities laws?” Journal of Finance 61(1): 1–32.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “The Economic



                                                                                       26
   Consequences of Legal Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature 46(2): 285–332.

McMillan, John and Pablo Zoido. 2004. “How to subvert democracy: Montesinos in
  Peru,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(4): 69–92.

Olken, Benjamin, 2007. “Monitoring corruption: Evidence from a field experiment in
   Indonesia,” Journal of Political Economy 115(2): 200-249.

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini. 2003. The Economic Effects of Constitutions.
   Cambridge and London: MIT Press.

Polity IV Project. 2005. Polity IV Project: Political Regime Characteristics and
    Transitions. College Park: University of Maryland. Available online at
    http://www.bsos.umd.edu/cidcm/inscr/polity/index.htm

Posner, Richard. 1981. “The economics of privacy,” American Economic Review Papers
   and Proceedings 71(2): 405-409.

Przeworski, Adam, Michael Alvarez, Jose Cheibub, and Fernando Limongi. 2000.
   Democracy and development: political institutions and well-being in the world, 1950-
   1990. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson. 2004. “The Power of Information: Evidence from a
   Newspaper Campaign to Reduce Capture,” World Bank Policy Research Working
   Paper No. 3239.

Schedler, Andreas, Larry Diamond, and Marc Plattner. 1999. The Self-Restraining State.
   Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, Inc.

Schneider, Frank. 2007. “Politicians, transparency, and corruption,” Mimeo, Harvard
   University.

Stigler, George. 1980. “An introduction to privacy in economics and politics,” The
    Journal of Legal Studies 9(4): 623-644.

Svensson, Jakob. 2005. “Eight questions about corruption,” Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 19: 19–42.

Teorell, Jan, Sören Holmberg, and Bo Rothstein. 2008. The Quality of Government
   Dataset, version 7 Jan08. Göteborg University: The Quality of Government Institute,
   http://www.qog.pol.gu.se

Treisman, Daniel. 2000. “The causes of corruption: A cross-national study,” Journal of
   Public Economics 76(3): 399-457.




                                                                                    27
Treisman, Daniel. 2007. “What have we learnt about the causes of corruption from ten
   years of cross-national empirical research?” Mimeograph, University of California,
   Los Angeles.

United Nations Statistical Database (http://unstats.un.org)

World Development Indicators at http://devdata.worldbank.org/dataonline/.




                                                                                  28
                                          Table 1: Sample distribution

                                                 Number of
                                                  countries                        Country names

Initial sample                                    175

Disclosures required by law                       109
                                                          46
Available to congress only                                63
Publicly available by law                                 46
All publicly available directly w/o conditions             6 Belgium,Colombia,Hungary,Italy,South Korea,Spain.
Only some disclosures publicly available                   3 Armenia, Greece, Russia.
Available only through press                               9 Bahamas,Belize,Canada,Cape Verde,Kazakhstan,
Available to public under conditions                         Mexico,Montenegro,Nicaragua,Spain.

                                                          51 Includes Bahrain (not publicly available by law).
Could obtain filled-out forms                             13 Algeria,Angola,Bahamas,Belize,Cape Verde, Kazakhstan,
Failed to obtain filled-out forms
                                                             Mexico, Namibia,Nicaragua,Peru,Russia,Sri Lanka,Uganda.

Disclosures not required but exist in practice                5 Denmark,Finland,Norway,Singapore,Zambia.
Available to congress only                                    1 Singapore.
Publicly available in practice                                4 Denmark,Finland,Norway,Zambia.

Total publicly available in practice                      55
                                                                      Table 2
                                                           Description of the variables
This table describes the variables collected for the 175 countries in our study. Unless otherwise noted, the sources of the variables are the laws,
regulations and blank disclosure forms for each country.

 Variable                                                                                       Description

                                                        1)Disclosure requirements and public availability of disclosures
 Disclosure required    This variable takes a value of 1 if the law or regulations of the country require MPs to provide either financial and/or business interests disclosures.
                        The variable takes a value of zero otherwise.

 Publicly available     This variable takes a value of 1 if we got access to the filled-out forms of the MPs’ financial and business interests’ disclosures in the country. The
                        variable also equals 1 if the country has voluntary disclosures available to the public and we could access the filled-out forms of the MPs. The variable
                        takes a value of 0.5 if the country has two different standards for public availability of disclosures for the financial and the business interest forms, and
                        only one of them was available (Belgium, Colombia, Hungary, Italy, and Spain). The variable takes a value of zero if we failed to get access to the
                        filled-out forms of the MPs or if the country has no public disclosure required from MPs.

                                                           2) Measures of disclosure based on blank disclosure forms
 Values available to    The index of values available to congress measures the ratio of all value items contained in the country’s blank disclosure form available to congress
 congress               over all value items potentially disclosed in the artificial “universal” form. It measures how many “conceivable” disclosures of value items are
                        required to be disclosed to congress (or to an alternative government agency) by the MP. To construct the measures of the content of disclosures, we
                        use the blank disclosure forms collected from the 106 countries with available blank forms. We begin by constructing an artificial “universal
                        disclosure form,” which incorporates all the information that any country requires its MPs to disclose. We then compare each country’s blank
                        disclosure form to the universal form. For each item, we assign a score of 1 when the item is included in the country’s blank form requesting to
                        provide disaggregated values (i.e., the value of each property, of each wage, etc…). We assign a score of 0.5 for each item included in the country’s
                        blank form requesting to provide only an aggregate value (i.e., the total value of all properties owned, total value of wages, etc…). We assign a score
                        of 0 when the country’s blank form does not include the specific item. When the country imposes a binding restriction (i.e., which cannot be
                        overturned) on a given item (i.e., the business activities of the MPs, their abilities to receive gifts, or to own stocks) we code the restriction as the
                        highest possible disclosure standard. The scores of each item of disclosure in a particular area are then averaged to create an equally-weighted score of
                        values for each area of disclosure. Finally, the overall values score of the blank form is calculated as the equally-weighted average across all six
                        categories with potential disclosure of value items (i.e., assets, liabilities, income, expenditure, gifts, and travel).

 Sources available to   The index of sources available to congress measures the ratio of all source items contained in the country’s blank disclosure form available to congress
 congress               over all source items potentially disclosed in the artificial “universal” form (see above). We compare each country’s blank disclosure form to the
                        universal form. For each item, we assign a score of 1 when the country’s blank form requests the information needed to identify the source (i.e., the
                        precise location of assets, the identity of creditors, the source of income, gifts and travel, and the identity of parties with whom they work, they have
                        relationships or associations, or with whom they have entered into post-tenure agreements). We assign a score of 0 when the country’s blank form
                        does not request the identification of the source of the specific item, or when the information requested is not sufficient to identify the item’s source.
                        When the country imposes a binding restriction (i.e., which cannot be overturned) on a given item (i.e., the business activities of the MPs, their
                        abilities to receive gifts, or to own stocks) we code the restriction as the highest possible disclosure standard. The scores of each item of disclosure in
                        a particular area are then averaged to create an equally-weighted score of sources for each area of disclosure. Finally, the overall sources score of the
                        blank form is calculated as the equally-weighted average across all six categories with potential disclosure of source items (i.e., assets, liabilities,
                        income, conflicts of interest, gifts, and travel).
Variable                                                                                    Description


Values publicly      The index of values publicly available measures the ratio of all value items contained in the country’s disclosure form available to the public over all
available            value items potentially disclosed in the artificial “universal” form. It measures how many “conceivable” disclosures of value items are publicly
                     available in practice. This index is constructed following the same methodology described above for the score of “values available to congress,” but
                     only takes into account completed disclosures we were able to obtain.

Sources publicly     The index of sources publicly available measures the ratio of all source items contained in the country’s disclosure form available to the public over all
available            source items potentially disclosed in the artificial “universal” form. It measures how many “conceivable” disclosures of source items are publicly
                     available in practice. This index is constructed following the same methodology described above for the score of “sources available to congress,” but it
                     only takes account of completed disclosures we were able to obtain.


                                                                          3) Enforcement indices

Registrar strength   The index is the weighted average of three separate variables: (1) Registrar unit is independent from parliament. This variable takes a value of 1 if
                     there is a registrar where the MPs turn in their forms and this unit is independent from parliament, and zero otherwise. (2) Registrar unit publishes
                     compliance data by law. This variable takes a value of 1 if the law specifically requires that the registrar unit publishes compliance data by MPs, or if
                     the law provides that disclosures are publicly available, and zero otherwise. (3) Penalties for MPs’ failure to comply. This variable takes a value of 1
                     if the law establishes penalties for those MPs who do not submit their disclosures, or for any breach of the law that requires submission of the
                     disclosures, and zero otherwise.

Checking unit        The index is the weighted average of three separate variables: (1) Agency/Body that routinely checks the disclosures is independent from parliament.
strength             This variable takes a value of 1 if there is an agency/body mandated by the law that is in charge of routinely checking the content of the disclosure
                     forms and if this unit is independent from parliament. The variable takes a value of zero otherwise. (2) Data integrity unit publishes compliance data
                     by law. This variable takes a value of 1 if the law specifically requires that the data integrity unit publishes the results of checking the content of the
                     disclosure forms by MPs, and zero otherwise. (3) Penalties for submitting false information. This variable takes a value of 1 if the law specifically
                     establishes penalties for those MPs who provide false information in the disclosures. The variable takes a value of zero if there are general penalties
                     for a breach of the law, but not specific penalties for providing false information, or if there are no penalties established at all.


                                                                         4) Corruption measures
ICRG corruption      The average of the index of corruption from the International Country Risk Guide between 2003 and 2007. The scale of the index is from 0 to 6,
index (2003-2007)    where higher numbers mean lower corruption. Source: International Country Risk Guide, Political Risk Services. www.prsgroup.com.

Kaufmann             The average score of the Kaufmann corruption index between 2003 and 2005. The range of the score is from -2.5 to +2.5, with a higher score
corruption index     indicating better governance. Source: Kaufmann et al (2008).
(2003-2005)

Transparency         The average score of the Transparency International index of corruption perception between 2003 and 2007. The index provides a measure of the
International        extent to which corruption is perceived to exist in the public and political sectors. The index focuses on corruption in the public sector and defines
corruption index     corruption as the abuse of public office for private gain. It is based on assessments by experts and opinion surveys. The index ranges between 0
(2003-2007)          (highly corrupt) and 10 (highly clean). Source: www.transparency.org.

                                                                                                                                                                               2
Variable                                                                                            Description
Heritage Foundation        The average score of the Heritage Foundation index of corruption between 2003 and 2007. The index is based on quantitative data that assess the
corruption index           perception of corruption in the business environment, including levels of governmental, legal, judicial and administrative corruption. The index is
(2003-2007)                based on the index of Transparency International but supplemented with quantitative information from other sources. The scale of the index is from 0
                           to 100, where higher numbers mean less corruption. Source: www.heritage.org.

GCR corruption             The average score of the Global Competitiveness Report index of corruption between 2003 and 2007. The index is based on survey measures that
index (2003-2007)          include questions about the business costs of corruption. The scale of the index is from 0 to 7, where higher numbers mean less corruption. Source:
                           International Country Risk Guide, Political Risk Services. www.prsgroup.com.

Firms that pay bribes      The percentage of firms that report “paying bribes to get things done” from the World Banks’ Enterprise Survey. The surveys collect information on
(%)                        firm characteristics, business perceptions, and indicators of the quality of the business environment. Source: www.enterprisesurveys.org.


                                                                            5) Other Variables and Controls
Log GNI per capita         Logarithmic of per capita Gross National Income Atlas Method (in US dollars) in 2006. Source: World Development Indicators at
2006                       http://devdata.worldbank.org/dataonline/.

Protestant
population                 The percentage of protestant population in the country in 1980. Source: La Porta et al (1999).
French civil law,
                           Identifies the legal origin of the company law or commercial law of each country. Each dummy variable is equal to 1 if the origin of the company law
German civil law
                           or commercial law of the country is French, German or Scandinavian, respectively, and zero otherwise. The omitted legal origin is English Common
and Scandinavian
                           law. Source: La Porta et al (2008).
law dummies
Democracy (1975-           Average democracy score from Polity IV for the years between 1975 and 2006. It is a measure of the degree of democracy in a given country based
2006)                      on: (1) the competitiveness of political participation; (2) the openness and competitiveness of executive recruitment; and (3) the constraints on the
                           chief executive. The democracy indicator is an additive eleven-point scale ranging from 0 to 10, where higher values equal a higher degree of
                           institutionalized democracy. Source: Jaggers and Marshall (2000) and updates of the Polity IV Database.

Proportional               Average of the proportional representation score for the years between 1975 and 2006. The variable equals 3 if 100 percent of the seats are assigned
representation             via proportional rule, 2 if the majority of seats are assigned via proportional rule, 1 if a minority of seats is assigned proportionally, and zero if no seats
(1975-2006)                are assigned through a proportional rule. Source: Beck et al (2001) and updates of World Bank Database of Political Institutions.

Party versus               Party versus candidate specific voting score for the year 2005. The variable captures the distinction between casting votes either for parties or for
candidate specific         individual candidates in the lower (or only) house. The variable takes a value of zero in countries where voters have only one vote for a party. It takes
voting                     a value of 1 in countries where voters can vote for a party or a candidate, where voters have multiple votes for multiple candidates, or where votes for
                           a party or candidate are observationally equivalent. Finally, it takes a value of 2 for countries where voters have one vote for an individual candidate.
                           Source: Johnson & Wallack (2006).

Government
ownership of         the   Market share of state-owned newspapers out of the aggregate market share of the five largest daily newspapers (by circulation). Source: Djankov et al
press (%)                  (2003).


                                                                                                                                                                                         3
Variable                                                                            Description
Government
ownership of     Market share of state-owned television stations out of the aggregate market share of the five largest television stations (by viewership). Source:
(%)         TV   Djankov et al (2003).

Newspaper        Logarithm of newspapers and periodicals circulation per thousand inhabitants in the year 2000 (or closest available). Source: United Nations
circulation      Statistical Database (http://unstats.un.org).

Judicial
                 The average of three variables: (1) Tenure of Supreme Court Judges; (2) Tenure of the Administrative Court Judges; and (3) Case Law. Source: La
independence
                 Porta et al (2004).




                                                                                                                                                                   4
                          Table 3: Disclosure and enforcement indices by income groups
                                      Requirements and            Form content (based on universal form
                                      public availabitily                       concept)                           Enforcement

                                                              Values       Sources     Values      Sources                Checking
                                     Disclosure    Publicly available to available to publicly     publicly     Registrar   unit
                                      required     available congress     congress    available    available    strength strength
                                                                          Panel A: Means

Full sample (175)                       0.62         0.29             0.23    0.31        0.09       0.15         0.32      0.21
Countries with blank form (106)         0.95         0.49             0.37    0.48        0.14       0.24         0.50      0.34


                                          Panel B: Means by income groups (and significance of t-tests of group vs. the rest)

                                              c
High income (37)                       0.76          0.61 a       0.20       0.41 a       0.09      0.32    a
                                                                                                                  0.27      0.19
Upper middle income (30)               0.83 a        0.42 b       0.35 a     0.45 a       0.16 a    0.25    b
                                                                                                                  0.51 a    0.37 a
Lower middle income (59)               0.66          0.21         0.29 c     0.31         0.08      0.08 a        0.37      0.24
Low income (49)                        0.35 a        0.08 a       0.11 a     0.12 a       0.04 b    0.03 a        0.18 a    0.10 a

Notes:
 Number of countries in parentheses.
 Significance levels: (a) if p<0.01; (b) if p<0.05; (c.) if p<0.10.
                      Table 4: Cross-sectional determinants of disclosure and enforcement

                                    Requirements and              Form Content (based on universal form
                                    public availabitily                         concept)                               Enforcement

                                                                  Values       Sources     Values      Sources                  Checking
       Dependent variable is: Disclosure        Publicly        available to available to publicly    publicly      Registrar      unit
                            . required          available        congress     congress    available   available     strength    strength

                                                                     Panel A: Controlling for religion

Log GNI percapita 2006              0.0211        0.0843a        -0.0222c      0.0118       0.0075        0.0462a    -0.0181     -0.0124
                                   [0.0279]      [0.0236]        [0.0121]     [0.0143]     [0.0080]      [0.0116]   [0.0200]    [0.0154]
Democracy (1975-2006)               0.0717a       0.0356a         0.0342a      0.0427a      0.0121a       0.0193a    0.0350a     0.0291a
                                   [0.0129]      [0.0123]        [0.0057]     [0.0069]     [0.0043]      [0.0060]   [0.0093]    [0.0076]
Protestant population              -0.0061a       0.0016         -0.0025b     -0.0025c     -0.0008        0.0015c   -0.0030b    -0.0027a
                                   [0.0020]      [0.0015]        [0.0010]     [0.0015]     [0.0007]      [0.0009]   [0.0012]    [0.0009]
Constant                            0.2282       -0.5268a         0.2887a      0.0547      -0.0115       -0.3124a    0.3453c    0.2163b
                                   [0.1894]      [0.1502]        [0.0916]     [0.1022]     [0.0571]      [0.0777]   [0.1365]    [0.1035]
Observations                          149           149             142          142          149           149        149         149
R-squared                             0.31          0.31            0.16         0.29         0.08          0.32       0.10        0.12


                                                                   Panel B: Controlling for legal origins

Log GNI percapita 2006              0.0384       0.0542b          -0.0173      0.0213      -0.0026        0.0352a    -0.0143     -0.0044
                                   [0.0280]      [0.0219]        [0.0126]     [0.0151]     [0.0075]      [0.0124]   [0.0197]    [0.0149]
Democracy (1975-2006)               0.0635a       0.0357a         0.0314a      0.0402a      0.0101a       0.0211a    0.0295a     0.0239a
                                   [0.0123]      [0.0112]        [0.0053]     [0.0067]     [0.0033]      [0.0056]   [0.0084]    [0.0070]
French civil law dummy              0.0447       -0.0047          0.0034       -0.0580      0.0136        -0.0489     0.0416      0.0510
                                   [0.0834]      [0.0733]        [0.0479]     [0.0508]     [0.0278]      [0.0431]   [0.0607]    [0.0449]
German civil law dummy              0.1289        0.4440a         0.0596       0.0019       0.2206a       0.1368c    0.1692c     0.0774
                                   [0.0870]      [0.1062]        [0.0676]     [0.0713]     [0.0590]      [0.0808]   [0.0976]    [0.0698]
Scandinavian law dummy             -0.8317a       0.3822a        -0.3401a     -0.5641a     -0.0067        0.0901    -0.3208a    -0.2988a
                                   [0.2358]      [0.0914]        [0.0627]     [0.0913]     [0.0658]      [0.0942]   [0.1011]    [0.0546]
Constant                            0.0313       -0.3251b        0.2322b       0.0110       0.0345       -0.2023b    0.2637c     0.1074
                                   [0.1967]      [0.1452]        [0.1034]     [0.1148]     [0.0610]      [0.0841]   [0.1519]    [0.1088]
Observations                          153           153             146          146          153           153         153         153
R-squared                             0.34          0.41            0.19         0.37         0.23          0.36       0.12        0.12
Robust standard errors in brackets
Significance levels: (a) if p<0.01; (b) if p<0.05; (c.) if p<
 Table 5: Determinants of the wedge between disclosures to public and to congress

                    Dependent variable is: Public availability        Values disclosure   Sources disclousure
                                         .       wedge                     wedge                wedge

                                                               Panel A: Controlling for religion

Log GNI percapita 2006                               0.1314a               0.0750a              0.0742a
                                                    [0.0481]              [0.0211]             [0.0237]
Democracy (1975-2006)                               -0.0101               -0.0128              -0.0080
                                                    [0.0206]              [0.0086]             [0.0100]
Protestant population                                0.0087a               0.0010              0.0039b
                                                    [0.0027]              [0.0014]             [0.0018]
Constant                                            -1.6168a              -0.7918a             -0.8621a
                                                    [0.3528]              [0.1638]             [0.1775]
Observations                                            94                    94                   94
R-squared                                              0.28                  0.15                 0.24


                                                           Panel B: Controlling for legal origins

Log GNI percapita 2006                               0.0827c               0.0551a             0.0509b
                                                    [0.0439]              [0.0197]             [0.0218]
Democracy (1975-2006)                                0.0031               -0.0111              -0.0022
                                                    [0.0184]              [0.0079]             [0.0092]
French civil law dummy                              -0.1367                0.0031              -0.0181
                                                    [0.1277]              [0.0698]             [0.0736]
German civil law dummy                              0.3005b                0.1786a              0.1399c
                                                    [0.1237]              [0.0673]             [0.0804]
Scandinavian law dummy                               1.0084a               0.2581a              0.5554a
                                                    [0.2487]              [0.0973]             [0.1436]
Constant                                            -1.1836a              -0.6616a             -0.6816a
                                                    [0.3597]              [0.1717]             [0.1820]
Observations                                            96                    96                   96
R-squared                                              0.35                  0.23                 0.31
Robust standard errors in brackets
Significance levels: (a) if p<0.01; (b) if p<0.05; (c.) if p<0.10.
                                                       Table 6: Disclosure and perceived corruption.

                                     Dependent variable in all regressions: ICRG corruption index (2003-2007)
                                                                        Proportional       Party vs       Government    Government
                                                       Democracy       representation     candidate-      owned press    owned TV     Newspaper        Judicial
      Additional control variable is:                 (1975-2006)       (1975-2006)     specific voting      (%)           (%)        circulation   independence

                                                                     Panel A: No disclosure variables

                                                                a
Additional control variable                              0.1780           0.5957a          0.3615b         -1.4662a      -0.7438b       0.5068a       1.2599a
                                                        [0.0245]          [0.209]          [0.172]          [0.226]       [0.314]      [0.0756]       [0.375]
Constant                                                 1.6175a          2.2052
                                                                                 a
                                                                                           2.4296
                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                           3.0504
                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                          3.1357
                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                                        0.7706
                                                                                                                                               b
                                                                                                                                                      1.9239
                                                                                                                                                             a

                                                        [0.0994]          [0.154]          [0.167]          [0.155]       [0.240]       [0.307]       [0.226]
Observations                                               137              126              104              89             89            78            68
R-squared                                                  0.34             0.06             0.02            0.22           0.04          0.41          0.09


                                               Panel B: Controlling for income per capita and disclosure requirement

                                                                a                                                                                             a
Additional control variable                              0.1115           0.1308           0.04554          -0.2727       -0.1293       -0.0199        0.8536
                                                        [0.0281]          [0.177]           [0.143]         [0.256]       [0.292]      [0.0967]        [0.299]
                                                 a              a                a                 a               a             a             a              a
Log GNI per capita 2006                    0.4659        0.3429           0.5202            0.5604          0.5419        0.5682        0.6426         0.5706
                                          [0.0594]      [0.0594]         [0.0635]          [0.0682]        [0.0678]      [0.0643]       [0.104]       [0.0623]
                                                                 a                b                 c               c             c             c
Disclosure required                        -0.1963      -0.5368          -0.4913           -0.4427         -0.4630       -0.4546       -0.4515         -0.2371
                                           [0.186]       [0.178]          [0.200]           [0.234]         [0.249]       [0.262]       [0.245]        [0.256]
Constant                                  -1.1753a       -0.4752         -1.4405
                                                                                  a
                                                                                           -1.7168
                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                           -1.5051
                                                                                                                    b
                                                                                                                         -1.7218
                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                       -2.3168
                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                      -2.5299
                                                                                                                                                               a

                                           [0.418]       [0.415]          [0.432]           [0.493]         [0.597]       [0.620]       [0.625]        [0.532]
Observations                                 132           128              121                99              86            86            76             66
R-squared                                    0.45          0.51             0.51              0.55            0.57          0.56          0.60           0.63


                                            Panel C: Controlling for income per capita and publicly available disclosures

Additional control variable                              0.0634b         0.00083            0.1002         0.04948        0.1687       -0.0628         0.5286
                                                                                                                                                              c

                                                        [0.0266]          [0.174]           [0.134]         [0.265]       [0.254]      [0.0910]        [0.286]
                                                 a
Log GNI per capita 2006                    0.3815        0.3091a          0.4272a           0.4858a         0.4856a       0.4883a       0.5855a        0.4617a
                                          [0.0523]      [0.0607]         [0.0596]          [0.0653]        [0.0726]      [0.0664]       [0.101]       [0.0720]
                                                  a             b                b                 c               b             b             b              b
Publicly available                         0.4893        0.3615           0.3540            0.2976          0.4316        0.4365        0.4511         0.6732
                                           [0.172]       [0.181]          [0.176]           [0.179]         [0.206]       [0.200]       [0.214]        [0.272]
Constant                                  -0.7893c       -0.4636         -1.0898
                                                                                  b
                                                                                           -1.6110
                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                           -1.6508
                                                                                                                    b
                                                                                                                         -1.7679
                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                                       -2.2114
                                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                                      -1.8061
                                                                                                                                                               a

                                           [0.412]       [0.438]          [0.438]           [0.516]         [0.637]       [0.601]       [0.627]        [0.608]
Observations                                 132           128              121                99              86            86            76             66
R-squared                                    0.48          0.49             0.49              0.54            0.56          0.57          0.60           0.66

Robust standard errors in brackets
Significance levels: (a) if p<0.01; (b) if p<0.05; (c.) if p<0.10.
                                       Table 7: Disclosure and perceived corruption; values and sources.

                                  Dependent variable in all regressions is: ICRG corruption index (2003-2007)
                                                                      Proportional       Party vs       Government    Government
                                                    Democracy        representation     candidate-      owned press    owned TV    Newspaper        Judicial
  Additional control variable is:                  (1975-2006)        (1975-2006)     specific voting      (%)           (%)       circulation   independence

                                            Panel A: Controlling for income per capita and values publicly available

Additional control variable                           0.0804a           0.0513            0.0913         -0.1352        0.1040      -0.0543         0.8143a
                                                     [0.0270]          [0.1771]          [0.1386]        [0.2775]      [0.2720]     [0.0894]       [0.2994]
Log GNI per capita 2006                0.4482a        0.3416a           0.4801a           0.5364a         0.5303a       0.5514a      0.6466a        0.5528a
                                      [0.0535]       [0.0605]          [0.0593]          [0.0645]        [0.0709]      [0.0656]     [0.1010]       [0.0634]
Values publicly available              0.0399        -0.1915           -0.1753           -0.3150         -0.0946        0.0073      -0.0124         0.2223
                                      [0.4017]       [0.4160]          [0.4173]          [0.4321]        [0.5285]      [0.4976]     [0.4915]       [0.6952]
Constant                              -1.1675a       -0.6644           -1.4005a          -1.8612a        -1.7782a      -2.0661a     -2.5537a       -2.5376a
                                      [0.4218]       [0.4396]          [0.4410]          [0.5149]        [0.6235]      [0.6048]     [0.6356]       [0.5552]
Observations                             132            128               121                99              86            86           76             66
R-squared                                0.44           0.48              0.48              0.53            0.54          0.54         0.57           0.63


                                            Panel B: Controlling for income per capita and sources publicly available

Additional control variable                          0.0582b            0.0252            0.1065          0.0529        0.2513      -0.0404         0.4806c
                                                     [0.0261]          [0.1663]          [0.1316]        [0.2508]      [0.2434]     [0.0868]       [0.2842]
Log GNI per capita 2006                0.3698a        0.3021a           0.4096a           0.4749a         0.4634a       0.4666a      0.5709a        0.4467a
                                      [0.0554]       [0.0615]          [0.0635]          [0.0692]        [0.0762]      [0.0699]     [0.1033]       [0.0746]
Sources publicly available             1.0121a       0.8079b            0.8049b           0.6183c         0.9515a       1.0010a     0.7193b         1.2660a
                                      [0.3112]       [0.3278]          [0.3209]          [0.3192]        [0.3477]      [0.3444]     [0.3430]       [0.4168]
Constant                              -0.6995        -0.3976           -0.9794b          -1.5321a        -1.4936b      -1.6741a     -2.1437a       -1.6400b
                                      [0.4293]       [0.4466]          [0.4614]          [0.5398]        [0.6444]      [0.6145]     [0.6454]       [0.6365]
Observations                             132            128               121                99              86            86           76             66
R-squared                                0.49           0.50              0.50              0.55            0.58          0.59         0.60           0.67

Robust standard errors in brackets
Significance levels: (a) if p<0.01; (b) if p<0.05; (c.) if p<0.10.
                      Table 8: Perceived corruption and publicly available disclosures: the role of democracy.

                               Dependent variable in all regressions is: ICRG corruption index (2003-2007)
                                                                 Proportional   Party vs         Government     Government
   Additional control variable                   Democracy      representation candidate-        owned press     owned TV       Newspaper        Judicial
                            is:                 (1975-2006)      (1975-2006) specific voting        (%)            (%)          circulation   independence

                                                                      Panel A: Above the mean democracy (1975-2006) score

Additional control variable                       0.05348            -0.00071       0.1266          0.9845         0.4210         0.1922         1.0431c
                                                  [0.0559]            [0.215]       [0.150]         [1.507]        [0.455]        [0.172]        [0.532]
Log GNI percapita 2006              0.6938a        0.6367a            0.6935a       0.6790a        0.7789a         0.7285a       0.5845a        0.6323a
                                   [0.0701]       [0.0876]           [0.0714]      [0.0747]         [0.129]       [0.0954]        [0.149]        [0.124]
Publicly available                 0.4877b        0.5022b             0.4830b      0.4170b         0.4362c         0.4214c       0.5545b        0.6536b
                                    [0.190]        [0.191]            [0.195]       [0.207]         [0.246]        [0.240]        [0.233]        [0.320]
Constant                           -3.6106a       -3.5264a           -3.6027a      -3.5032a        -4.3963a       -4.0660a       -3.5099a       -3.8349a
                                    [0.628]        [0.625]            [0.641]       [0.662]         [1.235]        [0.852]        [0.791]        [1.248]
Observations                           65             65                 64            60              47             47             52             39
R-squared                             0.65           0.66               0.65          0.64           0.64            0.65           0.67           0.67


                                                                      Panel B: Below the mean democracy (1975-2006) score

Additional control variable                       0.09033             0.1173        0.0504         -0.1543         0.1168        0.08566         0.2948
                                                  [0.0726]            [0.230]       [0.216]        [0.285]         [0.291]       [0.0969]       [0.392]
Log GNI per capita 2006             0.1250         0.1471c            0.1521        0.2179         0.2023c         0.2073c        0.2016        0.2867b
                                   [0.0772]       [0.0789]            [0.114]       [0.144]        [0.106]         [0.112]        [0.213]       [0.128]
Publicly available                 0.06368         -0.1103           -0.00792      -0.01167        0.05475         0.1328         -0.2778        0.1115
                                    [0.225]        [0.299]            [0.287]       [0.296]        [0.341]         [0.269]        [0.423]       [0.418]
Constant                           1.0990b         0.8170             0.8755        0.4456         0.5867          0.3605         0.5352        -0.2892
                                    [0.546]        [0.584]            [0.736]       [0.960]        [0.736]         [0.828]        [1.325]       [0.999]
Observations                           63             63                 55            38             39              39             21            27
R-squared                            0.08            0.10               0.09          0.13           0.20            0.19           0.30          0.31


                                                              Panel C: Tests for the equality of public availability across groups

F-Statistic                          2.08           2.98              2.01           1.42            0.82           0.64              3.17        1.07
Prob > F                            0.1521         0.0869            0.1595         0.2358          0.3668         0.4247            0.0798      0.3046
Robust standard errors in brackets
Significance levels: (a) if p<0.01; (b) if p<0.05; (c.) if p<0.10.
                         Table 9: Perceived corruption and sources publicly available: the role of democracy.

                               Dependent variable in all regressions is: ICRG corruption index (2003-2007)
                                                                      Proportional       Party vs       Government    Government
                                                   Democracy         representation     candidate-      owned press    owned TV    Newspaper      Judicial
 Additional control variable is:                  (1975-2006)         (1975-2006)     specific voting      (%)           (%)       circulation independence

                                                                       Panel A: Above the mean democracy (1975-2006) score

Additional control variable                          0.0469             0.0905            0.1356          1.3542        0.5277       0.2317       0.9752c
                                                    [0.0568]           [0.2180]          [0.1433]        [1.4110]      [0.4394]     [0.1681]     [0.5610]
Log GNI percapita 2006                0.6931a        0.6439a            0.6873a           0.6787a         0.7883a       0.7176a      0.5703a      0.6641a
                                     [0.0782]       [0.0959]           [0.0792]          [0.0819]        [0.1343]      [0.1029]     [0.1497]     [0.1228]
Sources publicly available           0.7483b        0.7585b            0.7592b            0.6425c         0.6959c       0.6997c      0.8464b      0.8357c
                                     [0.3133]       [0.3154]           [0.3306]          [0.3322]        [0.3581]      [0.3641]     [0.3664]     [0.4542]
Constant                             -3.5516a       -3.4815a           -3.5685a          -3.4632a        -4.4641a      -3.9901a     -3.5062a     -3.9721a
                                     [0.6747]       [0.6765]           [0.6823]          [0.7094]        [1.2690]      [0.8815]     [0.8200]     [1.2914]
Observations                             65             65                 64                60              47            47           52           39
R-squared                               0.65           0.65               0.65              0.64            0.64          0.65         0.67         0.66


                                                                       Panel B: Below the mean democracy (1975-2006) score

Additional control variable                          0.0804             0.1004            0.0545          -0.1062       0.1599        0.0664      0.2244
                                                    [0.0755]           [0.2339]          [0.2173]        [0.2513]      [0.2850]     [0.0982]     [0.3837]
Log GNI per capita 2006               0.1200         0.1392c            0.1433            0.2109          0.1920c       0.1947c      0.2240       0.2790b
                                     [0.0762]       [0.0783]           [0.1102]          [0.1474]        [0.1063]      [0.1104]     [0.2358]     [0.1314]
Sources publicly available            0.3263         -0.0306            0.1895            0.1074          0.5572        0.6800       -0.3490      1.0057
                                     [0.4934]       [0.6898]           [0.6178]          [0.6462]        [0.6094]      [0.5033]     [0.7656]     [1.1158]
Constant                              1.1253b        0.8757             0.9307            0.4808          0.6071        0.3922       0.3982      -0.2157
                                     [0.5418]       [0.5850]           [0.7204]          [0.9833]        [0.7490]      [0.8281]     [1.4638]     [1.0229]
Observations                             63             63                55                38               39            39           21           27
R-squared                               0.08           0.10              0.09              0.13             0.22          0.22         0.28         0.33


                                                           Panel C: Tests for the equality of sources publicly available across groups

F-Statistic                            0.52           1.08               0.66              0.55            0.04          0.00        2.13         0.02
Prob > F                              0.4716         0.3001             0.4171            0.4594          0.8445        0.9748      0.1496       0.8869

Robust standard errors in brackets
Significance levels: (a) if p<0.01; (b) if p<0.05; (c.) if p<0.10.
                                                     Table 10: Other corruption measures and disclosure indices


                                         Transparency       Heritage                                                  Transparency       Heritage
                             Kaufmann     International Foundation       GCR                              Kaufmann     International Foundation       GCR
                             corruption    corruption      corruption  corruption Firms that              corruption    corruption      corruption  corruption Firms that
     Dependent variable is:    index    index      (2003-    index       index    pay bribes                index    index      (2003-    index       index    pay bribes
                          . (2003-2005)       2007)       (2003-2007) (2003-2007)    (%)                 (2003-2005)       2007)       (2003-2007) (2003-2007)    (%)

                                                                                             Panel A: Full sample

Democracy (1975-2006)             0.0248           0.0614c            0.3956      0.0326     -1.3651       0.0210         0.0552       0.3116        0.0300      -1.3719
                                 [0.0157]         [0.0329]           [0.3571]    [0.0220]   [1.0473]      [0.0160]       [0.0338]     [0.3682]      [0.0225]    [1.0304]
Log GNI per capita 2006           0.4538a          0.9182a            10.558a     0.4654a   -6.6046a       0.4472a        0.9084a     10.4341a       0.4611a    -6.4850a
                                 [0.0371]         [0.0818]           [0.8631]    [0.0524]   [2.1621]      [0.0372]       [0.0819]     [0.8664]      [0.0525]    [2.2517]
Publicly available                0.1318           0.3306             1.4824      0.0082     -2.1789
                                 [0.1130]         [0.2560]           [2.6212]    [0.1410]   [4.4932]
Sources publicly available                                                                                 0.3875c       0.8244         5.6964       0.1123      -4.8379
                                                                                                          [0.2113]      [0.5163]       [5.2314]     [0.2690]    [9.4050]
Constant                         -3.8262a         -3.6879a           -47.1291a    0.2710     94.8891a     -3.7764a      -3.6084a      -46.2179a      0.3004     94.0698a
                                 [0.2500]         [0.5390]            [5.880]    [0.3780]   [14.7501]     [0.2526]      [0.5438]       [5.9254]     [0.3813]   [15.2798]
Observations                        152              152                141         126         77           152           152            141          126          77
R-squared                          0.71             0.71               0.72        0.59        0.28          0.72         0.71           0.72         0.59         0.28


                                                    Panel B: Subsample of countries with high democracy scores (above the mean democracy (1975-2006))

Democracy (1975-2006)             0.0729c          0.1647c            0.7824      0.0772      2.8567       0.0699c        0.1566c      0.7595        0.0755       2.8125
                                 [0.0390]         [0.0915]           [1.1750]    [0.0601]   [2.2591]      [0.0390]       [0.0924]     [1.1819]      [0.0606]    [2.3642]
Log GNI per capita 2006           0.5994a          1.2827a            14.565a     0.5594a    -5.9726       0.5969a        1.2871a     14.3938a       0.5530a     -5.1198
                                 [0.0525]         [0.1172]           [1.7081]    [0.0910]   [6.1532]      [0.0539]       [0.1206]     [1.7208]      [0.0914]    [6.5926]
Publicly available               0.2790b          0.6233b             4.8038      0.2728c    -5.0690
                                 [0.1251]         [0.2900]           [3.2692]    [0.1551]   [5.3660]
Sources publicly available                                                                                 0.4979b       1.0183b        9.3849c      0.5027b    -11.2415
                                                                                                          [0.1939]       [0.4779]      [5.1102]     [0.2475]   [10.3019]
Constant                         -5.6441a         -8.0503a           -89.5812a   -1.1365b    60.4171      -5.5886a       -7.9781a     -87.9100a     -1.0606b     53.9245
                                 [0.3331]         [0.7194]            [9.8883]   [0.4972]   [42.8801]     [0.3433]       [0.7539]     [10.0478]     [0.4954]   [44.4919]
Observations                        71               71                  68         68          35            71            71             68           68          35
R-squared                          0.82             0.79                0.75       0.72        0.12          0.82          0.79           0.76         0.72        0.13

Robust standard errors in brackets
Significance levels: (a) if p<0.01; (b) if p<0.05; (c.) if p<0.10.
                                                               Table 11: All corruption measures, disclosure indices and religion


                                                    Transparency  Heritage                                                                     Transparency  Heritage
                               ICRG      Kaufmann International Foundation     GCR                                        ICRG      Kaufmann International Foundation     GCR
                             corruption  corruption  corruption  corruption  corruption Firms that                      corruption  corruption  corruption  corruption  corruption Firms that
     Dependent variable is:    index       index       index       index       index    pay bribes                        index       index       index       index       index    pay bribes
                          . (2003-2007) (2003-2005) (2003-2007) (2003-2007) (2003-2007)    (%)                         (2003-2007) (2003-2005) (2003-2007) (2003-2007) (2003-2007)    (%)

                                                                                                           Panel A: Full sample

Democracy (1975-2006)              0.0422         0.0125          0.0267          0.1866        0.0173     -1.3854        0.0394        0.0100       0.0238       0.1514      0.0159    -1.4090
                                  [0.0275]       [0.0171]        [0.0356]        [0.3649]      [0.0229]    [1.0612]      [0.0269]      [0.0171]     [0.0359]     [0.3673]    [0.0231]   [1.0413]
Log GNI per capita 2006            0.3057a        0.4599a         0.9250a        10.1067a       0.4477a    -6.4138a       0.2985a       0.4540a      0.9178a     10.0425a     0.4448a   -6.1322a
                                  [0.0601]       [0.0374]        [0.0814]        [0.8365]      [0.0522]    [2.1377]      [0.0612]      [0.0376]     [0.0816]     [0.8424]    [0.0523]   [2.2259]
Publicly available                 0.2953c        0.1032          0.2487          1.2681       -0.0592     -3.6666
                                  [0.1770]       [0.1073]        [0.2389]        [2.4156]      [0.1381]    [4.4142]
Sources publicly available                                                                                               0.6861b        0.3148       0.6099        3.9013    -0.0368      -9.2700
                                                                                                                         [0.3253]      [0.2061]     [0.4957]      [5.0375]   [0.2649]    [8.8110]
Protestant population              0.0143a        0.0083a         0.0230a          0.2452a      0.0130a     -0.2655b      0.0136a       0.0079a      0.0225a       0.2408a    0.0129a    -0.2632b
                                  [0.0045]       [0.0020]        [0.0043]         [0.0434]     [0.0024]     [0.1151]     [0.0046]      [0.0020]     [0.0044]      [0.0444]   [0.0024]    [0.1128]
Constant                          -0.4704        -3.9105a        -3.8294a        -44.9456a      0.3813      95.8150a     -0.4064       -3.8666a     -3.7700a     -44.4445c    0.3970     93.9890a
                                  [0.4207]       [0.2457]        [0.5178]         [5.4251]     [0.3673]    [14.4944]     [0.4313]      [0.2489]     [0.5240]      [5.4941]   [0.3700]   [15.0070]
Observations                         127            149             149              139          123          76           127           149          149           139        123          76
R-squared                            0.56           0.74            0.75             0.77         0.64        0.33          0.56          0.75         0.75          0.77       0.64        0.33


                                                                     Panel B: Subsample of countries with high democracy scores (above the mean democracy (1975-2006))

Democracy (1975-2006)              0.0336         0.0539          0.1081          1.0005        0.0751      2.6548        0.0301        0.0535       0.1044       0.9989      0.0763     2.3870
                                  [0.0641]       [0.0419]        [0.0948]        [1.1442]      [0.0612]    [2.3176]      [0.0645]      [0.0416]     [0.0952]     [1.1508]    [0.0610]   [2.4563]
Log GNI per capita 2006            0.5942a        0.5914a         1.2530a        12.4131a       0.4880a    -4.2632        0.5958a       0.5869a      1.2538a     12.3092a     0.4789a   -2.9703
                                  [0.0993]       [0.0558]        [0.1210]        [1.5973]      [0.0967]    [6.3143]      [0.1075]      [0.0571]     [0.1242]     [1.6490]    [0.0960]   [6.8355]
Publicly available                0.4465b        0.2551b         0.5350c          4.8884c       0.2132     -6.3484
                                  [0.1897]       [0.1192]        [0.2726]        [2.9222]      [0.1569]    [5.0218]
Sources publicly available                                                                                               0.7037b       0.4658b       0.8784c       8.8280c    0.4333c   -16.3728c
                                                                                                                         [0.3086]      [0.1875]     [0.4646]      [4.9832]   [0.2428]    [9.0616]
Protestant population             0.0098b         0.0066a         0.0188a          0.1968a      0.0098a     -0.2871b     0.0097b        0.0064a      0.0185a       0.1933a    0.0096a    -0.2899a
                                  [0.0041]       [0.0017]        [0.0037]         [0.0435]     [0.0020]     [0.1100]     [0.0044]      [0.0018]     [0.0039]      [0.0459]   [0.0020]    [0.1050]
Constant                          -3.1026a       -5.5237a        -7.6049a        -74.4186a     -0.5857      50.7958      -3.0438a      -5.4688a     -7.5372a     -73.2395a   -0.5149     42.6933
                                  [0.6642]       [0.3246]        [0.6851]         [8.6637]     [0.5248]    [44.0582]     [0.7128]      [0.3330]     [0.7131]      [8.9236]   [0.5175]   [45.6654]
Observations                         64              69              69               66           65          34           64             69           69            66         65         34
R-squared                           0.70            0.84            0.83             0.81         0.76        0.20         0.70           0.84         0.83          0.81       0.77       0.22

Robust standard errors in brackets
Significance levels: (a) if p<0.01; (b) if p<0.05; (c.) if p<0.10.
                                   Figures 1 and 2
Scatter plots of the form content disclosure indices for the full sample of 175 countries.




                                                                                             1
                                                                             Figures 3 and 4
Partial scatter plots of publicly available and the ICRG corruption index (2003-2007) for the subsamples of
countries above (Figure 3) and below (Figure 4) the mean value of the democracy score (1975-2006) of our
sample of 175 countries. The dependent variable is the ICRG corruption index (2003-2007). In addition to
publicly available, each regression controls for the log of GNI per capita 2006 and democracy (1975-2006).


                                                                                 FIGURE 3
                     2




                                                                                                  FIN
                                                                                                     NZL
    ICRG corruption index 2003-2007




                                                                             LKA               DNK
                                                                                    IND                CHL
                             1




                                                                       ECU                       SWE
                                                                                                  AUT               MNG
                                                                                                 NLD
                                                                         HND                      CAN
                                                                                              COL DEU
                                                                 BWA                              AUS                BOL
                                                                 URY SLV                      NOR                 PHL
                                                                   PER                       LUX
                                                                                                USA   PRT
                                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                               CHE
                                                                           ESP                            ARG         MDA
                   0




                                                             MYS TUR         HUN                              DOM
                                                                BRA                                   EST
                                                                      UKR
                                                          ISR PANYUG     BEL   PNG                          ZAF ARM
                                                    FRA                                               POL
                                                           SVN RUSNAM
                                                                   CRI                                  SVK THA
                                                                                                  JPN
                                                                                                  KOR      LTU
                                                                     JAM                        IRL     CZE
                                                                                                         LVA
       -1




                                                            TTO VEN
                                                          GRC
                                                                LBN           ITA
                     -2




                                      -1                     -.5                     0                     .5                      1
                                                                             Publicly available
                                      coef = .5022116, (robust) se = .19105367, t = 2.63




                                                                                 FIGURE 4
                                             SGP           MDG
                     2
    ICRG corruption index 2003-2007
                             1




                                                                 JOR       MAR                                               ZMB
                                                                               GIN
                                                    GUY                     TZALBR
                                                                           CMR
                                                   GMBSEN
                                              NIC             OMN         VNM
                                                                        ETH
                                                                         UGA
                                                         MLI
                                                         KWT          GNB
                                                                       BFA                     TWNHRV
                                                                    YEM
                                                                  MWI   SLE
                                                                      CIV
                                                                      SYR                                ROM
                                                                COG
                                                                  AGOCHN
                   0




                                                        QATGHA
                                                             IRNTUN
                                                      BLR SAU
                                                         ARE   MOZ AZEEGY
                                                                       IRQTGO                                                IDN
                                                                                                                            BHR
                                            MEX          BGD                                         BGR              PAK
                                                                HTI
                                                               DZA
                                                              KAZ             ZAR
                                                           NGA KEN
                                            GTM               NER                                               ALB
                                                                     SDN
       -1




                                                                 GAB
                                                  PRY



                                                                   ZWE
                     -2




                                      -.5                              0                            .5                             1
                                                                             Publicly available
                                      coef = -.11028699, (robust) se = .29916138, t = -.37




                                                                                                                                       2
                       Appendix A: Disclosure and enforcement indices by income groups
                          Requirements and
                          public availability         Form content (based on universal form concept)               Enforcement
                                                      Values         Sources       Values      Sources
                        Dsclosure    Publicly       available to   available to   publicly     publicly        Registrar    Checking
Country                 required     available       congress       congress      available    available       strength    unit strength

                                                    Panel A: High income with publicly available disclosures

Australia                 1.00         1.00            0.00           1.00          0.00          1.00           0.33          0.33
Austria                   1.00         1.00            0.02           0.24          0.02          0.24           0.00          0.00
Bahrain                   1.00         1.00            0.00           0.18          0.00          0.18           0.00          0.00
Belgium                   1.00         0.50            0.03           0.48          0.00          0.29           0.83          0.67
Canada                    1.00         1.00            0.76           0.94          0.33          0.92           0.00          0.00
Denmark                   0.00         1.00            0.00           0.00          0.00          0.52           0.00          0.00
Finland                   0.00         1.00            0.00           0.00          0.29          0.44           0.00          0.00
Germany                   1.00         1.00            0.45           0.65          0.33          0.65           0.67          0.33
Greece                    1.00         0.00            0.31           0.28          0.00          0.00           0.33          0.67
Hong Kong, China          1.00         1.00            0.00           0.48          0.00          0.48           0.33          0.00
Ireland                   1.00         1.00            0.08           0.57          0.08          0.57           0.00          0.00
Italy                     1.00         0.50            0.11           0.36          0.11          0.18           0.33          0.00
Japan                     1.00         1.00            0.33           0.28          0.33          0.26           0.33          0.00
Korea                     1.00         1.00            0.40           0.40          0.40          0.40           0.00          0.17
Luxembourg                1.00         1.00            0.14           0.18          0.14          0.18           0.00          0.00
Netherlands               1.00         1.00            0.29           0.58          0.29          0.58           0.00          0.00
New Zealand               1.00         1.00            0.08           0.79          0.08          0.79           0.33          0.33
Norway                    0.00         1.00            0.00           0.00          0.04          0.65           0.00          0.00
Portugal                  1.00         1.00            0.27           0.64          0.27          0.64           0.50          0.50
Spain                     1.00         0.50            0.25           0.52          0.00          0.24           0.17          0.33
Sweden                    1.00         1.00            0.08           0.31          0.08          0.31           0.33          0.00
Switzerland               1.00         1.00            0.00           0.22          0.00          0.22           0.33          0.00
Taiwan, China             1.00         1.00            0.22           0.38          0.22          0.38           1.00          0.67
United Kingdom            1.00         1.00            0.12           0.83          0.12          0.83           0.00          0.00
United States             1.00         1.00            0.34           0.87          0.34          0.87           0.33          0.33
 Mean                     0.88         0.90            0.17           0.45          0.14          0.47           0.25          0.17

                                                  Panel B: High income with disclosures available to congress

Antigua and Barbuda       1.00         0.00            0.50           0.63          0.00          0.00           1.00          0.33
Bahamas                   1.00         0.00            0.39           0.38          0.00          0.00           0.67          0.67
France                    1.00         0.00            0.32           0.55          0.00          0.00           0.67          0.33
Israel                    1.00         0.00            0.83           0.83          0.00          0.00           0.33          0.00
Puerto Rico               1.00         0.00            0.83           0.96          0.00          0.00           0.67          0.67
Singapore                 0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00           0.00          0.00
Slovenia                  1.00         0.00            0.33           0.73          0.00          0.00           0.67          0.67
 Mean                     0.86         0.00            0.46           0.58          0.00          0.00           0.57          0.38

                                                     Panel C: High income without disclosure requirements

Brunei                    0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00           0.00          0.00
Kuwait                    0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00           0.00          0.00
Qatar                     0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00           0.00          0.00
Saudi Arabia              0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00           0.00          0.00
United Arab Emirates      0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00           0.00          0.00
Mean                      0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00           0.00          0.00

                                                Panel D: Upper middle income with publicly available disclosures

Argentina                 1.00         1.00            0.64           0.61          0.64          0.61           0.00          0.00
Chile                     1.00         1.00            0.31           0.51          0.31          0.51           0.33          0.33
Croatia                   1.00         1.00            0.40           0.51          0.40          0.51           0.67          0.33
Czech Republic            1.00         1.00            0.62           0.68          0.62          0.68           0.33          0.33
Estonia                   1.00         1.00            0.28           0.57          0.19          0.47           0.67          0.33
Hungary                   1.00         0.50            0.28           0.42          0.28          0.30           0.50          0.00
Latvia                    1.00         1.00            0.38           0.57          0.29          0.40           0.67          0.67
Lithuania                 1.00         1.00            0.51           0.75          0.26          0.75           0.33          0.00
Palau                     1.00         1.00            0.64           0.73          0.64          0.73           1.00          0.67
                         Appendix A: Disclosure and enforcement indices by income groups
                            Requirements and
                            public availability         Form content (based on universal form concept)               Enforcement
                                                        Values         Sources       Values      Sources
                          Dsclosure    Publicly       available to   available to   publicly     publicly      Registrar    Checking
Country                   required     available       congress       congress      available    available     strength    unit strength
Poland                      1.00         1.00            0.32           0.84          0.28         0.79          0.17          0.33
Romania                     1.00         1.00            0.60           0.79          0.60         0.79          0.67          1.00
Slovakia                    1.00         1.00            0.34           0.48          0.19         0.28          0.33          0.33
South Africa                1.00         1.00            0.29           0.66          0.22         0.66          0.33          0.33
Mean                        1.00         0.96            0.43           0.63          0.38         0.58          0.46          0.36

                                             Panel E: Upper middle income with disclosures available to congress

Belize                      1.00         0.00            0.44           0.38          0.00         0.00           1.00         0.67
Costa Rica                  1.00         0.00            0.67           0.67          0.00         0.00           0.67         0.33
Gabon                       1.00         0.00            0.29           0.45          0.00         0.00           1.00         0.67
Lebanon                     1.00         0.00            0.10           0.06          0.00         0.00           0.67         0.33
Mauritius                   1.00         0.00            0.15           0.03          0.00         0.00           0.67         0.33
Mexico                      1.00         0.00            0.46           0.62          0.00         0.00           1.00         0.33
Russia                      1.00         0.00            0.35           0.45          0.00         0.00           0.33         0.67
St. Lucia                   1.00         0.00            0.67           0.67          0.00         0.00           1.00         1.00
Trinidad and Tobago         1.00         0.00            0.64           0.73          0.00         0.00           1.00         0.67
Turkey                      1.00         0.00            0.31           0.38          0.00         0.00           0.33         0.33
Uruguay                     1.00         0.00            0.46           0.49          0.00         0.00           1.00         0.33
Venezuela                   1.00         0.00            0.37           0.38          0.00         0.00           0.67         0.67
Mean                        1.00         0.00            0.41           0.44          0.00         0.00           0.78         0.53

                                                   Panel F: Upper middle income without disclosure requirements

Botswana                    0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00           0.00         0.00
Malaysia                    0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00           0.00         0.00
Oman                        0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00           0.00         0.00
Panama                      0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00           0.00         0.00
Seychelles                  0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00           0.00         0.00
Mean                        0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00           0.00         0.00

                                                  Panel G: Lower middle income with publicly available disclosures

Albania                     1.00         1.00            0.64           0.77          0.48         0.60           0.67         0.67
Armenia                     1.00         1.00            0.34           0.45          0.27         0.37           0.67         0.33
Bolivia                     1.00         1.00            0.48           0.48          0.11         0.00           0.67         0.00
Bulgaria                    1.00         1.00            0.50           0.33          0.50         0.33           1.00         0.67
Colombia                    1.00         0.50            0.44           0.60          0.10         0.27           0.33         0.00
Dominican Republic          1.00         1.00            0.32           0.35          0.32         0.35           0.67         0.00
Georgia                     1.00         1.00            0.71           0.70          0.71         0.70           0.67         0.33
Indonesia                   1.00         1.00            0.73           0.68          0.22         0.18           1.00         0.33
Macedonia                   1.00         1.00            0.55           0.49          0.49         0.35           0.67         0.33
Moldova                     1.00         1.00            0.41           0.40          0.41         0.40           0.33         0.67
Montenegro                  1.00         1.00            0.40           0.42          0.28         0.42           0.33         0.00
Philippines                 1.00         1.00            0.21           0.34          0.21         0.34           0.33         0.00
Thailand                    1.00         1.00            0.58           0.59          0.58         0.59           0.67         0.67
 Mean                       1.00         0.96            0.48           0.51          0.36         0.38           0.62         0.31

                                             Panel H: Lower middle income with disclosures available to congress

Algeria                     1.00         0.00            0.06           0.21          0.00         0.00           0.67         0.33
Angola                      1.00         0.00              .              .           0.00         0.00           0.33         0.00
Belarus                     1.00         0.00            0.64           0.67          0.00         0.00           0.33         0.33
Bhutan                      1.00         0.00            0.40           0.38          0.00         0.00           0.67         0.33
Bosnia and Herzegovina      1.00         0.00            0.31           0.42          0.00         0.00           0.33         0.33
Brazil                      1.00         0.00            0.62           0.50          0.00         0.00           0.67         0.67
Cape Verde                  1.00         0.00            0.26           0.51          0.00         0.00           0.67         0.33
Ecuador                     1.00         0.00            0.36           0.38          0.00         0.00           0.67         0.33
Egypt                       1.00         0.00            0.28           0.60          0.00         0.00           0.33         0.33
El Salvador                 1.00         0.00            0.46           0.40          0.00         0.00           0.67         0.33
Guatemala                   1.00         0.00            0.58           0.55          0.00         0.00           0.67         0.33
                           Appendix A: Disclosure and enforcement indices by income groups
                              Requirements and
                              public availability         Form content (based on universal form concept)               Enforcement
                                                          Values         Sources       Values      Sources
                            Dsclosure    Publicly       available to   available to   publicly     publicly        Registrar    Checking
Country                     required     available       congress       congress      available    available       strength    unit strength
Guyana                        1.00         0.00            0.44           0.71          0.00         0.00            1.00          0.67
Honduras                      1.00         0.00            0.54           0.54          0.00         0.00            0.67          1.00
Jamaica                       1.00         0.00            0.67           0.50          0.00         0.00            0.67          0.67
Jordan                        1.00         0.00            0.17           0.21          0.00         0.00            0.67          0.67
Kazakhstan                    1.00         0.00            0.26           0.28          0.00         0.00            0.67          0.67
Morocco                       1.00         0.00               .              .          0.00         0.00            0.33          0.00
Namibia                       1.00         0.00            0.73           0.88          0.00         0.00            0.33          0.33
Nicaragua                     1.00         0.00            0.64           0.64          0.00         0.00            0.67          0.67
Paraguay                      1.00         0.00            0.56           0.47          0.00         0.00            0.33          0.33
Peru                          1.00         0.00            0.58           0.38          0.00         0.00            0.33          0.33
Serbia                        1.00         0.00            0.40           0.57          0.00         0.00            0.67          0.67
Sri Lanka                     1.00         0.00            0.22           0.40          0.00         0.00            0.33          0.33
Swaziland                     1.00         0.00               .              .          0.00         0.00            0.33          0.00
Ukraine                       1.00         0.00            0.27           0.16          0.00         0.00            0.33          0.33
Vanuatu                       1.00         0.00            0.22           0.14          0.00         0.00            0.67          0.33
 Mean                         1.00         0.00            0.42           0.46          0.00         0.00            0.54          0.41

                                                     Panel I: Lower middle income without disclosure requirements

Azerbaijan                    0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Cameroon                      0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
China                         0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Congo, Republic               0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Djibouti                      0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Dominica                      0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Fiji                          0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Iran                          0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Iraq                          0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Kiribati                      0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Lesotho                       0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Maldives                      0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Micronesia                    0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
St. Vincent & Grenadines      0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Suriname                      0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Syria                         0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Tonga                         0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Tunisia                       0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
West Bank and Gaza            0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Western Samoa                 0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
 Mean                         0.00         0.00            0.00           0.00          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00

                                                        Panel J: Low income with publicly available disclosures

Kyrgyz Republic               1.00         1.00            0.63           0.67          0.44         0.31            0.67          0.67
Mongolia                      1.00         1.00            0.62           0.64          0.62         0.64            1.00          0.33
Pakistan                      1.00         1.00            0.25           0.21          0.25         0.21            1.00          0.33
Zambia                        0.00         1.00            0.00           0.00          0.56         0.50            0.33          0.00
Mean                          0.75         1.00            0.38           0.38          0.47         0.42            0.75          0.33

                                                      Panel K: Low income with disclosures available to congress

Comoros                       1.00         0.00              .              .           0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Ghana                         1.00         0.00            0.48           0.56          0.00         0.00            0.33          0.33
India                         1.00         0.00            0.33           0.38          0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Kenya                         1.00         0.00            0.42           0.21          0.00         0.00            0.33          0.00
Madagascar                    1.00         0.00            0.33           0.38          0.00         0.00            0.67          0.67
Nigeria                       1.00         0.00            0.55           0.55          0.00         0.00            0.67          0.33
Papua New Guinea              1.00         0.00              .              .           0.00         0.00            0.67          0.67
Rwanda                        1.00         0.00            0.33           0.38          0.00         0.00            0.33          0.00
Sao Tome and Principe         1.00         0.00              .              .           0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
Solomon Island                1.00         0.00              .              .           0.00         0.00            0.67          0.33
Tanzania                      1.00         0.00            0.51           0.55          0.00         0.00            0.67          0.33
Togo                          1.00         0.00              .              .           0.00         0.00            0.00          0.00
                             Appendix A: Disclosure and enforcement indices by income groups
                                  Requirements and
                                  public availability        Form content (based on universal form concept)                  Enforcement
                                                             Values         Sources         Values        Sources
                                Dsclosure     Publicly     available to   available to     publicly       publicly      Registrar     Checking
Country                         required      available     congress       congress        available      available     strength     unit strength
Uganda                            1.00          0.00          0.50           0.59            0.00           0.00          0.67           0.33
Vietnam                           1.00          0.00          0.09           0.21            0.00           0.00          0.00           0.00
Mean                              1.00          0.00          0.39           0.42            0.00           0.00          0.36           0.21

                                                            Panel L: Low income without disclosure requirements

Afghanistan                        0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Bangladesh                         0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Benin                              0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Burkina Faso                       0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Burundi                            0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Cambodia                           0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Central African Republic           0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Chad                               0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Congo, Democratic Republic         0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Côte d'Ivoire                      0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Eritrea                            0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Ethiopia                           0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Gambia                             0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Guinea-Bissau                      0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.67           0.33
Guinea                             0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Haiti                              0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Lao, People's Dem. Rep.            0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Liberia                            0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Malawi                             0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Mali                               0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Mauritania                         0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Mozambique                         0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Niger                              0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Senegal                            0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Sierra Leone                       0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Sudan                              0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Tajikistan                         0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Timor-Leste                        0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Uzbekistan                         0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Yemen, Rep.                        0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Zimbabwe                           0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00
Mean                               0.00         0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.00           0.02           0.01


Note: As reported in the text, there are 8 countries where we could not obtain the blank form (see text for details). These countries have a "." in
the diclosures of values and sources for congress. In all cases, these countries do not make the disclosures publicly available.
