                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DO TEENAGERS RESPOND TO HIV RISK INFORMATION? EVIDENCE FROM
                      A FIELD EXPERIMENT IN KENYA

                                           Pascaline Dupas

                                        Working Paper 14707
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14707


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2009




I am grateful to Esther Duflo, Michael Kremer and Rohini Pande for their generous advice and support.
I also wish to thank Sandy Black, Moshe Bushinsky, David Evans, James Habyarimana, Seema Jayachandran,
Adriana Lleras-Muney, Debraj Ray, Jonathan Robinson, Kudzai Takavarasha, Chris Udry, as well
as seminar participants in various departments and conferences for very helpful comments and discussions.
Special thanks to ICS Africa and the Kenya Ministry of Education for their collaboration. This project
would have been impossible without the dedication of Grace Makana, Susan Nduku, Carolyne Nekesa,
and the fi…eld and data entry teams in Busia Kenya. This project was supported by a grant from the
World Bank. All views expressed are mine, and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the World
Bank. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Pascaline Dupas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Do Teenagers Respond to HIV Risk Information? Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya
Pascaline Dupas
NBER Working Paper No. 14707
February 2009
JEL No. C93,I1,O12

                                           ABSTRACT

I use a randomized experiment to test whether information can change sexual behavior among teenagers
in Kenya. Providing information on the relative risk of HIV infection by partner's age led to a 28%
decrease in teen pregnancy, an objective proxy for the incidence of unprotected sex. Self-reported
sexual behavior data suggests substitution away from older (riskier) partners and towards protected
sex with same-age partners. In contrast, the national abstinence-only HIV education curriculum had
no impact on teen pregnancy. These results suggest that teenagers are responsive to risk information
but their sexual behavior is more elastic on the intensive than on the extensive margin.


Pascaline Dupas
Department of Economics
UCLA
8283 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
pdupas@econ.ucla.edu
1     Introduction
Nearly 2 million people become infected with HIV/AIDS every year in sub-Saharan Africa,
the great majority of them through sex, and a quarter of them before the age of 25. AIDS is
incurable and no succesful AIDS vaccine has been developed yet. Thus ensuring the adoption
of safer sexual behavior among youth remains critical to combating the disease. Now that
the great majority of children in Africa acquire at least some primary education, some have
argued that primary schools o¤er a unique opportunity to deliver HIV prevention education
to youths before they become sexually active (Bundy, 2002). There is, however, considerable
debate over whether scalable school-based HIV/AIDS education programs can be e¤ective in
limiting the spread of HIV/AIDS among youths, and over what should be the content of these
programs. Many sub-Saharan African countries have incorporated HIV/AIDS education in
their school curriculum, but the great majority of those curricula are limited to risk avoidance
information: they aim at completely eliminating pre-marital sex, by promoting abstinence
until marriage. They omit to provide risk reduction information, for example that condom
use reduces the risk of HIV transmission.
    Voluntarily limiting information so that youths are unaware of the “low risk”option (e.g.
condom-protected sex) and only face the choice set {high risk; no risk} might be socially
optimal since individuals do not internalize the epidemiological externalities of their own
behavior, and therefore what might be optimal at the individual level (a low but non-zero
risk level) might be suboptimal from a public health perspective. However, if sexual behavior
is more elastic on the intensive margin (what type of sex to have and with whom) than on
the extensive margin (whether to have sex or not), HIV education programs that focus only
on abstinence may be ignoring an important margin along which youths could reduce their
risk of infection.
    This paper uses data from a …eld experiment to measure the responsiveness of teenagers
to HIV information and compares their responses along both the risk avoidance and the
risk reduction margins. The risk reduction margin I focus on is partner selection. Partner
selection is an important risk reduction margin for teenagers in sub-Saharan Africa, where
the prevalence of HIV is at least three times higher among teenage girls than among teenage




                                               2
boys1 . Multiple studies have suggested that this discrepancy is due, in part, to the high
incidence of unsafe cross-generational sexual relationships — that is, unprotected sex between
teenage girls and adult men more than …ve years their senior.2;3 Men involved in these
relationships, often called “sugar daddies”, are more likely to be infected with HIV than
teenage boys since they have been sexually active for longer. Thus, compared to relationships
with teenage boys, cross-generational relationships pose a higher risk of HIV infection for
teenage girls. On the other hand, older men, who typically have more income, are usually
better able to provide for the teenage girl and the baby if the sexual relationship leads to
pregnancy. Since the distribution of income is more readily observable than the distribution
of HIV infection, adult men may have an advantage over teenage boys in negotiating for
unprotected sex. Most HIV prevention campaigns may not reduce this advantage, since
they only provide information on the average HIV risk (the overall prevalence) and their
key message is that “Anyone can give you HIV.” Though true in essence, this message
obscures the fact that in sub-Saharan Africa 25-year-old men are more likely to have HIV
than 16-year-old teenagers.
       In this context, providing teenage girls with full information on HIV prevalence disaggre-
gated by gender and age groups may reduce the incidence of unprotected cross-generational
partnerships, and along with it new HIV infections of young women by older partners. The
total amount of sexual activity might increase, however, if teenage girls who learn that sex
with teenage boys is relatively safe increase their sexual activity with teenage boys. This
might have negative public health consequences, both in terms of teen pregnancies and in
terms of lifetime HIV risk and its epidemiological implications (Magruder, 2007). A rigorous
test of the impact of risk reduction information and how it compares with the impact of risk
avoidance information is thus needed.
       I use data from a randomized …eld experiment involving 328 primary schools to compare
the e¤ects of providing abstinence-only versus detailed HIV risk information on teenage

   1
     For example, in Kenya and Zambia, prevalence in the 15-19 age group has been found to be at least …ve
times higher among girls than among boys (Glynn et al. 2001).
   2
     Laga et al. (2001), Luke and Kurz (2002), Gregson et al. (2002), Kelly et al. (2003), Clark (2004).
   3
     The prevalence gap between young women and young men is also due to the fact that risk of male-to-
female HIV transmission is greater than the risk of female-to-male transmission (Peterman et al. 1988), but
this biological factor, accounts for only a third of the gap observed (Gregson et al. 2002).



                                                    3
sexual behavior. Half of the schools, randomly selected, received teacher training on the
national HIV/AIDS curriculum, which focuses on abstinence until marriage, but does not
discuss risk reduction strategies (such as condom use or selection of safer partners). In
71 schools, randomly selected after stratifying by teacher training status, an information
campaign provided teenagers with information on the prevalence of HIV disaggregated by
age and gender group (the “relative risks information” campaign). The randomized design
ensured that there would be no systematic di¤erence in the prior information held by the
students across groups at the onset of the programs. This ensures rigorous identi…cation of
the impact of each of the two programs, by comparing behaviors and outcomes across groups
over time.
   I …nd that the teacher training on the national HIV/AIDS curriculum had no e¤ect
on the likelihood that teenage girls had started childbearing within a year, suggesting no
reduction in risky behavior. In contrast, the relative risks information campaign led to a 28%
decrease in the likelihood that girls had started childbearing within a year, suggesting an
important decrease in the incidence of unprotected sex among those girls. I provide evidence
that the pregnancies averted by the relative risks information campaign would have been
with partners more than …ve years older, suggesting that the reduction in the incidence of
unsafe sex corresponds to a reduction in unsafe cross-generational sex. The relative risks
information campaign also led to an increase in self-reported sexual activity among teenage
boys, suggesting that girls substituted away from older partners and towards their agemates.
But there was no increase in pregnancies among teenage couples, consistent with the fact
that teenage girls report higher rates of condom use, presumably in order to avoid pregnancy
with resource-constrained teenagers.
   Taken together, these results suggest that the behavioral choices of teenagers are not
responsive to risk avoidance messages but are responsive to information on the relative
riskiness of potential partners. Overall, the relative risks information campaign led to an
increase in reported sexual activity, but to a decrease in unsafe sex. This suggests that
teenage sexual behavior is more elastic on the margin of what type of sex to engage in —
the choice of partner and the choice of protection level — than on the margin of whether
to engage in sex or not. These results suggest that, in the …ght against HIV, risk reduction



                                              4
messages might be more e¤ective than risk avoidance messages. This is in line with the
non-experimental evidence that has recently emerged from a longitudinal study in the US
(Trenholm et al., 2007).4
      Prior evidence on the e¤ectiveness of sexual health education in Africa is almost non-
existant. Gallant and Maticka-Tyndale (2004) review 11 studies of HIV education programs
conducted in sub-Saharan Africa, and show that the mixed results generated by those studies
are questionable, either because they do not have a convincing identi…cation strategy, or
because they rely on self-reported measures of risk-taking, which are likely to su¤er from
social desirability biases. The only prior randomized controlled experiment in Africa that
studied biological outcomes lacked statistical power to detect small or moderate e¤ects and
thus can only reject very large e¤ects (Hayes et al. 2005). This paper overcomes these
shortcomings by using a randomized experiment that involved a large sample of primary
schools in Kenya, combined with data on teenage pregnancy, arguably an objective measure
of the incidence of unprotected sex.
      Overall, the …ndings of this paper suggest that teenagers are responsive to risk informa-
tion. This is in line with studies of youth behavior in other contexts, which have found that
youths are responsive to information on the returns to education (Jensen, 2007), respon-
sive to prices (Gruber and Zinman, 2001, Pacula et al., 2001) and responsive to regulatory
incentives (Dee and Evans, 2001, Levitt and Lochner, 2001).
      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the Kenyan
context and the experimental design. Section 3 presents the theoretical motivation behind
the experimental design. Section 4 presents the data and outlines the evaluation strategy.
Section 5 presents the results, and Section 6 concludes.

  4
    Previous studies in the US have yielded mixed evidence. Douglas Kirby (2008) reviews 56 US-based
studies and …nds that most abstinence programs do not delay initiation of sex, while two thirds of the
more comprehensive programs (that include boh abstinence and risk reduction information) seem to have
an impact on both margins (delay of initiation and incresed condom use).




                                                  5
2       Kenya Background and Experimental Design
The experiment took place in two rural districts of Western Kenya, and involved a total
of 328 primary schools. Among them, 163 were randomly chosen for Treatment 1, the
Teacher Training on the national HIV/AIDS curriculum for primary school, which focuses
on abstinence-only messages. In addition, 71 schools were sampled to receive Treatment 2,
the Relative Risks Information Campaign, that provided 8th graders with information on
HIV prevalence by sex and age. Before describing these two treatments in detail, I present
some background summary statistics on HIV and sexual behavior among youths in Kenya.


2.1     Kenya Background

2.1.1    HIV prevalence

The principal mode of transmission of HIV in Kenya is heterosexual contact (Baltazar et
al. 2001). The 2003 Kenya Demographic and Health Survey estimated that 7% of Kenyan
adults are infected with HIV (Central Bureau of Statistics, Kenya 2004). The breakdown
by age and gender group is presented in Figure 1. The highest infection level is for women
in the 25-29 age group (12.9%). Levels of infection among young women rise quickly (3% in
the 15-19 age group and 9% in the 20-24 age group). In contrast, prevalence rises gradually
with age among men, starting at 0.4% in the 15-19 age-group, rising to 2.4% in the 20-24
age-group, and reaching its peak (8.8%) in the 40-44 age group.


2.1.2    HIV-related knowledge and sexual behavior among teenagers

Table 1, Panel A presents summary statistics on HIV-related knowledge and behavior col-
lected at baseline among a subset of students sampled for the experiment. At the time they
…lled the survey, the students were enrolled in 8th grade (the last grade of primary school).
Due to high levels of repetition through primary school, the average age of students in 8th
grade is much greater than in the US, at 15.1 for girls and 15.5 for boys.
    Overall, 21% of girls and 48% of boys sampled for the survey reported they ever had sex.
Knowledge of risk reduction strategies among these students was relatively limited. While
46% of girls and 71% of boys thought that condoms could protect from HIV infection, only


                                             6
29% of girls and 25% of boys knew that older men were more likely to be HIV positive than
teenage boys.
   Panel B of Table 1 presents data collected at the end of the study among girls in the
control group who had started childbearing within a year. The data suggests that the great
majority (87%) of teen pregnancies are unplanned. The older the male partner, the more
likely pregnancy triggers marriage. While the rate of marriage is 42% if the teenage girl gets
pregnant with a partner less than 5 years older, it rises to 63% if the age di¤erence between
partners is 5 to 10 years, and to 79% if the age di¤erence is greater than 10 years. In 73% of
teen pregnancies, the partnership involves regular cash transfers from the male to the female
partner prior to the pregnancy.
   Overall, 45% of teenage pregnancies observed in the control group were with partners
more than 5 years older, and 11% with partners more than 10 years older. The share of
sexually active teenage girls engaging in sexual partnerships with men 5 or more years older
might have been lower than that, however, since cross-generational partnerships may be
more likely to result in a pregnancy than within-cohort partnerships. In a study conducted
in western Kenya, Luke (2003) …nds evidence that a larger age di¤erence between partners is
associated with both a lower probability of condom use and higher transfers from the male
to the female partner.


2.1.3   National Policy on HIV Education

The Kenya Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MoEST) integrated HIV/AIDS
education into the primary school curriculum in 2001. The national HIV/AIDS curriculum
includes information on the biology of HIV/AIDS, how it is transmitted, how to care for peo-
ple living with AIDS, and the consequences of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on families, schools,
and the nation at large. It also includes a prevention section which emphasizes moral values,
refusal skills, and abstinence until marriage. The curriculum does not mention condoms
and provides only limited scope for teachers to discuss protected sex in response to students’
questions. It does not cover partner selection, and though it covers love relationships between
same-age boys and girls, the o¢ cial textbooks do not mention cross-generational relation-
ships (and their associated risk). The proposed strategies to avoid infection are to “Avoid



                                              7
Sex” and to “Say NO to sex before marriage”.5 All sexual activity outside of marriage,
irrespective of the age of the partner, is thus considered equally risky.
       While the HIV/AIDS curriculum was introduced in 2001, HIV/AIDS education was
in e¤ect largely absent from Kenyan primary schools by early 2003. Only few schools had
included HIV/AIDS in their timetable, and when asked why they did not teach the mandated
curriculum, schools and their teachers would often say they were not familiar with its content
or did not know how to teach the topic. In response, the Kenya Institute of Education (KIE)
and the MoEST trained a number of trainers to provide in-service training for teachers on
HIV/AIDS education methodology. The training was being phased-in over a large period of
time (starting in 2003), which allowed randomization.


2.2       Treatment 1: The Teacher Training Program (TT)

In 2003, 328 primary schools in Western Kenya were sampled for a randomized evaluation
designed to test the e¤ectiveness of the national HIV prevention curriculum for primary
schools. After stratifying the 328 schools by location, test scores, and gender ratio, half of the
schools were randomly chosen to receive Teacher Training (henceforth TT) on the HIV/AIDS
curriculum in 2003.6 The training was conducted jointly by one facilitator from the AIDS
Control Unit of the Ministry of Education (ACU-MOEST), two facilitators from the Kenya
Institute of Education (KIE), and one trained sta¤ member from the non-governmental
organization ICS. Three teachers by primary school were trained during multiple week-long
in-service training sessions.
       During the training, teachers discussed the material in the o¢ cial HIV/AIDS curriculum
and learned how to discuss HIV/AIDS issues in class. At the end of the training, teachers
were asked to prepare an “action plan” for HIV/AIDS education in their school, including
how they would reach out to the other teachers in the school and integrate HIV/AIDS into
the timetable.
       In addition to delivering the classroom-based activities, trained teachers were advised to

   5
     These are quotes from the o¢ cial textbook "Let’s Talk About It", book 3 (grades 6, 7, 8), p. 26 and 19.
(Textbook produced by the Kenya Institute of Education with the …nancial support of UNICEF).
   6
     To my knowledge, the training has not yet been phased into all the control schools.




                                                     8
set up health clubs to encourage HIV avoidance through active learning activities such as
role plays. A year after the training, 86% of the schools whose teachers had been trained
had established health clubs.


2.3     Treatment 2: The Relative Risks Information Campaign (RR)

Information on the distribution of HIV infections by age and gender is typically not given
to adolescents by their teachers, even if their teachers were trained, because it is not in-
cluded in the o¢ cial curriculum.7 To test the e¤ect of this information on teenage behavior,
the “Relative Risk Information Campaign” (henceforth RR), was conducted in 2004 in 71
schools selected among the 328 schools involved in the TT program. The RR campaign was
conducted by the non-governmental organization ICS. A trained project o¢ cer visited each
of those 71 schools and, with the authorization of the teachers, spoke to Grade 8 students
for a 40-minute period. At the start of the period, the students were asked to complete an
anonymous, self-administered survey to determine how much they knew about the distribu-
tion of HIV in the Kenyan population.8 After the survey, students were shown a 10-minute
educational video on “sugar daddies”.9 The video screening was followed by an open dis-
cussion about cross-generational sex. During the discussion, the project o¢ cer shared the
results of studies conducted in Kenya and Zambia (Glynn et al. 2001) and Zimbabwe (Greg-
son et al. 2002) on the role of cross-generational sex in the spread of HIV. In particular, the
project o¢ cer wrote on the blackboard the detailed prevalence rates of HIV, disaggregated
by gender and age group, in the nearby city of Kisumu, a place familiar to the students. The
prevalence rates shared with students had been published by the WHO in 1997 and were
reported in the Kenyan Government’s brochure AIDS in Kenya of 2001 (Ministry of Health,
2001).10 In accordance with the Kenyan government policy, the project o¢ cers conducting

   7
     A few education programs speci…cally addressing the risks associated with "sugar daddy relationships"
started after the onset of this study. See for example Population Services International (2005).
   8
     The results of this survey were discussed in Section 2.1.2 and are presented in Table 1, Panel A.
   9
     The animated movie, “Sara: the Trap,” was produced by ACE communications, 2000, for UNICEF.
  10
     The statistics provided to the students by the NGO were as follows:
     Age       15-19 20-24 25-29 30-39
     Female 22%         36%     35%     32%
     Male      4%       13%     28%     32%




                                                    9
the RR program did not volunteer information on condoms nor demonstrate how to use
condoms, but scienti…cally answered students’questions about condoms.
    The 71 schools chosen for the RR program were selected randomly after stratifying by
participation in the TT program of 2003. Thus, the RR program was implemented both in
schools where teachers had been trained and in schools where teachers had not been trained.



3     Theoretical Motivation
This section provides a simple theoretical framework that incorporates the key facts observed
in section 2.1.2, and highlights the outcomes that the experiment needs to identify in order
to determine what information set (TT or RR) is socially optimal.
    Consider that a teenage girl’s utility depends on her consumption of purchased goods, C,
as well as her health level, H, the number of sexual partnerships she is in, S, and whether
she has a child, F :
                                         U = U (C; H; S; F )

    with @U=@C         0; @U=@H     0. U could be non-linear in S, with, for example, a maximum
at S = 1. Having a child could be either desirable or undesirable.
    Engaging in a sexual partnership entails both a risk of HIV infection and a risk of preg-
nancy. The health level H corresponds to the girl’s HIV infection status, which itself depends
on whether she engages in sexual partnerships, and on the characteristics of the partners
she chooses: H = H(S; agepartner ). Whether a teenage girl gets pregnant and has a child
depends on whether she engages in sexual partnerships: F = F (S).
    Raising a child is costly. In other words, consumption of purchased goods is constrained
by a budget constraint:
                                    pC + f E(F ) = W + T ransf

where p is the price of purchased goods; f is the cost of rearing a child; W is the girl’s

  The city of Kisumu is the capital of Nyanza province, which is predominantly Luo, while this study took
place in Western Province, which is predominantly Luhya. While prevalence in Kisumu is higher than in
the rest of Kenya, the ratios between male and female by age-groups and the ratios between age-groups by
gender are similar.




                                                   10
initial cash endowment; and T ransf is the net amount she gets in transfers from her sexual
partner(s), itself the outcome of bargaining between the teenage girl and her partner(s). Fi-
nally, I consider that the consumption of purchased goods is subject to a survival constraint:
C         C:
         Teenage girls maximize their expected utility based on their beliefs about the risks of
HIV infection and pregnancy occuring, and how those risks vary with condom use and
partners’ characteristics. For example, the case where girls have no knowledge of the risk
of HIV and assume zero HIV risk can be represented with the assumption                      H= S = 0:
girls consider their health stock independent of their sexual behavior when choosing their
utility-maximizing sexual behavior. The case where girls are aware that there is a risk of
HIV infection corresponds to the assumption             H= S < 0. If girls are unaware that the risk
of infection increases with age among men, they will assume @H=@agepartner = 0. If they
know how prevalence evolves with men’s age, they assume @H=@agepartner < 0:
         Note that in the case where girls derive no utility from being in a sexual partnership
and no utility from children, the only reason why they might want to engage in a sexual
partnership is if their initial endowment W is so low that in the absence of any transfers
from partners, their survival constraint is binding. This subcase of the model can be called
the “poverty-driven prostitution”case.11

         Comparative Static 1: impact of the Teacher Training program
         The impact of introducing general information about HIV (through the TT program)
on teenage girls’ demand for sexual partnerships (S) depends on two things: prior beliefs
about HIV risk ( H= S), and men’s ability to pay (the distribution of the upper bound on
T ransf among men).

           The e¤ect of the information is zero for girls who already know about HIV at the time
           the information is provided.

           For girls who are unaware or underestimate the risk of HIV at baseline and update their

    11
    This subcase of the model seems to be what most aid agencies and practitioners in Africa have in mind.
A number of calls have been made for programs o¤ering young women “economic alternatives to trading
their bodies for material and …nancial gain” (Population Services International, 2005).



                                                   11
  beliefs about   H= S when exposed to the TT program, the impact is ambiguous:

    – Girls’ reservation transfer goes up, and therefore their demand for sexual part-
       nerships, holding the level of partners’transfers constant, decreases.

    – But men may have the resources to increase the amount they transfer. If they can
       match girls’new reservation transfer, the demand for sexual partnerships among
       teenage girls will remain unchanged.

Comparative Static 2: impact of the Relative Risks Information campaign

  If all men have the same ability to transfer resources to their sexual partners (T ransf
  is independent of partners’age), information on the distribution of prevalence among
  men unambiguously leads teenage girls to move towards lower risk partners (in our
  case, teenage boys) and thus reduce the rate of cross-generational transmission of HIV.

  However, in a setting where teenage boys have lower ability to transfer resources, the
  impact of the RR information on the transmission rate is ambiguous, for two reasons.

    – First, the adjustement might occur on the transfer size margin rather than on the
       partner selection margin: older men could simply compensate girls for the greater
       HIV risk they pose by transferring more resources to them (e.g. marrying them).

    – Second, even if the adjustment happens on the partner type rather than on the
       transfer size margin, girls who face a binding survival constraint might need to
       increase the number of men they engage in a partnership with: if younger men can
       transfer only half of what older men can transfer, teenage girls in the “poverty-
       driven prostitution” case may need to have two simultaneous teenage boyfriends
       in order to meet their survival constraint. This would increase the incidence of
       unprotected sex between teenage girls and teenage boys.

  Finally, if information about the average prevalence of HIV in the area is already
  known at the time teenagers receive the RR information, providing RR information
  may trigger entry into sexual activity by previously abstaining teenage girls: they



                                          12
        learn that the infection rate among teenage boys is below the average infection rate,
        and thus revise downwards their beliefs about the risk of engaging in sex with teenage
        boys, which can a¤ect the decision to enter sexual activity for girls at the margin.


      Overall, the theoretical predictions of both programs are unclear. The TT program
could either leave the level of sexual activity unchanged or decrease it. The RR informa-
tion campaign could either not change anything, or reduce cross-generational relationships
with a one-for-one substitution towards same-age relationships, or reduce cross-generational
relationships with a more than one-for-one increase in same-age relationships. The poten-
tial positive e¤ect on the amount of within-cohort sexual activity might have negative health
consequences. While individuals fully internalize the cost of getting infected with HIV them-
selves, they might not fully internalize the fact that they might transmit the disease to others.
Because of this externality, a public health maximizing policy maker may not always want
to provide information that may increase the overall amount of sexual activity in the pop-
ulation. An empirical test is thus needed to resolve the type of information to provide in
order to maximize public health bene…ts.



4       Data and Evaluation Strategy

4.1       The Sample

The Teacher Training program (TT) was phased into 164 schools over 4 months, from Feb-
ruary to May 2003. The Relative Risks Information Campaign (RR) was phased into 71
schools over 4 months, from July to October 2004.12 In November 2004, students in Grade
8 took the Kenya Certi…cate of Primary Education (KCPE) exam, the gateway exam to
secondary school. Those students who had performed well on the exam and whose family
could a¤ord the tuition fees began secondary school in February 2005.
      The TT program a¤ected all grades in a school, whereas the RR program a¤ected only
Grade 8 students. Hereafter I consider all students who were enrolled in Grade 8 at the time

 12
      The school year in Kenya starts in January and ends at the end of November.




                                                    13
of the RR campaign (2004) as part of the “study cohort”. All students who were either a
year ahead or a year behind this group can be used as control cohorts for the RR campaign.
       Students in the study cohort were followed-up in 2005. Even though most of them had
left primary school at the time of the follow-up, information on their whereabouts could still
be collected at their primary school of origin. Appendix Table 1 presents summary statistics
on their status in July 2005, averaged by school and broken down by gender and treatment
status. Attrition is relatively low, below 2%, and cannot be distinguished across groups.


4.2       Data

I focus on two key outcomes: the incidence of unprotected sex between teenage girls and
male partners …ve or more years older; and the incidence of unprotected sex between teenage
girls and teenage boys. My main measure of the incidence of unprotected sex is the incidence
of childbearing. To completement the childbearing data, I report evidence from self-reported
sexual behavior data.13


4.2.1      Childbearing Data

Childbearing data was collected in two steps. First, information on childbearing and marital
status was obtained for all girls in the sample during school visits conducted at regular
intervals in the 12-month period of study. At each visit, the list of all students on the 2004
enrollment form was read aloud to pupils enrolled in upper grades in 2005, and for each of
the students on the list, the following questions were asked: Is X still in school? If yes, in
what grade? In what school? Does she still live in the area? Is she married? Does she have
any children? If so, how many? How old is her …rst born? Is she pregnant?14

  13
      Data on the incidence of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections in the sample is not available.
A pilot biomarker follow-up conducted in 2007 indicates that the incidence of HIV and other sexually
transmitted infections in this age group is not high enough for this study to have statistical power to detect
signi…cant di¤erences in HIV prevalence between the treatment and the control groups.
   14
      This technique of collecting childbearing and marital outcomes generates accurate data. Among a
subsample of 282 teenage girls that were tracked at their home and interviewed, 88% of those who were
reported as having started childbearing by their former schoolmates had indeed started childbearing, and
92% of those who were reported as not having started childbearing had indeed not started. The accuracy
rates were similar across groups.




                                                     14
       Second, enumerators conducted a home follow-up visit with all female students who had
been reported to have started childbearing by July 2005. This follow-up included questions
on the child’s father (his age, marital status, and the transfers, if any, he had made before and
after the pregnancy) in order to identify pregnancies that resulted from a cross-generational
relationship. When the teenage girl herself could not be found (for example, because she
had moved with her husband to another district), her mother was interviewed.15
       Childbearing is not a perfect proxy for the incidence of risky sex, for various reasons.
First, adolescent girls who are in a long-term relationship with one partner are more likely to
get pregnant than those who have several short-term relationships.16 Second, since pregnancy
by a teenage boy is unlikely to result in marriage or child support (see Section 2.1.2), teenage
girls who get pregnant might be more likely to abort if the father of the child is another
teenager. Or teenage girls might start engaging in non-vaginal sex with teenage partners.
Anal sex is of particular concern since it is highly risky in terms of HIV transmission. All
in all, the RR information campaign could have increased the incidence of unprotected sex
with teenage partners in the treatment group, but also increased the incidence of abortion
and/or the incidence of anal intercourse, therefore generating no increase in pregnancy rates
among same-age partners. Given this, comparing the incidence of childbearing with same-
age partners across groups could underestimate the impact of the RR information campaign
on the incidence of risky unprotected sex.
       It is di¢ cult to estimate the importance of these e¤ects, since neither data on anal sex nor
data on abortion is available. However, as a rough test of di¤erential incidence of abortions
across groups, we can compare mortality rates among girls. Because abortion is illegal in

  15
     In the presence of concurrent partnerships, it is possible that a girl might not know who is the true
biological father of her child. However, as long as a childbearing girl is married or supported by an older
partner, it is safe to assume that, even if she had a concomittant teenage partner, she must have had
unprotected sex with that older partner, in order to be able to convince him that he is the father. In
addition, given that older partners are typically wealthier, we can expect that in the presence ambiguity
about the biological father, the teenage girl (and possibly her parents) would choose to "blame" the pregnancy
on the older (wealthier) partner.
  16
     In particular, partners willing to have a child might decide to undergo HIV testing to ensure they are
both negative before having unprocted sex. This is unlikely for the age group in this sample since 87%
of pregnancies by teenage girls the area of study are declared unplanned, as presented in section 2.1.2. In
addition, voluntary HIV counseling and testing services are not o¤ered to minors in Kenya, unless they are
considered "mature". The de…nition of "mature" is unclear.




                                                     15
Kenya, those that do happen tend to be unsafe and often result in maternal death.17 The
results are in Appendix Table A. I …nd that the mortality rate among girls between July 2004
and July 2005 was low (less than 0.2%) and similar across groups, providing some suggestive
evidence that the incidence of abortion was not greater in the RR treatment group than
in the RR comparison group. Overall, the incidence of childbearing in the sample seems a
reasonable, though imperfect, proxy for the incidence of unprotected sex.


4.2.2      Self-Reported Sexual Behavior

Since childbearing data is not a perfect proxy for unprotected sex, it can be insightful to
complement it with self-reported sexual behavior data. However, as most students in the
study sample left primary school shortly after the RR information program was implemented,
conducting a follow-up survey with everyone was not feasible.
       Instead, a follow–up survey was administered to students enrolled in a secondary school
in the study area between May and July 2005, about 7 to 9 months after the RR program.
The survey included questions on sexual activity, characteristics of sexual partners, condom
use, and primary school of origin, to identify the treatment status of each student. Overall,
55% of the secondary school students who completed the follow–up survey came from one of
the 328 primary school that participated in the study.
       As shown in Appendix Table 1, the likelihood that sampled teenagers enrolled in sec-
ondary school in 2005 is balanced across RR treatment and RR control schools, suggesting
that the students who …lled the follow-up behavioral survey were not di¤erentially selected
across groups for the RR program.18 This is not the case for the TT program, as a higher
fraction of students in the TT control group enrolled in secondary school than in the TT

  17
      Unsafe abortion is a leading cause of maternal deaths in developing countries (Grimes, 2003). Up to
50% of maternal deaths in sub-Saharan Africa are due to induced abortion (Rogo, 1993). However, because
abortions are illegal, getting estimates of the incidence of abortion among teenage girls in Kenya proves
di¢ cult.
   18
      The fact that girls in the RR treatment group are not more likely to enroll in secondary school than girls
in the RR control group, despite the fact that I show below a decrease in pregnancy in the RR treatment
group, is interesting in itself. It suggests that girls who know that they can go to secondary school (because
their parents can a¤ord the fees and because they are performing well enough in grade 8) are not the marginal
girls on whom the RR information program had an e¤ect. This is not surprising, since the opportunity cost
of pregnancy for girls who can attend secondary school is very high (pregnancy is de facto incompatible with
schooling).




                                                      16
treatment group. This selection issue should be kept in mind while analyzing the results of
the behavioral survey.
   Another important caveat to the behavioral survey is that it includes only teenagers who
joined secondary school, and those are clearly not representative of all teenagers. In Kenya,
only students with su¢ cient …nancial resources and with high enough scores at the primary
school exit exam can go to secondary school. This means that the behavioral data at hand
includes only the richer and smarter students in the sample.
   Finally, self-reported data on sexual behavior may su¤er from reporting biases, and has
been found to be often inconsistent with biological outcomes (Gersovitz et al. 1998). For
example, in a study conducted in Western Kenya, Glynn et al. (2001) found that 12%
of women who reported being virgins were HIV-positive (and some had other sexually-
transmitted infections, making it unlikely that they acquired HIV non-sexually). Likewise,
self-reported sexual data are typically impossible to reconcile at the population level (e.g.
men typically report much more sexual activity than women).
   While overall the self-reported data in this paper seems consistent with the biological
(childbearing) data, it is important to keep in mind that the magnitude of the e¤ects observed
in the self-reported data could be largely due to reporting biases. In particular, it is possible
that students who participated in the RR information campaign recognized that the NGO
collecting the data was the same NGO that had talked to them about sexual partnerships the
year before, and they might have been less wary of truthfully reporting their sexual activity
than students who were less familiar with the NGO.


4.3    Evaluation Strategy

The randomized design provides a straightforward source of identi…cation. For both the
TT and the RR programs, random assignment of schools to the treatment and comparison
groups ensures that the schools in either group are similar in all other respects except in that
treatment schools were exposed to the program. Table 2 shows the baseline school averages
for a series of school and pupils outcomes, by treatment groups. Except for class size, which
is lower on average in RR treatment schools, all other di¤erences in pre-treatment school
characteristics are small and insigni…cant. However, the sample is less balanced when it


                                               17
comes to the long-term schooling status of teenagers. Schools in the RR treatment group
are signi…cantly less likely to allow their students to repeat Grade 8 compare to schools in
the RR control group. What’s more, schools in the TT treatment group are signi…cantly
less likely to see their students go on to secondary school than schools in the TT comparison
group. To palliate these imbalances, I systematically include controls for schooling status in
the regression analysis outlined below.
       To estimate the impact of the intervention, I use simple reduced form regression speci…ca-
tions. Denote Yisc the outcome of individual i formerly enrolled in primary school s in cohort
c. RRs is the RR treatment status of school s and StudyCohortc the dummy for being in
the study cohort. T Ts is a dummy equal to 1 if school s received the Teacher Training on
the HIV curriculum.
       First, I estimate the simple di¤erence (SD) in means by ordinary least squares with
clustering at the school level. The model is a linear probability model :


                           Yis1 =   1   +   1    RRs +    1    T Ts + Ii0   1   + "is


where Ii is a vector of controls for individual characteristics (age and schooling status). The
average e¤ect of coming from a RR treatment school (RRs = 1) versus a RR comparison
school (RRs = 0) is captured by             1.   Since RRs = 1 was randomly assigned, we should
expect E("is jRRs ) = 0 so that the estimator of          1   is unbiased. The average e¤ect of coming
from a school that received the teacher training can be captured by                     1.   Since T Ts = 1 was
also randomly assigned, we should expect E("is jT Ts ) = 0 so that the ordinary least squares
estimator of     1   is also unbiased. By comparing       1   and   1,   we can thus compare the impact
of the two information sets.19 To increase the precision of the estimators, I control for the
observable characteristics of the primary school of origin (for the childbearing data) and for
the characteristics of the current secondary school (for the behavioral survey). Finally, when
the outcome is binary, I also estimate the e¤ect of the program on the probability that the
outcome occurs using a Probit model.

  19
    Considering the low incidence of childbearing, the sample size does not provide enough power to estimate
the e¤ect of the interaction between the two programs.




                                                     18
    Second, I estimate the di¤erence-in-di¤erences (DD) when data on a control cohort is
available:


              Yisc =     2   +   2   RRs          StudyCohortc +   RRs +   RRs

                        +    2   T Ts + Ii0   2   + ! isc


Comparing the single-di¤erence to the di¤erence-in-di¤erences estimates is useful for two
reasons. First, if the randomization of the RR program assignment was not perfect, the
di¤erence-in-di¤erences will adjust for potential pre-existing random di¤erences between
RR treatment and RR comparison schools. Second, the di¤erence-in-di¤erences allows the
inclusion of school …xed e¤ects, which allows to control for unobservable school characteris-
tics. However, the double-di¤erence estimates could be biased in the presence of treatment
spillovers across cohorts. I will come back to this issue when I discuss the results below.



5     Results

5.1    Impact on Incidence of Teen Childbearing

Table 3, Columns 1 to 4 show the estimates of the e¤ects of each program on the incidence of
childbearing with four di¤erent regression speci…cations: the simple di¤erence with a linear
probability model (OLS); the simple di¤erence with a probit model (reporting marginal
e¤ects); the OLS estimate of the di¤erence-in-di¤erences; and the OLS estimate of the
di¤erence-in-di¤erences with school …xed e¤ects. The RR information campaign reduced
the incidence of childbearing by 1.5 percentage points among treated girls relative to girls in
the comparison group (Table 3, Column 1). The childbearing rate in the comparison group
is 5.4%, and thus the RR treatment e¤ect corresponds to a 28% decrease in the incidence of
childbearing. The magnitude and signi…cance of the RR e¤ect are robust to all speci…cations.
In the di¤erence-in-di¤erences without school …xed e¤ects, the estimate of the coe¢ cient for
“RR Information” is close to zero, con…rming the absence of ex-ante di¤erence between
treatment and comparison schools (Column 3, Row 1).
    In contrast, the TT program had no impact on the incidence of childbearing (Row 3).


                                                     19
This despite the fact that the training had a large impact on the amount of HIV education
delivered in schools and increased scores of pupils on HIV knowledge tests (Du‡o et al., 2006).
This result may re‡ect the fact that the curriculum promotes abstinence until marriage as
the only way to avoid HIV infection, and so would not deter teenagers from having children
and marrying at a young age.
   Columns 5 to 12 in Table 3 show estimates of the treatments on childbearing broken
down by marital status. The bulk of the decrease in the incidence of childbearing in the
RR treatment group corresponds to a decrease in childbearing outside of marriage, while the
incidence of childbearing within marriage decreased only slightly and not signi…cantly. This
means that, among girls who started childbearing, the proportion of girls who are married
is signi…cantly larger in the treatment group than in the comparison group. Since women
typically receive greater …nancial support from their partner when they are married than
when they are not, these …ndings imply that, relative to girls in the comparison groups, girls
who received RR information are more likely to refuse to enter into an unprotected sexual
relationship with an adult man unless they get compensation commensurate with the higher
risk involved. In other words, in the absence of the RR information program, girls at the
margin (just above the threshold of engaging with an older partner) would have engaged
in unprotected sex with an older partner with relatively limited resources, who would have
turned out to not marry in case of a pregnancy.


5.2    Age of Childbearing Partner

To determine the extent to which the observed decrease in the incidence of childbearing in
the RR treatment group corresponds to a decrease in the incidence of unprotected sex with
older men, I look at the age di¤erential between girls who have started childbearing and
their partners. The data is available for two cohorts: the study cohort (Grade 8 of 2004) and
one control cohort (Grade 7 of 2004).
   Since the RR information campaign reduced the incidence of childbearing in the RR
treatment group, the data is available for di¤erentially selected subsamples of each group.
Nevertheless, as long as the RR treatment did not a¤ect the likelihood of getting pregnant
conditional on having unprotected sex di¤erentially across relationships’ types (cross- or


                                              20
intra-generational), we should expect the ratio of cross-generational to intra-generational
pregnancies to be the same across subsamples, unless the RR treatment had an e¤ect on age
di¤erentials between partners.
   The dependent variable in Table 4, Columns 1 and 2, is the age di¤erence between the
respondent and her baby’s father. The RR treatment e¤ect is negative and signi…cant:
among girls who had begun childbearing, the average age gap with the baby’s father is 1.7
years smaller for RR treated girls compared to girls who did not receive the RR treatment
(Column 1). This di¤erence is signi…cant at the 99% con…dence level. In Columns 3 to
5, the dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether the baby’s father is more than 5
years older than the teenage girl. The coe¢ cient of the treatment e¤ect is negative and large
( 22 percentage points o¤ of a mean of 48% in the control group) and signi…cant at the
95% con…dence level (Column 3). In contrast, the TT program seems to have, if anything,
increased the likelihood that teenage girls start childbearing with older partners, though
none of the coe¢ cients are signi…cant (Row 4).
   The di¤erence-in-di¤erence estimates of the e¤ect of the RR program on the RR cohort
are greater in magnitude than the simple di¤erence results. This seems driven by the fact
that the coe¢ cients for being in an RR information school (but not in the RR cohort) are
large and positive (Row 1, Columns 2, 5 and 9). This suggests that the RR program might
have had negative spillovers onto non-treated students in the RR treatment schools. Indeed,
the control cohort used in Table 5 is a younger cohort (the 7th graders of 2004). This cohort
could have been indirectly and negatively a¤ected by the RR information program if the
sugar daddies newly turned down by informed 8th graders decided to try their luck with 7th
graders instead. Alternatively, the 7th graders could have bene…tted from positive informa-
tion spillovers if the 8th graders shared the information with their younger schoolmates. To
fully assess the epidemiological consequences of providing information on HIV risk by group,
it would be necessary to look at such general equilibrium e¤ects. In particular, one should
address the question of what becomes of the older men who are turned down by informed
teenage girls. On one hand, they might reduce their sexual activity. On the other hand, they
might engage in unprotected sex with commercial sex workers, which could have negative
epidemiological consequences. I do not address these issues in this paper, as I do not have



                                             21
data on the behavior of older men in the study area.20


5.3       Overall impact of RR Information on pregnancies by partner’s
          type

Table 5 combines the results of Tables 3 and 4 to compute the treatment e¤ects of the RR
and TT programs on the incidence of pregnancies with older partners and the incidence of
pregnancies with teenage partners. I consider a normalized case in which 100 pregnancies
occur in the RR comparison group. Of these, 47:6 are by men more than 5 years older
(hereafter labelled “older men”). In the RR treatment group, we would observe 72 preg-
nancies, 18:4 of which are by older men. Thus, the RR program averts 29:2 pregnancies by
older partners in the treatment group. This means that the incidence of cross-generational
pregnancies declined by 61:3% in the RR treatment group relative to the comparison group,
while intra-generational pregnancies remained stable.
       These results suggest that providing teenagers with information on relative risks led to a
large decrease in the incidence of unprotected sex between teenage girls and older men, but
did not lead to an increase in the incidence of unprotected sex between teenage girls and
teenage boys. This suggests that the RR program might have reduced teenagers’exposure
to the risk of HIV infection.
       In contrast, the TT program had, if anything, a positive impact on the incidence of
childbearing by older partners, although the e¤ects cannot be distinguished from zero (none
of the coe¢ cient estimates for the TT program in Tables 3 and 4 are statistically signi…cant).

  20
    It is possible that similar spillover e¤ects could have been at play across primary schools. On one hand,
information on relative risks could have spread to comparison primary schools that are near treatment schools,
and girls in those comparison schools may also have avoided unprotected sex with adult partners. This would
mean that the treatment e¤ect on childbearing estimated above is an underestimation of the overall e¤ect of
the RR information campaign. On the other hand, if adult men responded to the change in the price charged
by treated teenage girls by moving away from treatment schools and towards the surroundings of comparison
schools when looking for sexual partners, the information campaign may have generated an increase in
childbearing by adult men in the comparison schools, and consequently the comparison between treatment
and comparison schools would be overestimating the treatment e¤ect. However, since the treatment group
is more than 4 times smaller than the comparison group, it is unlikely that this price e¤ect could explain
more than a fourth of the treatment e¤ect found.




                                                     22
5.4       Mechanisms? Suggestive evidence from self-reported sexual
          behavior

Did the decrease in the incidence of childbearing by older partners in the RR treatment
group come from an increase in condom use within cross-generational partnerships or from a
decrease in the number of cross-generational partnerships? If teenage girls in the treatment
group did not engage in partnerships with older men, did they substitute towards teenage
boys (low-risk option) or towards abstinence (zero-risk option)? The general case of the
model predicts a one-for-one substitution towards teenage partners, but the “poverty-driven
prostitution”subcase (when the survival constraint is binding) implies that the substitution
towards teenage boys should be more than one for one, since teenage boys have less resources
than older men, and thus would predict an increase in the number of partners reported by
teenage girls.
       To shed light on these issues, Table 6 presents self-reported data collected among teenagers
who joined a secondary school in the study area. This subgroup is not representative of all
teenagers in the sample.21 Nevertheless, studying the impact of the RR program on the
self-reported sexual behavior of secondary school students is interesting in itself and can
help shed light on the mechanisms behind the observed decrease in childbearing with older
partners.
       For each outcome, Table 6 shows the results of two speci…cations: the OLS estimate of
the simple di¤erence (Column 1) and the probit estimate of the simple di¤erence (Column
2). Panel A shows the coe¢ cient estimates for girls and Panel B shows the estimates for
boys.
       Girls in the RR treatment group are not more likely to have had multiple partners than
other girls, but conditional on being sexually active, they are 50% more likely to report
having a regular partner. The likelihood that their partner is more than 5 years their senior
is signi…cantly lower, reduced to close to zero (against 8% in the RR control group). Girls

  21
     Girls enrolled in secondary school have a higher incentive to avoid childbearing than girls who are out of
school, since childbearing is often not compatible with schooling. As such, the sexual behavior of secondary
school girls may di¤er substantially from that of out-of-school girls. Similarly, out-of-school boys are more
likely to be working, and thus may have more income than secondary school boys, which may raise their
ability to make transfers to girls in return for sex.



                                                      23
in the TT treatment group are also 50% more likely to declare having a regular partner, but
the TT program had no e¤ect on the likelihood that girls choose an older partner.
      The results for boys are quite di¤erent. Boys in the RR treatment group are 10 percentage
points more likely to report having had sex with multiple partners. This represents an almost
50% increase compared to the base rate of 23% in the control group.
      The RR program also led to an increase in the likelihood that teenagers report ever
having had sex (Columns 7-8). The di¤erence between RR treatment and RR control girls
is 8 percentage points, signi…cant at 1%. This suggests that the RR information decreased
the perceived riskiness of teenage boys, and therefore some girls who were abstinent before
the RR information campaign decided to enter the market for sex with teenage boys.22
Accordingly, boys coming from RR treatment schools are 12 percentage points more like to
report ever having had sex. In contrast, the TT program, if anything, decreased the likelihood
that teenagers report being sexually active, but the e¤ect is small and not signi…cant.
      The increase in sexual activity for both boys and girls in the RR treatment group does
not seem to correspond to an increase in unsafe sexual activity: the share of teenagers who
ever had sex but never used a condom did not increase signi…cantly (Columns 9-10). The
share of girls who report having used a condom at their last sexual intercourse is 24% in
the RR control group, and this increases by 11 to 12 percentage points (a 50% di¤erence)
among girls in the RR treatment group (Columns 11-12). However, there is no signicant
change in condom use at last intercourse for boys in the RR treatment group compared to
the comparison.
      Overall, the self-reported sexual behavior data at hand, while imperfect, con…rms the
childbearing results, and suggests that, in response to the RR information, teenage girls
substituted away from older partners and towards protected sex with teenage partners, but
not more than one-for-one. In addition, the self-reported data suggests that the RR in-
formation triggered some teenage girls to enter sexual activity earlier, but with condoms,
presumably to avoid pregnancy with a resource-constraint teenage boy.

 22
      Alternatively, this result could be a pure reporting artefact as discussed in section 4.2.2.




                                                        24
5.5       Cost-E¤ectiveness of the RR Information Campaign

This section provides a rough calculation of the cost-e¤ectiveness of providing RR informa-
tion to teenagers through schools, and compares it to other HIV prevention programs that
have been shown successful.
       The information campaign reached about 1; 300 girls in 71 schools and cost just under
US$2; 000. The campaign reduced the incidence of childbearing by 1.5 percentage points
in the treatment group, which means that a total of 20 (1; 300                    0:015) pregnancies were
averted thanks to the program. All of the averted pregnancies would have resulted from
a cross-generational partnership as computed in section 5.3. Thus, the overall cost per
cross-generational pregnancy averted is just under US$100.
       To calculate the cost per HIV infection averted, I need an estimate of the ratio of the risk
of HIV infection to the risk of cross-generational pregnancy, a ratio which is not available
in the literature.23 Instead, I compute cost-e¤ectiveness estimates using three hypothetical
ratios: 5/100, 15/100, and 25/100.24 Table 7 shows the cost per HIV infection using these
ratios. For a ratio of 15/100, US$98 per cross-generational pregnancy averted corresponds
to a cost of US$653 per primary HIV infection averted among teenage girls (Scenario 2).
It is important to note, however, that these estimates consider only primary cases of HIV
transmission, and thus do not include averted secondary HIV infections (i.e. transmission
to subsequent sex partners).
       These rough cost-e¤ectiveness estimates compare favorably with other HIV prevention
programs, such as treating sexually transmitted infections other than HIV (estimated at
US$213 per HIV infection averted by Gilson et al. 1997); male circumcision (estimated at
US$1269-3911 per infection averted by Gray et al., 2007); or voluntary HIV testing (esti-
mated at US$537 per additional HIV positive person tested by Thornton, 2008).

  23
     What makes this ratio particularly complicated to estimate is the fact that infectiousness of a person
with HIV varies with her viral load, and the viral load follows a U-shape: it is very high during the …rst weeks
or months after infection, then decrease substantially and peaks again (in the absence of ARV treatment)
when the patient develop AIDS 8 or 9 years later (Magruder, 2007).
  24
     The Kenya antenatal surveillance sites recorded HIV prevalence rates in pregnant women between 12
and 35 percent in 2002 (Baltazar et al. 2001).




                                                      25
6     Conclusion
This paper uses a randomized …eld experiment to study the change in the sexual behavior of
Kenyan teenagers in response to information on HIV risk. I use the incidence of pregnancy as
an objective proxy for the incidence of unprotected sex. I …nd that providing information on
the relative risk of HIV infection by type of partner led to a 61% decrease in the incidence of
pregnancies with older (riskier) partners among teenage girls, without increasing pregnancies
with same-age partners. In contrast, the national HIV/AIDS education program, which
provided general information about the risk of HIV but did not inform teenagers of the
risk distribution in the population, had no impact on the incidence of unprotected sex, as
measured by pregnancy rates. Self-reported sexual behavior data collected among a subset
of the sample is consistent with the pregnancy results, and suggest that teenage girls who
received information on the relative riskiness of older partners substituted away from older
partners and towards condom-protected sex with same-age partners.
    The …ndings of this paper suggest that teenagers are responsive to risk information, but
their sexual behavior is more elastic on the intensive than on the extensive margin. These
…ndings have important policy implications. Public health interventions often focus their
e¤orts on the extensive margin of a risky behavior: they aim at the complete elimination of
the behavior and urge complete abstinence from the activity. Accordingly, they rarely provide
information on the relative riskiness of di¤erent varieties of a risky activity – information
that would enable people to reduce the intensity of their exposure to risk while remaining
active. For example, despite the fact that three randomized medical trials in sub-Saharan
Africa have recently demonstrated that circumcision considerably reduces the risk of HIV
transmission for men, some African governments are wary of disseminating such information
and of promoting circumcision, because they are afraid it could induce circumcised men
to increase their demand for unprotected sex. However, the amount of information that
a prevention campaign should provide in order to maximize its health impact depends on
the relative size of two elasticities: the elasticity between high- and low-risk varieties of an
activity and the elasticity between activity and no activity at all. The empirical evidence
presented in this paper suggests that, in the case of sexual behavior, the former appears the




                                              26
larger of the two. This result suggests that HIV education campaigns may achieve a wider
health impact if they include both risk reduction and risk avoidance information.




                                            27
References
[1] Bundy, Donald (2002). Education and HIV/AIDS: A Window of Hope. Washington DC,
   The World Bank.

[2] Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) [Kenya], Ministry of Health (MOH) [Kenya], and
   ORC Macro. (2004). Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 2003. Caverton, Maryland:
   CBS, MOH, and ORC Macro.

[3] Clark, Shelley (2004) “Early Marriage and HIV risks in Sub-Saharan Africa”. Studies
   in Family Planning 35[3]: 149–160.

[4] Dee, Thomas and William Evans (2001). “Teens and Tra¢ c Safety”, in J. Gruber,
   editor, Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, University of Chicago
   Press, pp. 121-165.

[5] Du‡o, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, Michael Kremer and Samuel Sinei (2006) “Education
   and HIV prevention: Evidence from Western Kenya”, Policy Research Working Paper
   4024, World Bank.

[6] Gallant, Melanie and Eleanor Maticka-Tyndale (2004), “School-based HIV prevention
   programmes for African youth”, Social Science and Medicine, 2004, 1337-1351

[7] Gersovitz, Mark, Hanan G. Jacoby, F. Seri Dedy and A. Goze Tape, (1998)“The Balance
   of Self-Reported Heterosexual Activity in KAP Surveys and the AIDS Epidemic in
   Africa,”Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 93, pp. 875-883.

[8] Glynn JR, Caraël M, Auvert B, Kahindo M, Chege J, Musonda R, Kaona F, Buvé A.
   (2001) “Why do young women have a much higher prevalence of HIV than young men?
   A study in Kisumu, Kenya, and Ndola, Zambia”. AIDS, 15 (suppl 4): S51-S60.

[9] Gray RH, Li X, Kigozi G, Serwadda D, Nalugoda F, Watya S, Reynolds SJ, Wawer
   M.(2007). “The Impact of Male Circumcision on HIV Incidence and Cost per Infec-
   tion Prevented: A Stochastic Simulation Model from Rakai, Uganda”. AIDS. Apr
   23;21(7):845-850.


                                           28
[10] Gregson S, Nyamukapa CA, Garnett GP, Mason PR, Zhuwau T, Caraël M, Chandiwana
    SK, Anderson RM. (2002) “Sexual mixing patterns and sex-di¤erentials in teenage ex-
    posure to HIV infection in rural Zimbabwe”. The Lancet; Vol 359.

[11] Grimes, David A. (2003). “Unsafe abortion: the silent scourge”. British Medical Bulletin
    67:99-113

[12] Gruber, Jonathan and Jonathan Zinman (2001). “Youth smoking in the United States:
    Evidence and Implications” in J. Gruber, editor, Risky Behavior Among Youths: An
    Economic Analysis, University of Chicago Press, pp. 69-120.

[13] Jensen, Robert (2007): “The Perceived Returns to Education and the Demand for
    Schooling”. Mimeo, Harvard University.

[14] Kelly RJ, Gray RH, Sewankambo NK, Serwadda D, Wabwire-Mangen F, Lutalo T,
    Wawer MJ. (2003). “Age di¤erences in sexual partners and risk of HIV-1 infection in
    rural Uganda”. Journal of Acquired Immune De…ciency Syndrome, 32:446-451.

[15] Kirby, Douglas (2008) “The Impact of Abstinence and Comprehensive Sex and
    STD/HIV Education Programs on Adolescent Sexual Behavior”Sexuality Research and
    Social Policy (2008;5(3):6-17)

[16] Laga M, Schwärtlander B, Pisani E, Sow PS, Caraël M. (2001) “To stem HIV in Africa,
    prevent transmission to young women.”AIDS 15: 9310934.

[17] Levitt, Steve and Lance Lochner (2001). “The determinants of Juvenile Crime”, in
    Jonathan Gruber, editor, Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, Uni-
    versity of Chicago Press, pp. 327-374.

[18] Luke, Nancy (2003) “Age and economic asymmetries in the sexual relationships of
    adolescent girls in sub-Saharan Africa.”Studies in Family Planning, Jun;34(2):67-86.

[19] Luke, Nancy and Kathleen M. Kurz (2002) “Cross-generational and Transactional Sex-
    ual Relations in Sub-Saharan Africa: Prevalence of Behavior and Implications for Ne-
    gotiating Safer Sexual Practices.” Washington. DC: International Center for Research
    on Women.


                                             29
[20] Magruder, Jeremy (2007). “Marital Shopping and Epidemic AIDS.” Mimeo, Yale Uni-
    versity.

[21] Ministry of Health, Kenya (2001) AIDS in Kenya: Background, Projections, Impact,
    Interventions and Policy, eds. 6th Ed, Nairobi, AIDS Control Unit of Ministry Of Health
    and National AIDS Control Council.

[22] Peterman, T, Stoneburner R, Allen J, Ja¤e H, and Curran J. (1988) “Risk of HIV
    transmission from heterosexual adults with transmission associated infections”. JAMA;
    259: 55–58.

[23] Population   Services   International   (2005).   “The   Sugar   Daddy     Syndrome:
    African    Campaigns     Battle   Ingrained   Phenomenon”.     Available   online   at:
    http://www.psi.org/resources/pubs/cross-gen.pdf (accessed November 22, 2008)

[24] Rogo, Kama O. (1993). “Induced abortion in sub-Saharan Africa”East African Medical
    Journal.70(6):386-95.

[25] Thornton, Rebecca L. (2008). “The Demand for and Impact of Learning HIV Status:
    Evidence from a Field Experiment”. American Economic Review 98 (5): 1829-63.

[26] Trenholm, Christopher, Barbara Devaney, Ken Fortson, Lisa Quay, Justin Wheeler,
    and Melissa Clark. "Impacts of Four Title V, Section 510 Abstinence Education
    Programs". Final report, Mathematica Policy Research Inc.. Availble online at:
    http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/abstinence07/index.htm (accessed November 28, 2008).




                                             30
                                                    Figure 1
                                 HIV Prevalence by Gender and Age Groups, Kenya
% HIV Positive
14

                                  12.9

                                                                                         Female             Male
12                                               11.7           11.8




10                                                                                9.5
                       9
                                                                                        8.8
                                                                       8.4

 8
                                         7.3
                                                        6.6

 6
                                                                                                             5.2


                                                                                                      3.9
 4
          3
                           2.4

 2


                 0.4

 0
          15-19        20-24        25-29         30-34          35-39              40-44              45-49
                                                 Age Group
                                                                             Source: Kenya Demographic and Health Survey, 2003


                                                         31
Table 1 Summary Statistics on Knowledge and Behavior among Adolescents in Study Area


Panel A: Baseline Knowledge, Attitudes and Practice (Self-reported) among 8th graders
                                                                                                                          (1)                 (2)
                                                                                                                        Girls               Boys
Average Age                                                                                                             15.10               15.52
                                                                                                                        (1.2)               (1.5)
Share thinking condoms can prevent pregnancy                                                                             0.46               0.71
Share thinking condoms can prevent HIV infection                                                                         0.45               0.66
Share thinking men above 25 have a higher HIV infection rate than teenage boys                                           0.29                0.25
Share reporting having had sex                                                                                          0.21                0.48
Share reporting that some girls in the class have a partner who is not a student                                         0.61                0.57
Number of observations                                                                                                   1176               1246

Panel B: Partnership Survey (Girls who started childbearing within a year of starting 8th grade)
Share reporting that the pregnancy was wanted                                                                            0.13
Share reporting age difference with male partner > 5 years                                                               0.43
Share reporting age difference with male partner > 10 years                                                              0.11
Share reporting that the partnership was consensual                                                                      0.99
Share reporting that the male partner made regular cash payments to the teenage girl                                     0.73
  prior to the pregnancy
Share reporting that the male partner is currently providing financial support to the                                    0.75
   teenage girl
Share married if age difference < 5 years                                                                                0.42
Share married if 5 years <age difference <10 years                                                                       0.63
Share married if age difference > 10 years                                                                               0.79

Number of Observations                                                                                                   362
Notes : Standard deviations are presented in parentheses. Panel A: Self-reported data collected among teenagers enrolled in Grade 8 in 2004, prior to RR
information campaign. The survey was self-administered. Panel B: Childbearing data collected in August 2005 for teenage girls enrolled in a RR
comparison school at baseline (2004), and who had begun childbearing by July 2005. In 55% of cases, the teenage girl was interviewed herself; in the rest
of cases, she was not at home on the day of the enumerator's visit and a relative (typically her mother) answered questions on her behalf.




                                                                        32
Table 2 Verifying Randomization:
        School Characteristics and Students Outcomes at Baseline, by Treatment Group
                                                                (1)                (2)             (3)                   (4)                (5)              (6)
                                                                        RR Information                                   TT on HIV/AIDS Curriculum
                                                          Comparison          Treatment Difference                 Comparison          Treatment        Difference
                                                           Group (C)          Group (T)    T-C                      Group (C)          Group (T)           T-C
Panel A. School Characteristics at Baseline
Class Size                                                      38.2              34.4             -3.8                  37.4               37.3            -0.06
                                                               [15.9]            [17.4]        (1.540)**                [16.9]             [15.7]          (1.281)
Pupils sex ratio (Girls/Boys)                                   1.07              1.12            0.049                  1.06               1.10            0.040
                                                              [0.489]           [0.668]         (0.072)                [0.476]            [0.586]          (0.059)
Teacher-pupil ratio                                            0.026             0.026            0.000                 0.025              0.027            0.003
                                                              [0.026]           [0.022]         (0.003)                [0.021]            [0.028]          (0.003)
Teachers sex ratio (Females/Males)                             1.033             0.921           -0.112                 1.003              1.014            0.011
                                                              [0.914]           [0.777]         (0.119)                 [0.92]            [0.852]          (0.099)
KCPE results (2003)                                            251.0             249.4             -1.6                 252.2              249.0             -3.2
                                                               [29.0]            [27.4]           (3.9)                 [28.6]             [28.5]           (3.2)
Sampled for TT on HIV/AIDS Curriculum                           0.50              0.49           -0.003                  0.00               1.00
                                                                                                (0.067)
Sampled for RR information                                     0.00                1.00                                  0.22              0.22            -0.002
                                                                                                                                                           (0.046)
Panel B. Girls enrolled in 8th grade in 2003 (Control Cohort for RR): Outcomes at the end of 2004
Percent repeating class 8                                      0.245             0.208            -0.04                 0.236             0.238             0.001
                                                                                                (0.021)*                                                  (0.018)
Percent in Secondary School                                    0.448             0.455            0.007                 0.471             0.428            -0.044
                                                                                                 (0.026)                                                 (0.021)**
Percent in Professional Training                               0.037             0.036            0.000                 0.037             0.036            0.000
                                                                                                 (0.008)                                                  (0.007)
Percent out of School                                          0.259             0.288            0.029                 0.246             0.286             0.040
                                                                                                 (0.022)                                                 (0.018)**
Percent married                                                0.112             0.121            0.009                 0.106             0.121            0.015
                                                                                                 (0.014)                                                  (0.011)
Percent who had begun childbearing                             0.122             0.115           -0.008                 0.110             0.132             0.022
                                                                                                 (0.018)                                                  (0.015)
Observations                                                   4783              1212             5995                  3016               2979            5995
Panel C. Boys enrolled in 8th grade in 2003 (Control Cohort for RR): Outcomes at the end of 2004
Percent repeating class 8                                      0.23                0.22          -0.006                  0.23              0.22            -0.004
                                                                                                 (0.022)                                                   (0.018)
Percent in Secondary School                                    0.52                0.51          -0.012                  0.53              0.51            -0.021
                                                                                                 (0.027)                                                   (0.023)
Percent in Professional Training                               0.01                0.01          -0.006                  0.02              0.01            -0.007
                                                                                                 (0.004)                                                  (0.004)*
Percent out of School                                          0.23                0.25           0.025                  0.22              0.25             0.036
                                                                                                 (0.023)                                                  (0.019)*
Percent married                                                0.023             0.014           -0.009                 0.022             0.020            -0.002
                                                                                                 (0.008)                                                   (0.006)
Observations                                                   4845              1229             6074                  3079               2995             6074

Number of Schools                                               252                71             323                    163                160             323
Notes: These are school averages. School characteristics collected in 2004. Students outcomes collected in 2004 for the control cohort (Grade 8 of 2003). Standard
deviations in brackets. Columns 3 and 6: Standard errors in parenthesis. Significantly different than zero at 1 (***), 5 (**), and 10 (*) percent. Five schools did not
have an 8th grade class in 2003 and therefore are excluded from the table.

                                                                              33
Table 3 Probability that Girls have started Childbearing
                                                      Has started childbearing                                  Has started childbearing,                                  Has started childbearing,
                                                                                                                       Unmarried                                                   Married
SPECIFICATION                               SD           SD                 DD        DD-FE           SD             SD           DD      DD-FE                  SD             SD           DD      DD-FE
MODEL                                       OLS      PROBIT (ME)            OLS        OLS            OLS       PROBIT (ME) OLS            OLS                   OLS       PROBIT (ME) OLS            OLS
                                            (1)          (2)                 (3)        (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)      (8)                   (9)           (10)         (11)     (12)

RR Information                             -0.015          -0.014          0.004                     -0.011           -0.009          0.006                     -0.004          -0.002          -0.002
                                         (0.008)**       (0.007)**        (0.011)                  (0.005)**        (0.004)**        (0.008)                    (0.006)         (0.005)         (0.009)
RR Information x 2004 Cohort                                               -0.024 -0.024                                             -0.017    -0.019                                           -0.006      -0.004
                                                                          (0.013)* (0.013)*                                         (0.009)* (0.008)**                                          (0.010)     (0.010)

TT on HIV/AIDS Curriculum                  0.006           0.008           0.000                      0.006          0.006            0.002                      0.000           0.002          -0.002
                                          (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.005)                    (0.004)        (0.003)*         (0.003)                    (0.005)         (0.004)         (0.004)
Sample
Control Cohort Included (2003 cohort)                                       Yes          Yes                                           Yes          Yes                                           Yes         Yes
Controls
Individual Characteristics       Yes                        Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes         Yes
Primary School Characteristics   Yes                        Yes             Yes                        Yes             Yes             Yes                        Yes             Yes             Yes
Primary School Fixed Effects                                                             Yes                                                        Yes                                                       Yes
Observations                                5989            5989           10970       10970          5989            5989            10970       10970          5989            5989           10970        10970
Mean of Dep Var (RR=0)                     0.054           0.054           0.054        0.054        0.021           0.021            0.021        0.021        0.033           0.033            0.033       0.033
Notes: Specifications: SD = simple difference; DD = difference-in-difference; FE= school fixed effects. Only the 2004 cohort was affected by the RR Information program. The dependent variables are at individual-
level dummies. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the school level. Significantly different than zero at 1(***), 5(**) and 10(*) percent. Columns 2, 6 and 10 report mean marginal effects. Individual
controls include: schooling status, age, and cohort when applicable. School controls include: gender ratio among pupils, average school performance on the national KCPE exam, location, timing of follow-up visit.
Follow-up visits were conducted after 15 to 21 months for the 2003 Cohort, and after 12 to 17 months for the 2004 Cohort. The timing of visits was balanced across treatment and control schools, with an average gap
of 16 months between baseline and follow-up in both groups (in both groups: 17.6 months for the 2003 Cohort and 14.5 months for the 2004 Cohort).




                                                                                                         34
Table 4 Age Gap between Girls who have started Childbearing and their Partner
                                                           Age Difference between
                                                            Teenage Girl and her                             Age gap >5 years                                       Age gap >10 years
                                                                   partner
SPECIFICATION                                                  SD               DD                 SD             SD                  DD                  SD               SD                   DD
MODEL                                                          OLS              OLS                OLS        PROBIT (ME)             OLS                 OLS          PROBIT (ME)              OLS
                                                               (1)              (2)                 (3)           (4)                  (5)                 (6)             (7)                   (8)

RR Information                                               -1.734             1.035             -0.221            -0.229            0.161              -0.066             -0.078              0.171
                                                           (0.571)***         (0.858)           (0.109)**         (0.090)**          (0.121)             (0.061)            (0.052)          (0.084)**
RR Information x 2004 Cohort                                                   -2.548                                                -0.350                                                    -0.236
                                                                             (1.061)**                                              (0.187)*                                                 (0.109)**
TT on HIV/AIDS curriculum                                    -0.811           -0.409               0.083            0.103             0.027              -0.078             -0.066             -0.031
                                                             (0.711)          (0.472)             (0.081)          (0.076)           (0.062)             (0.059)            (0.053)            (0.038)
Sample
Control Cohort Included (2005 cohort)                                           Yes                                                    Yes                                                       Yes
Controls
Individual characteristics                                     Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
Primary School Characteristics                                 Yes              Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes

Observations                                                   120              250                134               134              278                 134                134                278
Mean of Dep Var (RR=0)                                         5.84             5.84               0.48              0.48             0.48                0.16               0.16               0.16
Std. Dev.                                                     (4.21)           (4.21)
Notes: Specifications: SD = simple difference; DD = difference-in-difference. Only the 2004 cohort was affected by the RR Information program. The dependent variables are at the individual level.
Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the primary school level. Significantly different than zero at 1(***), 5(**) and 10(*) percent. Columns 4 and 7 report mean marginal effects. Individual
controls include: schooling status, age, and cohort when applicable. School controls include: gender ratio among pupils, average school performance at national KCPE exam, location.




                                                                                                    35
Table 5 Overall Treatment Effects on Incidence of Childbearing by Male Partners More than 5 Years Older

Panel A. Effect of Relative Risks Information
                                                                          Sampled for RR Information?
                                                                                                                   Treatment
                                                                                NO                   YES           Effect in %         Change
                                                                             Base=100
# Teen Pregnancies                                                             100.0                 72.3             -27.7%            -27.7
Share of Pregnancies by men >5 years older                                     48%                   26%              -22.1%
# Pregnancies by men >5 years older                                            47.6                  18.4             -61.3%            -29.2
# Pregnancies by men ≤5 years older                                            52.4                  53.8              2.8%              1.4



Panel B. Effect of Teacher Training on HIV/AIDS curriculum
                                                                             Sampled for TT on national
                                                                                    curriculum?                     Treatment
                                                                                NO                   YES              Effect           Change
                                                                             Base=100
# Teen Pregnancies                                                             100.0                 111.1            11.1%              11.1
Share of Pregnancies by men >5 years older                                     48%                   56%               8.3%
# Pregnancies by men >5 years older                                            47.6                  62.1             30.5%              14.5
# Pregnancies by men ≤5 years older                                            52.4                  49.0             -6.5%              -3.4
Notes: In each panel: First row: effect on number of teen pregnancies reported from Table 3, column 1. Second row: effect on share of pregnancies by
older men reported from Table 4, column 3.




                                                                        36
Table 6 Self-Reported Sexual Behavior for Students who joined Secondary School

Panel A: Girls
                                                     (1)          (2)                 (3)            (4)              (5)        (6)                  (7)            (8)             (9)         (10)                 (11)        (12)
                                                     Has had sex with                                                Partner >5 years                                               Ever had sex but               Used a condom at last
                                                                                   Has a regular partner                                               Ever had sex
                                                     multiple partners                                                    older                                                   never used a condom               sexual intercourse
MODEL                                                OLS      PROBIT                 OLS         PROBIT              OLS      PROBIT                OLS          PROBIT             OLS       PROBIT                 OLS       PROBIT
                                                                (ME)                              (ME)                          (ME)                              (ME)                          (ME)                             (ME)
RR Information                                      0.005           0.005           0.130      0.118                -0.070        -0.079            0.085      0.075                 0.020          0.019             0.121           0.111
                                                   (0.015)         (0.012)         (0.066)* (0.055)**              (0.041)*      (0.044)*        (0.029)*** (0.024)***              (0.026)        (0.023)          (0.072)*        (0.063)*
TT on HIV/AIDS curriculum                          -0.010          -0.009           0.122      0.123                 0.003        -0.004           -0.013     -0.013                 -0.016         -0.017           -0.006          -0.002
                                                   (0.012)         (0.010)        (0.046)** (0.043)***              (0.035)       (0.033)          (0.022)    (0.021)               (0.017)        (0.017)           (0.057)         (0.055)
Observations                                        2209            2209             368        368                   258           258             2209       2209                   2209           2209              373             373
Mean of Dep Var (RR=0)                               0.04           0.04             0.21           0.21             0.08           0.08             0.16           0.16              0.11           0.11              0.24           0.24
Controls
Individual Characteristics                            Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
Secondary School Characteristics                      Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes

Panel B: Boys
                                                     Has had sex with                                                                                                               Ever had sex but               Used a condom at last
                                                                                   Has a regular partner              Age of partner                   Ever had sex
                                                     multiple partners                                                                                                            never used a condom               sexual intercourse
MODEL                                                OLS      PROBIT                 OLS         PROBIT                      OLS                    OLS          PROBIT             OLS       PROBIT                 OLS       PROBIT
                                                                (ME)                              (ME)                                                            (ME)                          (ME)                             (ME)
RR Information                                      0.104      0.097                 -0.01         -0.008                   -0.373                  0.125      0.126                 0.062          0.061             0.014          0.014
                                                 (0.031)*** (0.027)***              (0.044)        (0.044)                  (0.338)              (0.035)*** (0.036)***              (0.039)        (0.038)           (0.032)        (0.031)
TT on HIV/AIDS curriculum                          -0.004     -0.004                 0.013          0.013                    0.471                 -0.023     -0.023                 0.003          0.003             -0.013         -0.013
                                                   (0.023)    (0.022)               (0.035)        (0.035)                  (0.416)                (0.025)    (0.025)               (0.023)        (0.023)           (0.027)        (0.026)
Observations                                        2730       2730                  1423           1423                      291                   2730       2730                  2730           2730               1438           1438
Mean of Dep Var (RR=0)                               0.23           0.23             0.26           0.26                    16.09                    0.51           0.51              0.35           0.35              0.22           0.22
Controls
Individual Characteristics                            Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes                     Yes                     Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
Secondary School Characteristics                      Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes                     Yes                     Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes
Notes: The dependent variables are individual-level dummies. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the secondary school level. Significantly different than zero at 1(***), 5(**) and 10(*) percent. Columns 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12
report mean marginal effects. Individual controls include: age and sampling status. Controls at the secondary school level include: location and gender ratio among pupils. Results are robust to the addition of all other available school
controls (school size, average performance, school type (day or boarding), tuition costs).
Columns 3-4 and 11-12: sample restricted to those who declare ever having had sex. Columns 5-6: sample restricted to those who declare having a regular partner.




                                                                                                                    37
Table 7 Cost-Effectiveness of the RR Information Campaign
                                                                                               US$
Total Program Cost                                                                           $1,911
Total # of pregnancies averted                                                                 19.5
Cost per Pregnancy Averted                                                                      $98
# of cross-generational pregnancies averted                                                      20
Cost per Cross-Generational Pregnancy Averted                                                   $98
Scenario 1
# of Primary HIV Infections Averted among Teenage Girls                                        4.88
Cost per Primary HIV Infection Averted among Teenage Girls                                    $392
Scenario 2
# of Primary HIV Infections Averted among Teenage Girls                                        2.93
Cost per Primary HIV Infection Averted among Teenage Girls                                    $653
Scenario 3
# of Primary HIV Infections Averted among Teenage Girls                                        0.98
Cost per Primary HIV Infection Averted among Teenage Girls                                   $1,960
Assumption in scenario 1: 25 cases of HIV infection per 100 cross-generational pregnancies
Assumption in scenario 2: 15 cases of HIV infection per 100 cross-generational pregnancies
Assumption in scenario 3: 5 cases of HIV infection per 100 cross-generational pregnancies




                                                 38
Appendix Table A Status of Study Sample at Follow-up, by Treatment Group

Panel A. Girls
                                                                (1)                (2)               (3)                   (4)               (5)              (6)
                                                                         RR Information                                   TT on HIV/AIDS Curriculum
                                                          Comparison          Treatment        Difference            Comparison Treatment Difference
                                                           Group (C)          Group (T)            T-C                Group (C) Group (T)     T-C
Status unknow (attrited)                                     0.017              0.013            -0.004                 0.018     0.014      -0.005
                                                                                                 (0.004)                                    (0.004)
Percent repeating class 8                                     0.235              0.212           -0.023                 0.223     0.237      0.014
                                                                                                 (0.022)                                    (0.018)
Percent in Secondary School                                   0.461              0.450           -0.011                 0.479     0.438      -0.041
                                                                                                 (0.026)                                   (0.021)*
Percent in Professional Training                              0.044              0.052            0.007                 0.046     0.045      -0.001
                                                                                                 (0.009)                                    (0.007)
Percent out of School                                         0.267              0.295            0.028                 0.262     0.285      0.022
                                                                                                 (0.025)                                    (0.020)
Percent Dead                                                  0.0014            0.0016           0.0002                0.0008    0.0021     0.0014
                                                                                                (0.0016)                                   (0.0013)
Observations                                                   5009               1189            6198                  3230      2968        6198
Number of Schools                                               253                71              324                   164       160         324

Panel B. Boys
                                                                         RR Information                                   TT on HIV/AIDS Curriculum
                                                          Comparison          Treatment        Difference            Comparison Treatment Difference
                                                           Group (C)          Group (T)            T-C                Group (C) Group (T)    T-C
Status unknow (attrited)                                     0.015              0.013             0.021                 0.014     0.015     -0.002
                                                                                                 (0.022)                                   (0.019)
Percent repeating class 8                                     0.219              0.189            0.000                 0.211     0.214     0.001
                                                                                                 (0.002)                                   (0.001)
Percent in Secondary School                                   0.487              0.498           -0.030                 0.491     0.487     0.004
                                                                                                 (0.019)                                   (0.016)
Percent in Professional Training                              0.038              0.033            0.011                 0.035     0.039     -0.003
                                                                                                 (0.025)                                   (0.021)
Percent out of School                                         0.263              0.283           -0.005                 0.268     0.266     0.004
                                                                                                 (0.008)                                   (0.007)
Percent Dead                                                  0.0006            0.0004          -0.0002                0.0011    0.0000    -0.0011
                                                                                                (0.0007)                                  (0.0006)*
Observations                                                   5490               1336             6826                   3458             3368             6826
Notes : Status as of July 2005. Study sample composed of students enrolled in 8th grade in 2004. The table present school averages. Standard errors in parenthesis.
Significantly different than zero at 1 (***), 5 (**), and 10 (*) percent. Four schools did not have an 8th grade class in 2004 and therefore are exluded from the table.




                                                                                 39
