NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIES OF DENSITY VERSUS NATURAL ADVANTAGE:
CROP CHOICE ON THE BACK FORTY
Thomas J. Holmes
Sanghoon Lee
Working Paper 14704
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14704

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2009

Holmes is grateful to NSF Grant 0551062 for support of this research. We have benefited from the
comments of seminar participants at the NBER agglomeration conference, UBC Sauder School of
Business, UBC Economics, UBC Agricultural Economics, the University of Minnesota, and the RSAI
North American meetings. We are grateful to Julia Thornton for research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
the Federal Reserve System, or the NBER.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by Thomas J. Holmes and Sanghoon Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Economies of Density versus Natural Advantage: Crop Choice on the Back Forty
Thomas J. Holmes and Sanghoon Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 14704
February 2009, Revised June 2009
JEL No. Q10,R12,R14
ABSTRACT
We estimate the factors determining specialization of crop choice at the level of individual fields, distinguishing
between the role of natural advantage (soil characteristics) and economies of density (scale economies
achieved when farmers plant neighboring fields with the same crop). Using rich geographic data from
North Dakota, including new data on crop choice collected by satellite, we estimate the analog of a
social interactions econometric model for the planting decisions on neighboring fields. We find that
planting decisions on a field are heavily dependent on the soil characteristics of the neighboring fields.
Through this relationship, we back out the structural parameters of economies of density. Setting an
Ellison-Glaeser dartboard level of specialization as a benchmark, we find that of the actual level of
specialization achieved beyond this benchmark, approximately two-thirds can be attributed to natural
advantage and one-third to density economies.

Thomas J. Holmes
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and also NBER
holmes@umn.edu
Sanghoon Lee
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC V6T1Z2, Canada
Sanghoon.Lee@sauder.ubc.ca

1

Introduction

A basic principle in economics is that a particular location may specialize in a particular
activity for two broadly-defined reasons. First, the location might have some underlying
characteristic that gives it a natural advantage in the activity. Second, some type of scale
economy may be attained by concentrating (or agglomerating) production at the location.
When we observe specialization, we can ask about the roles these two factors play. For
example, Chicago became a major city because of its specialization as a transportation
hub. How much credit is due to its natural advantage (through its access to Lake Michigan
and the Chicago River), and how much is due to agglomeration benefits? (See Cronon
(1991) on this issue.) Los Angeles specializes in making movies. How much of this is
due to locational advantages (the weather, quick access to mountains and beaches, the large
number of beautiful people who live in the area), and how much to agglomeration benefits?
We tackle the question of why a location specializes in a setting where the geographic
scale is extremely narrow and the issues are illustrated in stark terms. We look at crop
choice on 160-acre square parcels of farmland called quarter sections. We observe that the
various fields within a quarter section tend to be planted the same way and ask: How much
of this specialization is due to natural advantage and how much is due to scale economies?
Obviously, natural conditions like soil quality and topography play key roles in determining what is planted. Indeed, agriculture is the textbook case for the role that natural
factors can play in the location of economic activity. Adjacent fields will tend to be similar
in attributes like soil quality and topography and for this reason it is no surprise to see
adjacent fields planted similarly.
Perhaps more subtly, scale economies also can also lead nearby fields to be planted
similarly. When a farmer is out in a field and has just run a particular piece of equipment,
the farmer can economize on setup costs by continuing on to the next field, treating it the
same way. Potential eﬃciencies extend beyond day-to-day field operations and include
economies involving specialized equipment, like a sugar beet harvester. When a farmer
acquires expensive equipment like this, the farmer needs to use the equipment on many
acres to justify its expense and ensure it gets suﬃcient utilization. So if the farmer includes
sugar beets in the crop rotation for one field, the farmer will have an incentive to include
sugar beets in the rotation of the neighboring fields. (We have more to say about crop
rotation in Section 2.) The issue of indivisibility applies to the farmer as well. Farmers can
have specialized knowledge that is crop specific. If a field is planted with a certain crop that
benefits from a particular kind of farmer knowledge, it will be advantageous for neighboring
fields to be planted the same way to fully utilize the farmer’s particular knowledge.

In standard concepts of scale economies there is no notion of geography; cost savings
are achieved by increasing scale at a particular point. With the scale economies considered
here, there is a notion of geography. Expanding a particular activity at one point (i.e.,
the planting of a particular crop on a particular field) makes it advantageous to expand the
activity at neighboring points (the neighboring fields). We use the term density economies
to distinguish this type of scale economies from the standard kind. We follow the literature
in using this terminology, as we explain below.
We are drawn to study the factors underlying agglomeration in agriculture because the
features of this industry allow for a particularly clean analysis. Agriculture is a unique
industry in terms of the extent to which it is possible to get a handle on the natural land
characteristics that determine natural advantage, such as the soil type, the slope of the land,
and moisture. Moreover, agriculture is a unique industry in terms of the extent to which
the crucial location characteristics can be taken as exogenous, since it is mainly dependent
on natural factors. The movie industry in Los Angeles benefits from its large supply of
beautiful people, but this characteristic depends upon the decisions of people to move there.
Our analysis will rely heavily on comparing the characteristics of neighboring fields. In most
related contexts, we would need to worry about a selection process for neighbors, with the
underlying units of analysis choosing who their neighbors are. But a field cannot pick itself
up and move around to select its neighbors.1 Glacial activity determined the characteristics
of a field’s neighbors long ago.
Before discussing results, we say a little more about our data. We focus on the long-run
average planting decisions in the Red River Valley region of North Dakota. We picked a
narrow geographic area because of computational considerations. The fertile Red River
Valley is ideal for our purposes because many years of crop data are available for this area
and because a wide variety of crops are planted in the area, making the analysis of which crop
to plant interesting. Detailed maps of land characteristics make it possible to determine
how characteristics vary throughout a quarter section (again, a 160-acre square parcel). We
combine this data with newly available maps of crop choice. Analogous to the data in
Burchfield et al. (2006), our data are based on pictures from the sky (satellite imagery), and
no confidentiality restrictions impede us from determining how a farmer is planting individual
quarter sections. In short, with the choice of this setting, we cleanly measure both the crucial
location characteristics and the activity choices at high geographic resolution.
We now provide some background about quarter sections. A quarter section is the
land unit that was distributed for free through the 1862 Homestead Act to individuals who
1

See Evans, Oates, and Schwab (1992) for an example of a paper in the social interactions literature that
has to confront a situation in which neighbors are endogenous.

2

promised to settle and farm the land. It is one-half mile on each side, so the area is a quarter
square mile. A virtually perfect grid of squares over North Dakota (and many other states)
was laid out in the early 1800s. A quarter section can be subdivided into quarter quarters
of forty acres each, which we call fields. The reader may be familiar with the terms “back
forty” and “front forty,” which refer to these units. We aggregate our data to the level of
these forty-acre fields and study the joint planting decisions of the four fields of a quarter
section.
We turn now to our results. In the reduced form of the structural model, if density
economies matter, the planting decision on a field depends not only on the soil characteristics
of the given field, but also on the soil characteristics of neighboring fields. We find strong
evidence of this link between neighbors. We estimate that for most crops, the weight placed
on a field’s neighbors is on the order of one-third, compared to two-thirds on the field’s
own characteristics. With the structural parameter estimates in hand, we can determine
what would happen to plantings if we were to shut down density economies across fields for
a particular crop. We estimate that long-run planting levels of the particular crop would
typically fall on the order of 40 percent.
Using our estimates we can also quantify the factors leading to crop specialization by
quarter sections within counties. That is, why we might see all four fields of one quarter
section planted with wheat, and in another quarter section within the same county, all
four fields planted with corn. Ellison and Glaeser (1997) have shown that any analysis
of geographic concentration with “small numbers” needs to take into account that some
concentration can emerge from “dartboard reasons.” In our analysis of specialization of
quarter sections, we have a small numbers issue because there are only four fields. Consider
the following extreme model of crop planting within a county. Suppose there are no density
economies and that the crop suitability of particular fields is independently and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) across the county, analogous to randomly throwing darts labeled “corn”
and darts labeled “wheat” at a county map. By chance, this process will result in some
quarter sections with all four fields that are wheat and other quarter sections with all four
fields that are corn. We are interested in concentration emerges beyond that occuring by
chance.
We expect that land is not i.i.d. across a county; rather, there is likely to be geographic
autocorrelation, since a natural event such as a glacial river or lake extends over a wider
area than a single field. Because of such a process, fields that are near each other–in
particular, those in the same quarter sections–will tend to specialize in the same crops
because they will have similar soils. Further, there is specialization in the same crop by the
four fields in a quarter section because of density economies. In Ellison and Glaeser (1997),
3

concentration beyond the dartboard level through natural advantage and increasing returns
is formally equivalent. But here–with our structural estimates of the density economy
technology parameters and our estimates of the soil quality of each field–natural advantage
and increasing returns can be distinguished. We take the dartboard level of concentration
as a benchmark and decompose the contribution of natural advantage and density economies
in determining the degree to which specialization of quarter sections within counties extends
beyond the dartboard level. We estimate that natural advantage goes about two-thirds of
the way. Given our priors of a high degree of geographic autocorrelation in soils, it is not
surprising that the natural advantage contribution is big. We find it interesting that the
share accounted for by density economies, about one-third, is as big as it is.
We also address the issue that our results may be driven by correlated eﬀects (in Manski
(1993)’s terminology) lurking in the background. That is, there may not be any connection
in decision making; the adjacent fields may simply have similar unobserved characteristics
that are not being adequately controlled for. We show that our findings cannot all be
attributed to correlated eﬀects through a boundary analysis. We find that the link between a
field’s planting decision and its neighbor’s characteristics is attenuated when the neighboring
field is on the other side of one of several kinds of boundaries, including a quarter section
boundary and an ownership or administration boundary. We show that in terms of observed
soil characteristics, neighboring fields across such boundaries are no more diﬀerent than
neighboring fields within such boundaries. Since the pattern of observed soil characteristics
does not change at a border, there is no reason to believe the pattern of unobserved soil
characteristics would change either. We conclude that the attenuation of the link between
neighbors is due to a reduction in the magnitude of density economies enjoyed across such
boundaries.
This paper is most closely related to the spatial literature on the economics of industry
location. The focus of much of this literature is determining the relative agglomerating force
of various types of scale economies (e.g., knowledge spillovers), leaving natural advantage
in the background (see Rosenthal and Strange (2004) for a survey). Ellison and Glaeser
(1999), Rosenthal and Strange (2001), and Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr (2007) are exceptions
in that they jointly consider the forces of natural advantage and scale economies as we do.
One obvious way their work diﬀers from ours is that they look at manufacturing in all of
the United States, whereas we look at crops in the Red River Valley. Our work also diﬀers
substantively in approach. We take a within-industry approach and estimate a structural
economic model. Their paper takes a cross-industry nonstructural approach. By being very
narrow in our application, we are able to precisely measure natural advantage in a way that
would be impossible in an aggregate analysis of all manufacturing industries in the United
4

States.
There is a long-standing interest in measuring economies of scale in farming and estimating farm production functions more generally (see, for example, the survey by Battese
(1992)). For many studies, the primary interest is how average cost changes as farm operations incorporate more land. Our analysis holds fixed the land margin at the four fields
of a quarter section, and examines how costs vary when those four fields are planted more
intensively for a particular crop, i.e., at higher density. This is analogous to the way, with
respect to the airline industry, that Caves, Christensen, and Tretheway (1984) distinguish
between an airline increasing the number of routes it serves and increasing the frequency
of flights. They call cost savings from the latter economies of density, and we follow their
terminology.
Holmes (2008) provides a recent analysis of economies of density in Wal-Mart’s store
location problem. The cost saving that Wal-Mart can achieve by locating its stores close
together is conceptually similar to what a farmer can achieve by planting neighboring fields
the same way. Arzaghi and Henderson (2008) study density economies (networking benefits)
of advertising agencies by analyzing the location pattern of new advertising agencies in
Manhattan. One important way in which our study diﬀers from typical farm productivity
analyses such as those cited in Battese (1992) is that we do not directly observe measures
directly related to productivity, such as bushels of output or labor or capital inputs. Rather,
we see soil conditions and crop choices. It is from the revealed preferences underlying these
choices that we infer density economy parameters. We finally cite the early study of Johnston
(1972) that discussed cost savings achieved when farmers operate land parcels that are close
together rather than dispersed.

2

Theory

We develop a variant of the linear-in-means social interactions model exposited in the survey
paper of Brock and Durlauf (2001b). Papers in this literature study the connection in the
behavior of neighboring decision units. For example, is a person more likely to commit a
crime if his neighbor commits a crime (an “endogenous eﬀect,” in Manski’s terminology)?
An analogous question arises here: Is it more likely that soybeans will be planted in a field
if soybeans are planted in an adjacent field? Before getting into the details of the model, it
is useful to raise four points about the model.
First, while we motivate the existence of density economies by appealing to the existence
of indivisibilities in the use of specialized capital and gains from plowing the next row over

5

the same as the previous one, we don’t explicitly model these various details about farming.
Instead, we capture these forces by writing down a reduced form profit structure where the
profitability of the planting choice on a particular field depends on the choices made on
neighboring fields. In the exercises we consider, estimates of the parameters of this profit
structure are suﬃcient for what we do.
Second, farmers typically pick crop rotations rather than individual crops. For example,
a farmer growing sugar beets would typically only plant beets every four years, rotating in
other crops the other years. One possibility would be sugar beets (year one), wheat (year
two), barley (year three), and wheat (year four). The basic issues that we are interested in
apply equally well when the choice variable is a rotation rather than a crop. For example, a
farmer choosing a rotation with sugar beets will need specialized equipment and knowledge
for sugar beets that a farmer choosing a two-year wheat/barley rotation will not need.
Explicitly modeling the underlying agricultural details that lead to crop rotation is beyond
the scope of this paper. Instead, we introduce in a reduced-form way an incentive to cycle
in, or out, a particular crop over time.
Third, the various economies we have in mind include those that emerge from daily
operations (e.g. from continuously operating a plow on adjacent fields) and those that
are longer term in nature (e.g. that involve utilization of long-lived equipment). In our
model, we explicitly diﬀerentiate these short run and long run considerations. However, it
is useful to alert the reader up front that in our estimation, we will be unable to separately
identify these two factors. Our identification strategy relies on relating planting decisions to
characteristics of adjacent fields like soil quality. If measurable field characteristics varied
over time, we could look at the dynamics of planting decisions to separate out short-run and
long-run considerations. But measurable field characteristics are constant over time, so we
are only able to identify the combined eﬀect of short-run and long-run economies. For the
exercises we consider, this is suﬃcient.
Fourth, we simplify by modeling the planting decision of each crop in isolation. Implicitly,
when deciding how much to plant a particular crop, there is an opportunity cost in terms of
other crops that is captured in a reduced form way in the profit function for the particular
crop. In our view, the limitations of this approach are trumped by the benefits, at least for
a first cut. In particular, the approach delivers linear policy rules relating long-run average
planting levels to neighboring field characteristics. This makes the analysis quite tractable
and enables us to back out a structural interpretation from raw moments of the data.

6

2.1

Details of the Model

We model the planting decisions on the four quadrants of a square piece of farmland. We
refer to the quadrants as fields and index them by  ∈ {1 2 3 4}. The fields are arranged
as illustrated in the following diagram:
1 2
3 4
Fields 2 and 3 are directly adjacent to field 1. We call directly adjacent pairs like these A
neighbors. Field 4 is diagonal to field 1 and 3 is diagonal to 2; we call such diagonal pairs
B neighbors. In our empirical work, a field corresponds to a 40-acre quarter quarter. The
four fields together make up a 160-acre quarter section.
There are  periods. For each field  and period , the farmer chooses  . We interpret
this as the planting level of a particular crop, e.g., the quantity of soybeans planted on field
 in period . For each field  there is a variable  that determines the long-run suitability
of growing the particular crop. This reflects the underlying soil characteristics of field .
We will call this the permanent soil quality measure. In each period , each field  has a
transient quality measure   . As this term can vary over time, it introduces a force in the
model to induce the farmer to cycle the planting of the crop, e.g. practice crop rotation.
We do not impose any restriction on how the   change over time or on the correlation of
the   across fields at a particular time. We do assume, without loss of generality, that
the   sum up to 0 over time for each field,
X

  = 0



Overall quality at a point in time is the sum  +   of the permanent and transient
components. Since the  sum to zero for each , the long-run average equality of field 
equals  .
Given the vector of the  and the matrix of the  , the farmer faces the problem of
picking a matrix of the  of plantings over fields and time to maximize total profit,
max


X

  



where for simplicity we are ignoring discounting.
7

(1)

The specification of the   is a key step. Assume that the profit on field 1 in period 
can be written as
1 2
1
+  1 ̄1
 1 = (1 +  1 )1 − 1
2
2
1 
1 
1
1
+  1 (2 + 3 ) +  1 (̄2 + ̄3 ) +  1 4 +  1 ̄4
2
2
2
2

(2)

P
for ̄ = (   )  . The profit on the other fields is the symmetric equivalent to (2).2
Observe first that the profit on field 1 depends upon its own field characteristic and its
own plantings: permanent soil quality 1 and transient quality  1 , current planting 1 ,
and long run average planting ̄1 . The interaction of 1 with ̄1 captures any long-run scale
economy that might arise from planting the same field the same way over time. If the
coeﬃcient   0, then plantings on the same field in diﬀerent periods are complements;
raising the planting level in one period makes it more profitable to raise planting in all
periods.
The profit also depends upon the interactions of its own planting 1 with the plantings
on the other fields. Fields 2 and 3 are the A neighbors (i.e., directly adjacent) to field
1, and the coeﬃcients on these interactions are  and  .  captures short-run density
economies between adjacent fields. If   0, then plantings on adjacent fields in the same
period are complements.  captures long-run density economies between adjacent fields. If
  0, then plantings on adjacent fields in diﬀerent periods are complements. Field 4 is
the B neighbor (i.e., diagonal), and the coeﬃcients on this interaction are  and  . The
parameter  and  have the analogous roles for diagonal neighbors. Note the coeﬃcients of
12 on the quadratic terms are a normalization on the units of profit that we impose without
loss of generality. We will refer to  ,  as the short run density economy parameters and
   as the long run density economy parameters.
Profit on field  does not directly depend upon the soil quality characteristic  of a
neighboring field . So this specification zeroes out what are variously called exogenous
or contextual eﬀects.3 The profit on field  indirectly depends upon the soil qualities of
2

Note that in the choice of 1 , the farmer takes into account not only how 1 impacts its own field
profits { 11   12   1 }, but also how 1 impacts the profits from the other fields 2, 3, and 4. This diﬀers
from the standard social interaction model where each unit is a separate maximizer, playing a game with
the other units (Brock and Durlauf (2001a), Bajari et al. (2006)). Here, it is not sensible to think of the
back forty as playing a game with the front forty.
3
It is possible to think of stories in which exogenous eﬀects might be present as well. For example,
perhaps the characteristics of neighboring fields aﬀect the likelihood that there will be pests, and the pests
from the neighboring fields might spill over. As shown by Manski (1993), in linear structures such as this,
endogenous and exogenous eﬀects cannot be separately identified. Since the latter strike us as second order,
we zero them out a priori.

8

neighboring fields because these qualities influence the planting levels of the neighboring
fields, which in turn aﬀect profitability on field . This is called an endogenous eﬀect in the
literature (Manski (1993)).
The first-order necessary condition of problem (1) with respect to 1 (the other fields
are symmetric) yields
0 =  (1 + 1 ) − 1 +  ̄1 +  (2 + 3 ) +  (̄2 + ̄3 ) +  4 +  ̄4 
Summing up the first order conditions over time we obtain
0 = 0 1 − ̄1 +  (̄2 + ̄3 ) +  ̄4 

(3)

where
 + 
( =  )
1 − 

≡

1 − 

 ≡
0

The parameter  combines the long-run and short-run density economies for neighbor type
. It is this parameter that we will go after in the empirical section as we are unable to
separately identify its components.
Solving equation (3) for field 1 and corresponding equations for the other fields, we obtain
the policy function that specifies the average planting on each field  as a function of the
vector of permanent field qualities (1  2  3  4 ). The policy function for field 1 (the other
fields are symmetric) is
(4)
̄1 =   1 +   2 +   3 +   4 
where




¡
¢
0 1 − 22 − 
=
(1 − 2 −  )(1 + 2 −  ) (1 +  )
0 
=
(1 − 2 −  )(1 + 2 −  )
¡
¢
0 22 +  − 2
=
.
(1 − 2 −  )(1 + 2 −  ) (1 +  )

9

We will refer to   ,   , and   as the policy function parameters. The parameter   is
the coeﬃcient on the field’s own quality, and   and   are the coeﬃcients on neighboring
qualities. If the policy function parameters are known, we can work backward and solve for
the three structural parameters 0 ,  , and  as follows:
(  −   ) ( 2 − 4 2 + 2    +  2 )
 2 − 2 2 +    
 ( −   )
= 2  2
  − 2  +    
−2 2 +   (  +   )
=
.
 2 − 2 2 +    

0 =



We summarize the density economies by defining the composite density parameter Θ as
Θ ≡ 2 +  .

(5)

We provide an interpretation of Θ by showing how the parameter summarizes the impact of a
hypothetical policy experiment shutting down density economies. Imagine a wall is erected
in a particular quarter section that separates all four fields in the quarter section, eliminating
all potential for density economies. Formally, after the wall, short-run and long-run density
economies are zero for both  and  neighbors,45
 =  =  =  = 0.
4

In our model, there is only one crop with production level  . But implicitly when  is low, the land is
being used for something else, an outside alternative. In our experiment as we shut down density economies
for the crop in question, we are leaving matters alone for the outside good.
5
For this discussion, we set Θ = 0 for one particular quarter section, holding it fixed in other quarter
sections. Otherwise, this aggregate change in technology might impact prices and ultimately the  parameter
(which can be interpreted as output price).

10

Average plantings across the four fields equals
1
̄1 + ̄2 + ̄3 + ̄4
= (  + 2  +   ) (1 + 2 + 3 + 4 )
4
4
0
1 + 2 + 3 + 4

=
1 − 2 − 
4
µ 0 ¶ 
1 + 2 + 3 + 4

=
1−Θ
4
0

=
̄,
1−Θ

̄ ≡

(6)
(7)

where ̄ is average plantings, ̄ is average quality, and again Θ is the composite density
parameter in (5). We assume that
1 − Θ  0
(8)
as otherwise the density economies are so big that there is no solution. We normalize 0
and the scaling of field quality so that
0
= 1.
1−Θ

(9)

With this normalization, the policy function coeﬃcients sum to 1 ( 0 + 2  +   = 1).
Suppose that the initial situation is that there is no wall. Given the normalization (9),
we see from (6) that with no wall, average field planting across the four fields equals average
field quality,
 _ = ̄.
When the wall is erected it has the eﬀect of reducing the composite density economies to
zero, Θ = 0, so average planting equals
  = 0 ̄ = (1 − Θ)  _ .
Thus the composite density parameter has a structural interpretation as the fraction that
average plantings decrease on account of a wall. Note to identify the impact of this policy
experiment, we need not separately identify the short-run and long-run components of density
economies. This follows because both kinds are eliminated by a wall and only the sum
matters.
Density economies not only impact average planting across the four fields, they also
impact the dispersion of plantings across the four fields. We use the within quarter section
11

variance as our dispersion measure,

=

P4

=1

(̄ − ̄)2
.
4

(10)

It is intuitive that when density economies are substantial, it induces a farmer to plant the
four fields of a quarter section the same way. Our formal result is,
Proposition 1. Set  = 0 and vary Θ over its range [0 1] by varying  . As Θ varies,
rescale  according to (9) to leave average plantings fixed. The variance measure (Θ)
strictly declines in Θ and goes to zero as Θ approaches its theoretical upper bound of 1.
Proof. See the Appendix.¥
Thus as Θ goes to its theoretical upper bound, plantings across the four fields are equalized.

2.2

The “Within” Specialization Measure

As we will see below, farmers tend to plant the four fields of a quarter section the same
way. The main task of this paper is to quantify the roles that density economies and natural
advantage play in this specialization. We first define the measure for this specialization and
show how we decompose it into a density economy share and natural advantage share. We
estimate the specialization measure and the shares in the empirical section.
Our specialization measure is based on the dispersion defined in (10) of plantings across
the four fields within a quarter section. Suppose we have a set of  quarters in an area (let’s
say a county) and let each quarter section be indexed by  = 1   . Let the county mean
within dispersion measure be
P


= =1


where  is the planting dispersion of quarter section . The term “within” is included
here to emphasize that dispersion is first calculated within each quarter section and then
averaged.
The mean within dispersion measure  is closely related to specialization. When
 it is very small, fields within a quarter section tend to be planted the same way. As
a benchmark with which to compare  , consider a hypothetical exercise where there
are no density economies and no natural advantages. In other words, (1) the planting of an
individual field is arbitrarily set to its field quality  =  and (2) all 4 fields in the
county are randomly reshuﬄed into groups of four that we call dartboard quarter sections
(as opposed to actual quarter sections). This idea of taking into account random dartboard
factors follows Ellison and Glaeser (1997). In the appendix, we show that if we were to
12

calculate the county dispersion measure for this hypothetical exercise, for large  it would
approximately equal
P P4
2
3
=4
=1 ( − ̄)

=

.
4
4
With this benchmark in hand, we define the Within Specialization Measure by
=

 − 
.


The Within Specialization Measure captures the specialization beyond what would happen
with a dartboard. If there are no density economies and if soils are randomly distributed across fields (with no tendency for adjacent fields to be correlated in soil types) then
 =  and the measure  = 0. In this extreme case, there exists zero tendency
for fields in the same quarter section to be planted the same way (relative to the way other
fields in the county are planted). At the other extreme case, if the fields within each quarter
section are planted exactly the same way, then the within specialization measure  = 1.
We focus on the “within” measure because it is jointly determined by the two forces
highlighted in the title of the paper. First, as shown in Proposition 1 above, when density
economies are big, the four fields will tend to be planted the same way, meaning the within
measure will be big. Second, the natural advantage force will also contribute to making the
within measure big. This follows because we expect the soil qualities within a quarter to
be more highly correlated than across quarters. To decompose the relative importance of
these two factors, define an intermediate case where the natural advantage factor is taken
into account but not density economies. In particular, define

_



=

P P4
=1

( − ̄ )2
4

=1

where ̄ is the mean field quality of quarter  and let
 _ =

 − _
.


If there are no density economies (Θ = 0), then  _ will equal our overall
within measure  (since  =  in this case). If Θ  0, then density economies also

13

contribute. The share of the credit that can be attributed to natural advantage is
Natural Advantage Share =

 _



(11)

while the balance of credit goes to density economies,
Density Economy Share =

3

 −  _
.


(12)

Econometric Issues

Rather than observe the scalar quality index  , we observe a vector of characteristics 
with  elements for each field  on quarter section . As we will explain below, this vector
consists of variables such as dummy variables for soil type and local ground characteristics
such as slope. We assume the following:
0
 +  
 = 

(13)

where the weight vector  on characteristics is unknown. Let  ≡ (1  2  3  4 ) be
the vector of unobserved quality components for quarter section  and analogously  ≡
(1  2  3  4 ). For simplicity, assume  are drawn i.i.d. across quarter sections. Make
the orthogonality restriction,
(14)
[ 0 ] = 0.
To summarize, our assumption here is that there is a vector of soil characteristics  that we
do observe (such as soil and weather variables) and there are other things  that we miss.
And this measurement error  is unrelated to the soil characteristics that we do observe.
Inserting (13) into (4) yields
̄1 =   10  +   (20 + 30 ) +   40  + (  1 +   (2 + 3 ) +   4 ) 

(15)

Conceptually, there is no diﬃculty here because we can consistently estimate  and 
jointly with nonlinear least squares. In practice, this estimation approach is diﬃcult when
the dimension of  is large, thereby complicating nonlinear optimization. A convenient
feature here is that once we fix  ≡ (        ), the equation is linear in  and we can
14

use the ordinary least squares method to calculate the minimum sum of squared errors
conditional on . It is then easy to find the  giving the minimum sum of squared errors.
(See Appendix A.3 for how we calculate the standard errors of the estimates obtained with
this method.)
We emphasize that no restriction is imposed on the correlation of the error term across
fields within a quarter section. In particular, we allow
[  0 ] ≥ 0
for  6=  0 . Thus, we allow for correlated eﬀects. It is likely that fields in the same quarter
section have an unobservable component of quality that will be correlated across the fields.
Because of this, even if  =  = 0, if ̄1 were regressed on its own measured soil quality 10 
and the other planting levels ̄2 , ̄3 , and ̄4 ...̄ , we would expect to see positive coeﬃcients
on the neighboring planting levels. But when we regress ̄1 on its own measured soil quality
10  and the neighboring measured soil qualities 20  30  30 , the coeﬃcients on the latter
will be zero if density economies are zero.
We note that we also get consistent estimates if we allow for measurement error in the
planting variables ̄ that is correlated across neighboring fields. Correlated measurement
error like this might show up due to clouds blocking the satellite view of neighboring fields.

4

Data

Three main data elements are used in our analysis. The first element is the boundary
information we use to define fields. The second element is data on crop choice. The third
is data on soil and other land characteristics. The analysis in Section 6 uses data on land
ownership and administration, but we defer description of this until later. Our data are
available online.6

4.1

Fields

The Public Land Survey System imposed a grid of squares upon the new lands of the young
United States. The Fifth Principal Meridian governing the origin of the grid for North
Dakota and nearby states was established in 1815 (Committee on Integrated Land Data
Mapping, 1982, p. 14). The grid consists of a hierarchy of diﬀerent size squares. There are
6

The link to the data can be found at http://strategy.sauder.ubc.ca/lee/research.html.

15

four quarter sections (half mile a side) in a section (one mile a side). There are thirty-six
sections in a township (six miles a side). Figure 1 illustrates the section grid for Pembina
County, one of the counties in North Dakota included in our study.7 The eastern boundary
of the county is irregular, following the Red River. The northern boundary meets Canada,
so the top row is not full height. Otherwise, the section grid is a virtually perfect system of
one-by-one-mile squares.
We will analyze the farmer’s problem at the quarter section level, dividing it up into the
four quarter quarters that we call fields. A field is 40 acres or 1/16 of a square mile. Our
crop and soil data are at a higher resolution than the field level and we could, in principle,
have allowed for smaller decision making units, e.g. quarter quarter quarter sections of 10
acres. Our motivation for aggregating up to the 40 acre field level is that it makes the
analysis tractable and interpretable.
We study crop choice in the North Dakota Red River region. We define this region to
include all counties along the Red River on the eastern border of North Dakota as well as
the next layer of counties in. The twelve counties in this region are illustrated in Figure
2.8 (They are also listed as part of Table 2 below.) There are a total of 231,000 fields in the
region.9 Equivalently, there are 14 400 ≈ 231 00016 square miles, since there are 16 fields
in each square mile section.

4.2

Crops

Our crop data are from the Crop Data Layer (CDL) program of the National Agricultural
Statistics Service (NASS). The data are based on satellite images combined with survey
information on the ground. Using the survey data, the NASS estimates a model of how
satellite images correspond to crops. The map product contains the fitted values.
Compared to other states, North Dakota is special in that there exists a relatively long
panel of annual CDL data that begins in 1997. There is significant variation across states
in the availability of CDL data, since its collection depends upon the cooperation of state
agencies. For example, there currently is no analogous CDL data available for Minnesota,
which lies on the eastern side of the Red River Valley. The availability of many years of
data with which we can determine long-run average land use is an important reason why we
7
The boundary files for sections are posted by the North Dakota State University Extension Geospatial Education Project at http://134.129.78.3/geospatial/default.htm. We constructed the boundaries for
quarters and quarter quarters ourselves by subdividing the section boundaries.
8
We excluded Barnes County, which is the second layer in from Cass County, because of concerns we had
about the data quality of our soil information for this county.
9
We discard quarter quarters (QQs) that do not consist of a regular quarter mile by quarter mile square.
These nonregular QQs are negligible in land area. In footnote 10 we explain our precise criteria.

16

picked North Dakota over other states.
The resolution of the crop data is at the level of 30 meter by 30 meter squares (approximately four points per acre). We use the program ArcGIS to strip the crop information
from the map product oﬀered by NASS. We take a fixed grid of points 30 meters apart and
for each year locate the point in the CDL map to determine the crop associated with this
point in each year. There are 40.8 million points in the grid for our twelve-county region.
Table 1 lists the land use classifications and the fraction of grid points in each category
averaged over our 1997—2006 sample period.10 The most common category is “Spring
wheat,” which has a .223 share. “Soybeans” is next, and then “Pasture” and “Fallow/idle
cropland.” Urban activity is negligible in this area, as can be seen from the .017 share for
“Urban.” The category “Clouds,” with a .028 percent share, is for observations where the
satellite view of the point in a given year is blocked by clouds.
Next we map each grid point from the crop data into the field that contains it. Figure 3
illustrates some fields in Pembina County and the grid points they contain. The dark lines
are the quarter section boundaries. The lighter lines are field boundaries within a quarter
section. As can be seen in Figure 3, we trim oﬀ the points near the border of each field and
use only interior points. We want to be careful not to misclassify a point near a border as
being in an adjacent field. Each field side is .25 miles (400 meters). We trim the points
that are .03 miles (48 meters) on each side of the border. Each field has approximately 100
points in the interior.11

Suppose crops are indexed by  and grid points indexed by . Let 
= 1 if crop  is
planted at grid point  in year  and set it to zero otherwise. Let ̄ be the mean value of

over the years in the sample. For example, if wheat is planted at grid point  in five of

the ten years, then ̄ = 12 . Farmers in the region commonly practice crop rotation, and
one such rotation is to alternate between wheat and soybeans. If this rotation is practiced
at point , then ̄ = 12 .

to
To aggregate the grid point crop information to the level of a field, we define ̄

be the mean of ̄ over all the grid points  in the interior of field  on quarter section .
This long-run average for each field corresponds to variable ̄ in our econometric model.12
10

The table uses the category definitions from the 2005 CDL. In 2006, the Conservation Reserve Program
was shifted from the “Pasture” category to the “Fallow/idle cropland” category, resulting in a large shift
between these categories. Over the years, there have also been a few reclassifications for some small crops
like canola. These reclassifications do not matter for any of the major crops.
11
We drop fields that have more than 130 points or less than 66 points. The soil information is missing
for some points, and we also drop fields if more than 10 percent of their points have missing information.
These cases represent a negligible land area.
12
The selected data and programs used in the paper are posted at http://strategy.sauder.ubc.ca/lee/
research.html.

17


Table 2 presents the summary statistics for ̄
by county and overall for the two major
crops, spring wheat and soybeans. We can see in this table that there is variation in crop
choice across counties. For example, the soybean share is relatively low in the northern
counties (.04 in Cavalier, .09 in Pembina) and high in the southern counties (.23 in Sargent,
.27 in Richland). There is also substantial variation across fields within each county.

4.3

Soil

Our soil data are taken from the Soil Survey Geographic (SSURGO) database maintained by
the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Any given county can have hundreds of diﬀerent soil
types. The SSURGO data map the location of the various soils at a high level of resolution
and provide underlying soil and ground characteristics for each soil type. The soil taxonomy
is a standard soil classification system based on soil-forming processes, wetness, climatic
environment, major parent material, soil temperature, soil moisture regimes, and so on. It
has diﬀerent classification levels: order—suborder—great group—subgroup—family—series, and
the SSURGO data set has the first four. With the four levels, there are 1,200 types of soils
in the system, and the areas we consider have 67 of them. The data come in the form of a
map boundary file. We take each point in our above-mentioned 30 meter by 30 meter grid
and use the SSURGO data to determine the soil and ground characteristics of that point.
As with the crop variables, we average the soil variables across points in a field to obtain
 , the value of soil characteristic  on field  of quarter section . Let  be the vector
of the  characteristics. In our analysis, this vector will include 67 dummy variables
for diﬀerent soil taxonomy codes, plus slope, aspect, air temperature, annual precipitation,
elevation, annual unfreezing days, soil loss tolerance factor ( factor), wind erosion index
(wei), latitude, longitude and their quadratic terms, and 12 dummy variables for counties.
Altogether, there are  = 110 characteristics.
The SSURGO soil map data are considered reliable enough to have widespread use in
practical applications. The maps can be found in real estate listings for farm property
analogous to the way in which listings of houses for sale include pictures of each room. The
detailed soil information is used in North Dakota to determine land value assessments for
property taxes.
We demonstrate the utility of the soil data for our purposes by running some preliminary
regressions. We regress the planting choice  at the field level on the field’s own soil characteristics, ignoring the characteristics of the field’s neighbors. We run the regression for
each of the twelve counties for each crop separately, so all of the variation in field characteristics is coming from within-county variation in soil variables. To interpret this regression
18

in terms of our model, note that if there are no density economies,  =  = 0, then the
policy function coeﬃcients on neighboring qualities   and   equal zero and it is possible
to consistently identify (up to a multiplicative scalar) the field attribute coeﬃcients  in
(15) through an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression. Table 3 reports, for each crop,
the mean value of the 2 of this regression averaged over the 12 counties. It also reports
the minimum, median and maximum. Recall that the crops are sorted so that the most
important crops come first. The 2 tends to be fairly high for the more important crops.
The mean 2 across the twelve counties is .34 for spring wheat and .24 for soybeans. The
2 is less for the smaller crops, but it is still non-negligible. Some of these smaller crops,
such as sugar beets or potatoes, tend to be concentrated in particular counties, so the 2 is
naturally higher in the places where the crops are grown.
One final point about soil is that human behavior can impact soil properties–what soil
scientists call the anthropogenic impact. In the Red River Valley, the largest anthropogenic
impact was due to cooperative eﬀorts to drain most of the land beginning in the early 1900s.
This eﬀort resulted in a legal drain system regulated by county governments. Since these
eﬀorts were regional in nature, they rarely led to diﬀerences in soil conditions at property
line boundaries. A producer’s management decisions can impact nutrients and stored soil
moisture conditions for next year’s crop, but these seasonal use-dependent variables are not
measured as part of routine soil surveys. Farming practices employed over a long period of
time can impact erosion and result in changes in near-surface soil properties. However, in
the Red River Valley region, farmers have tended to use similar, proven practices on this
valuable land. Most of the soils in the Red River Valley did not suﬀer the Dust Bowl erosion
problems in the 1930s, as areas farther west and south did. According to Mike Ulmer, the
USDA-NRCS senior regional soil scientist for the Northern Great Plains, most significant
variations in soil variables for the Red River Valley region are due to natural soil genesis
rather than human behavior.13

5

Basic Analysis

This section conducts the basic empirical analysis. The first part estimates the structural
model parameters. The second part uses the model estimates to examine the contributions
of density economies and comparative advantage to specialization.
13

We are grateful to Mike Ulmer for his help with this paragraph. The USDA-NRCS is the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service.

19

5.1

Parameter Estimates

The structure parameters of our model consist of density economy parameters  and 
and the field quality coeﬃcients . (The field quality coeﬃcients  and 0 are scaled so
that (9) holds, and 0 drops out.) We use the nonlinear least squares procedure discussed in
Section 3 to estimate the structural parameters of equation (15) for each crop.
Our baseline estimates are obtained by estimating the model on a crop-by-crop basis
jointly for all twelve counties together.14 The density parameters  ,  are assumed to be
the same in each county and the soil characteristics vector  is the same, except that we
allow for county dummies in the soil vector. These estimates are reported in Table 4. The
policy function estimates as well as the structural parameter estimates are reported. (The
coeﬃcients on soil quality are too numerous to report here but are available upon request.)
We begin our discussion with the policy parameter estimates. The robust pattern across
all the crops is that the planting rule for a given field depends heavily on the neighboring
fields. Furthermore, as one would expect, the eﬀect is stronger with the type A neighbors
that are immediately adjacent as compared to the type B diagonal neighbor. Given the
scaling (9), the policy parameters sum to one ( 0 + 2  +   = 1). If there were no
density economies, then the own quality coeﬃcient   would equal one. It is apparent in
the table that   is substantially less than one for all of the crops. Consider spring wheat,
for example. The weight on own field quality is .66. The weight   on the two adjacent
fields is .13 each, and the weight   on the diagonal is .09. Altogether, fully one-third of
the weight in the planting decision of spring wheat for a particular field depends upon the
qualities of the other fields in the quarter section.
We turn now to the structural parameters. The robust pattern across all the crops is that
the density economy parameter  for adjacent fields is significantly positive. The parameter
 is substantially smaller in each case. The last column contains Θ, the composite density
parameter (equal to 2 +  ). Recall the interpretation for Θ discussed above. If density
economies are shut down for a particular crop at a particular quarter section, this is the
decline in planting of the crop, expressed as a share of the initial planting. For wheat,
the decline share would be .389. For most of the other crops, the decline is even bigger.
The estimated density economies are suﬃciently big that if the farmer were precluded from
enjoying them for a particular crop, we predict there would be a substantial reduction in the
planting of the crop.
Next we discuss the robustness of our estimates under alternative specifications and data
restrictions. We focus on the robustness of our estimate of the composite Θ because this is a
14

We use only those quarter sections with four complete fields.

20

useful summary statistic. The baseline specification imposes that the structural parameters
are constant across all counties including the soil coeﬃcients. Our first robustness check is
to estimate the model separately for each of the twelve counties. In Table 5 we report our
average estimate of Θ. There is little diﬀerence in the result. The average Θs are higher
than the baseline model estimates for seven crops and lower for the other five crops.
Next we consider what happens when we throw out quarter sections that contain land that
is other than prime farmland. Our soil data contain a ranking of soil quality with categories
like “prime farmland,” “farmland of local importance,” and “not prime farmland.” For our
baseline, we leave in all of the categories because the issues we are interested in very much
apply here. A farmer might be more willing to plant wheat on a field that is not prime
farmland if it is next to a field that is. Still, it is interesting to see what happens when we
condition on all of the land being prime farmland so that all variation in soils is then within
the prime farmland category. When we restrict attention to quarter sections where all four
fields are 100 percent prime farmland, we eliminate 46 percent of the observations. Table
5 shows the results. The composite density parameter Θ actually tends to increase when
the model is estimated on the prime farmland subsample, going from .389 to .578 for wheat,
.422 to .598 for soybeans, and .672 to .825 for corn.

5.2

What Determines Specialization?

In the theory section, we defined the within specialization measure and decomposed it into
natural advantage share and density economy share. We do not directly observe actual soil
qualities. But with our parameter estimates, we can compute fitted values. We take the
fitted values of soil quality and the fitted values of crop choice and plug these into our formulas
for the specialization measure and shares. We evaluate means at the level of a county. For
example, we calculate _ for a particular crop by diﬀerencing out the mean in
each county. Then we average over the county-level variances. So the specialization we
examine compares quarter sections within the same county. Table 6 reports the results.
Recall that the within specialization measure captures specialization beyond what would
happen with a dartboard. The measure would be zero if there were no density economies
and soil quality were distributed i.i.d. within each county. The measure becomes one if all
the four fields of each quarter section were planted exactly the same way. Table 6 shows
that the measure is roughly .9 throughout various crops, which indicates a strong tendency
for specialization within quarter sections. We decompose this specialization measure into
the natural advantage share and the density economy share. Table 6 shows that roughly
two thirds of the specialization is due to natural advantage and one third is due to density
21

economies.

6

Further Analysis

The key empirical finding of the previous section is that planting in a land parcel depends
on neighboring soil characteristics in addition to those of the parcel itself. From this exhibited behavior, we recover structural parameters in which density economies are significant.
A natural concern in interpreting any result like this is that there are some unobservable
characteristics of the given land parcel that are somehow being captured by the measured
soil characteristics of the neighbors. The most plausible candidate here is some kind of measurement error in soil classification. Perhaps a soil scientist made a mistake in classifying
one field but got things correct on an adjacent field. For example, suppose type  soil is
good for corn and type  is good for wheat. Actual soil types of nearby fields tend to be
correlated, and it may be that all of the fields of a quarter section are type  . If one field
is mistakenly classified as –and we see wheat planted on this field–we might mistakenly
attribute this to density economies flowing from the adjacent wheat fields.
Here we explore the issue by examining what happens across the borders of quarter
sections, taking an approach in the spirit of Holmes (1998). The idea is that if all of our
results are entirely due to soil measurement error issues and the like, then we should get
similar results when we look at fields that cross quarter section boundaries and ownership
boundaries. But if our results are arising from density economies, then we would expect
the results to be attenuated at such boundaries, because such boundaries are relatively
more likely to be boundaries between farm operations. We expect the potential for density
economies to be less when adjacent fields are managed by diﬀerent operations.
The first part of this section introduces additional data on farm operations. The second
part presents simple descriptive evidence to make our point. In the last part, we reestimate
our model with some of the additional data brought in.

6.1

Ownership Data

Here we introduce additional data related to ownership. The data make the point that quarter section boundaries are closely connected to ownership and administration boundaries.
Recall we earlier defined the  neighbors of a field to be the two directly adjacent neighboring fields in the same quarter section. As illustrated in Figure 4a, a field has two
additional adjacent neighbors in diﬀerent quarter sections. Call these the  neighbors of a

22

field.
For one of the counties of our study, Cass County, we have obtained a file containing
all the land parcels in the county and the name of the owner of each parcel.15 We take
each point in our above-mentioned 30 meter by 30 meter grid and map it to our parcel
information. We then aggregate up to the field level.16
In Table 7, we examine diﬀerences in ownership at field boundaries. For this analysis, we
exclude fields categorized as urban from the soil file information (approximately 2 percent
of the observations) and fields where one of the owner names is blank at the field boundaries
(slightly more than 1 percent of observations). We classify boundaries of adjacent fields
as to whether the fields are  neighbors or  neighbors. We see from Table 7 that for
 neighbors, in a fraction .87 of the time, the two fields are part of the same legal land
parcel. In contrast, if the fields are  neighbors–again, meaning that they are separated
by a quarter section boundary–in only .01 of the time are the fields part of the same legal
parcel. Table 7 makes clear that in this county, legally defined land ownership parcels are
essentially quarter sections.
Even when adjacent fields are contained in diﬀerent legal parcels, it still may be the case
that the two parcels are held by the same owner. The table also shows the fraction of cases
where owner name is identical for the adjacent fields.17 At  borders, the match rate goes
from .87 for parcels to .92 for owner name. At  borders, the match rate goes from .01 to
.29. So we see that ownership commonly crosses quarter section boundaries. Nevertheless,
in well more than half of the cases, adjacent fields that cross quarter section boundaries are
held by owners with diﬀerent names.
Even when ownership names diﬀer across quarter section boundaries, the fields may be
operated as part of the same operation. Fields held within the same family can be listed
under diﬀerent names (e.g., a wife’s or grandmother’s maiden name). And farmers can
operate land that they lease. The Department of Agriculture maintains a database of
farm operation boundaries but does not publicly release this information. However, before
2008, it released a data product that we can use to draw inferences about farm operation
boundaries. (The 2008 Farm Act bans release of the data from this point forward, so we are
lucky to get the data when we did.) The data are geospatial information on “Common Land
Units” (CLUs). These are the reporting units for government subsidy programs. CLUs are
15
This GIS shapefile is posted by the Cass County government at http://www.casscountynd.gov/
departments/gis/Download.htm/. We used the file that was current as of 2007/07/30.
16
In the rare cases where there are diﬀerent owner names within the same field, we assign ownership to
the modal name.
17
Identical owner name is defined as a match on the first five characters. Last name is listed first, so this
permits matches on diﬀerent first names. It does not make much diﬀerence if we require a match on all the
characters.

23

typically quarter sections, though there is much variation. The public release of the CLU
data did not disclose the individual operators. Nevertheless, it was published in such a way
that we were able to manipulate it to determine which county oﬃce administers the federal
farm programs for each field.18 Typically, a field is administered by the oﬃce in the same
county as the field. But there are cases where farm operations cross county boundaries, and
in such cases it is typically convenient for the farmer to work with a single administrative
oﬃce. In such a case, a field can be administered by an oﬃce in a diﬀerent county from
where the field is located.
The bottom part of Table 7 shows our results for the county administrator variable in
Cass County. Adjacent fields being administered by diﬀerent counties is relatively rare. Out
of about 54,000 adjacent field pairs, this happens only 1,002 times. When this does happen,
it is 10 times as likely to occur when the pair crosses quarter section boundaries (type )
than not (type )–1,002 instances versus 110. For these type  borders, the fraction of
cases with the same ownership name falls from .30 if the administrator is the same to only
.06 if the administrator is diﬀerent. We take this as solid evidence that a diﬀerence in county
administrator across field boundaries is a good signal of a diﬀerence in farm operations across
field boundaries. This is useful because we have the county administrator variable for all our
counties but have the legal parcel information just for Cass County. Below, we use both
variables.

6.2

Evidence of Planting Discontinuities at Quarter Section
Boundaries

This part makes the point that soil quality does not change discontinuously at quarter section
boundaries, but planting does. We begin with a graphical illustration. Figure 5a provides
a map of soil boundaries for a particular area in our sample and an overlay of the quarter
section boundaries. It illustrates there is heterogeneity in soils within a field. Given the
arbitrary way in which quarter section boundaries were drawn back in the early 1800s, we
expect to see no connection with soil boundaries and no connection is evident here.
Figure 5b provides a crop map over the same area. The connection between crop borders
and quarter section borders is readily evident. So we see that crops change at quarter
section boundaries but soil does not.
We now make the same point in a table. In column 1 of Table 8, we report the mean
within quarter section deviation of soil quality for each crop, normalized by the mean plant18
The county-level CLU data happen to contain (1) all the CLUs in the county plus (2) CLUs outside the
county that are administered by the county.

24

ings for the crop.19 The statistic reported is like a coeﬃcient of variation. Note that the
variation of soil quality within quarter sections is significant, the statistic ranging from about
.12 to .24 throughout the various crops. The existence of this within quarter section soil
heterogeneity is a key part of our identification strategy.
To explain the second column, we introduce the concept of a fake quarter section. As
illustrated in Figure 4b, we imagine the quarter section boundaries were drawn one-quarter
mile to the west and one-quarter mile to the north, compared to the way they were actually
drawn. As before, there are four fields in a fake quarter section. But now we see that each
field is actually in a diﬀerent true quarter section. Now field boundaries are actually quarter
section boundaries.
In column 2, we do the same calculation as for column 1, except we calculate the standard
deviation of soils within each fake quarter section. The two columns are virtually the same.
Just as in Figure 5a, soil changes are unrelated to quarter section boundaries.
The last two columns report the standard deviation within each quarter section in actual
average plantings, again normalized by the mean levels. The variation is much greater
across boundaries in the fake quarters than within boundaries for the actual quarters. This
is consistent with the sharp delineation in crop boundaries illustrated in Figure 5b.

6.3

Extended Model Estimates

We reestimate our earlier model in three diﬀerent ways and show how taking into account
boundary considerations impacts the results. The results are in Table 9. For the sake of
comparison with our earlier work, we repeat in the first column of Table 9 our baseline
estimate of the Θ from Table 4.20
The first exercise reestimates the model exactly as we did in Table 4, except we use the
fake quarters rather than the actual quarters. Recall that the distribution of soils for the
fake quarters is the same as for the actual quarters. We get very diﬀerent results with
the fake quarters. The estimate of Θ is attenuated for all of the crops. For example, for
wheat, the coeﬃcient falls from .39 to .32, soybeans .42 to .37, corn .67 to .56. Now we are
not surprised that we are still getting estimates of significant density economies even in the
fake quarters, because we expect density economies are larger and extend beyond quarter
sections, an issue we raise in the conclusion. Our main point is that a measurement error
19

For each quarter section  we compute the standard deviation across the four fields and then take the
mean over all quarter sections over all 12 counties. We divide by mean plantings for each crop, which
approximately equals the means in Table 1. (The slight diﬀerence arises because a few incomplete quarter
sections are thrown out here.)
20
We get a slightly diﬀerent number of observations because we use only the fields that have all three
neighbors in the same fake squares.

25

story for why we are getting positive estimates for Θ cannot account for why these estimates
would be attenuated at quarter section boundaries.
The second exercise estimates the model with actual quarters, as in our original approach.
But now we use information about county administration. We estimate a specification of
the reduced form policy function so that plantings in neighboring given fields are weighted
by   and   as before if they are administered by the same county. But if a diﬀerent county
(and then likely a diﬀerent operation), we assume the weights are   and   . So the
parameter  is like a discount factor. In the estimates, there is clear pattern of substantial
discounting. We focus our discussion on the major crops. For spring wheat, soybeans, and
corn, the discount factors are .59, .70, .51. These are substantially below one.
The third exercise is analogous to the second exercise. But now we discount when the
name is diﬀerent rather than when the county administrator is diﬀerent. We use data from
Cass County because that is all that is available. For all but the negligible crops at the
bottom of the list where there is little data, there is a clear pattern of discounting. For
example, for spring wheat, soybeans, and corn the estimated discount factors are .78, .67,
and .81. Again, these are well less than one, but not zero. We do not expect these to come
out to zero, because farm operation boundaries clearly can cross ownership name boundaries
through rental markets and through diﬀerent names in the same family. Again, the point
here is that alternative explanations for our positive estimates of   and   based on some
kind of measurement error that is averaged out across field boundaries cannot account for
why the estimates are significantly attenuated at name change boundaries. Our density
economy explanation can account for this pattern.
One last thing to note is that planting patterns can change at ownership boundaries
because diﬀerent farmers may have diﬀerent skills for diﬀerent crops. We do not regard
this point as an alternative explanation of the phenomenon we have identified but rather
an instance of what we are emphasizing. If a crop is to be planted on a particular field,
it is good to have a farmer to work the field whose skill set is a good match for the crop.
But given the indivisibilities involved with farm labor, it will be desirable to have that same
farmer work adjacent fields.

7

Conclusion

For the quarter sections in North Dakota’s Red River Valley, we estimate the determinants
of crop specialization. We quantify the relative contributions of Ellison-Glaeser dartboard
eﬀects, natural advantage (land characteristics), and scale economies (density economies

26

here). These kinds of decompositions are diﬃcult to provide in most settings. We are able
to get somewhere in this setting because (1) the natural advantage factor in agriculture is
overwhelming, (2) we are able to get extremely detailed data at a narrow geographic level
on land characteristics and choice, and (3) in the early 1800s, the United States government
drew an arbitrary square grid of quarter sections in the landscape, and we make heavy use
of this grid.
We believe the major limitation of this paper is that it does not take into account density
economies that extend beyond the quarter section level. The average farm size in North
Dakota from recent Census figures is eight quarter sections.21 Of course, planting decisions
at the individual farm operation level will extend more broadly over a farm’s operations
and not just a single quarter section. Moreover, we expect that scale economies extend
beyond individual farm operations because the fixed costs of infrastructure such as grain
elevators, sugar beet processing plants, and research in location-specific seeds are spread
over many farms, and as neighboring farmers share knowledge. Once we start expanding
the geographic scope to be big enough to cross individual farm operations, we need to bring
in various game-theoretic coordination issues and externality issues. As a first step, we
picked a land unit–a quarter section–small enough that we could be confident it was all
under the same management, but large enough so that it is possible to conduct an interesting
geographic analysis. The next step in this research line is to broaden the geographic reach
and confront externality issues.
We expect that our approach of combining micro soil data with the satellite crop data will
have other applications. Indeed, having such detailed information about what is happening
at such a narrow geographic level is rare in any industry. In particular, these data could
be used to look at the impacts of government policies, perhaps including policies related
to ethanol. The corn-soybean rotation mentioned in the introduction has actually been
discontinued recently by some farmers wishing to take advantage of ethanol-induced high
prices for corn and planting corn every year instead. The detailed data permit us to
determine exactly where the switches are taking place.

21
In the 2002 Census, the average farm size in North Dakota is reported to be 1,238 acres or 8.01=1,238/160
quarter sections. If we were to weight farms by acreage, the mean would be substantially higher.

27

A
A.1

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1

Setting  =  and  = 0 in the equations for   ,   , and   in the text and imposing the
normalization (1 − 2) = 1 yields




¢
¡
1 − 22
=
(1 + 2)

=
(1 + 2)
22
=

(1 + 2)

So we can write 1 − ̄ as (noting ̄ = ̄)

̄1 − ̄ =

1 − 22


22
1 + 2
1 +
2 +
3 +
4 −
̄
1 + 2 ⎛
1 + 2
1 + 2
1 + 2
1 + 2
2

2

1
4

2
4

3
4

4
4

⎞

1 ⎜ 1 − 2 1 + 2 + 3 + 2 4 − − − −
⎟
⎝
⎠
1 + 2
− 2 1 − 2 2 − 2 3 − 2 4
¶
µ
1
3


2 3 4 

2
2
=
1 − 2 1 + 2 + 3 + 2 4 −
−
−
− 1 − 4
1 + 2 4
2
2
4
4
4
2
2
µ
¶
1

=
1 − ̄ − 22 (1 − 4 ) + ∆
1 + 2
2
1
1
=
1 + 2
=

for 1 and ∆ defined by

1 ≡ 1 − ̄ − 22 (1 − 4 ) + ∆
2
∆ ≡ 2 + 3 − 1 − 4 .

28

From symmetry we have

2 ≡ 2 − ̄ − 22 (2 − 3 ) − ∆
2

3 ≡ 3 − ̄ − 22 (3 − 2 ) − ∆
2

2
4 ≡ 4 − ̄ − 2 (4 − 1 ) + ∆.
2
We need to show that
=

∙
4
X
1
=1

1
4 1 + 2

¸2

2

decreases in . Clearly, the eﬀect of  on the middle term is decreasing. So it is suﬃcient
to show that
4
X

 0.
2

=1
Now
1
1

2
2

3
3

4
4


=
=
=
=

∙
¸∙
¸

1
2
1 − ̄ − 2 (1 − 4 ) + ∆ −4 (1 − 4 ) + ∆
2
2
∙
¸∙
¸

1
2
2 − ̄ − 2 (2 − 3 ) − ∆ −4 (2 − 3 ) − ∆
2
2
∙
¸∙
¸

1
2
3 − ̄ − 2 (3 − 2 ) − ∆ −4 (3 − 2 ) − ∆
2
2
∙
¸∙
¸

1
2
4 − ̄ − 2 (4 − 1 ) + ∆ −4 (4 − 1 ) + ∆ 
2
2

Observe that the ̄ term will cancel out when we add these up, so set it to zero. If we add
the first and fourth lines, we get
£
¤
1
[1 + 4 + ∆] ∆ + 1 − 4 − 42 (1 − 4 ) [−4 (1 − 4 )]
2
£
¤
1
= [1 + 4 + ∆] ∆ − 4 1 − 42 (1 − 4 )2 
2
By symmetry, when we add the second and third lines, we get
£
¤
1
− [2 + 3 − ∆] ∆ − 4 1 − 42 (2 − 3 )2 
2
29

Adding these together yields
£
¤
1
[1 + 4 − (2 + 3 ) + 2∆] ∆ − 4 1 − 42 (1 − 4 )2
2
£
£
¤
¤
1 2
= − [1 − 2] ∆ − 4 1 − 42 (1 − 4 )2 − 4 1 − 42 (2 − 3 )2 
2
This is negative as long as 1 − 2  0 and 1 − 42  0, which is true for   12 , as claimed.
Q.E.D.

A.2

Calculation of the Dartboard Dispersion Measure

In the case where field quality is i.i.d., the population mean for large  of the within-quarter
section variance is
 = [1 − ̄]2
"µ
¶2 #
2 3 4
3
1 −
−
−
= 
4
4
4
4
12
12
[21 ] −  [1 ]2
16
16
3

=
4
P P4
2
3 =4 =1 ( − ̄)
=

4
4

=

where we use independence of the draws of 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , for the equalities in lines 3 and 4.

A.3

How to Calculate Standard Errors of the Nonlinear Least
Square Estimates Obtained with the Two-Stage Method

This section shows an easy way to calculate the standard errors (and covariance matrix) of
the estimates (γ β) using any statistical package. (See Davidson and MacKinnon (2004) for
a more detailed explanation.) We express the estimation equation (15) as the following:
̄1 = x (γ β) + 
where x (γ β) =   10  +   (20 + 30 ) +   40  and  =   1 +   (2 + 3 ) +   4 
30

³
´
Let γ̂ β̂ be the nonlinear least squares estimates and let X (γ β) = [x (γ β) γ
x (γ β) β]. The consistent estimator of the covariance matrix of the nonlinear estimator
(γ β) is
´−1
³
³
´

(16)
d
 ̂ ̂ = 2 X̂0 X̂
³
´
where X̂ = X ̂ ̂ and

2 ≡

³
´´2
1 X 2
1 X³
̂ =
1 − x ̂ ̂

−
−

(17)

³
´
³
´
An easy way to calculate the covariance matrix (16) is to regress ȳ1 −x ̂ ̂ on X̂ ≡X ̂ ̂
and use the resulting covariance matrix.
³
´
ȳ1 −x ̂ ̂ = X̂b+
This is called the Gauss-Newton regression (GNR) and the covariance matrix for the
OLS parameter estimates b̂ is
´−1
³
³ ´
0 2
0

  b̂ = ( ) X̂ X̂

(18)

where
³
´
´2
1 X
1 X³
2
 =
y − x ̂ ̂ − X̂b 
( ) =
−
−
0 2

Since the regressor does not have any explanatory power (b = 0), (0 )2 is equal to 2 in
equation (17). Therefore, it holds that
³
´
³ ´
d
  ̂ ̂ =   b̂ 

³
´
³
´
We can regress ȳ1 −x ̂ ̂ on X ̂ ̂ in any statistical package and easily calculate
³ ´
³
´
  b̂ and thus d
 ̂ ̂ .

31

References
Arzaghi, Mohammad and J. Vernon Henderson (2008). "Networking oﬀ Madison Avenue,"
Review of Economic Studies, vol. 75(4), pages 1011-1038, October.
Bajari, Patrick, Han Hong, John Krainer, and Denis Nekipelov (2006), “Estimating Static
Models of Strategic Interactions,” Working paper, University of Michigan.
Battese, George E. (1992),“Frontier Production Functions and Technical Eﬃciency: A
Survey of Empirical Applications in Agricultural Economics,” Agricultural Economics,
7(3—4): 185—208.
Brock, William A., and Steven N. Durlauf (2001a), “Discrete Choice with Social Interactions,” Review of Economic Studies, 68(2): 235—260.
Brock, William A., and Steven N. Durlauf (2001b), “Interactions-Based Models,” in Handbook of Econometrics, Vol 5, ed. J. J. Heckman and E. E. Leamer, Amsterdam: North
Holland.
Burchfield, Marcy, Henry G. Overman, Diego Puga, and Matthew A. Turner (2006), “Causes
of Sprawl: A Portrait from Space,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 587—633.
Cass County GIS.ed, Cass county property parcels [computer file]. Available online at
http://www.casscountynd.gov/departments/gis/Download.htm, accessed August 2008.
Caves, Douglas W., Laurits R. Christensen, and Michael W. Tretheway (1984), “Economies
of Density versus Economies of Scale: Why Trunk and Local Service Airline Costs
Diﬀer,” RAND Journal of Economics, 15(4): 471—489.
Cronon, W. (1991), Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the GreatWest, New York: Norton.
Davidson, Russell, and James G. MacKinnon (2004), Econometric Theory and Methods,
New York: Oxford University Press.
Duranton, Gilles, and Henry Overman (2005), “Testing for Localisation Using MicroGeographic Data,” Review of Economic Studies, 72(4): 1077—1106.
Committee on Integrated Land Data Mapping (1982), Modernization of the Public Land
Survey System, Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L. Glaeser (1997), “Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing Industries: A Dartboard Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(5):
889—927.
32

Ellison, Glenn, and Edward L. Glaeser (1999), “The Geographic Concentration of Industry:
Does Natural Advantage Explain Agglomeration?” Papers and Proceedings, American
Economic Review, 89(2): 311—316.
Ellison, Glenn, Edward L. Glaeser, and William Kerr (2007), “What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns,” Working Paper 13068, National Bureau of Economic Research, April.
Evans, William N., Wallace E. Oates, and Robert M. Schwab (1992), “Measuring Peer
Group Eﬀects: A Study of Teenage Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 100(5):
966—991.
Glaeser, Edward L., and Jose A. Scheinkman (2001), “Measuring Social Interactions,” in
Social Dynamics, ed. S. N. Durlauf and H. P. Young, pp. 83—102, Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Holmes, Thomas J. (1998), “The Eﬀect of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing:
Evidence from State Borders,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(4): 667—705.
Holmes, Thomas J. (2008), “The Diﬀusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density,” Working
Paper 13783, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Johnston, Warren E. (1972), “Economies of Size and the Spatial Distribution of Land in
Farming Units, American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 54(4): 654—656.
Manski, Charles F. (1993), “Identification of Endogenous Social Eﬀects: The Reflection
Problem,” Review of Economic Studies, 60(3): 531—542.
Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange (2001), “The Determinants of Agglomeration,” Journal of Urban Economics 50(2), 191-229.
Rosenthal, Stuart S., and William C. Strange (2004), “Evidence on the Nature and Sources
of Agglomeration Economies,” in Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics, Vol. 4,
Cities and Geography, ed. J. V. Henderson and J.-F. Thisse, pp. 2119—2172, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Soil Survey Staﬀ, Natural Resources Conservation Service, United States Department of
Agriculture. Soil Survey Geographic (SSURGO) Database for North Dakota [computer
file]. Available online at http://soildatamart.nrcs.usda.gov, accessed 2007.
USDA, National Agricultural Statistics Service, North Dakota Cropland Data Layer 1996—
2007 [computer file]. Available online at http://datagateway.nrcs.usda.gov/.
33

Figure 1. Section Boundaries,
Pembina County, ND

Figure 2. Counties Used in Our Analysis
(North Dakota Red River Region)

Bottineau

Rolette

Cavalier

Roseau

Pembina

Lake of the Woods

Kittson

Towner

Renville

Ward

McHenry Pierce

Ramsey
Benson

Sheridan

Wells

Grand Forks

Nelson
Eddy

Foster

North Dakota Griggs

Steele

Traill

Marshall

Koochiching

Pennington

orth
eN
o f th

McLean
Mercer

er
Riv
Red

Walsh

Beltrami

Red Lake
Itasca
Clearwater Mississippi

Polk

Norman

Minnesota
Mahnomen
Hubbard

Oliver
Burleigh

Kidder

Stutsman

Becker

Cass

Barnes

Cass

Clay
Morton

Wadena
Wilkin
Logan

Grant

Ransom

Emmons

Sioux
Corson

LaMoure

Richland
McIntosh
McPherson

Campbell

Otter Tail

Dickey

South Dakota Brown

Sargent
Marshall

Todd
Grant
Roberts Traverse
Stevens

Douglas
Pope

Benton
Stearns

Figure 3. Example Fields and Grid Points
from Pembina County

Figure 4a. Extended Neighborhoods
1

2

1

2

3

4
D

3
C

4
D

1

2
C

1

2
A

3

4
D

3
A

4
B

Figure 4b. Fake Quarter Neighborhoods
1

2

1

2

3

4
D

3
C

4
D

1

2
C

1

2
A

3

4
D

3
A

4
B

Note: Dotted lines indicate fake quarter section boundaries. Note that in a fake
quarter section, each field belongs to a different true quarter section.

Figure 5a. Example Soil Map in a Quarter Section

Figure 5b. Example Crop Map in a Quarter Section

Table 1
Land Use in North Dakota Red River Region
Averages over 1997-2006 Period

Crop

Share

Spring Wheat

.223

Soybeans

.158

Pasture/Range/Conservation Reserve Program/Farmstead

.154

Fallow/Idle Cropland

.098

Corn

.049

Dry Edible Beans

.037

Water

.037

Sunflowers

.036

Barley

.034

Clouds

.028

Durum Wheat

.026

Other Small Grains & Hay (Oats, Millet, Rye & Winter
Wheat, Alfalfa & Other Hay)

.020

Canola

.019

Urban

.017

Beets

.015

Other Crops (Canola, Flaxseed, Safflower and Very Small
Acreage Crops)

.012

Woods, Woodland Pasture

.010

Potatoes

.009

Miscellaneous (15 Residual Categories)

.018

Source: Authors calculations with Cropland Data Layer North Dakota 1997 - 2006

Table 2
Summary Statistics of Crop Planting Share at the Field Level
Two Major Crops in North Dakota Red River Region

Spring Wheat

Soybean

County

Number
of Fields

Mean

Std Dev

Min

Max

Mean

Std Dev

Min

Max

All Counties

231,595

.23

.16

.00

.86

.17

.15

.00

.98

Cass

28,750

.25

.14

.00

.70

.34

.15

.00

.98

Cavalier

24,576

.30

.15

.00

.79

.04

.04

.00

.33

Grand Forks

23,426

.25

.15

.00

.72

.16

.11

.00

.65

Nelson

16,128

.20

.16

.00

.70

.08

.09

.00

.57

Pembina

18,599

.31

.16

.00

.86

.09

.08

.00

.54

Ramsey

21,102

.18

.13

.00

.65

.06

.07

.00

.41

Ransom

13,824

.14

.15

.00

.75

.17

.15

.00

.68

Richland

24,013

.15

.14

.00

.67

.27

.15

.00

.84

Sargent

14,324

.14

.13

.00

.62

.23

.16

.00

.72

Steele

11,520

.27

.13

.00

.72

.23

.13

.00

.78

Traill

14,327

.25

.13

.00

.69

.27

.13

.00

.75

Walsh

21,006

.27

.16

.00

.74

.09

.08

.00

.54

By County

Source: Authors calculations with Cropland Data Layer North Dakota 1997 - 2006

Table 3
Goodness of Fit of Planting Regression on Soil Characteristics
(Summary Statistics of R2s of Individual Regressions for Each of Twelve Counties)

Crop

Mean

Min

Median

Max

Spring Wheat

.335

.210

.322

.562

Soybeans

.237

.084

.246

.384

Corn

.182

.057

.196

.393

Dry Beans

.156

.057

.154

.337

Sunflowers

.108

.047

.108

.222

Barley

.115

.032

.110

.239

Durum Wheat

.102

.027

.054

.257

Other Small Grains

.179

.055

.168

.333

Canola

.078

.021

.044

.250

Beets

.152

.028

.129

.360

Other Selected Crops

.067

.020

.048

.165

Potatoes

.119

.041

.088

.318

*Note: For each regression, the planting choice of a field is regressed on its own field
characteristics, ignoring the characteristics of the neighboring fields.

Table 4
Baseline model estimates
(N = 208,220)
Policy
Parameters

Structural
Parameters

γO

γA

γB

θA

θB

Θ =2θA + θB

Spring Wheat

.658
(.006)

.128
(.004)

.087
(.006)

.160
(.008)

.070
(.012)

.389
(.008)

Soybeans

.632
(.007)

.137
(.005)

.094
(.007)

.174
(.011)

.074
(.017)

.422
(.010)

Corn

.459
(.007)

.199
(.005)

.144
(.007)

.316
(.027)

.040
(.044)

.672
(.014)

Dry Beans

.530
(.010)

.181
(.006)

.109
(.009)

.278
(.026)

.016
(.039)

.573
(.017)

Sunflowers

.613
(.012)

.147
(.008)

.093
(.011)

.197
(.020)

.056
(.030)

.451
(.017)

Barley

.757
(.011)

.095
(.007)

.053
(.010)

.113
(.011)

.041
(.017)

.267
(.014)

Durum Wheat

.721
(.011)

.115
(.007)

.048
(.010)

.147
(.014)

.019
(.020)

.313
(.015)

Other Small Grains

.519
(.008)

.183
(.005)

.114
(.008)

.284
(.023)

.020
(.035)

.588
(.015)

Canola

.602
(.013)

.143
(.009)

.112
(.013)

.180
(.021)

.100
(.033)

.460
(.019)

Beets

.366
(.012)

.225
(.008)

.184
(.012)

.408
(.088)

.002
(.152)

.818
(.028)

Other Selected Crops

.706
(.015)

.112
(.009)

.070
(.014)

.136
(.018)

.056
(.027)

.329
(.020)

Potatoes

.325
(.010)

.234
(.002)

.207
(.005)

.441
(.008)

0
(0)

.882
(.0015)

Crop

Table 5
Robustness Check
Baseline Model

By County

Only on Prime
Farm Land

Θ

Average Θ

Θ

Spring Wheat

.389
(.008)

.447
(.117)*

.578
(.022)

Soybeans

.422
(.010)

.433
(.147)*

.598
(.026)

Corn

.672
(.014)

.527
(.248)*

.825
(.028)

Dry Beans

.573
(.017)

.567
(.237)*

.503
(.032)

Sunflowers

.451
(.017)

.551
(.121)*

.702
(.045)

Barley

.267
(.014)

.536
(.244)*

.624
(.062)

Durum Wheat

.313
(.015)

.543
(.250)*

.818
(.057)

Other Small Grains

.588
(.015)

.574
(.229)*

.470
(.032)

Canola

.460
(.019)

.664
(.243)*

.870
(.035)

Beets

.818
(.028)

.759
(.178)*

.739
(.026)

Other Selected Crops

.329
(.020)

.588
(.266)*

.804
(.066)

Potatoes

.882
(.0015)

.730
(.148)*

.867
(.024)

Crop

N

208,220

* Standard error calculated from county level Θ estimates

111,596

Table 6. Natural Advantage vs. Density Economies Decomposition

Within Specialization
Measure

Natural Advantage
Share

Density Economy
Share

Spring Wheat

.880

.690

.310

Soybeans

.891

.670

.330

Corn

.970

.674

.326

Dry Beans

.943

.669

.331

Sunflowers

.869

.544

.456

Barley

.762

.646

.354

Durum Wheat

.855

.761

.239

Other Small Grains

.942

.634

.366

Canola

.945

.802

.198

Beets

.995

.862

.138

Other Selected Crops

.895

.808

.192

Potatoes

.996

.689

.311

Crop

Table 7
Ownership Statistics for Cass County
Mean Match Rates for Adjacent Fields

Adjacent
Fields Part of
Same Legal
Parcel

Adjacent
Fields Have
Owners with
Same Name

Number of
Adjacent
Field Pairs

A

.87

.92

27,271

C

.01

.29

26,946

Border Type

Same County
Administrator?

A

Yes

.87

.93

27,161

A

No

.34

.41

110

C

Yes

.01

.30

25,944

C

No

.00

.06

1,002

Source: Cass county property parcel map, county level common land unit maps

Table 8
Variation in Soil and Crop Plantings
Across Actual Quarters and Fake Quarters

x variation

y variation

Actual

Fake

Actual

Fake

Spring Wheat

.136

.137

.230

.379

Soybeans

.120

.121

.257

.417

Corn

.249

.253

.391

.713

Dry Beans

.185

.188

.477

.724

Sunflowers

.125

.127

.481

.765

Barley

.132

.133

.471

.698

Durum Wheat

.132

.134

.506

.677

Other Small Grains

.244

.248

.621

.837

Canola

.166

.166

.469

.763

Beets

.249

.251

.450

.840

Other Selected Crops

.168

.169

.537

.857

Potatoes

.284

.287

.616

.866

Crop

Table 9. Further Analysis Estimates
Baseline
Model
(from
Table 4)
Θ

Same as
Baseline
but Fake
Quarters
Θ

Spring Wheat

.389
(.008)

Soybeans

Policy Function Estimates
With Discounting if Different
County Administrator

Policy Function Estimates
With Discounting if Different
Ownership Name
(Cass County Only)

γA

γB

δ

γA

γB

δ

.318
(.008)

.129
(.004)

.085
(.006)

.592
(.041)

.192
(.016)

.089
(.024)

.836
(.028)

.422
(.010)

.368
(.011)

.137
(.005)

.094
(.007)

.703
(.048)

.157
(.014)

.053
(.021)

.773
(.034)

Corn

.672
(.014)

.558
(.014)

.199
(.005)

.144
(.007)

.509
(.066)

.197
(.016)

.147
(.023)

.606
(.065)

Dry Beans

.573
(.017)

.472
(.016)

.182
(.006)

.108
(.009)

.711
(.052)

.246
(.026)

.160
(.038)

.933
(.056)

Sunflowers

.451
(.017)

.311
(.018)

.148
(.008)

.093
(.011)

.761
(.074)

.234
(.023)

.132
(.035)

.782
(.067)

Barley

.267
(.014)

.188
(.014)

.097
(.007)

.050
(.010)

.354
(.101)

.241
(.034)

.266
(.052)

.824
(.045)

Durum Wheat

.313
(.015)

.244
(.015)

.118
(.007)

.045
(.010)

.000
(.091)

.184
(.034)

.255
(.050)

.919
(.056)

Other Small Grains

.588
(.015)

.449
(.013)

.183
(.005)

.114
(.008)

1.326
(.064)

.145
(.013)

.013
(.019)

1.642
(.184)

Canola

.460
(.019)

.375
(.019)

.155
(.008)

.152
(.012)

.000
(.061)

.241
(.039)

.152
(.058)

.992
(.081)

Beets

.818
(.028)

.759
(.026)

.228
(.008)

.181
(.012)

.781
(.043)

.229
(.024)

.182
(.035)

.874
(.060)

Other Selected Crops

.329
(.020)

.283
(.020)

.122
(.009)

.088
(.013)

.000
(.101)

.261
(.038)

.171
(.058)

1.014
(.157)

Potatoes

.888
(.032)

.862
(.015)

.235
(.008)

.205
(.011)

1.091
(.045)

.225
(.045)

.096
(.065)

1.164
(.146)

208,220

201,596

Crop

N

208,220

25,124

