NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LONG-RUN IMPACTS OF UNIONS ON FIRMS:
NEW EVIDENCE FROM FINANCIAL MARKETS, 1961-1999
David Lee
Alexandre Mas
Working Paper 14709
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14709

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2009

We thank Jonathan Berk, David Card, John DiNardo, Lawrence Katz, Morris Kleiner, Robert Moffitt,
Jesse Rothstein, Eric Verhoogen, Hans-Joachim Voth, and numerous seminar participants for helpful
suggestions. Emily Buchsbaum, Mariana Carrera, Elizabeth Debraggio, Briallen Hopper, Sanny Liao,
Xiaotong Niu, Zhuan Pei, Andrew Shelton, and Fanyin Zheng provided outstanding research assistance.
We gratefully acknowlege research support from the Center for Economic Policy Studies at Princeton
University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2009 by David Lee and Alexandre Mas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Long-Run Impacts of Unions on Firms: New Evidence from Financial Markets, 1961-1999
David Lee and Alexandre Mas
NBER Working Paper No. 14709
February 2009
JEL No. J01,J08,J5,J51
ABSTRACT
We estimate the effect of new unionization on firms' equity value over the 1961-1999 period using
a newly assembled sample of National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) representation elections matched
to stock market data. Event-study estimates show an average union effect on the equity value of the
firm equivalent to a cost of at least $40,500 per unionized worker. At the same time, point estimates
from a regression-discontinuity design -- comparing the stock market impact of close union election
wins to close losses -- are considerably smaller and close to zero. We find a negative relationship between
the cumulative abnormal returns and the vote share in support of the union, allowing us to reconcile
these seemingly contradictory findings. Using the magnitudes from the analysis, we calibrate a structural
"median voter" model of endogenous union determination in order to conduct counterfactual policy
simulations of policies that would marginally increase the ease of unionization.

David Lee
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
davidlee@princeton.edu
Alexandre Mas
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
amas@haas.berkeley.edu

“[L]aymen and economists alike tend, in my view, to exaggerate greatly the extent to which
labor unions affect the structure and level of wage rates.” – Milton Friedman, 19501
“Everyone ‘knows’ that unions raise wages. The questions are how much, under what conditions, and with what effects on the overall performance of the economy.” – Richard Freeman
and James Medoff, 19842

1 Introduction
It is undisputed that employers oppose unions, viewing them as a threat to profitability. An example receiving
recent national attention is Wal-Mart’s effort to resist unionization – from its strategic location of stores in
areas less favorable to unions to its hard-line stance against organization (Basker, 2007). According to
a handbook the retailer distributed to its managers, “Staying union free is a full-time commitment...The
commitment to stay union free must exist at all levels of management – from the Chairperson of the “Board”
down to the front-line manager....”3 It is easy to find isolated cases that confirm the fears of employers like
Wal-Mart. For example, in a March 1999 National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) representation election,
workers at National Linen Service (NLS) Corp., a large linen supplier, voted by an over 2 to 1 margin to
organize as a local chapter of the Union of Needletrades, Industrial, and Textile Employees (UNITE). The
stock market response appeared to punish NLS in a severe, though perhaps not swift, fashion. Figure 1
shows the cumulative return of NLS’ stock for the two years prior to and following the election, as well
as the cumulative return of a broad market index over the same period. Before the election, the returns for
NLS and the market tracked each other quite closely. But immediately following the election, NLS began
to lag. By March 2001, the price of NLS shares had fallen by 25 percent, while the broad market index had
increased by 50 percent.
How general is this phenomenon? Is NLS the exception or the rule? Despite an enormous literature
documenting numerous aspects of unions and their role in the labor market, the magnitude of an “average”
effect of unions on firm performance throughout the economy remains somewhat unclear.
Empirically, there are at least three reasons why measuring these effects is quite challenging. First, largescale establishment or firm-level micro-data containing the relevant information on the extent of unionization
1 See

Friedman (1950).
Freeman and Medoff (1984).
3 Quoted in Featherstone (2004).
2 See

1

are not readily available. Second, even when such data are available, omitted variables and the endogeneity
of unionization at the firm-level makes it difficult to separate causal effects from other unobserved confounding factors. Third, it is difficult to find data that can also be plausibly representative of the population
of unionized companies in the United States.
Furthermore, from a theoretical standpoint, it is not obvious to what degree unions should affect firms.
One view, articulated by Friedman (1950), is that workers would reject substantially above-market wages,
knowing full well that such wages could adversely affect job security. Unions, after taking these considerations into account, would tend to moderate wage demands.4 Moreover, firms may respond to a unionization
threat by conceding higher wages and better working conditions. Accounting for these forces suggests a
reduction in the gap in compensation and working conditions between union and non-union workforces, at
least in situations where there is a threat of unionization. The possibility that unions may temper their demands because of electoral pressure may help explain the results of DiNardo and Lee (2004), who found
generally small differences in wages, employment, and output between unionized and otherwise comparable
non-unionized workplaces in close representation elections.
In this paper, we first assess the extent to which the pattern in Figure 1 is a generalizable phenomenon,
measuring an average overall effect of unionization among publicly-traded firms. To do so, we begin with a
sample frame that is the universe of all firms with NLRB union representation elections between 1961-1999.
Since a large number of unionized workplaces in the U.S. come into existence via a secret-ballot election
on the question of representation, this population provides a reasonable representation of newly unionized
workplaces and, to the extent they survive, the future stock of unions in the United States.
We begin analyzing the stock market reaction to union victories using event-study methodologies. The
most distinctive feature of our data – crucial for our research design – is the long panel (up to 48 months
before and after the election) of high-frequency data on stock market returns for each firm. This feature
allows us to use the pre-event data to test the adequacy of the benchmarks used to predict the counterfactual
returns in the post-event period. The long panel also allows us to examine returns several months beyond
the event, so as to capture the long-run expected effects of new unions, without having to rely heavily on the
assumption that the stock price immediately and instantaneously adjusts to capture the expected presence of
the unions.
Our event-study analysis reveals substantial losses in market value following a union election victory –
4 It

is this line of reasoning that led to Friedman’s view that the impact of wages was exaggerated (Friedman, 1950).

2

about a 10 percent decline, equivalent to about $40,500 per unionized worker. The evidence supporting this
finding is compelling: we find that these firms’ average returns are quite close to the predicted returns every
month leading up to the election, but at precisely at the time of the election, the actual and counterfactual
returns diverge. The results for these firms are robust to a number of different specifications. In the sample of
firms where we know that the union is a small fraction of the workforce, we do not find a similar divergence
of returns from the benchmark. Notably, while the equity value of firms unionizing begins diverging at the
time of the election, the full effect takes approximately 18 months to fully materialize. This slow speed of
adjustment is consistent with a number of studies showing that over horizons of 3 to 12 months share prices
underreact to bad news (Hong et al., 2000).
The event-study estimate appears to average a great deal of heterogeneity in the effects. We additionally
employ a Regression Discontinuity (RD) design, implicitly comparing close union victories to close union
losses, and consistent with DiNardo and Lee (2004), we find little evidence of a significant discontinuous
relationship between the vote share and market returns. If anything, the RD point estimates show a 4 percent
positive (though statistically insignificant) effect of union certification (vis-a-vis union defeat). The eventstudy estimates vary systematically by the observed vote share, with the largest negative abnormal returns
for cases where the union won the election by a large margin.
We use our estimates to make predictions for the effects of policies that lower the threshold for new
unionization, such as the recently proposed Employee Free Choice Act (EFCA). To do so while also incorporating unions’ and firms’ responses to the new policy requires modeling their behavior and interactions.
We choose as our framework a two-party model of electoral competition, where the firm and the union are
each seeking to win the sympathies of the “median” voter in an NLRB election. As is standard in this class of
models, despite having opposing interests, the two parties may be forced to propose a level of compensation,
(accompanied by a risk of job loss), that is closer to the preferences of the median voter.
Within this framework, which is reminiscent of Friedman’s view, the RD design estimate of the unionization effect identifies the gap between the union’s and firm’s proposals for workplaces where the median
voter has moderate demands. Depending on how aggressively firms and unions court voters, this gap could
be close to zero, even if on average – including both small and large electoral victories – unions significantly
affect the profitability of firms. Viewed through the lens of this model, the pattern of results imply that voters
have a strong desire for higher wages (or better working conditions) in a relatively small number of elections. Overall, our policy simulation exercise suggests that a policy-induced increase in the win rate from 33
3

to 70 percent would lead to a 4.3 percent decline in market value, averaged across all firms (including firms
that unionize under the new policy, as well as those that remain nonunion). For a more dramatic policy that
increases the win rate from 33 to nearly 99 percent, the estimate is a decline of about 11 percent averaged
across all firms.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly highlights what is known from
the literature and how our study relates to those findings. We provide some institutional details in Section
3 that are relevant to our research design, which we describe along with our data. We present and discuss
the empirical results in Section 4. In Section 5 we present a structural model, which we then use to conduct
counterfactual policy simulations. Section 6 concludes.

2 Existing Literature and Background
In this section we provide a brief overview of the literature most relevant to our analysis. First, there is an
enormous union wage premium literature, discussed and summarized in the landmark works of Freeman and
Medoff (1984) and Lewis (1986), with more recent evidence discussed in Blanchflower and Bryson (2007).
These studies typically use household-level survey data to compute the wages for workers who are union
members, comparing them to “otherwise comparable” non-union members. In some cases, these studies
track workers in longitudinal data sets, as they switch from union to non-union status. In their analysis,
Freeman and Kleiner (1990) note that these “[e]stimates based on longitudinal data...contrast workers who
change union status by moving to or from already organized workplaces rather than contrasting workers in
plants that are newly organized with those in plants that remain non-union.” Expanding upon this point,
DiNardo and Lee (2004) clearly state that the effect of unionization (changing a workplace from non-union
to union) is distinct from the effect of moving a worker from a non-unionized to a unionized workplace. In
particular, a “typical” unionized workplace may differ from a “typical” non-unionized workplace along a
number of dimensions (e.g. geography, firm size, industry), which may independently influence wage levels.
We therefore view this well-established literature as fundamentally unable to account for the selection of
unionism at the firm- or establishment-level, and thus potentially estimating something quite distinct from
the causal effect of unionizing a workplace.
Next, there is a literature utilizing firm- or establishment-level data with information on union status.
As discussed in Hirsch (2007), a recent study reviewing this evidence, there are a number of important

4

reasons warranting caution when drawing inferences from the existing research. First, there can be important
omitted variables – unobserved determinants of the long-run viability of the firm that could be correlated
with the presence of the union. Related, there is a potential endogeneity problem, whereby unions may
specifically target a highly profitable firm for organization. Alternatively, it may be that poorly managed,
and thus low-performing, firms lead to the demand for worker representation. Examples of studies implicitly
relying on the assumption that union status is an exogenous variable include the in-depth analyses of Clark
(1984), Hirsch (1991a), and Hirsch (1991b). A second limitation Hirsch (2007) emphasizes is the limited
generalizability of many of the studies. For example, the cement industry is examined in Clark (1980a) and
Clark (1980b), hospitals and nursing homes in Allen (1986a), the construction industry in Allen (1986b), the
trucking industry in Rose (1987), and sawmills in Mitchell and Stone (1992). It is difficult to extrapolate the
findings on productivity from these studies to a broader, representative cross-section of firms in the United
States. Indeed, our analysis is largely motivated by the belief that it might be easy to find particular incidents
and/or companies where unions have imposed large costs on firms. The challenge, however, is determining
to what extent isolated examples (such as the one illustrated in Figure 1) generalize to a broader population
of interest.
Finally, there are three particular studies that we consider to be most closely related to our analysis:
Lalonde et al. (1996), Ruback and Zimmerman (1984), and DiNardo and Lee (2004). We believe our analysis
addresses some of the most important limitations of each of these studies.
The main difficulty faced in Lalonde et al. (1996) – which utilizes a “fixed effects” approach with
establishment-level panel data from the Longitudinal Research Database (LRD) to examine the impact of
a successful union organizing campaign – is one of interpretation. The study shows some differences in
employment growth between the eventually successful and failed organizing attempts prior to the election
event. For example, one sample shows an expanding gap in employment, while another shows a contracting
gap. Overall, the estimates and standard errors are consistent with pre-election employment growth differences ranging from -10 to 14 percent. As a result, Lalonde et al. (1996) are careful to note that their
examination of pre-election growth rates for many of the outcome variables proved “inconclusive,” and that
their “subsequent findings on the effects of unionization may be too large.” Essentially, the main problem is
that the data they examine are not rich enough to rigorously test their “difference-in-difference” specification
with the pre-event data, and as a result more caution is required in interpreting the post-event patterns.5
5 Another

study in the spirit of a “before-after” design is that of Freeman and Kleiner (1990), in which 203 establishments

5

A similar issue arises in the well-known study of Ruback and Zimmerman (1984), which, like our analysis, examines the stock market reaction to NLRB union certification events.6 There, the main estimates
of a 3.8 percent drop in stock market valuation is computed within a few months surrounding the unionization event.7 Again, the difficulty in interpretation arises from the substantial negative abnormal returns that
emerge well before the unionization event; specifically, a decline in market value of about 7 percent between
the 12th and 7th months preceding unionization. While Ruback and Zimmerman (1984) have no explanation
for this significant decline, they argue that it is unlikely to indicate anticipation of the outcome of the election
due to its timing.8 This pattern raises the question of whether the post-election decline in the stock market
valuation reflects unionization or the factors which led to the pre-election trend in the first place.
In our analysis, we address these ambiguities by taking advantage of a very long panel of monthly data
on stock returns, using an arguably more disciplined approach to modeling the counterfactual “no union”
state. Specifically, we use the data from 24 months prior to the event and just before the event to test our
specification. If there are significant departures between our predicted returns and the observed returns
over the two year period before the event, we consider any estimates obtained from the post-event data to
be invalid.9 This approach is a direct application of conventional testing of over-identifying restrictions
for “difference-in-difference” modeling in labor economics program evaluation.10 Furthermore, we track
abnormal returns over a period of at least 24 months after the unionization. Strictly speaking, perfectly
efficient financial markets imply that any changes in valuation caused by the outcome of the election that are
known to investors will be fully capitalized into the stock price by the time the outcome of the election is
were surveyed before and after NLRB elections took place and were compared to 161 “control” firms (where elections did not
take place). In the study, there was only one period before and one period after, so testing the over-identifying restrictions of the
difference-in-difference design was not possible.
6 There are a number of other studies that examine various aspects of unions through stock market reactions. They typically
do not aim to generate effects of unionization (versus the absence of unions), as they use samples of already unionized firms or
industries. See Abowd (1989), Becker and Olson (1986), Neumann (1990), DiNardo and Hallock (2002), and Becker (1987). Olson
and Becker (1990) is an exception in this regard, as it examines the impact of the passage of the National Labor Relations Act on 75
firms that were at risk of being unionized in the 1930s.
7 Specifically, the main estimate of -3.84 percent is computed by taking the one-month change associated with the petition date
and adding it to the one-month change associated with the date of the actual certification. This can be seen as the summation of the
third and fifth rows, which equals the first row of the third column in their Table 2. Their main estimate can also be seen in their
Figure 1(c) as the summation of the two downward notches around the petition and certification dates.
8 Specifically, on p.1145, they note that “[t]he abnormal return for these firms in the 6 months immediately preceding the petition
is 0.16 percent. This timing suggests that the pre-petition abnormal returns are not due to unionization. Instead, the results suggest
that firms in which unions are successful experienced declines in value prior to the union activity.”
9 An alternative interpretation of pre-election divergence in the predicted and actual returns is the diffusion of anticipatory information regarding the election outcome. Recognizing this alternative, we allow for non-zero excess returns in a short window prior
to the event, but conclude that any significant divergence over a long-period of time prior to the event is evidence of a mis-specified
model.
10 For example, see Ashenfelter and Card (1982) and Heckman and Hotz (1989).

6

revealed. Nevertheless, our approach relies less on the assumption of instantaneous adjustment by examining
the patterns of returns for many months following unionization, thus allowing time for the market to adjust.
The final closely related study is the regression discontinuity analysis of union elections, using data
from the LRD, in DiNardo and Lee (2004). They exploit the “near-experiment” generated by secret ballot
elections, comparing establishments where unions became recognized by a close margin of the vote with
workplaces where the union barely lost. The most precise estimates in that study are those on wages: wage
increases of 2 percent could be statistically ruled out as far away as seven years after the election.11 There
are a number of important limitations to inferring the long-run costs of unions from this evidence. For one, it
may take a much longer period of time – perhaps a decade or more – for unions to establish enough support
within the workplace to have the required bargaining power to negotiate for substantially higher wages.
Secondly, unions impose other costs that are not measured by the LRD, such as the use of seniority rules,
work rules, grievance procedures, and other working conditions specified in union contracts. In principal, our
approach in this paper of examining the effect of stock market valuation addresses both of these concerns: if
the market correctly prices the firm, it should capture the sum of all costs imposed by the union, and effects
that might occur many years in the future should be capitalized into the stock market valuation of the firm in
the short-run.
A final important limitation is that by estimating a discontinuity in the relationship between wages and the
vote share at the 50 percent threshold, the RD analysis can only estimate a weighted average treatment effect,
where the weights are proportional to the ex ante likelihood an election was predicted to be “close.”12 That
is, among the observed close elections, a disproportionately small number would have had the fundamentals
of strong union support. The RD is fundamentally unable to provide a counterfactual for the set of elections
where workers voted 90 percent in favor of unionization. By contrast, the present analysis seeks to estimate
effects for precisely these “inframarginal cases.” In the analysis we describe below, we present results from
both an event-study as well as an RD approach, and provide a framework for interpreting both sets of results.
11 Interestingly,

the magnitudes are also in line with what was found on wages in Lalonde et al. (1996). Freeman and Kleiner
(1990) also find wage effects that are much smaller than those found in cross-sectional worker-level studies.
12 For a detailed discussion of this interpretation, see Lee (2008).

7

3 Institutional Background, Data, and Research Design
The National Labor Relations Act provides the legal framework by which most workers in the United States
become unionized. Workers who organize into unions through the procedures specified by the NLRA are
guaranteed the right to bargain collectively. There are several ways a group of workers may become unionized under the auspices of the NLRA, though it is believed that most new unionization occurs through representation elections (Farber and Western, 2001). There are several steps involved in this process, which are
described in detail in DiNardo and Lee (2004). Briefly, when a group of workers decides to organize, they
first petition the NLRB to hold a representation election. To be legally granted an election, the petition must
be signed by at least 30 percent of the workforce, typically over no longer than a six month period. Once the
NLRB determines the appropriate bargaining unit, it holds an election at the work site. The union wins the
election with a simple majority of support amongst the workers. Barring objections by the employer, a win
means the union is certified as the exclusive bargaining agent for the unit and that the employer is legally
required to bargain with the union in good faith.
Our research design and subsequent data collection were motivated by our desire to estimate the average
effect of union victories and losses in representation elections on firm profitability, and to attempt to address
some of the aforementioned puzzles and challenges in the literature. In collecting the data our goal was to
obtain information on the profitability of firms over a long time span, with a panel structure allowing for an
event-study design with a long event window. Our sample size needed to be large enough so we could also
estimate the cross-sectional relationship between post-event abnormal returns and the union vote share. For
these reasons, and because we were also interested in how the union effect evolved over time, we sought to
collect information on elections over as many years as possible. Since data on the profits of privately held
firms are difficult to come by, we focused on publicly traded firms for which stock market information and
other performance measures are available through mandatory disclosure.

3.1 Data Set Assembly
This study primarily uses three sources of data: election results from the NLRB, data from the Center for
Research on Security Prices (CRSP), and the CRSP/Compustat Industrial Quarterly Merged Database.
The NLRB began publicly reporting representation election vote tallies in 1961. However, previous
studies using NLRB election data typically used records that were already in electronic form (e.g. Farber

8

and Western, 2001; DiNardo and Lee, 2004; and Holmes, 2006). We use those data for the 1977-1999 period,
but augment those with data from 1961-1976 that we digitized for this study.13 Data for the 1961-1976 period
were hand-entered from hard copies of NLRB monthly election reports. Among other things, the NLRB
data set contains the number of voters who voted in favor of the union, the number of voters voting against
the union, the number of eligible voters, the name of the company, a two digit industry code, the city and
state of the election, and the month that the NLRB closed the election.14 The CRSP and Compustat data
were obtained from Wharton Research Data Services.
The primary objective of the data assembly process was to match companies in the NLRB election files
to companies in the CRSP data file. The procedure for matching establishments in NLRB dataset to firms
in the CRSP dataset is detailed in the Data Appendix. This matching process is complex because while the
NLRB file provides the company name where the election took place, most other identifying information is
unknown.15,16 However, as explained in the Appendix, we are confident that the match is high quality.
Previous event studies of representation elections use samples of elections with a very large number of
eligible voters. Ruback and Zimmerman (1984) and Bronars and Deere (1990) limit their sample to elections
with at least 750 eligible voters. Elections of this size are quite rare, thereby resulting in small sample sizes
(54 union victories in the main sample of Ruback and Zimmerman, 1984). We believe that the effects of
these elections are easier to detect if the number of eligible voters is large relative to the size of the firm.
However, limiting the sample to large elections is neither necessary nor sufficient to achieve this objective.
Because many of these elections take place in very large firms, the ratio of voters to total firm employment is
no larger here than for moderately sized elections. While we do not have the exact sample used by Ruback
and Zimmerman (1984), we can attempt to replicate it based on their description of the sample selection
scheme.17,18 Using their sample selection scheme we find that in more than 10 percent of the elections, less
13 The

1977-1999 period data were obtained from Thomas Holmes’ website (http://www.econ.umn.edu/~holmes/data/geo_spill/)
and are used in Holmes (2006).
14 For a limited number of years the NLRB data has information on the calendar date of the election and the calendar date the
NLRB closed the case.
15 The location of the election is not very useful for matching because the CRSP file only contains the location of company
headquarters, which may differ from the location of any establishment undergoing a recognition election.
16 The only additional information that could help us identify a match is the two digit SIC industry code of the establishment.
However, the industry of an establishment may differ from the primary industry of the firm. This variable is more useful as a check
for the validity of the matches.
17 We contacted Professors Ruback and Zimmerman to request their dataset. As their paper was published more than 20 years
ago they understandably could no longer provide it.
18 Using the Ruback and Zimmerman procedure we ended up with almost twice as many elections as they had considered over
the same time period. The only information that Ruback and Zimmerman had that we do not is the petition date. They excluded
elections where the petition date was unavailable. We therefore infer that this exclusion restriction would have resulted in us dropping
50 percent of the elections in the sample.

9

than 1 percent of the firm’s workforce voted. In our reproduction of their sample, the median percentage
of the workforce voting in an election is 5 percent.19 By contrast, our main analysis limits the sample to
elections where at least 5 percent of the total workforce voted.20 The median election in our sample consists
of 13 percent of the company’s workforce voting (mean = 22 percent).21 Therefore, our sample selection
scheme not only provides us with elections that are relatively salient for a given firm (or, at a minimum,
excludes those elections which are clearly not salient), but also yields a substantially larger sample size
compared to what we would have obtained using the Ruback and Zimmerman (1984) criterion. Our baseline
sample is almost eight times larger than the Ruback and Zimmerman (1984) sample.
We present summary statistics of firm characteristics in Table 1. Columns (1) and (2) correspond to
elections where at least 5 percent of the workforce voted (hereafter the “≥ 5% sample”) for UV (“Union
Victory”) and UL (“Union Loss”) firms respectively. Columns (3) and (4) correspond to elections where
less than 5 percent of the workforce voted (hereafter the “< 5% sample”) for UV and UL firms respectively.
We report the market value of the firm using both the CRSP and the Compustat databases. Because there are
a large number of missing observations in the Compustat database, especially before 1970, these measures
differ. Companies in the Compustat database have larger market values on average, implying that small firms
are underrepresented in the Compustat dataset.
Looking at the first row of Table 1, there are about twice as many elections in the < 5% sample than in
the ≥ 5% sample, and in both samples there are about twice as many firms where the union lost than where
the union won. Not surprisingly, firms in the ≥ 5% sample tend to be substantially smaller than firms in
the < 5% sample. This inference can be made by comparing a variety of measures, including employment
(4,530 vs.73,223 employees) and market value ($338 million vs. $5.9 billion in 1998 dollars, using the
more broadly available CRSP measure). However, the ≥ 5% sample corresponds to bigger elections, with
an average of 453 workers voting as compared to an average of 291 in the < 5% sample.
In addition to the mean and standard deviation, for variables derived from the Compustat database we
report in braces the average percentile rank of that variable relative to all other firms in the Compustat
database for the year and quarter of election. The average percentile rank is convenient for assessing how the
19 Huth

and MacDonald (1990) conduct an event-study of decertification elections. Their sample selection scheme involves all
decertification elections involving at least 250 workers between June 1977 and May 1987. They also do not condition on there being
a sufficiently high fraction of a firm’s workers involved in the election. Our (inexact) reproduction of their sample has a median
fraction of the workplace voting of 2 percent, with approximately 30 percent of elections in the sample involving less than 1 percent
of the company’s workforce.
20 Total employment in the year of the election is from the Compustat annual files.
21 We do not use elections where employment information is missing.

10

firms in our sample compare to companies in the Compustat universe, and is advantageous as a statistic that
is "robust" to outliers. From the percentile rankings it can be seen that firms in the < 5% sample tend to be
around the 75th percentile in the size distribution of all Compustat companies, whereas firms in the ≥ 5%
sample are, on average, in the 35th percentile. In both samples, firms tend to be fairly representative with
respect to profit margins, return on assets, Tobin’s Q, and the dividend ratio. At the time of the election, UL
and UV firms appear to be similar in most measures, including employment, market value, profit margin,
profit per employee, Tobin’s average Q, and industry composition.
Table 1 also shows the delisting rate for companies. We report the fraction of companies delisted in
the two years before or after the election. UV firms are slightly more likely to delist than UL firms (10
versus 8 percent delisting rates respectively).22 While this difference is not large, we will consider several
approaches to address this issue, as well as the presence of missing returns more generally. These approaches
involve imputing missing returns, estimating all models excluding periods with missing returns, or limiting
the sample to firms that have no missing returns in the event window. Simply excluding missing values
has the disadvantage that some of the changes in cumulative returns over time may reflect firms that are
entering or dropping out of the sample. Using a balanced panel has the advantage that we can be sure that
any differences over time are not caused by compositional differences. However, a balanced panel does
involve discarding a large number of elections and implies that inclusion into the sample may depend on the
realization of the dependent variable. We will demonstrate that the results are not sensitive to the approach
employed.

3.2 The Event-Study Method
Our objective is to assess the impact of union elections on the stock market value of firms. Ideally, we would
like to compare the firm’s stock returns to the returns the firm would have experienced in the absence of a
union organizing event. The event-study method provides a framework for estimating this counterfactual
return.
As is standard in financial economics literature, we define the abnormal return as the difference between
a stock’s actual return and the expected return given market conditions. For the company corresponding to
22 We

define delisting as any company with a non-missing delisting return in the CRSP dataset.

11

union representation election i, in month t, the abnormal return is:

ARit ≡ rit − E[rit |Xt ],

where rit is the actual return and E[rit |Xt ] is the predicted return. For this study, rit is the CRSP monthly
holding-period return including distributions, which is constructed using prices that are adjusted for splits
and distributions.23
For convenience, we express time in terms of months relative to the event:

ARiτ ≡ riτ − E[riτ |Xτ ],
where ARiτ is the abnormal return of the security corresponding to election i in the τ ’th month relative to
the event.
Because returns of companies with unionization events may vary systematically before the elections, perhaps due to anticipation of the event, and because the market may not react instantaneously, we are interested
in the cumulative abnormal return (CAR) in a window surrounding the election. The CAR corresponding to
event i between months T1 and T2 relative to the event is:
T2

CAR(T1 , T2 )i ≡

∑ ARiτ .

τ =T1

The statistic of interest is the average (across N firms in the sample) cumulative abnormal return:

ACAR(T1 , T2 ) ≡

1 N
∑ CAR(T1 , T2)i .
N i=1

We will present the average cumulative abnormal return for the set of union victory (UV) and union loss
(UL) firms beginning two years prior to the election. Our decision to use such a long event window is in
part the consequence of having information on the month that the NLRB closed the case, rather than the
exact calendar date. By considering a very long pre-event window we can verify that any difference in the
cumulative return of the UL and UV firms and any counterfactual (or “benchmark”) portfolio is not simply a
23 When stocks are delisted we use CRSP delisting returns. We replace missing returns with the predicted return (E[r |X ]) in
it t
order to mitigate survivorship bias, though the results are not sensitive to how missing values are treated. Specifically, the results are
not sensitive to simply ignoring missing values, nor to only selecting companies with no missing returns in the entire event-period.

12

continuation of differential pre-event trends. The long panel also allows us to examine returns in the months
beyond the event, so as to capture the long-run expected costs to the firm without having to rely on the
assumption that the stock price immediately and instantaneously adjusts to the presence of the union.
A critical decision in event-studies is how to model E[rit |Xt ]. In traditional short-run event-studies the
counterfactual is often estimated from a market-model fit to historical data (as described, for example, in
Campbell et al., 1997). In this approach, denoting Rmt as the return of a broad market index in month t, one
uses historical data to estimate:

E[rit |Xt ] = ai + bi Rmt

(1)

This approach is theoretically attractive because the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) predicts that
market beta is sufficient to describe cross-sectional expected returns. While this choice of benchmark is
theoretically justified, a voluminous literature has discredited this idea (see Fama, 1998 for a review), leading
to the use of additional explanatory factors for the expected return. For example, it is common practice to
include the company’s size and the book-to-market equity ratio (BE/ME) (Fama and French, 1993; Carhart,
1997) in these market models.
As pointed out in the literature though, there are a number of difficulties with estimating counterfactual
returns using out-of-sample data in long-run event-studies. The approach requires that the estimated parameters remain time-invariant, an assumption that is known to not hold (Harvey, 1989). Additionally, estimation
of the market-model parameters in the pre-event period must be done over an interval that is free of unusual
pre-event returns, perhaps owing to the event. A solution to this problem is to estimate the market-model
parameters using data from a long time (perhaps several years) prior to the event. But doing so exacerbates
the first problem – that the market-model parameters may have changed – and leads to a new one: stocks that
were not listed during the estimation window will be excluded from the analysis. As a result of these, and
other concerns, the traditional methodologies developed for short-run studies are rarely used for long-run
examinations.
A common approach for computing abnormal returns in long-run event-studies involves the use of reference or “benchmark” portfolios matched on a firm’s characteristics (see Barber and John D. Lyons, 1997;
Lyon et al., 1999; and Brav, 2000). The advantages of this approach are that the benchmark can be constructed in-sample and that it allows for shocks occurring by chance that affect firms with similar character-

13

istics. We employ this approach, matching every firm in our sample to a portfolio of firms in the same sizedecile.24 As a probe for robustness we have also used the CRSP equally-weighted NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ
index as a benchmark, comparing firms both in the same size decile and in the same one-digit SIC industry.25
A second commonly used approach in long-run event-studies is the calendar time portfolio (CTP) approach developed by Jaffe (1974) and Mandelker (1974) and advocated by Fama (1998). For each calendar
month we compute the return of an equally-weighted portfolio of companies that unionized in the last T
months, where T is either 18 or 24 in our study. The return of this “unionization portfolio” is denoted Rut ,
where u indicates that the portfolio consists of companies where workers voted for unionization and t denotes the calendar month. The unionization portfolio is rolling, because companies with new unionization
events are added in any given month, while firms without a unionization event within the last T months are
dropped. The Fama-French three factor model (Fama and French, 1993) is used to compute the abnormal
return of this portfolio:
Rut − R f t = αu + bu (RMt − R f t ) + su SMBt + hu HMLt + εut ,

(2)

where R f t is the one-month treasury bill rate, RMt is the monthly return on a value-weight market portfolio
of NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks, SMB is the difference in the returns on portfolios of small and
big stocks (below or above the NYSE median), and HML is the difference in the returns of portfolios of
high- and low-BE/ME stocks.26 In practice, Equation 2 is estimated by weighting the number of equities in
the RMt portfolio at time t, as suggested by Fama (1998). Assuming that the broad-market return and the
Fama-French factors adequately describe average returns, the parameter of interest, αu , can be interpreted as
the average abnormal return associated with holding this simulated portfolio.
The CTP methodology has been used in many long-run event-studies, for example Loughran and Ritter (1995), Brav and Gompers (1997), Mitchell and Stafford (2000), and Greenstone et al. (2006). This
approach is thought by some, including Fama (1998) and Mitchell and Stafford (2000), to have better statistical properties than leading alternatives. For example, firms clustered in event-time can lead to over-stated
24 CRSP produces

indices for such purposes. Specifically, every year CRSP allocates companies into one of ten size deciles, based
on market-value. The value-weighted average return of securities in these deciles are then calculated on a monthly basis. CRSP also
produces a cross-walk that allows one to link each security to the appropriate size decile.
25 We cannot match on the book-to-market equity ratio, as many studies do, because this variable is unavailable for a large number
of companies in our sample, especially in the earlier periods.
26 The
three factors,
RMt ,
SMB,
and HML,
were taken from Kenneth French’s web page
(http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html).
The web page contains additional information
on the construction of these series.

14

test statistics in the matched-portfolio approach described above.27 Since the CTP methodology uses a
time-series of portfolio returns, cross-correlations of firm abnormal returns are incorporated in the portfolio
variance. Additionally, this approach allows for classical statistical inference because the distribution of the
estimator is well-approximated by the normal distribution (Mitchell and Stafford, 2000). A disadvantage to
this approach is that the market-model parameters of the portfolio are assumed constant. But, because the
model is estimated over a long time-period (1961-1999) and because the firms in the portfolio are changing,
that assumption is unrealistic.
A complication arising in both methodologies is how one defines the “event.” The appropriate event
is the date on which most of the information on the probability of future unionization is incorporated. For
much of the sample (1961-1976) we only observe the month that the NLRB closed the case. While we have
a well-defined event, it is not the only relevant event and it may not be the most important one. Alternative,
potentially important events are the petition and election dates. Using post-1977 data, where both the election
and case closure calendar dates are available, we find that the median time between the election and NLRB
case closure is ten days. In some cases, typically when one of the parties issues a challenge, this gap can be
considerably longer. In 5 percent of the elections it took at least six months for the NLRB to close the case.
While we do not have data on when the petition was submitted to the employer, it is known from Roomkin
and Block (1981) that elections usually occur very soon after the petition. In their sample, 42 percent of
elections occurred within one month of petition and 83 percent within two months. Therefore, we do not
believe that using the month the NLRB closed the election presents serious problems for estimation if most
of the new information is revealed at or after the petition date. To assess whether gradual diffusion of news
led to abnormal returns prior to the closing date it is useful to examine a long pre-event window. We believe,
however, that it will be difficult to empirically distinguish the market’s anticipation of unionization from an
inadequate comparison portfolio.
The event-study method can inform us on how the equity value of firms responds to certification elections. We can also estimate event-study models for elections with varying degrees of union support in order
to explore heterogeneity in the effect size. A more complete investigation of heterogeneity in the impact of
certification elections on stock market performance involves estimating the post-event cumulative abnormal
return for every election and relating these to the vote share in a flexible way. We conduct this analysis to
27 Though,

it should be noted, we will allow for such correlations in computing standard errors by clustering on election and
calendar month, using the formula from Cameron et al. (2006).

15

examine the heterogeneity in the stock market reaction to election outcomes and to determine whether there
is a discontinuous relationship between cumulative abnormal returns and the vote share at the 50 percent
threshold.

4 Empirical Results
4.1 Event-Study Estimates
In Figure 2 we plot the average cumulative return of union victory firms against the average cumulative return
of the size-matched reference portfolios over the same time period.28 The figure reveals that both UV firms
and the corresponding reference portfolios have almost identical trends in returns prior to the union victory.
However, near the time of the election there is a pronounced downward break in the returns of UV firms
relative to the benchmark, persisting for approximately a year and a half. The average cumulative abnormal
return implied by this divergence is approximately -10 percent.
In order to assess the magnitudes and statistical significance of the effect implied by Figure 2, in Figure
3, Panel A we plot ACAR(−24, τ ), for τ = −24 through τ = 24, with 95 percent point-wise confidence intervals. In Panel B we plot ACAR(0, τ ), for τ = 0 through τ = 24. This second panel is relevant for assessing
the overall effect size and for determining statistical significance. The figures show that the downward shift
in abnormal returns emerging soon after NLRB case closure is statistically significant. We can reject the
null hypothesis that the average abnormal returns are equal to zero five months after the event at a 5 percent
level of significance. We interpret Figures 2 and 3 as providing evidence that union election wins correspond
to large negative abnormal returns.
Figure 4 contains the plot of the average cumulative return for union loss firms against the average
cumulative return of the size-matched reference portfolios. As with the UV firms, the reference portfolios
closely track the progression of UL firms prior to the election, but unlike UV firms, the returns of UL firms
do not diverge from the benchmark after NLRB case closure. If anything, there is a moderate increase in the
cumulative return of UL firms relative to the benchmark, though in Figure 5, which presents the difference in
these series with confidence bands, we see this increase is not statistically significant at conventional levels.
We have conducted a variety of analyses to determine whether the patterns seen in Figure 2 and Figure
28 For convenience,

we will often refer to the event month as the “election month," though it should be understood that we actually
only know when the NLRB closed the case.

16

4 are robust. These analyses include: not imputing missing returns (Appendix Figures 1 and 7); using a balanced panel (Appendix Figures 2 and 8); excluding elections where cumulative abnormal returns following
case closure are less than or equal to the 5th percentile or greater than or equal to the 95th percentile of all
post-event cumulative returns (Appendix Figures 3 and 9); using a four year pre-event window (Appendix
Figures 4 and 10); using an industry×size matched-reference portfolio (Appendix Figures 5 and 11); and
using the CRSP equally-weighted market index as the reference portfolio (Appendix Figures 6 and 12). In
all cases the overall pattern of cumulative returns look very similar to those seen in Figures 2 and 4.29
Table 2, Panel A presents average cumulative abnormal returns following union victories. The first column corresponds to the use of the size-matched benchmark. Column (2) corresponds to the industry ×sizematched benchmark. Column (3) corresponds to the CRSP equally-weighted NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ index
benchmark. In the first row of Panel A we report ACAR(0,24) for each of the three benchmarks. The estimated post-election average cumulative abnormal returns range from -9 to -10 percent and are significant
at the 1 percent level. To gauge magnitudes, we calculate that a 10 percent negative return corresponds to
approximately $20 million in lost market value (in 1998 dollars), or $40,522 per worker eligible to vote.
This appears to be a plausible value. Assuming that the entire profit effect is coming about from an increase
in wages, the annual income of workers prior to unionization is $25,000 (in 1998 dollars), and a 6 percent
discount rate, the magnitudes are equivalent to a 10 percent union wage premium.30,31 Of course, we are
unable to say whether the loss in equity value reflects increases in compensation, benefits, or inefficiencies.
In the second row of Table 2 we report ACAR(-24,-4), the average cumulative abnormal return prior
to case closure, excluding the three months immediately preceding the event. ACAR(-24,-4) is statistically
indistinguishable from zero in all three specifications. The lack of significant abnormal returns prior to the
election indicates that the market did not anticipate these events, on average, and also suggests that all three
benchmarks do a reasonable job of predicting average returns of the portfolio of UV firms. In the third row
we compute ACAR(0,24) after adjusting abnormal returns in the post-event period for the equity-specific
trends in abnormal returns in the months before the election. Specifically, before computing ACAR(0,24)
we subtract the average abnormal return for the equity in months -24 through -7 relative to case closure
from the post-event abnormal return. The point estimates are very close to the unadjusted version. But, not
29 A possible exception is Appendix Figure 10, which shows that UL firms experienced a period of positive abnormal returns three
years before the election.
30 In 1980 (the mid-point of our sample frame) the average non union wage was $12.43 in 1998 dollars (Hirsch and Macpherson,
2008)(Hirsch and MacPherson 2008), translating to approximately $25,000 in annual income
31 This premium is a lower-bound because approximately 25% of union election victories do not lead to contracts (Cooke, 1985).

17

surprisingly, they are somewhat less precise. Table 2, Panel B reports the same set of estimates for union
loss firms. Consistent with what we observe in Figure 5, the cumulative abnormal returns are close to zero
and statistically insignificant.
One possible concern is that elections are endogenous to the performance of firms. However, we find
little evidence that this is the case. The firms in our sample track their benchmarks quite closely prior to the
election, so it does not appear to be the case that the election is a result of the firms under- or over-performing
the benchmark. There is also no indication that the firm’s performance in the two years prior to the election
the union fares in the election. This can be seen in a number of ways. For example, looking at Figure 2,
winners and losers are not trending differentially prior to the election. To test this hypothesis more directly
we have regressed the union vote share in the election of the cumulative abnormal return from -24 to -4 and
found no significant relationship between the two variables.32 If workers are deciding on the performance
of the firm, they are basing their decision on forecasts of future performance rather than past performance.
While we cannot rule out this possibility, it is not obvious how workers could forecast future share prices of
the firm, and why it would be optimal for them to ignore past performance. Moreover, it is not clear why it
would be optimal to unionize when the firm is projected to perform poorly.
Our sample selection scheme was partly predicated on choosing elections where a sizable fraction of the
firm’s workforce was voting: in practice we used a 5 percent cutoff. As a falsification exercise we examine
elections where a small fraction of the firm’s total workforce voted. The idea is that we should not see effects
in firms where only a very small share of the employees voted. In Table 3 we examine whether cumulative
abnormal returns following an election become more pronounced when a larger share of the firm’s workforce
is participating. Specifically, using the full sample of elections we relate ACAR(0,24)i , where i denotes an
election, to the share of the firm’s total workforce in the bargaining unit. As seen in Column (1) of Panel A,
when the union wins the election and the fraction of the firm’s workforce in the bargaining unit is essentially
zero, the firm experiences a small and positive abnormal return. As we would expect, as the share of the firm
involved in the election increases, the resulting effect on the abnormal return becomes more pronounced.
Each percentage point increase in the share of the firm’s employees voting in the election is associated with
a third of a percentage point decline in the post-event cumulative abnormal return, a relationship which is
statistically significant at the 5 percent level. In Column (2) we use adjusted-ACAR(0,24) and the relation32 Specifically,

we estimate a coefficient of -0.006 with a standard error of 0.09. This estimate is not sensitive to the pre-event
window over which the CAR is calculated.

18

ship continues to hold. Panel B presents these estimates for the union loss sample. The negative relationship
in the post-event cumulative abnormal return and the share of the workforce voting is not present. In fact,
there is a positive relationship, which is what we would expect if union losses resulted in positive abnormal
returns.
Finally, Table 4 presents the estimates from the calendar time event-study methodology. The portfolio
of stocks consisting of all firms with a unionization win in the previous 24 months has a precisely estimated
alpha of -0.005 (t-ratio=-3.6). In the second row we consider a hypothetical portfolio of firms that are
purchased two years prior to case closure and are sold four months prior to case closure (-24 to -4 months
relative to closure). This portfolio corresponds to a small and statistically insignificant alpha. Likewise, we
do not observe an economically or statistically significant alpha for portfolios of firms recently experiencing
union losses (Table 4, Panel B), nor for portfolios consisting of firms with small elections relative to the size
of the company (Table 4, Panels C and D). These results give us confidence in our finding: negative alphas
are only present when the union wins, and even then, only when the electorate is a large fraction of the firm’s
total workforce. Moreover, the results are robust to the use of two standard methodologies for long-run event
studies.

4.2 Discussion of the Results and Additional Analyses
Speed of Adjustment
Perhaps a surprising feature of Figure 3 is that, while the efficient market hypothesis would predict the
entire unionization effect should be fully realized by the time of the election, we instead see an effect which
grows over a longer period, with an abnormal return beginning around the time of election and persisting
for approximately 15 months. Ours is not the first study showing that markets under-react to seemingly
important events. Systematic under-reactions have been reported in response to IPOs and SEOs (Loughran
and Ritter, 1995), mergers (Asquith, 1983; Mitchell and Stafford, 2000), stock splits (Ikenberry et al., 1996),
share repurchases (Mitchell and Stafford, 2000), exchange listings (Dharan and Ikenberry, 1995), dividend
initiations (Michaely et al., 1995), spin-offs (Cusatis et al., 1993), earnings announcements (Ball and Brown,
1968), and predictable changes in demographics (Dellavigna and Pollet, forthcoming). While Fama (1998)
questions the robustness of some of these findings, even he acknowledges that the short-term continuation
of returns documented by Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) is “an open puzzle,” and that the slow post-earnings

19

announcement drift “has survived robustness checks, including extension to more recent data.”33
Hong et al. (2000) show that stock prize momentum is largely confined to smaller stocks, so perhaps it
is not surprising that there is a gradual-adjustment following an union election win as our sample selection
ensures that the firms in our sample are relatively small. Hong et al. (2000) theorize that stock prices exhibit
momentum because information, especially negative information, diffuses gradually to investors. To examine whether the slow diffusion of information explains the speed of adjustment of stock prices in our study
we follow their example and compare firms with and without analyst coverage.
According to I/B/E/S International analyst data, only 50 percent of the firms in our sample had analyst
coverage at the time of the election, meaning that these elections may not have been widely publicized or
followed.34 In Figure 6 we compare average cumulative abnormal returns for companies that did and did
not have analyst coverage at the time of the election. Companies with analyst coverage appear to have experienced negative abnormal returns earlier than those without analyst coverage. But even these experienced
a relatively slow-reaction to the event on average, suggesting that the lack of analyst coverage is not the
complete story.35
While we do not have an explanation for why the adjustment happens slowly in this case, it is true
that by definition these large unionization events are typically singular for a given firm. Investors may
simply not have known how to process this new information, and instead reacted primarily to news on
fundamentals. In Section 4.3 we will see that union wins are associated with a trend break in the growth rate
of these companies, as measured by assets, shareholder equity, and profits – an effect that may not have been
immediately obvious to investors, but which may have become apparent over time.

Evolution of the unionization effect over time
Next we turn to the evolution of the effect over time. The DiNardo and Lee (2004) sample includes
elections beginning in 1984. It is possible that unions did not affect firm performance in this latter period,
while in earlier years the effects may have been more pronounced. In Figure 7 we compare the average
cumulative abnormal return of UV firms for elections occurring in the 1961-1983 period to those occurring
33 Quoted

in Fama (1998).
50 percent figure is derived from I/B/E/S International analyst data for years 1976-1999.
35 We are aware that companies not appearing in I/B/E/S may still have analyst coverage. This kind of misclassification tends
to reduce the measured difference in excess returns between these two groups of firms, if in fact there are actual differences. It
is unlikely that this measurement problem will affect the relatively slow speed of adjustment for companies covered by analysts,
as these are presumably measured correctly, meaning that our basic conclusion–that analyst-covered companies exhibit a relatively
slow speed of adjustment–still holds.
34 The

20

in the 1984-1999 period. The figure indicates that the average effect of a union certification win on firm
performance has remained fairly stable over time. Therefore, we do not believe that the lack of an estimated
unionization effect in DiNardo and Lee (2004) is due to their sample frame.36

4.3 Compustat Analysis
The results presented up to this point suggest that union victories are associated with negative abnormal returns. We complement this analysis with an additional investigation of accounting variables. Using quarterly
data from Compustat, we examine whether shareholder equity, assets, total liabilities/total assets (a measure
of leverage), plant, property and equipment, sales, the dividend ratio, Tobin’s average Q, profit margins, and
returns on assets are affected by the outcome of representation elections. We compute the average value of
these variables (logged when appropriate) over the twelve quarters before and after the event date, comparing
UV and UL firms.37 As before, we assess whether these series were trending differentially prior to the event
and whether their trend breaks around the time of the event. While we regard this analysis as informative, we
are cognizant that the coarseness of these data means that it is more challenging to assess the specifications,
as compared to the event-studies, because the pre-event window are shorter.
Unfortunately, the early part of the sample period is unusable in the Compustat analysis because many of
these variables were not reported until the late 1960s, and not universally until the early 1970s. Moreover, the
fraction of missing observations is substantially higher in the Compustat dataset than in the CRSP dataset.
As a result, for this analysis we will only consider elections over the 1973-1999 period. In order to mitigate
composition bias to due to unbalanced panels we de-mean the variables, but do not drop elections with
missing values.
In the nine panels of Figure 8 we plot averages of the de-meaned variables over event-time, in each
case comparing elections where the union won to those where the union lost. The figures show that the
time pattern of variables proxying for “size” are consistent with the pattern in equity value.

UV firms

display a downward break in trend in total assets (Panel A), shareholder equity (Panel B), and sales (Panel
36 We

have also compared the effects for states with and without right-to-work laws. Conditional on a union winning its election,
the stock-market effects of unionization tend to be more pronounced in states with right-to-work laws than those without. This
finding does not mean that states with right-to-work laws are more favorable to unions – these firms differ in other dimensions,
and it is also probable these laws (or the business climate more generally) affect the likelihood that a union organizes, as well as
the likelihood that a union wins an election. The result does call into question though, whether right-to-work laws fundamentally
weaken unions because of a potential free-riding problem. This finding lends qualified support to the conclusion of Farber (1984)
and Moore and Newman (1985) that right-to-work laws are primarily symbolic, reflecting a taste against union representation rather
than having any real effect.
37 All variables in 1998 dollars, when appropriate.

21

C) near or just before certification. The reduction in asset growth is, in large part, due to reduced growth
in plant, property, and equipment (Panel D).38 The smaller sample sizes mean these series are not as wellbehaved as those for equity values, though they have a similar pattern. We see little effect of union wins on
the measure of leverage, defined as long-term debt divided by total assets (Panel E). This last finding can be
viewed as circumstantial evidence that companies are not using leverage strategically to influence bargaining
negotiations, at least in this sample.39
The marked reduction in the growth rate of assets is notable because if unionization increases the price
of labor, there should be substitution from labor to capital (though, as seen in Panel F, Tobin’s average
Q appears stable). The fact that assets are actually declining implies that the “scale” effect from reduced
reinvestment dominates the possible substitution effect. The time pattern of these variables also sheds light
on the seemingly slow reaction of investors to unionization events that we see in Figure 3. The pattern of
abnormal returns mirrors the time-pattern we observe in shareholder equity, assets, sales, and pre-tax income.
The evidence is consistent with the stock market pricing the effect of unionization only after changes in these
variables become known.
While the reduced relative size of the UV firms is associated with lower pretax income (Panel G), variables that proxy for operating performance, for example return on assets and profit margins, appear stable.40
At first blush, the finding that companies that undergo unionization experience lower growth rates but stable
returns on assets and profit margins may seem puzzling. But if firms only select projects that are sufficiently profitable and unionization reduces the number of these high net present value (NPV) projects, then
it is possible for the company’s growth rate to decline in spite of experiencing no change in its operating
performance.
In Table 5 we present difference-in-difference estimates for the effect of a union victory relative to a
union loss on each of the six aforementioned variables.

The sample consists of election × event-time

observations. We regress each of the (non-demeaned) variables on election fixed-effects, an indicator for
whether the NLRB closed the election on or after the given quarter (“post"), and the interaction of “post"
with an indicator for whether the union won the election (“post × union win"). The point estimates suggest
38 We

have also examined the corresponding figures using a balanced panel. The overall patterns are the same as when using the
unbalanced sample, but because we lose so many elections the confidence intervals are substantially wider.
39 Bronars and Deere (1991) show there is a positive association between financial leverage and unionization in the cross-section.
Matsa (2006) provides evidence that firm measures of leverage were affected by state-level changes in right-to-work laws.
40 The profit margin in UV firms appears to decline a bit relative to UL firms, but not until about seven quarters after the election
(Panel I).

22

that assets, shareholder equity, and sales fall by approximately 10 percent in UV firms after the election,
relative to UL firms. Pre-tax profits of UV firms are approximately 17 percent lower in the post-election
period relative to the pre-election period (relative to UL firms). These statistically significant estimates are
consistent with the 10 to 14 percent negative abnormal returns we observe in equities.

4.4 Heterogeneous Impacts of Unionization
In view of the findings summarized in the preceding discussion, a natural question comes to mind: how can
these large effects be consistent with the substantially smaller ones found in DiNardo and Lee (2004)? This
sections aims at providing a partial answer to this question.
While DiNardo and Lee (2004) identify the “unionization effect” by focusing on an implicit comparison
of winning and losing establishments among close elections, we can learn how unions affect firms by examining the heterogeneity in the effects of unionization at all points in the vote share distribution. This analysis
is possible because of the long-panel structure we have at our disposal.
We begin by relating the security-level cumulative abnormal return in the two years following the election
to the union vote share. Specifically, we are interested in the shape of E[CAR(0, 24)i |vi ], where vi denotes
the union vote share in election i. We graphically plot this function by: (1) averaging CAR(0, 24)i over 20
equally-spaced vote share bins41 and (2) plotting the predicted values from the model E[CAR(0, 24)i |vi ]=
p(vi ) + β 1(vi > 0.5), where p(·) denotes a sixth-order polynomial and 1(vi > 0.5) is an indicator function
for whether the union vote share in a given election exceeded 50 percent. Figure 10 presents estimates of
E[CAR(0, 24)i |vi ] using both of these approaches. (For reference, Figure 9 shows the histogram of the union
vote share variable.)
Figure 10 shows clear evidence that the effect of a certification election is heterogeneous, and that it
depends on the union vote share. As in the Dinardo and Lee study, there is no discernible discontinuity in
the E[CAR(0, 24)i |vi ] at the 50 percent union vote share threshold. In fact, the estimated discontinuity is
somewhat perverse: firms with close union wins experience elevated post-election cumulative returns vis-avis firms with close union losses. On the other had, union victories with higher union vote shares correspond
to negative excess returns, and the negative impact of a union election win appears to become markedly more
pronounced when the union has a higher vote share. A greater than 60 percent union vote share is associated
with negative cumulative abnormal returns of 20 to 30 percent.
41 See

DiNardo and Lee (2004) for a description of construction of these 20 equally spaced bins.

23

Firms with union losses also exhibit a downward sloping relationship between abnormal returns and vote
share. Much of the decline appears to occur at the largest vote shares, but there is also greater variability in
the predicted cumulative abnormal returns due to small sample sizes. Close union losses are associated with
marginally-significant negative abnormal returns, though as we will show, these declines can be explained
by a small amount of pre-election trending in the abnormal returns.
We now turn to several robustness checks. In Figure 11 we overlay the predicted CAR in months 0
through 24 (shown in Figure 10) with the predicted CAR computed over event-months -24 to -4. The figure
shows that the gradient in CAR by vote share, seen for months 0 to 24, is not present for months -24 through
-4. This plot reassures us that the negative CAR observed for higher union vote shares is not a continuation
of a pre-event trend.
In order to address the issue of pre-event trends more completely, we consider an additional analysis
where we adjust abnormal returns in the post-event period for possible pre-event trends. Specifically, we
calculate the cumulative abnormal return in the post-event period deviated from the average abnormal return
in the pre-event period (from months -24 to -7 relative to case closure):

adjusted-AR iτ ≡ ARiτ −

1 −7
∑ ARiτ
18 τ =−24

We then calculate:
24

adjusted-CAR(0, 24)i ≡

∑ adjusted-ARiτ .

τ =0

Figure 12 plots the predicted adjusted-CAR with 95 percent pointwise confidence intervals.42 The figure
shows virtually the same pattern of heterogeneity seen in the earlier figures, though with wider confidence
intervals. The main difference between the pattern in this figure and Figure 10 is that there is weaker evidence
here of a negative CAR among firms with close union losses.
In Table 6 we conduct formal statistical inference. Using the same sample of 1,436 elections used to
construct Figure 10, in Column (1) we regress CAR(0,24) on a dummy for whether the union won the
election. Consistent with earlier analyses, we find that union wins are associated with cumulative abnormal
returns that are 12.1 percentage points lower than firms with union losses (t-ratio = -3.5). In Column (2)
42 As

before, the abnormal returns from the pre-event period are calculated using an estimation window that ends 29 months prior
to the closing month. The abnormal returns from the post-event period are calculated using an estimation window that ends 5 months
prior to the closing month.

24

we add the union vote share as a covariate.43 The introduction of this variable alone is enough to change
the sign on the coefficient of the union win dummy, resulting in a union effect of 0.048 (t-ratio = 0.89).
Adding higher-order polynomial terms in the vote share (Column 3) only makes the estimated union win
coefficient more positive; the “regression discontinuity" estimate of a union win is 8 percentage points, but
is statistically indistinguishable from 0. In Column (4) we examine whether the negative gradient between
CAR and the vote share differs among elections where the union won and lost. Specifically, we regress
CAR(0,24) on a union win indicator, the vote share, and the vote share interacted with the win indicator. The
interaction term is statistically insignificant in all specifications.
In Columns (5)-(8) we estimate the same set of models using CAR(-24,-4) as the dependent variable.
None of the patterns observed when using CAR(0,24) as the dependent variable are evident here. In Columns
(9)-(12) we re-estimate these models using adjusted-CAR(0,24) as the dependent variable. The point estimates in this set of specifications are very close to the ones obtained using CAR(0,24), but are less precise,
with standard errors approximately 50 percent larger than those in Columns (1)-(4).

5 Interpretation and Policy Implications
In this section, we investigate what our empirical results could imply about the potential effect of a policy
that makes it easier for workers to unionize. An example of such a policy shift can be seen in the Employee
Free Choice Act, recently proposed legislation that is meant to amend the National Labor Relations Act.
Specifically, one of the provisions of the legislation would allow employees to authorize a union via “card
check”, a showing that the majority of the workers signed cards to authorize a union, without having to win
certification via a secret-ballot election process. It is widely believed that the legislation, supported by the
AFL-CIO, would make it much easier for workers to unionize, if it were to become law.
In essence, we view such a policy change as a ceteris paribus marginal increase in the probability of
unionization. One way to conceive of such an exogenous increase, would be to consider the thought experiment of lowering the necessary vote share threshold for certification. After all, the card check process is not
unlike the petitioning that constitutes the first step in the NLRB election process.
As a thought experiment, consider lowering the threshold from 50 percent to say, 45 percent. One
conjecture is that such a policy change would only effect those firms with vote shares between 45 and 50
43 Vote share is grouped into one of 20 equally spaced bins, ranging from 0 to 1. We transform this variable in order to avoid the
“integer” problem described in DiNardo and Lee (2004).

25

percent, and that the effect could be approximated by the RD estimate. The shortcoming of this conjecture
is that it assumes that unions, firms, and workers do not respond to the increased ease of unionization. As
we noted in the introduction, Friedman (1950) suggested that unions might be forced to moderate promises
to raise wages when seeking the support of their workers. In a representation election, this might mean
moderating wage expectations to increase their chance of winning. With these forces at work, an exogenous
increase in the probability of a union victory could very well lead unions to be more aggressive, resulting in
increased negative impacts on profitability – not just for those firms near the 50 percent threshold, but also
for those where the union won by a wider margin. Exogenously easing the unionization process might also
affect the outcome for firms that eventually do not unionize, through union threat.
Thus, in order to make quantitative predictions regarding the impacts of making unionization easier –
predictions that both use the magnitudes we estimate, and allow for behavioral responses to a change in
policy – it is necessary to adopt assumptions about the behavior of unions and firms and how profitability
is affected by changes in the probability of unionization. We consider a “median voter”-type model of
endogenous union determination. The basic idea of the model is that in anticipation of the representation
election, the firm and the union each propose an outcome (e.g. a wage level), and voters, recognizing that
wages can be both too low or “too high” (if it poses too large a risk of job loss), vote on the two choices
in the election. Both the union and the firm face similar trade-offs: the union (firm) would benefit from
higher (lower) wages, but proposing those wages loses votes among those workers who have more moderate
preferences.
We present a parsimonious parameterization for the model, and then calibrate it by choosing parameters
such that the model produces both an equilibrium vote share distribution and event-study estimates that most
closely match that which we observe in the data (shown in Figure 12).
This calibrated model yields a distribution of voter preferences, and also allows us to simulate the effects
of lowering the vote share threshold, a policy which exogenously increases the probability of unionization.
We also assess the model’s predictions for the impact on equity value of two sub-populations, a marginal
group (the firms that are not currently unionized, but would be in the new regime), and two inframarginal
groups (firms that are either already unionized or not unionized, and whose status does not shift after the
policy change).

26

5.1 Endogenous Voting Model
There are surely an unlimited number of distinct ways to model the interaction between unions, workers,
and firms in an election context. Arguably, an obvious starting point is to adopt a “textbook” model of
electoral competition.44 Indeed, median voter-type models have previously been considered in the theoretical
literature on unions (see Atherton, 1973; Farber, 1978; and Booth, 1995).45
We assume there are three optimizing entities involved in a representation election, the workers, the
union, and the management.46
Workers: Each worker is assumed to maximize their own individual utility, and faces the decision
to either vote for or against union recognition. In doing so, each forward-looking worker compares the
anticipated outcome if the union wins to the expected outcome if the union loses. For example, the main
issue could be wages, where the anticipated wage level is higher if the union prevails in the election than if
it fails. Workers will not always vote for higher wages, because it may also carry a higher risk of job loss as
the firm must respond to those higher wages. So for each worker, there is an “ideal wage” or a “bliss point”.
It is most natural to discuss workers’ (and unions) preferences over wages, benefits and other working
conditions. But as long as improved (inferior) compensation and conditions lead to lower (higher) profits
for the firm, we can equivalently consider workers’ and unions preferences over profit levels, by applying an
appropriate monotonic transformation from wages, for example, to profits. In the discussion below, we use
this equivalent formulation, focusing our attention on “profit levels” (strictly speaking, the change in stock
market value of the firm).
Thus, the actions of the workers are summarized by the probability of the firm winning the election
P (πM , πU )
where πM is the resulting anticipated profit level if the firm wins, and πU is the anticipated level if the union
wins.

∂P
∂ πM

and

∂P
∂ πU

are both negative: as the outcome under a firm victory becomes more “extreme” and more

profitable to the firm, fewer workers find that outcome attractive, lowering the chance of an electoral victory
44 See

Persson and Tabellini (2000) for a guide to models of this sort.
this model has many parallels to the model of final offer arbitration developed in Farber (1980). The two bargaining parties face the same trade-offs as the union and firm do here, and the role of arbitrator is played by the median voter in this
context.
46 The setup is similar to Ashenfelter and Johnson (1969) who also consider management, workers, and unions as separate maximizing entities.
45 Interestingly,

27

for the firm. Conversely, if the anticipated profit level is more moderate, the “middle” of the electorate
gravitates towards voting for the firm. The same is true for the union: the firm has a lower chance of winning
if the outcome under a union victory πU (which will always be less than πM ) is higher (and hence more
moderate).
Note that we assume a probabilistic voting model (e.g. workers, firm, and union cannot perfectly predict the outcome) as is common in many electoral competition models. It will be clear that without some
uncertainty, there can be no equilibrium where πM 6= πU . Thus, introducing some uncertainty as to the exact
location of the median voter expands the range of possible equilibria.
Management: The firm influences the anticipated result of a firm electoral victory. Essentially, they
propose a profit level πM in order to maximize expected profits

πM · P (πM , πU ) + πU · (1 − P (πM , πU ))

taking the union’s proposal as given. The management faces a clear trade-off: higher profits are desired, but
proposing an outcome that leads to higher profits raises the chance that the workers will vote to unionize,
which would lead to lower profits.
In this sense the model captures the possibility of “union threat”, where the presence of unions can
compel firms to offer above-market wages, even if the workers ultimately do not unionize.
Union: The union faces a similar problem with similar trade-offs. It controls anticipated outcome πU
under a union victory. Essentially, they make a proposal πU to maximize the objective function
U · P (πM, πU ) +U (πU ) (1 − P (πM, πU ))
taking πM as given. U is the level of utility the union obtains if it loses the election, and U (πU ), which is
decreasing in πU , is obtained if the union prevails. We assume that for all the feasible πU , U ≤ U (πU ), so
that the union would never prefer to lose the election. Again, the union benefits from a lower-profit outcome
if it prevails in the election. But it must also take into account that the further away their proposal is from
the median worker, the more likely the less desirable outcome πM will occur.

28

Equilibrium: We consider the Nash Equilibrium, which is characterized by the first order conditions

∂ P (πM , πU )
(πM − πU ) = 0
∂ πM

∂ U (πU )
∂ P (πM , πU )
(1 − P (πM , πU )) +
U −U (πU ) = 0
∂ πU
∂ πU
P (πM , πU ) +

(3)

The solution to this system yields equilibrium proposals for πU and πM as well as the equilibrium probability
P (πM , πU ).
Finally, we introduce two elements of heterogeneity to make it possible for the model to generate a
relationship between the vote share and the observed profit level. First, we allow for heterogeneity across
workplaces in the preferences of the workers (i.e. the median voter): heterogeneity in P (πM , πU ). Second,
we allow for heterogeneity in preferences among workers within each workplace. It is possible to include
this kind of heterogeneity without affecting the specification of P (πM , πU ) and hence the equilibrium πM and

πU , but without some heterogeneity, realized vote shares could only equal 1 or 0.47

5.2 Parameterization and Estimation
Our policy extrapolation exercise requires us to parameterize the model. We choose the following functional
forms.
1. In bargaining over wages, profits are bounded. We let π be the maximum feasible profits, given the
constraints of the market. For example, π could be the profit level if the post-election wage equaled
the competitive market wage. If firms are price takers in the labor market, then any wage below that
level would mean that they could not hire any workers and would be forced to shut down.
2. We let U (πU ) = −

πU
c

2
− 1 , which is representative of the entire class of concave quadratic functions

in πU .48 c is the union’s “ideal” profit level. We also set U = U (π ) so that the union gains exactly
nothing if it wins the election but achieves a wage level no different than the market competitive wage.
3. Voters ideal profit levels (“bliss points”) are uniformly distributed over the interval [µ − ε − σ , µ − ε ],
where µ varies across workplaces and σ quantifies the degree of heterogeneity of voter preferences
47 If

all voters had the same ideal profit level as the median, then either all workers will vote for or against the union.
quadratic function has three parameters, but the expected utility is invariant to affine transformations, so that it is innocuous
to rescale and shift the function so that the peak of the function equals zero, and that the function equals -1 when πU = 0. This is
therefore a one-parameter function.
48 A

29

within the workplace. ε is a stochastic component, uniformly distributed on [0, λε ], reflecting the uncertainty that both union and firm face regarding the exact location of the workers. If individual workers’ utility over π are symmetric around their bliss point, this implies that the vote share for the union




 49
πU
πU
− (µ − ε − σ ) , and that P (πM , πU ) = Pr V S < 12 = λ1ε µ − σ2 − πM +
.
will be V S = σ1 πM +
2
2
This specification satisfies the above assumption that as the firm or union raises its proposal, the probability of a firm victory declines.

4. µ is distributed across workplaces, such that −µ follows an exponential, F x; λµ , µ = 1− exp(−λµ ·(x−

µ )) for x − µ ≥ 0, and 0 otherwise. The distribution of µ thus has a long left tail, and a maximum at
µ.
To summarize, the model contains 6 parameters in total, µ , λµ , λε , σ , π , c. µ , λµ characterize how worker
preferences are approximately distributed across workplaces, λε quantifies the degree of uncertainty of the
precise location of the voters’ preferences, and σ quantifies heterogeneity in workers’ preferences within a
firm. π represents the limit on how low the firms’ wages can be, and c is the union’s “ideal” profit level.
These six parameters are sufficient for generating a joint distribution of π obs (an event-study estimate
of the impact of the union on the firm) and the vote share in favor of the union, the two variables that
we observe in the data. Specifically, a µ is drawn from the distribution given by the parameters µ , λµ .
Conditional on this value of µ , and the remaining 4 parameters (λε , σ , π , c), the firm and the union make
∗ and
optimal proposals according to the marginal conditions in 3. Subsequent to these optimal choices πM

πU∗ , an ε is drawn and the V S is determined as above, and the observed profit level is given by π obs =
∗ · 1 [V S < .5].
πU∗ · 1 [V S > .5] + πM

At the same time, the model has a minimal number of parameters. There is one parameter for the union’s
objective function (c), one for the firm (π ), and two parameters for the distribution of worker preferences
across firms (µ , λµ ). Without allowing for λε , there would be no uncertainty in the precise location of voters’
preferences, which would imply that the firm’s and union’s proposals could never be different in equilibrium.
Finally, without σ , a vote share would never be anything except 0 or 1.
49 Additionally, V S

and P (πM , πU ) must be between 0 and 1.

30

To calibrate this model, we choose parameters that most closely generate 1) the pattern of event-study
estimates in Figure 12, and 2) the distribution of vote shares. Specifically, we minimize the quadratic form










′ −1
f (θ ) V̂ f (θ ) , where f (θ ) = 









α̂1 − E
> .5


α̂2 − E π obs |V S < .5


α̂3 − lim+ E π obs |V S = .5 + ∆
∆→0


α̂4 − lim+ E π obs |V S = .5 − ∆


π obs |V S

∆→0

α̂5 − E [V S]


α̂6 − E V S2



















and θ is the vector of parameters from the model, the expectations are the moments predicted by the model
given θ , and the α̂ s are the corresponding observed moments. α̂1 is the event-study estimate for all union
victories, α̂2 is the event-study estimate for all union losses, α̂3 and α̂4 are the event study estimates close
to, and on either side of, the 50 percent union vote share threshold, and α̂5 and α̂6 are the first and second
moments of the vote share.50 π obs is the change in market value predicted by the model and V S is the
predicted vote share for the union. V̂ is the estimated variance-covariance matrix of these 6 estimators.
Although our model is parsimonious and we chose simple functional forms (e.g. uniform distributions
for ε , the distribution of voter preferences, and quadratic utility), it leads to somewhat complicated (and not
particularly illuminating) analytic expressions for the theoretical moments in f (θ ). Therefore, we estimate
the parameters via Monte Carlo simulation. For each set of parameter values, we take 50000 Monte Carlo
draws of µ and ε , and for each of those draws compute π obs and V S as described above. We then use that
simulated data to compute the theoretical moments in the same way the observed moments are calculated.
Before reporting the results, we provide some intuition as to how various parameters would affect the
theoretical moments. First, as the distribution of µ (given by the parameters µ and λµ ) shifts in the negative
direction, one can expect π obs to become more negative, as both firm and union proposals respond to the
location of µ . Second, π is essentially an upper bound to the union and firm proposals, so decreases will
generally lead to lower π obs as well. Third, a very small σ implies that workers within a firm have very
similar preferences, and therefore will vote similarly, implying that the only observed vote shares would be
close to either 0 or 1. If σ is very large, then vote shares would be clustered around an intermediate value.
50 Specifically, α̂ and α̂ are the values of the regression prediction on either side of the 50 percent threshold, from a regression
3
4
of π obs on a quartic in the vote share and a dummy variable for the vote share being greater than 50 percent.

31

Fourth, a very small λε , which would represent very little uncertainty in the distribution of voters, would
lead union and firm offers to converge towards each other. If the proposals are virtually identical, then we
would expect no discontinuity in the event-study estimate with respect to the vote share.
Finally, we recognize that the observed data on π obs and V S does not reveal the magnitude of c in any
obvious way. For example, given the first order condition in 3 and quadratic utility function, a less negative
c would raise the marginal gain to the union of lowering an offer, but at the same time it would increase the
potential penalty of losing the election; this suggests an ambiguous impact of c on π obs .51 For this reason,
we investigate the extent to which our qualitative results are sensitive to the value of c by estimating the
remaining 5 parameters, conditional on varying values of c.

5.3 Results and Policy Extrapolation
We estimate the model by minimizing the quadratic form described above. In doing so, we discovered
that the objective function was virtually flat with respect to the parameter c, and that the estimated five
parameters were not sensitive to the magnitude of c. For example, estimating the full six-parameter model
gave estimates of c = −17.20, π = 0.042, µ = 0.339, λµ = 7.80, σ = 0.311, λε = 0.101, whereas estimating
the remaining 5 parameters conditional on fixing the value of c at −2.29 yielded π = 0.043, µ = 0.343,

λµ = 7.90, σ = 0.314, λε = 0.102. We concluded that c was not well-identified, and therefore we report the
results from fixing c at −2.29.52
To illustrate the fit of the model, we generated simulated data according to the estimated parameters.
Figure 13 shows a histogram of simulated equilibrium vote shares. Overall, the distribution shares a similar
shape to the actual distribution of vote shares in Figure 9. As expected – since the estimation procedure only
used the first two moments – there are some notable discrepancies. First, the simulated data yields a ratio of
union losses to victories is about 2 to 1, compared to the actual ratio of about 2.5 to 1. Second, the simulated
data produced no observations with vote shares above 83 percent, whereas Figure 9 shows a small number
of cases in that upper tail.
The fit of the model can also be seen in Figure 14, which provides the predicted change in market value,
51 Adding to the ambiguity of how c might affect the equilibrium offers is the fact that c is a lower bound on both union and firm
offers.
52 −2.29 seems to be the lower bound on the change in market value (relative to the broad market index): historically, over an
18 month period, the most the broad market index has ever increased has been 129 percent. Since an individual firm’s stock price
cannot lose more than 100 percent of its initial value, we take as the most negative excess returns to be -229 percent. Fixing c to be
half of that value (−1.15) has almost no effect on the magnitude of the remaining parameters.

32

as a function of the observed vote share, using the simulated data. The figure gives the same overall shape as
that in Figure 12, with the union effects flat and near zero to the left of the 50 percent vote share threshold,
and a negative slope to the right of the threshold. In our judgment, while this five-parameter model certainly
does not capture every feature of the observed data, it does seem to provide a reasonable approximation.
Importantly, our modest “calibration” exercise of this electoral competition framework suggests that
unions are responding to workers’ preferences. Using the simulated data, the regression of the union offers
on the expected median position (µ − σ2 − λ2ε ) yields a coefficient of 0.734. Furthermore, our model suggests
that firm and union offers are generally more “moderate” than the positions of the median voter. Figure 14
plots the average realized position of the median (µ − σ2 − ε ) worker by the realized vote share using the
simulated data. It shows that when the union loses, the median worker’s ideal profit is higher than the firm’s
offer, while the worker’s ideal level is more negative than what the union offers, when the union prevails in
the election.
The simulation results also provide insights into worker preferences. The simulations imply that the
distribution of worker preferences for higher compensation is highly skewed left. The 50th percentile of the
median voter distribution (across firms) has a median voter with a preference for the change in equity value
of positive 4.6%. At the same time, 25 percent of median voters have preferences that are more negative
than -4.3%, while 5% have preferences for the change in equity value of less than -24%. This distribution
suggests that the taste for large compensation packages amongst workers considering unionization is present
in only a small number of establishments. We can think of these preferences as related to the establishment’s
elasticity of labor demand in the sense that workers are willing to accept larger compensation packages when
demand is more inelastic and when their jobs are not at risk. From this perspective these simulations imply
that the great majority of establishments undergoing elections have fairly elastic labor demand.
For the policy simulation we hold all of the parameters fixed at their estimated values, and c at -2.29, and
then vary the threshold for a union election win. Changing the threshold alters the probability P (πM , πU ) in
our model. For example, if the threshold is 25% of affirmative votes required to unionize, then the probability




πU
of a firm victory becomes P (πM , πU ) = Pr V S < 14 = λ1ε µ − 34 σ − πM +
. We then conduct a Monte
2
Carlo simulation with 50,000 draws to compute the equilibrium union and management offers, and the union
vote share distribution. We view this analysis as applicable to proposals that would make it easier for unions
to organize workers, such as EFCA. Under the EFCA scenario there would no longer be elections, but it is
arguably still true that we can view workers as deciding between two options (sign card or not), which is not
33

unlike an election with a low union vote threshold. As in our model, firms and unions would try to influence
that decision. Our policy simulation yields predicted effects of making it marginally easier to unionize (as
indexed by the fraction that would win certification).
In Table 7 we present the results from the policy simulations. The columns represent different scenarios
according to the union vote share threshold for certification. The population is split into five mutually
exclusive groups, represented by the rows. Each sub-group will either be all unionized or not, depending
on the scenario, as indicated by the labels “YES” and “NO”. In the “Proportion” column, it is seen that as
the threshold decreases, more and more elections result in a union win. For example, a 25 percent threshold
corresponds to a (33+37+15=) 85 percent union win rate while a 50 percent threshold corresponds to a 33
union win rate.
The first row shows the predicted average percentage change in market value for the entire population for
the different scenarios. Note that here we include both sets of establishments (winners and losers) because
the model allows for management the vary their offers in response to a union threat and because lowering the
threshold changes the composition of establishment in each category, as more establishments are unionizing.
We find that a more than doubling of the union win rate (from 33 to 70 percent, as we move from the 50
percent to the 33 percent vote share threshold), leads to an overall decrease in equity value of about 4 percent.
If the union vote share threshold were lowered to 10 percent, it would increase the proportion unionized to
0.99, and the simulation predicts a further 6.6 percent decline (from -0.058 to -0.124) in equity value.
Our fully specified model allows us to examine the main sources of these changes. We are able to
examine the changes for the sub-groups defined in the second through sixth rows of Table 7. We point to three
general patterns. First, as we lower the vote share threshold, the market value change of the group of firms
that would continue to lose under the new scenario remains fairly stable. Indeed the group in the second row
(“Inframarginal Loss”) experiences no change in market value. This pattern is consistent with management
not being highly responsive to increased union threat as a result of the policy change. By contrast, we do see
important changes in equity value among “inframarginal” unions who are already victorious with the higher
threshold. This can be seen most clearly in the “Inframarginal win” row of Table 7, where the union effect
drops from -0.117 to -0.153, moving from the 50 percent to the 33 percent threshold. This negative equity
effect falls to -0.205 when the threshold falls to 10 percent, which according to the simulation would mean
nearly the entire population would be unionized. Finally, we observe that when a marginal group shifts from
the union losing the election to it winning the election there is a significant reduction in the market value of
34

the firm. We note that each time this occurs, the change in the marginal group (ranging from -0.08 to -0.10)
is reasonably approximated by the the estimated RD estimate using the simulated data (also is in the -0.08 to
-0.10 range), which is shown in the last row of Table 7. Thus, one reason to be cautious about the simulated
overall effect is that it is to some extent being driven by the simulated RD estimate, which is somewhat larger
than the point estimates we obtain from the actual data.
There are other reasons for caution in making these policy predictions, particularly because of our choice
of model. For example, we are not modeling which establishments hold union representation elections in the
first place. It is possible that lowering the threshold for unionization will change the composition of which
establishments hold elections. We speculate that the marginal firms induced to hold an election by the policy
change would be ones where wage demands are relatively weak in the first place, since one could argue that
the cost of holding an election outweighed the potential benefits to the union.
A perhaps more fundamental concern is that our conclusions are made through the lens of a model of
electoral competition. But it is possible that workers are not voting on compensation packages, and hence that
unions and management are not acting strategically to influence the vote. In this case, we might expect to see
the observed relationship between the vote share and the change in the market value because unions require
widespread support in order to be effective, for example to impose a credible strike threat. Distinguishing this
model from the one we propose would involve examining the employment changes following representation
elections. One prediction of a model of electoral competition is that there should be limited employment
effects from new unionization, something that we view as plausible given the results in DiNardo and Lee
(2002, 2004). Exploring this further would be a fruitful avenue for future research.
We are not aware of any other attempt to estimate the impact of policies that ease unionization. Thus, in
spite of the above caveats, we believe that our modeling and simulation exercise, which is disciplined by the
magnitudes we find in our event-study and RD analyses, provides a useful benchmark for policy predictions.

6 Conclusion
The economic effects of unions on the labor market and the economy have been a longstanding area of
interest for economists. The literature has considered the impact of unions on wages, their potential role as
monopolies, their role in work stoppages, their effect on the aggregate economy, as well as the question of
how they can even exist and survive in a competitive labor market. In order to even partially address many

35

of these questions, we must first understand how unions affect firms.
We began by asking whether the case of National Linen Services was the rule or the exception. In one
respect, it is the rule. We have shown that among publicly traded firms where the workforce attempting to
organize is not too small, new unionization is associated with a reduction in the firm’s market value, in a
way that parallels the experience of NLS. Like the NLS case, the stock market reaction to union victories is
somewhat slow, as has been found in a number of other event-study contexts. This finding is robust to the
use of a variety of specifications and to the use of several different methodologies. The negative effects
of unionization on the equity value of firms appears fairly stable over time, showing no major differences
before or after 1984. An examination of accounting variables of both sets of firms reveals that union wins are
associated with relatively lower growth, though there is little evidence to suggest that these firms experienced
lower return on assets or profit margins as compared to firms with union losses. The evidence is therefore
consistent with the claim that unionization reduces the number of sufficiently positive NPV projects available
to a firm.
In another respect, however, the case of NLS is a clear exception. By two years after the union victory,
NLS stock had earned negative 75 percent abnormal returns. By contrast, for our sample we estimate abnormal returns of about negative 10 percent, and our sample is somewhat representative of publicly-traded
firms at risk of unionization. Based on the market capitalization of these firms, this 10 percent equity loss
translates to a total loss of about $40,500 (in 1998 dollars) per voter. Since this amount represents a combination of a transfer to workers as well as lost profit due to inefficiencies caused by the union, one can view
this magnitude as an upper bound on the redistributive effect or the efficiency effect.53 For example, if the
true average union wage effect is 8 percent and if our back-of-the-envelope calculation (that a $40,500 loss
would translate to a pure transfer equivalent to a 10 percent wage premium) is correct, then this would imply
a 2 percent loss in terms of efficiency due to unions.
The large difference in magnitude between the case of NLS and the estimated average effects serves to
highlight the importance of heterogeneous effects, which we carefully document in our analysis. Using a
different sample from DiNardo and Lee (2004), we also find RD estimates that imply unionization is largely
ineffective for firms where there is more moderate support for unions, at least to the extent that unions do not
affect a firm’s equity value. This finding can be reconciled with the findings from the event-study analysis
53 Treating

this magnitude as an upper bound requires assuming that unions can only impose efficiency costs, and cannot lead to
increases in profitability (after netting out compensation costs).

36

through the negative gradient in abnormal returns in relation to the union vote share.
Finally, we consider a voting model of endogenous union determination, and calibrate it with the magnitudes we find in our empirical analysis to make a first-cut prediction on the likely impact of policies that
increase likelihood of unionization. Policy simulations show that easing the threshold necessary to gain
recognition would not lead to union threat effects (firms losing value by having to respond to the threat of
unionization), but would cause unions to use this increased voter slack to be more aggressive. While the
RD estimates reasonably approximate effects for small policy changes, the approximation leads to a increasingly larger understatement of the effects of larger policy shifts. Our exercise suggests that a policy-induced
doubling of unionization would lead to a 4.3 percent decrease in the equity value of all firms at risk of
unionization.

37

References
Abowd, John M., “The Effect of Wage Bargains on the Stock Market Value of the Firm,” American Economic Review, September 1989, 79 (4), 774–800.
Allen, Steven G., “The Effect of Unionism on Productivity in Privately and Publicly Owned Hospitals and
Nursing Homes,” Journal of Labor Research, 1986, 7, 59–68.
, “Unionization and Productivity in Office Building and School Construction,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1986, 39, 187–201.
Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card, “Time Series Representations of Economic Variables and Alternative
Models of the Labour Market,” Review of Economic Studies, 1982, 49 (5), 761–81.
and George Johnson, “Trade Unions, Bargaining Theory, and Industrial Strike Activity,” American
Economic Review, May 1969, 59, 35–49.
Asquith, Paul, “Merger bids, uncertainty, and stockholder returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, April
1983, 11, 51–83.
Atherton, Wallace N., The Theory of Union Bargaining Goals, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1973.
Ball, Ray and Philip Brown, “An Empirical Evaluation of Accounting Income Numbers,” Journal of Accounting Research, Autumn 1968, 6 (2), 159–178.
Barber, Brad M. and William John D. Lyons, “Detecting long-run abnormal stock returns: The empirical
power and specification of test statistics,” Journal of Financial Economics.Volume 43, Issue 3, March
1997, Pages 341-372, March 1997, 43 (3), 341–372.
Basker, Emek, “The Causes and Consequences of Wal-Mart’s Growth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
2007, Summer, 177–198.
Becker, Brian E., “Concession Bargaining: The Impact on Shareholders’ Equity,” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, 1987, 40, 268–279.
and Craig A. Olson, “The Impact of Strikes on Shareholder Equity,” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, April 1986, 39 (3), 425–438.
Blanchflower, David G. and Alex Bryson, “What Effect Do Unions Have on Wages Now and Would
Freeman and Medoff Be Surprised?,” in James T. Bennett and Bruce E. Kaufman, eds., What Do Unions
Do? A Twenty-Yr. Perspective, Transaction Publishers, 2007.
Booth, Alison Lee, The Economics of the Trade Unions, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Brav, Alon, “Inference in Long-Horizon Event Studies: A Bayesian Approach with Application to Initial
Public Offerings,” The Journal of Finance, October 2000, 55 (5), 1979–2016.
and Paul A. Gompers, “Myth or Reality? The Long-Run Underperformance of Initial Public Offerings:
Evidence from Venture and Nonventure Capital-Backed Companies,” Journal of Finance, 1997, 52 (5), 5.
Bronars, Stephen G. and Donald R. Deere, “Union Representation Elections and Firm Profitability,” Industrial Relations, Winter 1990, 29, 15–37.

38

and , “The Threat of Unionization, the Use of Debt, and the Preservation of Shareholder Wealth,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1991, 106, 231–54.
Cameron, Colin A., Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, “Robust Inference with Multi-Way Clustering,” Technical Working Paper T327, National Bureau of Economic Research September 2006.
Campbell, John Y., Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay, The Econometrics of Financial Markets,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997.
Carhart, Mark M., “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance, 1997, 52, 57–82.
Clark, Kim B., “The Impact of Unionization on Productivity: A Case Study,” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, 1980, 33, 451–69.
, “Unionization and Productivity: Micro-Econometric Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1980,
95, 613–39.
, “Unionization and Firm Performance: The Impact on Profits, Growth, and Productivity,” American
Economic Review, December 1984, 74 (5), 893–919.
Cooke, William N., “The Failure to Negotiate First Contracts: Determinants and Policy Implications,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, January 1985, 38 (2), 163–178.
Cusatis, Patrick J., James A. Miles, and J. Randall Woolridge, “Restructuring through spinoffs: The
stock market evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, June 1993, 33 (3), 293–311.
Dellavigna, Stefano and Joshua Pollet, “Demographics and Industry Returns,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Dharan, Bala G. and David L. Ikenberry, “The Long-Run Negative Drift of Post-Listing Stock Returns,”
The Journal of Finance, December 1995, 50 (5), 1547–1574.
DiNardo, John and David S. Lee, “The Impact of Unionization on Establishment Closure: A Regression
Discontinuity Analysis of Representation Elections,” Working Paper 8993, National Bureau of Economic
Research 2002.
and , “Economic Impacts of New Unionization on Private Sector Employers: 1984-2001,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, November 2004, 119 (4), 1383–1441.
and Kevin F. Hallock, “When Unions "Mattered": The Impact of Strikes on Financial Markets, 19251937,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 2002, 55.
Fama, Eugene, “Market efficiency, long-term returns, and behavioral finance,” Journal of Financial Economics, September 1998, 49 (3), 283–306.
Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and Bonds,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 1993, 33, 3–56.
Farber, Henry, “Individual Preferences and Union Wage Determination: The Case of the United Mine
Workers,” Journal of Political Economy, 1978, 86, 923–942.
Farber, Henry S., “An Analysis of Final-Offer Arbitration,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, 1980, 24, 683–
705.

39

, “Right-to-Work Laws and the Extent of Unionization,” Journal of Labor Economics, July 1984, 2 (3),
319–352.
and Bruce Western, “Accounting for the Decline of Unions in the Private Sector, 1973-1998,” Journal
of Labor Research, 2001, 22, 459–486.
Featherstone, Liza, “Will Labor Take the Wal-Mart Challenge?,” The Nation, 2004, June.
Freeman, Richard B. and James L. Medoff, What Do Unions Do?, New York: Basic Books, 1984.
and Morris M. Kleiner, “The Impact of New Unionization on Wages and Working Conditions,” Journal
of Labor Economics, January 1990, 8 (1), S8–S25.
Friedman, Milton, “Some Comments on the Significance of Labor Unions for Economic Policy,” in
David McCord Wright, ed., The Impact of the Union: Eight Economic Theorists Evaluate the Labor
Union Movement, New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1950. Institute on the Structure of the Labor
Market, American University, Washington D.C.
Greenstone, Michael, Paul Oyer, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen, “Mandated Disclosure, Stock Returns,
and the 1964 Securities Acts Amendments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2006, 121 (2), 399–
460.
Harvey, Campbell, “Time-varying conditional covariances in tests of asset pricing models,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 1989, 24 (2), 289–317.
Heckman, James and Joseph Hotz, “Alternative Methods for Evaluating the Impact of Training Programs,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1989.
Hirsch, Barry T., Labor Unions and the Economic Performance of U.S. Firms, Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1991.
, “Union Coverage and Profitability among U.S. Firms,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1991, 73,
69–77.
, “What Do Unions Do for Economic Performance?,” in James T. Bennett and Bruce E. Kaufman, eds.,
What Do Unions Do? A Twenty-Yr. Perspective, Transaction Publishers, 2007.
and David A. Macpherson, Union Membership and Earnings Data Book, Bureau of National Affairs,
Inc., 2008.
Holmes, Thomas, “Geographic Spillover of Unionism,” April 2006.
Hong, Harrison, Terrence Lim, and Jeremy C. Stein, “Bad News Travels Slowly: Size, Analyst Coverage,
and the Profitability of Momentum Strategies,” Journal of Finance, 2000, 55 (1), 2650295.
Huth, William L. and Don N. MacDonald, “Equity Market Response to union Decertification Petitions
and Elections,” Journal of Labor Research, Spring 1990, 11 (2), 193–201.
Ikenberry, David L., Graeme Rankine, and Earl K. Stice, “What Do Stock Splits Really Signal?,” The
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, September 1996, 31 (3), 357–375.
Jaffe, Jeffrey, “Special Information and Insider Trading,” The Journal of Business, July 1974, 47 (3), 410–
428.

40

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan and Sheridan Titman, “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Implications for Stock Market Efficiency,” The Journal of Finance, March 1993, 48 (1), 65–91.
Lalonde, Robert J., G. Marschke, and Kenneth Troske, “Using Longitudinal Data on Establishments to
Analyze the Effects of Union Organizing Campaigns in the United States,” Annales D’Economie et de
Statistique, 1996, 41/42, 155–185.
Lee, David S., “Randomized Experiments from Non-random Selection in U.S. House Elections,” Journal of
Econometrics, 2008, 142, 675–697.
Lewis, H. G., Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986.
Loughran, Tim and Jay R. Ritter, “The New Issues Puzzles,” The Journal of Finance, March 1995, 50 (1),
23–51.
Lyon, John D., Brad M. Barber, and Chih-Ling Tsai, “Improved Methods for Tests of Long-Run Abnormal Stock Returns,” The Journal of Finance, February 1999, 54 (1), 165–201.
Mandelker, Gershon, “Risk and return: The case of merging firms,” Journal of Financial Economics,
December 1974, 1 (4), 303–335.
Matsa, David, “Capital Structure as a Stretegic Variable: Evidence from Collective Bargaining,” September
2006.
Michaely, Roni, Richard H. Thaler, and Kent L. Womack, “Price Reactions to Dividend Initiations and
Omissions: Overreaction or Drift?,” The Journal of Finance, June 1995, 50 (2), 573–608.
Mitchell, Mark L. and Erik Stafford, “Managerial Decisions and Long-Term Stock Price Performance,”
The Journal of Business, July 2000, 73 (3), 287–329.
Mitchell, Merwin W. and Joe A. Stone, “Union Effects on Productivity: Evidence from Western Sawmills,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1992, 46, 135–45.
Moore, William J. and Robert J. Newman, “The Effects of Right-to-Work Laws: A Review of the Literature,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1985, 38 (4), 571–585.
Neumann, George R., “The Predictability of Strikes: Evidence from the Stock Market,” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, July 1990, 33 (4), 535–535.
Olson, Craig A. and Brian E. Becker, “The Effects of the NRLA on Stockholder Wealth in the 1930s,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, October 1990, 44 (1), 116–129.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy, MIT Press,
2000.
Roomkin, Myron and Richard Block, “Case Processing Time and the Outcome of Representation Elections: Some Empirical Evidence,” Univeristy of Illinois Law Review, 1981, 1, 75–97.
Rose, Nancy, “Labor Rent Sharing and Regulation: Evidence from the Trucking Industry,” The Journal of
Political Economy, December 1987, 95 (6), 1146–1178.
Ruback, Richard and Martin Zimmerman, “Unionization and Profitability: Evidence from the Capital
Market,” Journal of Political Economy, 1984, 92, 1134–1157.

41

Data Appendix

This Appendix describes how we match establishments in the NLRB data to firms in the CRSP database.
When matching we looked for similarities in the name listed in the NLRB election file to names that were
ever present in the CRSP files. To this end, we created two data sets: one containing the company names in
the NLRB election file and the other containing every company name that has ever appeared in the CRSP
database.54 This second data set will be hereafter referred to as the “master names file." In addition to the
company names, the master names file also contains a unique company id, the “PERMNO”, which allows
for further matching to the CRSP and Compustat databases.
There are 195,889 certification elections in the NLRB data set that could potentially be matched to
companies in the master names file. Because the matching process is tedious, and must almost entirely
be done manually, we excluded any election with less than 100 voters. This resulted in 24,709 firms in
the certification election file that potentially matched firms in the master list of CRSP company names.55
These elections are comprised of 61 percent of all workers eligible to vote in NLRB certification elections.
Using this smaller subset, firms in the election file were compared to firms in the master CRSP file using the
matching algorithm employed by DiNardo and Lee (2004), which makes use of the SAS SPEDIS function.
The algorithm matches company names in the NLRB file to company names in the master names file based
on a so-called “spelling distance,” which considers those comparisons with a spelling distance above a predetermined threshold as candidate matches.56 The algorithm may match a company in the election file to
more than one company name in the CRSP file. In these cases we selected the lowest spelling distance as
the candidate match. If there was a tie in spelling distance between two candidate comparisons, we selected
one match at random.
Because we matched firms on names only, manual inspection of the matches revealed that our automated
procedure resulted in many matches that were obviously incorrect. Therefore, research assistants reviewed
54 Many

companies have multiple names.
a firm can have multiple elections, this number includes multiple cases of the same firms. There are 18,344 unique
firm spellings, though there are fewer unique firm names because of misspellings and abbreviations.
56 We refer the reader to DiNardo and Lee (2004) for further details on this algorithm. That study relied heavily on the establishment’s street address, which is unavailable here. Therefore, the spelling distance threshold was quite specific to that application. As
a first pass, we modified the program to match only on firm name, and discovered that in this application, that same threshold led to
“too many” matches. As we describe below, we therefore augmented the process with a manual review.
55 Because

42

every match and dropped those where they judged the two firm names as different companies.57 ,58 We then
collected all of the unmatched companies in the election file, from the initial set of 24,709, and attempted to
locate each one in Dun and Bradstreet’s Million Dollar Directory and the Lexis/Nexis’ Directory of Corporate
Affiliations for the year of election. This step identified subsidiaries of publicly traded parent companies,
and allowed us to spot companies that were dropped erroneously in the previous step.
We ultimately matched 7,693 elections from the NLRB election file to companies in the CRSP master
file. In 1,579 cases, the firm in the CRSP file was not publicly traded at the time of the election. After
excluding the private firms, our final sample contained 6,114 elections, consisting of 20 percent of all workers
eligible to vote in NLRB elections.
In order to determine whether the matches appeared reasonable, we compared the reported two-digit
SIC industry code and the state of the establishment from the election file to the corresponding variables in
the CRSP and Compustat files, for industry and state respectively. Because companies are diversified, the
main SIC code for a company in the CRSP database need not be the same as the SIC code for a particular
establishment in the NLRB election file. Similarly, an establishment may not be located in the same state
as the company’s headquarters. However, the comparisons are reassuring: the two digit SIC codes in the
two data sets are the same for 50 percent of the matches, while 40 percent of the matches show the same
state. For reference, if we randomly pair companies from the final NLRB data set to companies in the master
names file that were never matched to the NLRB data through our procedure, the corresponding match rate
is 5 percent for industry and 4 percent for state.

57 For example, the algorithm determined that any company in the election file with the word “American” as part of its name was
a sufficiently good match for the company “American Enterprises” in the CRSP file, if a better match did not exist. Therefore, a disparate set of companies like “American Laundry,”“American Envelope,”and “Pan American Screws” were all matched to “American
Enterprise.”All of these matches were dropped by our research assistants.
58 Because there was an element of judgment, these exclusions were recorded in a log file for replication purposes.

43

-.5

Cumulative return
0

.5

Figure 1: Cumulative stock market returns surrounding National Linen Service’s 1999
representation election

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to NLRB election
National Linen Service Corp.
CRSP equally-weighted market index

20

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2
.3

.4

Figure 2: Average cumulative returns of union victory firms and of the size-matched reference
portfolio, by month relative to NLRB case closure

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Union victory

20

Benchmark

Note: Union victory firms consist of publicly traded companies holding representation elections where at least 5% of the
company’s workforce voted, and where the union won. Each point is the average cumulative return up to the month relative to
case closure, beginning 24 months prior to case closure. Each firm in the sample is associated with a benchmark portfolio
matched on size. The benchmark series corresponds to the average cumulative return of these size-matched reference portfolios.
Returns are expressed net of the risk-free rate.

Figure 3: Average cumulative abnormal return of union victory firms, by month relative to NLRB
case closure

-.2

Average cumulative abnormal return
-.15
-.1
-.05
0

.05

Panel A: Beginning 24 months prior to case closure

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure

20

-.15

Average cumulative abnormal return
-.1
-.05

0

Panel B: Beginning month of case closure

0

5

10
15
Months relative to case closure

20

25

Notes: Both panels show the difference in the average cumulative return of union victory firms and the size-matched reference
portfolio, as shown in Figure 2. Panel A corresponds to the average cumulative abnormal return computed beginning 24 months
prior to case closure. Panel B corresponds to the average cumulative abnormal return computed beginning in the month of case
closure. The dashed lines represent the 95% confidence intervals, which are computed using standard errors clustered on
elections and calendar months. We use the formula in Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2006) to compute standard errors with
multi-way clustering.

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2

.3

Figure 4: Average cumulative returns of union loss firms and of the size-matched reference
portfolio, by month relative to NLRB case closure

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Union loss

20

Benchmark

Note: Union loss firms consist of publicly traded companies holding representation elections where at least 5% of the company’s
workforce voted, and where the union lost. Each point is the average cumulative return up to the month relative to case closure,
beginning 24 months prior to case closure. Each firm in the sample is associated with a benchmark portfolio matched on size.
The benchmark series corresponds to the average cumulative return of these size-matched reference portfolios. Returns are
expressed net of the risk-free rate.

Figure 5: Average cumulative abnormal returns of union loss firms, by month relative to case
closure

-.05

Average cumulative abnormal return
0
.05

.1

Panel A: Beginning 24 months prior to case closure

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure

20

-.05

Average cumulative abnormal return
0
.05

.1

Panel B: Beginning month of case closure

0

5

10
15
Months relative to case closure

20

25

Notes: Both panels show the difference in the average cumulative return of the union loss portfolio and the size-matched
reference portfolio, shown in Figure 4. Panel A corresponds to the average cumulative abnormal return computed beginning 24
months prior to case closure. Panel B corresponds to the average cumulative abnormal return computed beginning at the month
of case closure. The dashed lines represent the 95% confidence intervals, which are computed using standard errors clustered on
elections and calendar months. We use the formula in Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller (2006) to compute standard errors with
multi-way clustering.

-.2

Average cumulative abnormal return
-.15
-.1
-.05
0
.05

Figure 6: Average cumulative abnormal return, by analyst coverage

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Covered by analyst

20

Not covered by analyst

Note: A company is considered to have analyst coverage if it appears in the I/B/E/S dataset in the year of the
election. The sample is limited to elections occurring in years where I/B/E/S data were available, between 1976 and
1999

-.15

Average cumulative abnormal return
-.1
-.05
0

.05

Figure 7: Average cumulative abnormal return, by time period of election

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
1984-1999

1961-1983

20

Panel G

-10 -5
0
5
10
Quarters relative to certificaton

Panel E

-10
-5
0
5
10
Quarters relative to certificaton

Panel H

-10
-5
0
5
10
Quarters relative to certificaton

D em ea ned ln( sa les )
-.15-.1
- .050.05.1

-10
-5
0
5
10
Quarters relative to certificaton

D em ea ned T ob. Q
-.05 0 .05 .1

-10 -5
0
5
10
Quarters relative to certificaton

Panel B

D em ea ned pr ofit m arg .
-.01
-.00 50.005.01

Panel D

D em ean ed ln( shr e q.)
-.1-.05 0 .05 .1

-10 -5
0
5
10
Quarters relative to certificaton

D em ean ed lev era ge
-.02
- .01 0 .01.02

Panel A

D em ean ed R OA
-.01-.005 0 .005

D em ean ed ln(in c.)
-.2 -.1 0 .1 .2

D em ean ed ln(PP E)
-.15-.1-.050.05.1

D em ean ed ln(as s ets )
-.15-.1-.050.05.1

Figure 8: Compustat variables; Union victory/loss comparisons

Panel C

-10
-5
0
5
10
Quarters relative to certificaton

Panel F

-10
-5
0
5
10
Quarters relative to certificaton

Panel I

-10
-5
0
5
10
Quarters relative to certificaton

Notes: The sample consists of publicly traded companies with elections taking place between 1973-1999 where at
least 5% of the workforce voted. Lines with circles correspond to union victory companies. Lines with diamonds
correspond to union loss companies. All variables are drawn from the Compustat quarterly database. Each variable
is demeaned, where the mean is taken within each election panel.

0

50

Frequency
100

150

200

Figure 9: Histogram of the union vote share

.025 .075 .125 .175 .225 .275 .325 .375 .425 .475 .525 .575 .625 .675 .725 .775 .825 .875 .925 .975

-1

-.75

E[CMAR(0,24)| Union vote share]
-.5 -.25 0 .25 .5 .75 1

1.25

Figure 10: Cumulative abnormal returns in the two years after NLRB closes election, by relation to
vote share

0

.2

.4
.6
Union vote share

.8

1

Note: Abnormal returns are the simple difference in the security’s return and the size-matched benchmark portfolio
in the same month. Cumulative abnormal returns are the sum of the abnormal returns over a two year period
beginning in the month of case closure. Predicted values are calculated using a sixth-order polynomial, and an
indicator for whether the union won. Dashed lines are the 95% confidence interval. Dots are the average
cumulative excess return in 20 equally spaced bins. See Section 4.4 for further details on the construction of this
figure.

-.4

-.2

E[CAR | vote share]
0
.2

.4

.6

Figure 11: Cumulative abnormal returns in the pre- and post-event periods, by relation to vote
share

0

.2

.4
.6
Union vote share
CAR(0,24)

.8

1

CAR(-24,-4)

Notes: Predicted values are calculated using a sixth-order polynomial and an indicator for whether the union won.
The solid line corresponds to the predicted cumulative excess return in the two years following case closure,
conditional on union vote share. The dashed line corresponds to the predicted cumulative abnormal return
calculated starting 24 months prior to the election through four months prior to case closure, conditional on union
vote share. See Section 4.4 for further details on the construction of this figure.

-1

E[CAR(0,24)| Union vote share]
-.5
0
.5
1

1.5

Figure 12: Cumulative adjusted abnormal returns in the two years after NLRB closes election, by
relation to vote share

0

.2

.4
.6
Union vote share

.8

1

Notes: Adjusted-cumulative abnormal returns are cumulative abnormal returns that have been adjusted for securityspecific pre-election trend in abnormal returns. See Section 4.4 for details on the construction of this variable.
Predicted values are calculated using a sixth-order polynomial and an indicator for whether the union won. Dashed
lines are the 95% confidence intervals.

0

.05

Relative frequency

.1

.15

Figure 13: Histogram of simulated equilibrium vote shares

.025 .075 .125 .175 .225 .275 .325 .375 .425 .475 .525 .575 .625 .675 .725 .775 .825

-1

Average cumulative excess return
-.75 -.5 -.25 0
.25 .5 .75

1

Figure 14: Predicted change in market value, as a function of the observed vote share, using the
simulated data

0

.2

.4
Union vote share

Average preference of median voter

.6
Average outcome

.8

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Number of elections

At least 5% of workforce voting
Union wins
Union loses
414
1022

Less than 5% of workforce voting
Union wins
Union loses
1163
2682

Vote share for union

0.62
[0.11]

0.35
[0.10]

0.64
[0.13]

0.35
[0.10]

Number of voters

449.1
[534.9]

454.2
[558.5]

276.5
[263.4]

297.6
[301.6]

Number eligible

496.0
[649.3]

494.0
[638.9]

286.4
[286.1]

317.9
[330.4]

Fraction of employees voting

0.21
[0.21]

0.23
[0.21]

0.01
[0.01]

0.01
[0.01]

Year of election

1975.2
[9.17]

1976.9
[9.11]

1974.9
[9.24]

1976.6
[9.42]

0.78

0.75

0.79

0.81

Number of employees

3813.3
[5377.5]

3430.8
[5195.4]

68468.6
[134336.5]

75284.6
[123610]

Market Value (CRSP)

353.8
[880.3]

330.9
[783.8]

4734.1
[10,547]

6350
[13,660]

Market Value (Compustat)

308.7
[614.9]
{0.34}

329.80
[799.0]
{0.33}

6334.1
[13372.0]
{0.76}

7580.9
[16,343.1]
{0.78}

Shareholder equity

242.6
[433.0]
{0.34}

233.2
[497.7]
{0.31}

4991.7
[13859.3]
{0.77}

4479.8
[9432.4]
{0.77}

Total Assets

588.4
[1243.3]
{0.37}

683.8
[1876.5]
{0.31}

13974.4
[36396.5]
{0.78}

14164.9
[33308.0]
{0.79}

Total Liabilities/Total Assets

0.060
[0.118]
{0.58}

0.068
[0.162]
{0.44}

0.062
[0.112]
{0.55}

0.071
[0.183]
{0.60}

Pretax income

15.11
[46.97]
{0.35}

9.76
[41.9]
{0.36}

249.3
[731.7]
{0.74}

276.3
[731.1]
{0.74}

Fraction in Manufacturing

Table 1 (cont.)
At least 5% of workforce voting
Union victory
Union loss
(UV firms)
(UL firms)

Less than 5% of workforce voting
Union victory
Union loss
(UV firms)
(UL firms)

Sales

160.7
[238.7]
{0.33}

144.2
[225.1]
{0.31}

2693.5
[5306.3]
{0.80)

3041.2
[5534.1]
{0.80}

Tobin's Q

1.17
[0.658]
{0.44}

1.30
[0.694]
{0.50}

1.29
[0.642]
{0.48}

1.31
[0.625]
{0.56}

Profit margin

0.069
[0.119]
{0.44}

0.060
[0.167]
{0.50}

0.084
[0.073]
{0.46}

0.084
[0.074]
{0.52}

Income/Employees

0.004
[0.023]
{0.41}

0.003
[0.008]
{0.49}

0.004
[0.006]
{0.48}

0.004
[0.007]
{0.51}

Return on Assets

0.013
[0.051]
{0.48}

0.022
[0.037]
{0.53}

0.026
[0.023]
{0.47}

0.027
[0.027]
{0.25}

Dividend Ratio

0.633
[3.42]
{0.44}

0.259
[1.100]
{0.50}

1.15
[6.99]
{0.58}

0.941
[11.02]
{0.59}

0.10

0.08

0.049

0.028

Fraction of stocks delisted

Notes: Summary statistics are based on the NLRB election, Compustat, and CRSP data. Standard deviations
are in brackets. For Compustat variables, the average percentile rank, relative to all Compustat companies in the
year and quarter of the election, are in braces. Market value, shareholder equity, total assets, pretax income, and
sales are in millions of dollars. Summary statistics for market value are derived from both the CRSP and
Compustat databases. These measures differ because there are more missing values in the Compustat database.
Fraction of stocks delisted is computed as the fraction of stocks with a non-missing delisting return in a two year
window surrounding the NLRB case closure month. Profit margin = pre-tax income/sales. Dividend ratio =
dividends/pre-tax income.

Table 2: Estimates of post-election cumulative abnormal returns
(1)
Size-matched
benchmark

(2)
Size × industrymatched
benchmark

(3)
Broad-market
benchmark

ACAR(0,24)

-0.092
(0.028)

-0.096
(0.028)

-0.103
(0.029)

ACAR (-24,-4)

-0.010
(0.020)

-0.009
(0.020)

-0.010
(0.020)

Adjusted- ACAR (0,24)

-0.100
(0.042)

-0.103
(0.042)

-0.111
(0.042)

ACAR (0,24)

0.029
(0.021)

0.020
(0.020)

0.016
(0.022)

ACAR (-24,-4)

0.034
(0.022)

0.004
(0.014)

-0.009
(0.014)

Panel A: Union Victory

Panel B: Union Loss

Adjusted- ACAR (0,24)

0.029
0.016
0.028
(0.030)
(0.032)
(0.031)
Notes: ACAR(X,Y) denotes the average cumulative abnormal return from month X to month
Y relative to the NLRB case closure month. There are 414 elections in the sample in Panel
A, and 1022 elections in Panel B. See Section 3.2 for details on the construction of the
benchmark portfolios and estimation.

Table 3: Relating post-event cumulative abnormal returns to the
share of the workforce in the bargaining unit
(1)
ACAR(0,24)

(2)
Adjusted- ACAR
(0,24)

Constant

0.03
(0.01)

-0.01
(0.02)

Share of workforce in
bargaining unit

-0.31
(0.08)

-0.26
(0.13)

Observations
Panel B: Union loss

1577

1577

Constant

0.03
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)

Share of workforce in
bargaining unit

0.06
(0.05)

0.17
(0.08)

Panel A: Union win

Observations
3704
3704
Note: Sample includes all NLRB elections that we matched to publicly traded
firms. See note to Figure 2 for details on how ACAR(0,24) and Adjusted-ACAR
(0,24) were constructed.

Table 4: Fama-French calendar time Portfolio estimates
Panel A: Union Win Portfolio (≥5% sample)
Event-window: Alpha
MKTRF
(0,24)
-0.0051
0.909
(0.0014)
(0.035)
(-24,-4)
-0.0015
0.996
(0.0015)
(0.038)

HML
0.421
(0.054)
0.487
(0.062)

SMB
1.12
(0.048)
1.14
(0.054)

Panel B: Union Loss Portfolio (≥5% sample)
Event-window: Alpha
MKTRF
(0,24)
-0.0001
1.04
(0.0017)
(0.031)
(-24,-4)
-0.0005
0.970
(0.0011)
(0.020)

HML
0.469
(0.048)
0.264
(0.040)

SMB
1.01
(0.043)
1.04
(0.035)

Panel C: Union Win Portfolio (<5% sample)
Event-window: Alpha
MKTRF
(0,24)
0.0010
1.10
(0.0014)
(0.037)
(-24,-4)
-0.0009
1.10
(0.001)
(0.026)

HML
0.395
(0.055)
0.283
(0.042)

SMB
0.222
(0.048)
0.373
(0.037)

Panel D: Union Loss Portfolio (<5% sample)
Event-window: Alpha
MKTRF
(0,24)
-0.0015
1.14
(0.0007)
(0.023)
(-24,-4)
-0.0009
1.10
(0.0008)
(0.017)

HML
0.509
(0.035)
0.220
(0.031)

SMB
0.212
(0.030)
0.335
(0.027)

Note: The “≥5% sample” consists of elections where at least 5% of the firm’s workforce voted. The “<5%
sample” corresponds to elections where less than 5% of the firm’s workforce voted. MKTRF is the
monthly return of the CRSP value-weighted NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ broad market index, SMB is the
monthly return on the zero investment portfolio for the common size factor in stock returns, and HML is the
monthly return on the zero investment portfolio for the common book-to-market equity factor in stock
returns. The unit of observation is the calendar month. Observations are weighted by the number of firms
in the event-window.

Table 5: Compustat Analysis
(1)

(3)

(4)

ln(Assets)

(2)
ln(Shareholder
equity)

ln(Sales)

(5)
ln(pretax
income)

(6)
Dividend
Ratio

(7)
Profit
margin

ln(PPE)

post

0.150
(0.021)

0.106
(0.020)

0.137
(0.028)

0.132
(0.019)

0.168
(0.031)

-0.197
(0.118)

post
× union win

-0.110
(0.037)

-0.098
(0.035)

-0.113
(0.048)

-0.077
(0.034)

-0.168
(0.062)

Observations

14,319

16,220

14,223

17,028

14,042

(8)
ROA

(9)
Tobin's
Q

(10)
Liabilities/
Assets

0.0001
(0.002)

-0.004
(0.001)

-0.054
(0.026)

-0.001
(0.005)

0.045
(0.263)

-0.005
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.031
(0.038)

0.003
(0.008)

6,127

14,585

13,960

14,035

5,791

R-squared
0.97
0.95
0.96
0.94
0.75
0.084
0.64
0.32
0.66
0.28
Notes: Variables are derived from Compustat data; 1973-1999. Each column corresponds to a different model estimated using OLS. Standard errors
clustered on election are in parentheses. Observations are event quarter × firm cells. The dependent variables are demeaned, where the mean is taken
over all non-missing observations in an election panel. Sample sizes vary due to the presence of missing values. PPE stands for plant, property, and
equipment. ROA stands for return on assets.

Table 6: Cumulative abnormal returns and vote share

Constant

Union won

(1)
0.029
(0.021)

CAR(0,24):
(2)
(3)
-0.065
-0.075
(0.030)
(0.039)

(4)
-0.064
(0.035)

-0.121
(0.035)

0.048
(0.054)

0.049
(0.053)

0.080
(0.066)

Union won
×vote share
vote share

p(vote share)

(5)
0.0003
(0.016)

CAR(-24,-4):
(6)
(7)
-0.018
-0.029
(0.025)
(0.033)

(8)
-0.035
(0.030)

(9)
0.029
(0.030)

0.003
(0.028)

0.037
(0.046)

0.027
(0.047)

-0.129
(0.051)

0.021
(0.057)

-0.016
(0.321)
-0.616
(0.160)

-0.610
(0.207)
X

Adjusted-CAR(0,24):
(10)
(11)
-0.024
-0.029
(0.045)
(0.058)
-0.032
(0.081)

0.035
(0.101)

0.332
(0.255)
-0.123
(0.126)

-0.235
(0.162)
X

(12)
-0.002
(0.053)
-0.019
(0.082)
-0.439
(0.469)

-0.353
(0.233)

-0.205
(0.301)
X

Observations
1436
1436
1436
1436
1436
1436
1436
1436
1436
1436
1436
1436
Note: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. The sample consists of all elections where at least 5% of the workforce voted. The variable “vote share”
denotes the union vote share, minus 0.5. Following Dinardo and Lee (2004), the vote share is aggregated to 20 discrete bins. The dependent variable is the
cumulative abnormal return from months 0 to 24 relative to case closure (columns 1-4), the cumulative abnormal return from -24 through -4 months relative to
case closure (columns 5-8), and the adjusted-cumulative abnormal return from 0 to 24 (columns 9-12),. See Section 4.4 for details on the construction of these
variables. The term p(vote share) denotes a fourth-order polynomial in the union vote share.

Table 7: Simulated Market Value Changes Under Different Vote Threshold Scenarios
Group

Proportion Threshold=0.50
Effect
Win?

-0.058

Threshold=0.25
Effect
Win?
-0.083

Threshold=0.10
Effect
Win?

Overall

1.00

Inframarginal Union Loss

0.01

0.042 NO

0.042 NO

0.042 NO

0.042 NO

Marginal Group 1

0.13

0.042 NO

0.042 NO

0.042 NO

-0.062 YES

Marginal Group 2

0.15

0.042 NO

0.040 NO

-0.041 YES

-0.074 YES

Marginal Group 3

0.37

0.031 NO

-0.050 YES

-0.069 YES

-0.098 YES

Inframaringal union win

0.33

-0.117 YES

-0.153 YES

-0.171 YES

-0.205 YES

-0.080

-0.081

-0.082

-0.108

Simulated Discontinuity

-0.015

Threshold=0.33
Effect
Win?

-0.124

Note: Each column represents a different scenario for necessary union vote share necessary for certification. The population is split into five groups
(represented by rows). "Inframarginal loss" denotes firms that would not be unionized under any scenario. "Inframarginal win" denotes firms that would be
unionized under all scenarios. "Marginal Groups" denote firms in which unions would lose under one or more scenarios, but would win with a lower
threshold (as indicated under the sub-column "Win?"). e.g. Marginal Group 3 comprises of firms where the union vote is marginally below the 50 percent
when the threshold is 0.50; they would become unionized in any of the other scenarios. "Simulated Discontinuity" is the RD estimate - via a 4th order
polynomial regression -- using the simulated data.

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2
.3

.4

Appendix Figure 1: Average cumulative returns of union victory firms and of the sized-matched
benchmark; non-imputed data

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Union victory

Benchmark

20

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2
.3

.4

Appendix Figure 2: Average cumulative returns of union victory firms and of the sized-matched
benchmark; Balanced panel

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Union victory

Benchmark

20

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2
.3

.4

Appendix Figure 3: Average cumulative returns of union victory firms and of the sized-matched
benchmark; eliminate 5% most positive and 5% most negative post-event abnormal return
elections

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Union victory

Benchmark

20

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2
.3
.4

.5

Appendix Figure 4: Average cumulative returns of union victory firms and of the sized-matched
benchmark; Four year pre-event window

-40

-20
0
Months relative to event
Union victory
portfolio

Benchmark

20

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2
.3

.4

Appendix Figure 5: Average cumulative returns of union victory firms and of the industry×sizedmatched benchmark

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Union victory

Benchmark

20

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2
.3

.4

Appendix Figure 6: Average cumulative returns of union victory firms and of the CRSP equallyweighted index benchmark

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Union victory

Benchmark

20

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2

.3

Appendix Figure 7: Average cumulative returns of union loss firms and of the sized-matched
benchmark; non-imputed data

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Union loss

Benchmark

20

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2

.3

Appendix Figure 8: Average cumulative returns of union loss firms and of the sized-matched
benchmark; Balanced panel

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Union loss

Benchmark

20

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2

.3

Appendix Figure 9: Average cumulative returns of union loss firms and of the sized-matched
benchmark; eliminate 5% most positive and 5% most negative post-event abnormal return
elections

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Union loss

Benchmark

20

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2
.3
.4

.5

Appendix Figure 10: Average cumulative returns of union loss firms and of the sized-matched
benchmark; Four year pre-event window

-40

-20
0
Months relative to event
Union loss

Benchmark

20

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2

.3

Appendix Figure 11: Average cumulative returns of union loss firms and of the industry×sizedmatched benchmark

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Union loss

Benchmark

20

0

Average cumulative return
.1
.2

.3

Appendix Figure 12: Average cumulative returns of union loss firms and of the CRSP equallyweighted index benchmark

-20

-10
0
10
Months relative to case closure
Union loss

Benchmark

20

