                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   STEREOTYPE THREAT AND THE STUDENT-ATHLETE

                                             Thomas S. Dee

                                         Working Paper 14705
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14705


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2009




I would like to thank the Mellon Tri-College Forum for financial support through its seed grant program.
I would also like to thank participants at the Fall 2008 NBER Higher Education Working Group meeting,
the Tri-College Summer Seminar and the Mellon 23 Workshop "Evaluating Teaching and Learning
at Liberal Arts Colleges" for useful comments. I would also like to thank Carolyn Abott, Andrew Fieldhouse,
and Yimei Zhou for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2009 by Thomas S. Dee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Stereotype Threat and the Student-Athlete
Thomas S. Dee
NBER Working Paper No. 14705
February 2009
JEL No. C9,D0,I2

                                               ABSTRACT

Achievement gaps may reflect the cognitive impairment thought to occur in evaluative settings (e.g.,
classrooms) where a stereotyped identity is salient (i.e., stereotype threat). This study presents an economic
model of stereotype threat that reconciles prior evidence on how student effort and performance are
influenced by this social-identity phenomenon. This study also presents empirical evidence from a
laboratory experiment in which students at a selective college were randomly assigned to a treatment
that primed their awareness of a stereotyped identity (i.e., student-athlete). This treatment reduced
the test-score performance of athletes relative to non-athletes by 14 percent (effect size = -1.0).


Thomas S. Dee
Department of Economics
Swarthmore College
Swarthmore, PA 19081
and NBER
dee@swarthmore.edu
1     Introduction

The relevance of an individual’s social identity for a variety of outcomes has

long been a central concept in most social sciences. However, economists have

only recently begun to explore explicitly the behavioral and welfare implications

of social identities (Akerlof and Kranton 2000,2002,2005; Fang and Loury 2005;

Bénabou and Tirole 2006; Benjamin, Choi, and Strickland 2007). One particu-

larly prominent thread in the broader research on social identity has been the

social-psychology literature on the phenomenon known as "stereotype threat."

Stereotype threat refers to the perceived risk of con…rming, through one’s behav-

ior or outcomes, negative stereotypes that are held about one’s social identity.

More speci…cally, its key conjecture is that the threat of being viewed through

the lens of a negative stereotype can create an anxiety that disrupts cognitive

performance and in‡uences outcomes and behaviors. The seminal study on this

topic (Steele and Aronson 1995) focused on the role of race in education-related

settings and presented evidence that subtly priming experimental subjects to

be aware of their racial identity did compromise their cognitive performance.

Numerous studies have since replicated the e¤ects of stereotype threat both

with respect to social identities other than race (e.g., gender) and with respect

to multiple outcomes (e.g., blood pressure, heart-rate variability, performance

expecations, e¤ort, risk aversion, and time discounting).

    In this study, I present a simple economic model of stereotype threat. This

model extends the conventional social-psychology explication of stereotype threat

by explicitly modeling stereotype threat in a choice-based framework. In partic-

ular, this simple model reconciles seemingly contradictory results in the extant

empirical literature by illustrating how the e¤ects of stereotype threat on e¤ort

and performance depend on context-speci…c factors. This model also di¤ers from

recent economic models of social identity in a straightforward but conceptually


                                       1
important detail. Previous economic models of identity have viewed individuals

as choosing behaviors that correspond to the social norms for an identity (or

set of identities) that they unambiguously view as their own. However, individ-

uals experiencing stereotype threat do not necessarily feel that they personally

do (or should) subscribe to stereotyped traits. Rather, it is the apprehension

that others view them through the lens of a negative stereotype that is conjec-

tured to create anxiety that compromises cogntive functioning and, eventually,

identi…cation with the stereotyped domain.

   This study also presents the results of a stereotype-threat experiment that

focuses on a particular social identity: that of a student-athlete at a selec-

tive post-secondary institution (i.e., Swarthmore College). The role of athlet-

ics at selective colleges and universities has recently received renewed critical

scrutiny following the publication of two widely discussed books ("The Game

of Life" by Shulman and Bowen [2001] and "Reclaiming the Game" by Bowen

and Levin [2003]), which documented a growing "athletic-academic divide." Us-

ing the unique "College and Beyond" data set on students from 30 selective

colleges and universities (including Swarthmore College), Shulman and Bowen

(2001) presented evidence that student-athletes received a substantial admis-

sions advantage but underperformed academically, even relative to their weaker

academic preparation. The College Sports Project, a collaborative initiative of

more than 70 Division III colleges and universities, has provided more current

data on the comparative academic performance of student-athletes by tracking

outcomes among the nearly 40,000 who entered the participating institutions

during the 2005-06 academic year. The …rst year of data from this study in-

dicate that there were only modest di¤erences in the performance of female

athletes and non-athletes but that male athletes (and, in particular, recruited

male athletes) underperformed relative to non-athletes (i.e., 8 percentile points



                                       2
lower in class rank).

    Bowen and Levin (2003, page 165) argue that the academic underperfor-

mance of student-athletes at selective institutions is explained primarily by in-

creasingly intense and specialized recruitment and admissions practices that

unintentionally select for students with comparatively low levels of academic

engagement (and not by the time demands or the unobserved socioeconomic

traits of student-athletes). However, Shulman and Bowen (2001) also acknowl-

edge that stereotype threat (i.e., the anxiety created by the threat of being

viewed as an especially undeserving student in a highly selective academic set-

ting) may also contribute to the academic underperformance of student-athletes.

They also note that "unfortunately, we have no way of assessing how important

stereotype threat is in the case of athletes" (Shulman and Bowen 2001, page

236). The experimental evidence presented here addresses this question directly

by testing whether athletics-related stereotype threat compromises cognitive

performance at one of the institutions in the "College and Beyond" data set.



2     Stereotype Threat and College Athletics

2.1    An Economic Model of Stereotype Threat

The model introduced in this section illustrates the conjectured mechanisms

by which stereotype threat can in‡uence both student e¤ort and their level of

skill formation. The basic theoretical framework introduced by Akerlof and

Kranton (2002) extends their seminal economic analysis of identity (Akerlof

and Kranton 2000) to issues related directly to schooling and provides a useful

point of departure for this model. Akerlof and Kranton (2002) present models

in which students explicity choose their social identity (e.g., leading crowd, nerd

or burnout). In models of this type, utility is determined by the social status of



                                        3
one’s chosen identity and by how well an endowment of traits (e.g., appearance,

intelligence) and a chosen level of e¤ort allow one to approximate the ideal

of that chosen social identity. Akerlof and Kranton (2002) discuss how these

intriguing models provide new insights into several stylized facts and paradoxes

from prior research on education policy. However, models of this type do not

correspond exactly with how social psychologists conceptualize the interaction

of social identity and stereotype threat. In particular, stereotype threat is not

about conforming to the ideals of what an individual actor perceives as their

salient social identity. Instead, the salient feature of stereotype threat is the

apprehension and diminished cognitive performance that may be created by the

suspicion about how one is viewed by others. In other words, the e¤ects of

stereotype threat do not depend on believing that one’s identity corresponds to

any particular stereotype. Rather, it is due to the anxiety from believing others

may see you as belong to that stereotyped identity.

   A simple extension of their model illustrates how stereotype threat may

in‡uence student e¤ort and outcomes. In a baseline economic model of e¤ort,

an individual’s utility re‡ects the return to skill, w, and a level of skill, k(n; e),

that is a function of ability, n, and e¤ort, e:

                                               1 2
                                  wk(n; e)       e                                (1)
                                               2

The second term in this utility function re‡ects the disutility of expending ef-

fort. Also following Akerlof and Kranton (2002, page 1174), skill formation is

assumed to increase linearly in one’s endownment of ability (i.e., k(n; e) = ne).

Akerlof and Kranton (2002) extend this simple model by introducing additional

arguments that re‡ect the returns and costs associated with particular social

identities that are available to choose. However, stereotype threat is not di-

rectly about the consequences of choosing an identity. Instead, the key feature


                                          4
of stereotype threat is the cognitive disruption from situational threats due to

concern about how one is viewed by others (e.g., being an athlete in classroom

at a highly selective institution). This simple model can be adjusted to re‡ect

this conceptualization by making the ability term, n, a decreasing function of

situational threats, t, that create this anxiety (i.e., nt < 0). Speci…cally, a sim-

ple model of stereotype threat would assume that an individual chooses a level

of e¤ort to maximize the following:

                                             1 2
                                  wn(t)e       e                                (2)
                                             2

In this extension of the baseline model, the e¤ect of stereotype threat on the

chosen level of e¤ort, e , can be shown to be unambiguously negative:

                                  @e
                                     = wnt < 0                                  (3)
                                  @t

The negative e¤ect of stereotype threat on e¤ort follows from the de…ning

assumption that stereotype threat decreases the productivity of e¤ort (i.e.,

nt < 0). The intuition here is straightforward: stereotype threat is, in e¤ect,

a negative productivity shock that compromises the return to academic e¤ort,

thereby reducing the amount of e¤ort chosen. The e¤ect of stereotype threat

on the equilibrium level of skill formation is illustrated by the following total

derivative:
                            dk(n; e ; t)            @e
                                         = e nt + n                             (4)
                                dt                  @t

The decision to expend less e¤ort in the presence of stereotype threat ( @e
                                                                          @t < 0),

combined with the reduction in the productivity of that e¤ort (nt < 0), implies

that skill formation becomes unambiguously lower.

   One notable shortcoming of this basic model is that it incorporates neither

the disutility that students may experience directly from stereotype threat nor


                                         5
how they respond to this disutility. Experiencing stereotype threat is likely to

reduce individual utility directly by increasing anxiety and discomfort (i.e., not

only through its e¤ect on skill formation). Furthermore, the direct disutility

created by stereotype threat could also have implications for the level of ef-

fort chosen. Individuals may attempt to reduce the direct disutility created by

stereotype threat by increasing their e¤ort in an attempt to de‡ect the stereo-

typed social identity. One way to think of this is as a "I’ll show them!" response

to the situational threat. A limited amount of empirical evidence suggests the

possible relevance of this phenomenon. For example, Steele and Aronson (1995,

page 804) found that a race-based prime increased the likelihood that black

participants would answer survey questions in a manner that sought to avoid

conforming to stereotypical images. Three gender-based studies suggest that

stereotype threat could increase e¤ort and motivation even by an amount su¢ -

cient to improve performance despite the reduced productivity of e¤ort. Oswald

and Harvey (2000) found that female undergraduates exposed to a hostile car-

toon prior to taking a math test actually performed better when there was no

attempt to reduce stereotype threat. Similarly, in a study of a visual-attention

task, Jamieson and Harkins (2007) found that gender-related stereotype threat

increased the motivation and performance of women when the experimental set-

ting facilitated the opportunity to correct mistakes through increased e¤ort (i.e.,

by allowing additional time). Third, a recent study by three economists (Fryer,

Levitt, and List 2008) found that, despite reporting higher levels of stress, fe-

males performed at their best when primed to be aware of math-related gender

stereotypes.

   The model introduced here can be extended to re‡ect this particular dimen-

sion of stereotype threat by introducing a term that re‡ects the direct disutility

associated with that threat, S(t; e). This disutility is assumed here to be both



                                        6
an increasing function of situational factors that create threat (i.e., t) and a

decreasing function of e¤ort. More speci…cally, this disutility is assumed here

to take the following form - S(t; e) = s(e)t - where the assumption that e¤ort

can reduce the disutility of feeling stereotyped implies that se < 0. The con-

jecture here is that increases in e¤ort can reduce the disutility of experiencing

stereotype threat by creating a more individual social identity that is viewed

as belonging in the stereotyped domain.1 In this extended model, individuals

choose a level of e¤ort to maximize:

                                              1 2
                                  wn(t)e        e     s(e)t                                (5)
                                              2

    The e¤ect of stereotype threat on the equilibrium choice of e¤ort in this

model (i.e., e ) can be shown to take the following form:

                                   @e   wnt se
                                      =           R0                                       (6)
                                   @t   1 + see t

The denominator of this expression is unambiguously positive by the second-

order condition. Therefore, whether stereotype threat actually increases e¤ort

(and, by implication, skill formation) can be seen to depend on the comparative

magnitudes of wnt and se . In other words, if stereotype threat leads to a

relatively large reduction in the productivity of e¤ort (i.e., jwnt j is large), then

e¤ort will decrease. However, if e¤ort is relatively e¤ective at reducing the

disutility of experiencing stereotype threat (i.e., jse j is large), then stereotype

threat would increase the chosen level of e¤ort.

    These theoretical results illustrate the potentially complex and context-speci…c

ways in which stereotype threat may in‡uence e¤ort and skill formation. The

canonical theoretical prediction and empirical result in the stereotype-threat lit-
   1 Alternatively, this e¤ect could be framed in terms of the expression for skills formation,

k(n; e; t), The results of doing so are similar to those discussed here.



                                              7
erature is that the presence of this threat compromises performance through cog-

nitive disruptions that e¤ectively compromise the productivity of e¤ort. How-

ever, some psychological studies have documented threat-induced increases in

e¤ort and, even, performance. The model presented here is consistent with this

disparate …ndings. Speci…cally, this model indicates that, in social contexts

where the direct disutility of experiencing stereotype threat is both large but

readily reduced through e¤ort, it is possible that stereotype threat will increase

e¤ort. A comparatively modest increase in e¤ort would imply that skill forma-

tion is still lower in the presence of stereotype threat (i.e., the total derivative

in equation [4] would still be negative) due to the reduced productivity of that

e¤ort. However, su¢ ciently large threat-induced increases in e¤ort could even

improve performance (Oswald and Harvey 2000, Jamieson and Harkins 2007,

Fryer, Levitt, and List 2008). These …ndings could have particular relevance

for stereotype-threat e¤ects related to traits like athletic status relative to those

related to race or gender. For example, it may be that one’s social identity

as an athlete (and the corresponding experience of stereotype threat) is more

malleable in response to changes in e¤ort than social identities and stereotype

threat linked to race or gender. In situations like this (i.e., jse j is large), threat-

induced increases in e¤ort are more likely to occur. The empirical evidence

presented in this study is somewhat consistent with this (i.e., a threat-induced

reduction in performance combined with some weakly suggestive evidence of an

increase in e¤ort).


2.2    Prior literature

Does stereotype threat contribute to the academic underperformance of student-

athletes? Bowen and Levin (2003, page 164) note that there is a stigma attached

to athletic participation at some selective institutions (especially in colleges and



                                           8
in speci…c "high-pro…le" sports) and they suggest that the stereotype threat

associated with this stigma could contribute to the academic underperformance

of student-athletes. But they also argue that it is unlikely to explain the large

di¤erential fully, particularly in contexts where the athletic identity of a student

may not be evident to a professor (e.g., larger universities, lower-pro…le sports

and women’s sports). However, this assertion of limited relevance turns on the

assumption that stereotype threat is due exclusively or largely to concerns about

how one is viewed by a professor. In fact, college students may care substantially

more about their social identity as viewed by their peers, who are more likely

to know their athletic status (at least at smaller, liberal-arts colleges). Because

of these issues, the potential contribution of stereotype threat to the academic

underperformance of athletes is a decidedly empirical question and one for which

heterogeneity by institution traits (e.g., size and degree of athletic stigma) and

student traits (e.g., sport played) are likely to play a role.

    Most of the empirical evidence in support of the stereotype-threat phe-

nomenon comes from laboratory experiments in which student-participants are

randomly assigned to receive a treatment that "primes" their awareness of a

stereotype prior to completing a test or some other task.2 For example, in the

seminal laboratory study by Steele and Aronson (1995), participating students

were randomly assigned to be told that the test they were about to take was

diagnostic of their ability (i.e., the stereotype-threat prime) or that the test was

non-evaluative (i.e., the control condition). They found that black students in

the "ability-diagnostic" condition performed signi…cantly worse on tests than

those in the control condition while the performance of white students was not

signi…cantly a¤ected by how the test was framed. In another widely used vari-

ant of this study design, participants would …rst complete a brief questionnaire
   2 See Aronson and Steele (2005) for a discussion of this growing literature. Interestingly,
there is also a small but growing body of …eld evidence that …nds e¤ects from interventions
designed to bu¤er students from the e¤ects of stereotype threat (e.g., Cohen et al. 2006).



                                              9
that included questions designed to prime their awareness of a racial or gen-

der identity (e.g., Steele and Aronson 1995, Shih, Pittinsky, and Ambady 1999,

Benjamin, Choi, and Strickland 2007).

    Only one prior study appears to have examined whether athletics-related

stereotype threat in‡uences cognitive performance. Yopyk and Prentice (2005)

recruited participants from the football team, the ice-hockey team, and a-

cappella singing groups at Princeton University (n = 67). Prior to taking a

10-question math test, these participants completed a questionnaire that in-

cluded one of three possible manipulations: an extracurricular prime, a student

prime, and no prime. Athletes in the extracurricular prime condition were asked

to write about their last athletic competition while the singers were asked to

write about their last performanc e. In the student-prime condition, students

were asked to write about their last academic success. In the no-prime condi-

tion, students were asked to write out explicit directions for getting from their

dorm room to the main library. Yopyk and Prentice (2005) found that athletics

assigned to the extracurricular prime were substantially less accurate on the

math test while there was not a similar e¤ect for the a cappella singers.3

    These results suggest that stereotype threat contributes to the academic

underperformance of student-athletes even at a larger institutions where this

social-identity phenomenon might have been thought less relevant. However,

there are several reasons to be circumspect about the results of this study.

First, the fact that participation in athletics was a condition for recruitment in

the study could compromise the external validity of these …ndings. Students

who were explicitly recruited for the study on the basis of their athletic status

may have been exceptionally susceptible to the threat prime. Furthermore, the
   3 The size of this statistically signi…cant e¤ect is quite large. The regression-adjusted percent
correct among athletes was 86 percent in the student-prime condition but only 67 percent in
the extracurricular-condition. Interestingly, the extracurricular prime led both singers and
athletes to answer fewer questions.




                                                10
priming mechanism (i.e., writing detailed comments on athletic participation)

is also unusually strong and does not parallel how a social identity as an athlete

is likely to be manifested in real-world settings. Another issue with respect to

external validity is that this study only only included males from two sports

that are considered high-pro…le.

    A particularly relevant concern with this study concerns internal validity.

Yopyk and Prentice (2005) used simple randomization to assign each of the 67

participants to one of the three experimental conditions. However, a "failure

of randomization" occurred such that participants in the student-prime condi-

tion had signi…cantly SAT scores than other participants. Yopyk and Prentice

(2005) suggest that their analysis corrects for this problem by conditioning on

SAT scores. However, conditioning on observables is unlikely to provide a sat-

isfactory solution for a randomization "failure." This is because the high-SAT

students who were predominantly in the student-prime condition were likely to

have any number of unobserved traits that in‡uenced their test performance.

Furthermore, the likely direction of this bias is one that would confound this

study’s main …nding. Those assigned to the student prime may have outper-

formed those in the extracurricular prime simply because they had unobserved

traits that predisposed them to do so.



3     A Stereotype-Threat Experiment

The laboratory experiment described here tests whether stereotype threat ap-

pears to contribute to the academic underperformance of college student-athletes

by implementing a conventional stereotype-threat experiment but with the dis-

tinction that an athletic identity, rather than identities related to race or gender,

is primed. This study was also designed to improve upon the limited prior ev-

idence (i.e., Yopyk and Prentice 2005) in two potentially critical ways. First,


                                         11
in order to increase the external validity that laboratory results might have for

real-world educational settings, the recruited partcipants were not aware of the

athletic focus of the study. Furthermore, the "priming" mechanism used in this

study and described below was both more subtle and more likely to re‡ect a

way in which athletic identity is actually made salient in classroom settings.

Second, this study addresses "internal validity" concerns about the potential

failure of simple randomization to create balance across the treatment and con-

trol states by utilizing a simple "block randomization" procedure (i.e., pairing

participants on relevant baseline traits and randomizing within pairs) that is

described below.

   As with any laboratory experiment, the external validity of these results for

other populations and real-world settings is an important issue. For example,

there are at least two reasons to suspect that a study of this type may have

unique power when based on students at Swarthmore College. First, the small

size of the College suggests that student-athletes are particularly likely to view

their athletic status as well known. Second, a fairly long history of animus in the

College community with respect to the relationship between athletics and the

core academic mission of the College also suggests that a de…nite athletic stigma

exists in the community. However, the broader criticisms of relevance that are

often raised about laboratory experiments may have unusually low applicability

in this particular context.4 This is partly because college students are the exact

study population of interest in this application. In other words, this is not a case

of using only college students to draw inferences about the nature of altruism in

the broader society or the strategic behavior of …rms in imperfectly competitive

markets. Furthermore, in this application, the unusual level of scrutiny that

characterizes the laboratory environment as well as the focus of the lab activity

(i.e., cognitive performance) correspond in an uniquely direct manner with the
  4 See   Levitt and List (2007a,b) for analyses and discussion of these concerns.


                                               12
broader research questions of interest (i.e., the performance of college students

in the similarly evaluative context of academic classrooms).


3.1     Recruitment

At the beginning of the Spring 2008 semester, all students at Swarthmore College

received emails inviting them to participate in a 1-hour laboratory experiment

whose goal was "to examine the determinants of cognitive functioning." Students

were also told that they would receive $15 for their hour of participation. In

order to promote statistical power and generalizability, additional emails and

a study-recruitment letter were sent to student-athletes. However, none of the

recruitment materials indicated the athletic focus of the study. Furthermore,

students could not directly infer from the emails or the mailer this selective

recruiting strategy. Current student-athletes were identi…ed through the rosters

that were publicly available on the College athletics web site.5 All recruited

students were directed to a secure web page where they could register for the

study by completing a questionnaire and indicating their scheduling availability.

The brief baseline questionnaire included questions about the participant’s age,

graduating class, academic major, sex, and math and verbal SAT scores.6

    Ninety-one students completed this registration and were randomized ac-

cording to the procedure described below. These participating students could

then select into one of …ve scheduled laboratory sessions that were held in the

5th and 6th weeks of the semester. Seven students who had registered for the
   5 Students-athletes who no longer played a sport could not be identi…ed from these data.
However, current and past athletic participation was later elicited either in the beginning of
the experiment (i.e., the treatment students) or as part of the exit questionnaire (i.e., the
control students).
   6 Conversions to SAT scores were made for two of the participating students for whom only

ACT scores were available. A small number of students could not recall their SAT scores.
With permission, SAT scores were obtained for those students from the Registrar’s o¢ ce. In
order to comply with the informed-consent procedures, students who were younger than 18
were not included in the study.




                                             13
study did not utlimately attend a session leaving a …nal sample of 84.7 . Roughly

a quarter of students at the College were athletes. However, 44% of the study

participants (i.e., 37 out of 84) were athletes, which re‡ected the success of

the di¤erential recruitment strategy. The presence of non-athletes in the study

makes it possible to separate the e¤ects of the stereotype-threat intervention

unique to athletes from any unintended, general e¤ect it might have. In any

experiment such as this one, an important question involves the other ways in

which the participants do or do not resemble the larger population from which

they were drawn. Table 1 provides just such a comparison. The study popula-

tion actually resembled the overall student body quite closely with respect to

gender and SAT scores. However, study participants were both more likely to

be freshman instead of seniors and less likely to be black or Hispanic.


3.2     Randomization

In order to increase the likelihood that the unobserved participant traits were

unrelated to treatment status, the randomization procedure used in this study

exploited the baseline traits available from the initial questionnaire and the

publicly available athletics rosters. Participants were matched to other partic-

ipants with respect to traits thought to be relevant to the study (e.g., athletic

status, math SAT scores). Randomization then occurred within these matched

pairs. Students who were identi…ed as current athletes from the roster data were

…rst sorted into cells based on the gender-speci…c sport that they played (e.g.,

women’s soccer, men’s basketball). The choice to group the athletes by genders-

speci…c sports re‡ected the concern that the existence and degree of stereotype

threat could be sport-speci…c as well as the fact that the sport played may proxy

for unobservables related to achievement. For the same reasons, multi-sport
   7 The characteristics of the attriters and the balance of the participants by treatment status

are discussed below.



                                               14
athletes were grouped with other students playing similar sport combinations.

Within each of these sport-gender cells, each participant was matched to another

participiant with similar math SAT scores. In cases where there were an odd

number of participants within cells, participants were matched to someone of the

same gender and similar math SAT score but a di¤erent sport. Any remaining

participant was assigned a treatment status through simple randomization. The

participants who did not appear on the current athletics rosters were assigned

a treatment status by a similar procedure. Speci…cally, they were …rst sorted by

gender and graduating class. Then participants were paired within each class-

gender cell to a another participant with a similar math SAT score. In cases

where there were odd remainders in a gender-by-cohort cell, they were matched

with a similar residual from a neighboring gender-speci…c cohort if available or

randomized as a singleton otherwise.

   The fundamental goal of randomization is, of course, to increase the like-

lihood that any e¤ects associated with the experimental treatment re‡ect the

true impact of that treatment rather than participant traits that may merely

correlate with the treatment. However, the intent of randomization can be com-

promised both by non-random attrition from the study as well as by chance.

Given the design features of this study, neither concern is likely to be relevant

in this context. More speci…cally, because participants were unaware of their

treatment status, it should be unrelated to attrition. Furthermore, the baseline

matching procedure described above should dramatically reduce the chance of

a randomization "failure." Nonetheless, auxiliary regressions provide a straight-

forward framework for assessing the ex post relevance of these concerns. Table

2 reports the key results from linear probability models where attrition from the

study is the dependent variable.8 Of the 7 students who attrited 5 had been

assigned to the treatment condition. However, the results in Table 2 indicate
  8 Probit   and logit models return results similar to those reported here.



                                               15
that treatment status was not signi…cantly related to attrition. These results

do indicate that minority students were signi…cantly more likely to attrit and

that reading SAT scores were also positively associated with attrition. Table

3 reports the results of linear probability models where treatment status is the

dependent variable. The results are uniformly consistent with a "successful"

randomization in that treatment status is unrelated to athletic status, gender,

graduating class, race-ethnicity, and SAT scores.9 In fact, in each of these spec-

i…cations, these regressors are jointly insigni…cant as well. A test statistic based

on the null hypothesis that R2 = 0 has a probability value of 0.52 or higher.


3.3    Experimental Procedures

Based on their availability, the study participants attended one of …ve 1-hour

lab sessions that occurred in the 5th and 6th weeks of the spring 2008 semester.

These 1-hour lab sessions were conducted in normal College classrooms by an

administrator who was blind to the treatment status of the participants. Before

beginning the experiment, the participants …rst reviewed and signed an informed

consent form. The administrator then distributed individual-speci…c folders of

materials to each participant. The experiment then consisted of guiding the

students through the sequenced completion of …ve distinct sets of experimental

materials (i.e., questionnaires, a test, etc.) in the folders. The experiment began

with a 1-page questionnaire. For students in both the treatment and the control

states, the questionnaire elicited information on the student’s graduating class,

whether they lived in College housing and whether they had a roommate.

   For the students in the treatment condition (both athletes and non-athletes),

the questionnaire then asked "Are you (or have you been) a member of a Na-

tional Collegiate Athletics Association (NCAA) sports team at the College?".

They were then asked to identify the sport(s) they played and to respond to three
  9 Again,   probit and logit models return results similar to those reported here.


                                               16
questions about the frequency with which (on a scale of 1 to 7) they experienced

scheduling con‡icts between athletics and, respectively, course/seminar meet-

ings, laboratory sessions, and other academic lectures (e.g., evening lectures by

outside speakers). For students in the control condition, the questionnaire con-

tinued instead with similarly structured questions related to the dinings services

on campus. The basic structure of these treatment and control questionnaires

parallels those used in the stereotype-salience study by Shih, Pittinsky, and

Ambady (1999) and a recent study by Benjamin, Choi, and Strickland (2007).

   Following the completion of this brief questionnaire, the participants were

instructed that they would have 30 minutes to complete a 39-question test. The

administrator explained to the participants that they might not be able to …n-

ish the test in the allotted time but that they should try to answer correctly as

many questions as possible. The test consisted of 30 quantitative questions and

9 verbal questions from a Graduate Record Examination (GRE). As in prior

studies of stereotype threat, this study reports the e¤ect of random assignment

to the stereotype-threat prime on participants’test accuracy (i.e., the percent

correct of answered questions) and on the number of questions answered. The

stereotype-threat prime could in‡uence the test accuracy of participants through

its e¤ects on both cognitive functioning and test e¤ort (i.e., respectively, the n

and e terms in the theoretical model). The number of questions answered is

commonly used as a less ambiguous proxy for participant e¤ort (e.g., Fryer,

Levitt, and List 2008). The extent to which the number of answered questions

is actually a reliable proxy for participant e¤ort is unknown. However, the in-

structions deliberately encouraged participants to care both about the accuracy

of their answers and the number of completed questions. And the data on com-

pleted questions suggest that participants did apply signi…cant e¤ort on this

margin. The 30-question quantitative section of the test was designed by the



                                       17
Educational Testing Service (ETS) to be taken though not necessarily completed

in a 30-minute GRE session. So, the addition of 9 additional GRE questions

to a 30-minute test period constituted an unusually stringent hurdle in terms

of answering questions. Nonetheless, slightly more than a third of participants

answered all 39 questions; 80 percent answered 30 questions or more and no

participant answerd fewer than 22 questions.

    At the conclusion of the 30 minutes allotted for the test, the students were

then directed to a word completion exercise designed to test the cognitive activa-

tion of the stereotype. Speci…cally, this exercise consisted of 30 word fragments,

12 of which were designed with the possibility that they could be completed as

sports-themed words (e.g., "GO _ _" which could be completed as "GOAL").

This list also contained word fragments that could be completed in a way that

suggested self doubt (e.g., "DU _ _" as "DUMB") and 11 …ller words. After this

10-minute exercise, the students were directed to a short questionnaire that con-

sisted of the 7 questions that constitute the academic sub-scale of the self-regard

survey (Fleming and Courtney 1984). The experiment then concluded with a

short exit questionnaire where participants could indicate the extent to which

they enjoyed the study and what they thought the study’s purpose was. All

students were also asked to identify their race-ethnicity. For students assigned

to the control condition, the exit questionnaire then contained the questions

about athletics that had been in the opening questionnaire for students in the

treatment condition. For students in the treatment condition, the questionnaire

instead continued with the questions related to dining services.



4     Results

On average, the participating students answered 35 of the 39 available questions

with 27 questions answered correctly. The primary measure of test performance,


                                        18
the percent of answered questions that were correct, averaged 78.4 percent with

a minimum value of 43 percent, a maximum value of 97 percent and a standard

deviation of 0.11. Figure 1 presents graphical evidence on the e¤ects of the

intervention by showing kernel-density estimates of the test-performance dis-

tributions by treatment status and athletic status. The top panel of Figure 1

indicates that, for the non-athletes, the distributions of test-score performance

are remarkably similar by treatment status.10 In contrast, the bottom panel of

Figure 1 indicates that, for the athletes participating in the study, assignment

to the threat condition led to a quite large leftward shift in the test-performance

distribution, an e¤ect consistent with the hypothesis of stereotype threat.

    The regression speci…cation used to estimate the e¤ect of the intervention

on test performance (i.e., yi ) takes the following form:


                       yi =    + (Ti Ai ) + Ti + Ai + Xi + "i                                (7)


where Ti and Ai are binary indicators that identify, respectively, whether stu-

dent i was assigned to the treatment and was an athlete and "i is a mean-zero

random error term. The coe¢ cient of interest, , re‡ects the unique e¤ect the

stereotype-threat intervention had on athletes. The matrix, Xi , contains various

other determinants of test performance, including …xed e¤ects for gender and

race, math and verbal SAT scores, and …xed e¤ects for the student’s graduating

class and laboratory session they attended. Given the random assignment, none

of these control variables should have a substantive in‡uence on the estimated

value of . However, these controls can improve the precision of this point esti-

mate. The …xed e¤ects for laboratory sessions provides a control for unintended

determinants that may have been unique to each session (e.g., administrator
  1 0 These comparative distributions may appear to suggest that the treatment modestly in-

creased test-score performance (e.g., a possible stereotype "lift"). However, this interpretation
re‡ects just two or three outlying observations. Regression-adjusted comparisons indicate that
the treatment did not have a statistically signi…cant e¤ect on the non-athletes.


                                               19
behavior, classroom setting, peer traits, etc.).

   The key results from estimating this model are reported in Table 4. The full-

sample results indicate that the unique e¤ect of the treatment on athletes (i.e.,

the estimate of        ) on athletes was uniformly negative and implied reductions

in test performance ranging from 7.3 to 9.5 percentage points. In speci…cations

that include few or no controls (i.e., columns 1 and 2), this estimate was some-

what smaller and statistically signi…cant or weakly signi…cant.                  However, in

estimates that include additional controls (in particular, SAT scores), this esti-

mate becomes larger and more precise. In contrast, the estimated main e¤ect of

the treatment (i.e., the estimate of ) was positive but smaller and statistically

insigni…cant in all speci…cations. The results in Table 4 also indicate that SAT

scores strongly predicted test performance and that female participants tended

to perform somewhat worse.

   The theoretical model introduced in this study suggested that contextual

factors can mediate the in‡uence of stereotype threat. One potentially im-

portant aspect of this possible heterogeneity involves whether the e¤ects of

stereotype threat vary with the sport played. Participation in particular sports

(e.g., lacrosse) may involve a unique academic stigma. Interestingly, the data

collected by the College Sports Project suggest that the comparative academic

performance of student-athletes varies considerably by sport (e.g., male and

female cross-country athletes outperform non-athletes academically). The num-

ber of athletes in this study (n = 37) does not allow for a statistically mean-

ingful breakdown by sports. However, one indirect way to address this issue

to re-evaluate the results from the …rst panel of Table 4 on the sub-sample of

respondents that excludes athletes who participated in track and …eld or cross

country (i.e., sports thought to have no academic stigma or, possibly, a positive

one).11 The results in the right panel of Table 4 are based on the resulting
 1 1 The   observed traits of students in this subsample are unrelated to treatment status as in


                                               20
sample of 75 respondents. Consistent with expectations, the estimated            be-

comes uniformly larger ranging from 0.109 to 0.118 and, across all speci…cations,

statistically distinguishable from zero at the 5-percent level.

    The results presented in Table 5 explore other types of response heterogeneity

using speci…cation (10) from Table 4 as a baseline. More speci…cally, Table 5

reports the estimated value of    based on samples de…ned by gender, race, math

SAT scores and graduating class. While the sample sizes do not allow for much

precision, at least two results are noteworthy. The treatment e¤ect unique to

athletes appears to be concentrated both among males and among respondents

with math SAT scores below the sample median (i.e., 720).

    Overall, these results suggest that stereotype threat may make a substantive

contribution to the academic underperformance of student-athletes documented

by Shulman and Bowen (2001). The stereotype-threat treatment studied here

reduced test performance by 11 percentage points (i.e., speci…cation (10) in

Table 4), which is equivalent to a 14 percent reduction in the mean performance

score or, alternatively, an e¤ect size of roughly -1.0. Treatment e¤ects of this size

are not uncommon in laboratory tests related to stereotype threat (e.g., Steele

and Aronson 1995, Shih, Pittinsky, and Ambady 1999, Yopyk and Prentice

2005). E¤ects of this magnitude as well as their relative concentration among

males and higher-pro…le sports are also roughly consistent with the patterns of

academic underperformance reported by Shulman and Bowen (2001) and the

College Sports Project. For example, Shulman and Bowen (2001, Table 3.1)

…nd that among males from the most recent "College and Beyond" cohort who

attended cohort liberal arts colleges, the regression-adjusted e¤ect associated

with being an athlete in a high-pro…le sport is a 8.8 percentile point reduction

in class rank. The corresponding e¤ect for females was 6.1 percentile points.

    The theoretical model of stereotype threat introduced in this study suggested
Table 3.



                                         21
that the e¤ects of stereotype threat on student e¤ort and performance could

be highly context-speci…c. For example, students may sometimes respond to

stereotype threat with increased e¤ort that may or may not be able to overcome

threat-induced reductions in the productivity of e¤ort that compromise task

performance. The evidence from this experiment is weakly suggestive of this

phenomenon. More speci…cally, given the ambiguous instructions to answer

correctly as many questions as possible, the number of test questions answered

can be viewed as a proxy for e¤ort. As the results in Table 6 indicate, the

stereotype-threat treatment increased the number of test questions answered

by athletes by roughly 5 percent but reduced the number of correctly answered

questions by 8 percent. However, these estimated e¤ects fall short of statistical

signi…cance.12

   The ancillary measures collected after the completion of the test were meant

to capture the e¤ects of the stereotype-threat intervention on awareness of

athletics-related stereotypes as well as measures of self-doubt and academic

self-regard. However, analyses of these measures based on speci…cations like

that in equation (7) suggest that there were no statistically signi…cant e¤ects

(Table 6). It should be noted that the test administered in this study was

quite long relative to similar studies in terms of the number of questions and

the corresponding length of the testing period (i.e., 30 minutes instead of 5).

The motivation for this design was to avoid ceiling e¤ects with respect to test

performance. This design may have contributed to the absence of e¤ects on the

post-test measures if it left subjects too fatigued or stressed to give valid re-

sponses. One empirical result consistent with this interpretation is that virtually

none of the observed student traits (e.g., race, gender, SAT scores) were signif-

icant predictors of the data collected in the last 20 minutes of the experiment
 1 2 Theresults are similarly imprecise in count-data and semi-log speci…cations as well as
in models based on sub-samples de…ned by participant traits (e.g., males and below-median
math SAT scores).



                                            22
(i.e., academic self-regard, self-doubt or sports-themed word completions).



5     Conclusions

The prominent role that social identity may play in in‡uencing a broad array

of economic and education-related outcomes is receiving an increasing amount

of attention. This study makes two broad contributions to this literature. One

is to adapt an economic model of social identity to re‡ect more accurately

one of the most prominent conjectures in the literature on social identity, the

phenomenon of stereotype threat. This model illustrates how prior, seemingly

contradictory, empirical evidence on how stereotype threat in‡uences e¤ort and

task performance can be reconciled in a model that captures how individuals

may respond to the direct disutility created by experiencing stereotype threat.

The second goal of this study is to examine through a laboratory experiment

whether stereotype threat contributes to a large and controversial achievement

gap observed at many selective colleges and universities: the academic under-

performance of student-athletes. The results of this study are consistent with

the hypothesis that the academic stigma associated with being a student-athlete

at a highly selective college or university makes a substantial contribution to

their academic underperformance.

    In the social sciences, the relevance for real-world settings of laboratory

studies such as this is always suspect (Levitt and List 2007). This study is no

exception. However, it is also the case that the laboratory experiment discussed

here is likely to have an unusually degree of external validity. The study partic-

ipants (i.e., college students), the key outcome measure (i.e., test performance)

and the unusual evaluative scrutiny of a laboratory session all strongly parallel

the …eld setting of interest (i.e., the academic environment at a selective institu-

tion). Nonetheless, a compelling next step for research in this area would involve


                                        23
well-designed trials that assess both the apparent relevance of stereotype threat

in a …eld setting and strategies to amerliorate this social-identity phenomenon

(e.g., Cohen et al. 2006).




                                       24
References
 [1] Akerlof, George and Rachel Kranton. "Economics and Identity," Quarterly
     Journal of Economics 115(3), August 2000, pages 715-753.
 [2] Akerlof, George and Rachel Kranton. "Identity and Schooling: Some
     Lessons for the Economics of Education," Journal of Economic Literature
     40, December 2002, pages 1167-1201.
 [3] Akerlof, George and Rachel Kranton. "Identity and the Economics of Or-
     ganizations," Journal of Economic Perspectives 19(1), Winter 2005, pages
     9-32.
 [4] Aronson, Joshua and Claude M. Steele. “Stereotypes and the Fragility
     of Academic Competence, Motivation, and Self-Concept,” in Handbook of
     Competence and Motivation, Andrew J. Elliot and Carol S. Dweck, editors,
     New York: Guilford Press, 2005.
 [5] Bénabou, Roland and Jean Tirole "Identity, Dignity and Taboos: Beliefs
     as Assets," working paper, December 2006
 [6] Benjamin, Daniel J., James J. Choi, and A. Joshua Strickland. "Social
     Identity and Preferences," NBER Working Paper No. 13309, August 2007.
 [7] Bowen, William G. and Sarah A. Levin. Reclaiming the Game: College
     Sports and Educational Values. Princeton University Press, 2003.
 [8] Cohen, Geo¤rey, Julio Garcia, Nancy Apfel, and Alison Master. 2006. “Re-
     ducing the racial achievement gap: A social-psychological intervention,”
     Science vol. (313), September 1: 1307-1310.
 [9] Fang, Hanming and Glenn C. Loury "’Dysfunctional Identities’ Can Be
     Rational," working paper, January 9, 2005.
[10] Fleming, James S. and Barbara E. Courtney. "The Dimensionality of Self-
     Esteem II:. Hierarchical Facet Model for Revised Measurement Scales,"
     Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 46(2), 1984, pages 404-421.
[11] Fryer, Roland G., Levitt, Steven D. and John A. List. "Exploring the Im-
     pact of Financial Incentives on Stereotype Threat: Evidence from a Pilot
     Study," American Economic Review, May 2008.

[12] Jamieson, J. P., & Harkins, S. G. (2007). Mere e¤ort and stereotype threat
     performance e¤ects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 544-
     564.
[13] Levitt, Steven D. and John A. List. "What Do Laboratory Experiments
     Measuring Social Preferences Reveal About the Real World?" Journal of
     Economic Perspectives 21(2), Spring 2007, pages 153-174.



                                      25
[14] Oswald, D. L., & Harvey, R. D. (2000). Hostile environments, stereotype
     threat, and math performance among undergraduate women. Current Psy-
     chology 19(4): 338-356.
[15] Shih, Margaret, Todd L. Pittinsky, and Nalini Ambady. "Stereotype Sus-
     ceptibility: Identity Salience and Shifts in Quantitative Performance," Psy-
     chological Science 10(1), January 1999, pages 80-83.
[16] Shulman, James L. and William G. Bowen. The Game of Life: College
     Sports and Educational Values. Princeton University Press, 2001.

[17] Steele, Claude M. and Joshua Aronson. "Stereotype Threat and the In-
     tellectual Test Performance of African Americans," Journal of Personality
     and Social Psychology 69(5), 1995, pages 797-811.
[18] Yopick, Darren J.A. and Deborah A. Prentice. "Am I an Athlete or a
     Student? Identity Salience and Stereotype Threat in Student-Athletes,"
     Basic and Applied Social Psychology 27(4), 2005, pages 329-336.




                                       26
Table 1 - Average Traits of College Students and Study Participants
                                               Study Participants
   Variable                College   Total    Treatment Control        p-value
   Athlete                 24.4%     44.0%      46.3%      41.9%        0.68
   Female                  52.0%     52.7%      53.7%      53.5%        0.99
   White Non-Hispanic      43.5%     61.5%      73.2%      60.5%        0.22
   Asian                   17.3%     22.0%      19.5%      27.9%        0.37
   SAT (Math)                736      724        729        721         0.51
   SAT (Reading)             716      718        720        714         0.68
   Class of 2008           27.2%     18.7%      19.5%      18.6%        0.92
   Class of 2009           24.7%     24.2%      22.0%      23.3%        0.89
   Class of 2010           22.5%     22.0%      17.1%      25.6%        0.35
   Class of 2011           24.5%     35.2%      41.5%      32.6%        0.40
   Enrollment               1,491      84         41         43

    Source: The Fact Book, Institutional Research O¢ ce, Swarthmore College
(http://www.swarthmore.edu/factbook.xml). College-speci…c athletic partici-
pation based on gender-speci…c 2005-06 data weighted by male and female en-
rollment. SAT scores are based on the matriculants from 2005, 2006, and 2007.
The p-value refers to a test of the hypothesis that the prevalence of the observed
trait is the same across the treatment and control groups.




                                       27
Table 2 - Auxiliary Regressions, OLS Estimates of the Determinants
                         of Study Attrition
       Independent Variable       (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)
       Treatment                 0.064       0.054     0.053      0.053
                                (0.056)     (0.043)   (0.043)    (0.043)
       Athlete                   -0.081      -0.064    -0.021     -0.030
                                (0.057)     (0.045)   (0.050)    (0.051)
       Female                      -         0.012     0.007      0.013
                                            (0.043)   (0.043)    (0.045)
       White Non-Hispanic          -        -0.459z   -0.504z    -0.506z
                                            (0.060)   (0.064)    (0.065)
       Asian                       -        -0.470z   -0.495z    -0.479z
                                            (0.071)   (0.076)    (0.078)
       SAT (Math)                  -           -       0.0001    0.000003
                                                      (0.0005)   (0.0005)
       SAT (Reading)               -           -      0.0008y    0.0007
                                                      (0.0004)   (0.0004)
       Class of 2009               -           -         -        0.030
                                                                 (0.067)
       Class of 2010               -           -         -        -0.052
                                                                 (0.071)
       Class of 2011               -           -         -        -0.054
                                                                   0.063
       R2                       0.0365      0.4464    0.4747      0.4916

   Notes: The sample size is 91 of whom 7 were attriters. Five of the attriters
had been assigned to the treatment.
     Statistically signi…cant at the 10-percent level
   y
     Statistically signi…cant at the 5-percent level
   z
     Statistically signi…cant at the 1-percent level




                                       28
Table 3 - Auxiliary Regressions, OLS Estimates of the Determinants
                        of Treatment Status
   Independent Variable       (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)
   Athlete                   0.045     0.028     0.063      0.078     0.016
                            (0.111)   (0.117)   (0.130)    (0.133)   (0.139)
   Female                      -       -0.001    0.003      0.032     0.085
                                      (0.113)   (0.113)    (0.119)   (0.123)
   White Non-Hispanic          -       0.164     0.120      0.108     0.104
                                      (0.194)   (0.213)    (0.220)   (0.216)
   Asian                       -       0.037     -0.035     -0.074    -0.078
                                      (0.221)   (0.238)    (0.244)   (0.241)
   SAT (Math)                  -           -     0.001      0.001     0.001
                                                (0.001)    (0.001)   (0.001)
   SAT (Reading)               -           -    -0.00001   0.0003     0.001
                                                 (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.001)
   Class of 2009               -           -       -        -0.057    -0.120
                                                           (0.179)   (0.180)
   Class of 2010               -           -       -        -0.074    -0.192
                                                           (0.190)   (0.202)
   Class of 2011               -           -       -        0.106     0.035
                                                           (0.165)   (0.172)
   Session Fixed E¤ects       No        No        No         No       Yes
   R2                       0.0020    0.0190     0.0295    0.0509    0.1477
   p-value (H0 : R2 =0)     0.6836    0.8204     0.8829    0.9085    0.5244

   Notes: The sample size is 84 of whom 41 had been assigned to the treat-
ment. The session …xed e¤ects control for which of the 5 laboratory sessions the
respondent attended.
     Statistically signi…cant at the 10-percent level
   y
     Statistically signi…cant at the 5-percent level
   z
     Statistically signi…cant at the 1-percent level




                                      29
          Figure 1 - Kernel Density Graphs of Test Performance
                     by Treatment and Athletic Status

            Test Performance by Treatment Status, Non-athletes
   4
   3
Density
  21
   0




          .4                 .6                       .8             1
                                    Percent Correct

                                  Treatment                Control




                Test Performance by Treatment Status, Athletes
    4
    3
Density
  2 1
    0




           .4                .6                        .8                1
                                    Percent Correct

                                  Treatment                Control




                                       30
                                     Table 4 - OLS Estimates of the Determinants of Test Performance
            Independent                             Full Sample (n=84)                     Excluding Non-Stereotyped Sports (n=75)
              Variable                 (1)      (2)          (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)        (7)      (8)       (9)       (10)
       Treatment x Athlete           -0.073 -0.081        -0.091y  -0.087y  -0.095y   -0.109y -0.118y     -0.113z   -0.112y   -0.110y
                                    (0.049) (0.048) (0.041)        (0.041)  (0.042)   (0.053) (0.052) (0.043)       (0.043)   (0.044)
       Treatment                     0.036    0.041         0.036    0.036    0.037     0.037     0.041    0.040     0.043      0.042
                                    (0.032) (0.032) (0.027)        (0.028)  (0.029)   (0.033) (0.032) (0.027)       (0.027)   (0.029)
       Athlete                       0.002    0.018        0.077y   0.067y   0.064      0.020      0.036   0.097z    0.089z    0.086y
                                    (0.034) (0.035) (0.031)        (0.032)  (0.033)   (0.037) (0.037) (0.032)       (0.033)   (0.035)
       Female                           -    -0.049y      -0.048y  -0.044y  -0.044        -       -0.041  -0.042y   -0.041     -0.038
                                             (0.024) (0.020)       (0.021)  (0.023)              (0.025) (0.021)    (0.021)   (0.024)
       White Non-Hispanic               -     0.042        -0.037   -0.047   -0.051       -        0.078   -0.023    -0.022    -0.030
                                             (0.042) (0.038)       (0.039)  (0.040)              (0.052) (0.046)    (0.047)   (0.049)
       Asian                            -     0.080        -0.003   -0.004   -0.011       -      0.121y    0.027     0.037      0.026




31
                                             (0.047) (0.043)       (0.044)  (0.044)              (0.055) (0.050)    (0.051)   (0.053)
       SAT (Math)                       -        -         0.001z   0.001z   0.001z       -          -     0.001z    0.001z    0.001z
                                                         (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002)                      (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0003)
       SAT (Reading)                    -        -         0.001z   0.001z   0.001z       -          -     0.001z    0.001z    0.001z
                                                         (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002)                      (0.0002) (0.0002) (0.0002)
       Class Fixed E¤ects              No       No           No       Yes      Yes       No         No       No       Yes        Yes
       Session Fixed E¤ects            No       No           No       No       Yes       No         No       No        No        Yes
       R2                           0.0502 0.1254         0.3829   0.4073   0.4337     0.0748 0.1651      0.4481    0.4714     0.4845
     Notes: The dependent variable is the percent of answered questions that were correct (y = 0:784):
       Statistically signi…cant at the 10-percent level
     y
       Statistically signi…cant at the 5-percent level
     z
       Statistically signi…cant at the 1-percent level
                   Table 5 - Results by Sample Traits
                 Sample                  Estimated Coe¢ cient         Sample
               Description              on Treatment x Athlete         Size
  Full Sample                                   -0.110y                 75
                                                (0.044)
  Male                                          -0.151y                  34
                                                (0.067)
  Female                                         -0.016                  41
                                                (0.061)
  SAT (Math) above median                        -0.004                  38
                                                (0.057)
  SAT (Math) below or equal to median           -0.176                   37
                                                (0.088)
  White Non-Hispanic                            -0.109y                  51
                                                (0.045)
  Non-White                                      -0.080                  24
                                                (0.187)
  Class of 2008 and 2009                         -0.088                  33
                                                (0.052)
  Class of 2010 and 2011                         -0.068                  42
                                                (0.072)

    Notes: These speci…cations condition on the available observables as well as
class and session …xed e¤ects (i.e., speci…cation [10] in Table 4).
      Statistically signi…cant at the 10-percent level
    y
      Statistically signi…cant at the 5-percent level
    z
      Statistically signi…cant at the 1-percent level




                                      32
                Table 6 - Results by Outcome Variables
         Dependent         Estimated Coe¢ cient    Dependent Mean
          Variable        on Treatment x Athlete (Standard Deviation)
   Test Performance               -0.110y               0.786
                                  (0.044)               (0.11)
   Questions Answered               1.84                 35.0
                                   (2.18)                (4.7)
   Correct Answers                  -2.30                27.5
                                   (1.95)                (5.2)
   Academic Self-Regard              0.26                0.07
                                   (0.45)               (0.99)
   Sports Words                     -0.48                 1.9
                                   (0.67)                (1.4)
   Self-Doubt Words                  0.21                 1.9
                                   (0.67)                (1.4)

   Notes: These speci…cations (n=75) condition on the available observables as
well as class and session …xed e¤ects (i.e., speci…cation [10] in Table 4).
     Statistically signi…cant at the 10-percent level
   y
     Statistically signi…cant at the 5-percent level
   z
     Statistically signi…cant at the 1-percent level




                                     33
